
A Royal Trial
Accused of tax fraud in connection with her husband's business activities, Princess Cristina, who is sixth in succession to the Spanish throne, became the first member of Spanish royalty to stand trial in modern memory. 
Her husband, the former Olympic handball player Iñaki Urdangarin, is accused of embezzling 6 million euros in public funds, or about $6.7 million. 
Princess Cristina, who first appeared in court in January, has denied any wrongdoing. 
The Spanish royal family has long sought to distance itself from the couple: They were barred from official duties when news of the scandal broke in 2011 and stripped of their dukedom in 2015.
A Legendary Buy
The Dalian Wanda Group acquired the American film studio Legendary Entertainment for $3.5 billion in January, making Wanda Group the first Chinese firm to own a United States studio. 
Legendary has been behind such international blockbusters as "Jurassic World" and "Inception."
Though some have viewed the acquisition as a vanity purchase, many in the industry see it as part of an inevitable trend of increasing ties between Hollywood and the world's most populous nation.
The Pope and the Patriarch
Pope Francis and Patriarch Kirill I, the leader of the Russian Orthodox Church, met in Cuba on Feb. 
12, marking the first time a bishop of Rome and a Russian patriarch have met in nearly 1,000 years. 
The historic meeting was a diplomatic coup for Francis, who has long sought to ease tensions that can be traced back to the deep-seated rift between the Eastern and Western branches of Christianity. 
Francis had already met with other Orthodox leaders, including Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew I of Constantinople, who is considered the spiritual leader of the world's Orthodox Christians.
Hugging Hedgehogs in Tokyo
Housed in the same building where people can pay to cuddle rabbits, a hedgehog cafe, Japan's first, has opened in Tokyo. 
People are lining up outside Harry - a play on the Japanese word for hedgehog - for 30-minute petting sessions that cost 1,000 yen, or a little less than $10. 
Places like Harry, which opened in February, fulfill a need for "iyasareru," which means emotional or psychological recharging, in crowded urban dwellings where pet ownership may not be feasible for some people.
Government-Backed Happiness in the Middle East
In the United Arab Emirates, a cheerful citizenry is a top priority. 
Prime Minister Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum in February named Ohood Al Roumi the nation's first minister of happiness, giving her a mandate to "create social good and satisfaction."
In September, Al Roumi sent 60 "chief happiness and positivity officers" to the United States and the United Kingdom for a five-month training program on the science of spreading happiness. 
The U.A.E. ranked 28th over all in the United Nations' World Happiness Report 2016 Update, down eight spots from its ranking in 2015.
First Solar-Powered Airport in Africa
An airport in South Africa is harnessing the power of the sun with a solar facility that satisfies about 40 percent of the airport's energy demand. 
The facility is the first of its kind in Africa and the second in the world, following India's Cochin International Airport. 
The 3,000 solar panels at George Airport, between Cape Town and Port Elizabeth, cost more than $1 million to install. 
The first phase of construction began in March and took six months to complete. 
In the meantime, two more South African airports have begun to incorporate solar power as part of sustainability efforts.
A Possible New Way to Break Down Plastic
Japanese scientists discovered bacteria outside a bottle-recycling facility that can eat a common type of plastic, raising the possibility for new methods to dispose of it. 
According to a study published in Science in March, the microbe Ideonella sakaiensis can convert polyethylene terephthalate - most commonly used in plastic water bottles because it is lightweight but durable - into an energy source. 
Critics caution that more research must be done before it can be determined whether the bacteria can be used as a viable way to degrade polyethylene terephthalate. 
More than 50 million tons of this type of plastic are produced worldwide each year.
First SpaceX Rocket Landing at Sea
SpaceX, founded by the tech entrepreneur Elon Musk, successfully landed its Falcon 9 rocket on a drone ship for the first time on April 8. 
The landing was an important step for the company, because mastering the maneuver means that SpaceX can cut costs by reusing rockets and remain an important part of the United States' space program. 
SpaceX has landed a rocket on the ship in the Atlantic Ocean several more times since then. 
However, the company suffered a major setback in September when a rocket exploded while being fueled at a Cape Canaveral, Fla., launchpad.
Wild Tiger Population on the Rise
The World Wildlife Fund reported in April that the number of tigers living in the wild is rising for the first time in a century. 
The global tiger population increased to about 3,890 in 2016, from 3,200 in 2010, with growth seen in at least four countries: Bhutan, India, Nepal and Russia. 
Despite the uptick, conservationists warn that tiger habitats continue to shrink and that tigers remain a favorite target for poachers, particularly in Southeast Asia. 
At the turn of the 20th century, there were an estimated 100,000 tigers living in the wild around the world.
Paralyzed Man Regains Control of Hand
An American who was paralyzed from the chest down has regained control of his right hand, thanks to a chip implanted in his brain. 
According to a study published in May in the journal Nature, this is the first example of limb reanimation in a person with quadriplegia. 
The chip allows the patient to bypass his spinal injury by using his thoughts to directly control the muscles in his right hand and fingers. 
However, this technology is not a viable cure for paralysis because he must be connected to computers in a lab for it to work.
A Sober State Visit to Hiroshima
President Obama became the first sitting president to pay an official visit to Hiroshima, Japan, where the United States dropped an atomic bomb in 1945, hoping to end World War II. 
On May 27, the president laid a wreath at Hiroshima Peace Memorial Park and exchanged emotional handshakes and embraces with survivors of the bombing in a visit that was carefully attuned to the sensitivities surrounding the occasion. 
It required a balance between honoring the victims of the attack and considering the atrocities that the Japanese military inflicted upon neighboring countries leading up to and during the war.
Climate Change Milestone in Antarctica
For the first time in four million years, carbon dioxide levels in Antarctica have reached 400 parts per million, according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. 
Levels of carbon dioxide, a byproduct of burning fossil fuels, have been on the rise in the atmosphere since the start of the Industrial Revolution. 
The Antarctic region was the last place in the world where levels had not reached this mark. 
It was first measured at the South Pole Observatory on May 23, meaning that the most remote location on the planet has caught up with its more populous neighboring continents.
A Celestial Dance of Sorts, Caught on Camera
The spacecraft Juno captured a heavenly sight in July as it approached Jupiter: video of the planet's largest four moons circling the massive orb. 
It's the first time that the world has seen the actual movement of these moons. 
The Italian scientist, Galileo Galilei, discovered the four moons - Callisto, Europa, Ganymede and Io - in 1610, finding scientific evidence that supported the then-controversial theory of heliocentrism. 
Among the Juno probe's goals is to learn more about Jupiter's origins and evolution.
Finding 'Dory' - in Captivity
A conservation group announced in late July that researchers had successfully bred blue tang in captivity for the first time. 
In previous attempts, larvae had survived for only days after hatching. 
Marine biologists were worried that the fish could become endangered because of the popularity of the Disney character Dory, a blue tang who first appeared in the 2003 film "Finding Nemo" and who was the star of the sequel "Finding Dory," released in June 2016. 
After "Nemo," which was about a clown fish, was released, sales at pet stores of those fish increased by 40 percent.
A Hard Day's Night Tube
For the first time, the London Underground - the world's oldest subway system - is keeping some of its busiest lines running all night on weekends, joining just a handful of cities that offer late-night, weekend-only subway service. 
The new hours began on the Central and Victoria lines on Aug. 
19. According to the city's transit agency, the additional service should shorten the average trip in the wee hours of the night by 20 minutes, and about 200,000 riders are expected to take advantage of it.
Some Olympic Firsts at the Rio Games
" For the first time in Olympic history, a team of refugees was allowed to compete - a decision made in light of refugee crises around the world. 
The International Olympic Committee chose 10 athletes to represent four countries torn by war and civil unrest: Syria, South Sudan, Ethiopia and the Democratic Republic of Congo.
" The swimmer Joseph Schooling won Singapore's first gold medal, beating his idol Michael Phelps in the 100-meter butterfly. 
Phelps, however, did not walk away from the 2016 Games empty-handed. 
He won his 12th and 13th individual gold medals, breaking a record set by the ancient Grecian Leonidas in 152 B.C.
" In addition to Singapore, eight other countries got their first taste of Olympic gold: Bahrain, Fiji, Ivory Coast, Jordan, Kosovo, Puerto Rico, Tajikistan and Vietnam.
" Fehaid Al-Deehani was the first athlete to win a gold as an independent athlete. 
The Kuwaiti national competed under the Olympic flag after his home country was banned from international competition by the International Olympics Committee in 2015. 
The I.O.C. maintains that Kuwaiti legislation undermines the independence of the Olympic movement in that country.
" Simone Manuel's victory in the 100-meter freestyle secured her a place in history as the first African-American woman to win an individual Olympic gold in swimming. 
Americans Brianna Rollins, Nia Ali and Kristi Castlin came in first, second and third in the 100-meter hurdles, the first sweep in that event and the country's first female sweep of any track and field event.
" Giulia Steingruber won a bronze medal in the vault final, making her the first Swiss woman to win a gymnastics medal.
"The first Iranian woman to medal in the Olympics, Kimia Alizadeh Zenoorin, won bronze in taekwondo.
"Usain Bolt of Jamaica became the first man to win three gold medals in three events - the 100-meter, 200-meter and 100-meter relay race - for the third consecutive Olympics.
The First of Many Flights to Cuba
In yet another sign of thawing relations between the United States and Cuba, JetBlue Flight 387 departed from Fort Lauderdale, Fla., and touched down in Santa Clara, Cuba, on Aug. 
31. It was the first direct commercial flight between the countries since the 1960s, and two Cuban-American pilots were at the helm. 
According to the Transportation Department, up to eight carriers are expected to offer direct flights to Havana by the end of 2016. 
Tourism in Cuba is still not technically permitted for American citizens, but travel is allowed under 12 categories, including family visits, official government business, educational activities and religious purposes.
Zombies Take Over South Korea
For the first time, a zombie movie made in South Korea became a summer smash, beating box-office records in that country, including the highest single-day gross of $9.9 million. 
"Train to Busan," which premiered at the Cannes Film Festival, focuses on the plight of a businessman traveling with his young daughter aboard a high-speed bullet train hit with a terrifyingly fast zombie outbreak. 
South Korean film critics note that the movie resonates with a populace that is disenchanted with government officials, who are portrayed in the movie as trying to cover up the outbreak. 
The government's missteps in handling a 2014 ferry accident in which more than 300 people died and President Park Geun-hye's recent political scandal have contributed to an overall feeling of distrust among South Koreans.
Chinese Universities Rank in Top 100 List for First Time
In 2016, universities in mainland China ranked among the top 100 in the world. 
The Academic Ranking of World Universities, released in September, ranked Tsinghua University 58th, while Peking University trailed at 71st place. 
For the 14th year in a row, Harvard University retained the No. 1 spot. 
Western universities have tended to dominate the list, which has been put together by an independent higher-education consultancy since 2003.
Looking Forward:
A New Face to Grace the $20
Move over, Andrew Jackson. 
Treasury Department officials announced plans to replace the portrait of the seventh president with that of the abolitionist Harriet Tubman on the $20 bill. 
Tubman will be the first black woman to appear on United States paper currency. 
Martha Washington, wife of George Washington, and Pocahontas appeared on certificates in the 1800s. 
The $5 and $10 bills will also be reconfigured in the coming years, with women added to the backs of both bills.
Starbucks Sets its Sights on Italy
Starbucks has more than 24,000 stores in 70 countries, but one country has escaped the siren call of its famous green mermaid - that is, until early next year. 
The chain announced that it would open stores in Italy, where coffee is a way of life. 
The first Italian Starbucks are expected to open in Milan, where the chief executive, Howard Schultz, said that he was inspired more than three decades ago to revolutionize how Americans take their coffee.
This is an article from Turning Points, a magazine that explores what critical moments from this year might mean for the year ahead.
Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and   Twitter, and sign up for the   Opinion Today newsletter.
Tricia Tisak is a writer and editor based in New Jersey.
At Japan's first hedgehog cafe, customers pay 1,000 yen, or about $10, for a half-hour of cuddling the creatures for emotional or psychological recharging. 
WOLFGANG KUMM/DPA VIA AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE - GETTY IMAGES ILLUSTRATIONS BY MIGUEL PORLAN SpaceX, founded by the tech entrepreneur Elon Musk, successfully landed its Falcon 9 rocket on a drone ship for the first time in April. 
SPACEX President Barack Obama and Prime Minister Shinzo Abe of Japan took part in a wreath-laying ceremony at the Hiroshima Peace Memorial in Japan in May. 
DOUG MILLS/THE NEW YORK TIMES MIGUEL PORLAN A conservation group announced in July that for the first time researchers were able to breed blue tang in captivity. 
Marine biologists had worried that the popularity of the Disney character Dory, a blue tang, would endanger it. 
NICOLE BENGIVENO/THE NEW YORK TIMES Usain Bolt of Jamaica looked back at rival Andre De Grasse of Canada in the men's 200-meter semifinal at the Summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro in August. 
Bolt ultimately went on to win that final, along with winning two other gold medals.
