
You'll never think of the phrase ''box office gross'' in the same way again: a pornographic 3-D movie that has already proved a hit in Asia is headed for a theatrical release in the United States. 
The movie, an erotic Hong Kong period drama called ''3D Sex and Zen: Extreme Ecstasy'' and directed by Christopher Sun, is a remake of a 1991 film called ''Sex and Zen,'' which in turn is adapted from a 17th-century work of Chinese erotic fiction known as ''The Carnal Prayer Mat.''
(Among its characters are a lascivious scholar, his virginal bride, a duke with an estimable harem and a horse.)
Explaining his film to Reuters last summer, Mr. Sun said that if audiences are going to pay additional ticket costs for 3-D movies, they should ''get into a world they've never seen before.''
He added, ''It's not just erotica, they want some wow factor.''
And the 3-D version of ''Sex and Zen'' evidently delivered on Mr. Sun's promises: when the movie opened in Hong Kong on April 14 it made $360,000 there, breaking the one-day record set by another 3-D film, ''Avatar'' (whose director, James Cameron, now probably regrets cutting a sex scene out of that movie). 
Reuters said the 3-D ''Sex and Zen'' had also performed strongly in Taiwan, South Korea, Australia and New Zealand.
Soon, prurient United States audiences will be able to see what all the fuss is about: Reuters said that the Chinese-New Zealand company China Lion Film Distribution had purchased North American distribution rights. 
But a release schedule for the film hasn't been decided yet. 
(At the very least, you can hope that other moviegoers won't recognize you while you're wearing your 3-D glasses.)
And while the grown-ups are out seeing that movie they can drop the kids off at a 3-D version of the animated feature ''The Lion King,'' which Disney said on Thursday it would release this fall. 
The upgraded ''Lion King,'' which will feature 3-D versions of beloved characters like Simba, Mufasa,Timon and Pumbaa (and none of the antics featured in ''Sex and Zen''), will receive a two-week theatrical release starting Sept. 
16, and will then receive a Blu-Ray home video release on Oct. 
4.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
