
In 2009, two Dutch compatriots -- Michiel Hulshof, a journalist covering China, and Daan Roggeveen, an architect working there -- met in Shanghai and discovered they had a mutual fascination with urbanization in China. 
They were particularly intrigued by developments in secondary cities like Taiyuan, Hohhot and Lanzhou, which were largely off the West's radar.
In such places, high-rise cities within cities were going up, each a self-sustaining gated community equipped with its own power sources and police forces. 
These complexes constituted an updated version of the traditional Chinese hutong, or enclosed neighborhood, a kind fast vanishing in Beijing under urban renewal.
Within a few years, Mr. Hulshof and Mr. Roggeveen were following the trail of China's urbanization model to Africa, where it was finding a warm welcome. 
The exhibition ''Facing East,'' at the Storefront for Art and Architecture, gathers their documentation of the Chinese development phenomenon in several African countries, including Angola, Ethiopia, Kenya and Nigeria. 
Their photographs and shortish labels demonstrate both the method and the look of an aspect of one culture's being grafted onto another. 
Their pictures of the Chinese-created Greatwall apartment complex in Nairobi, Kenya, could easily have been shot in China itself, were it not for the ethnicity of the tenants.
Architecture is, of course, never socio-politically neutral. 
Cities like Luanda in Angola, Addis Ababa in Ethiopia and Lagos in Nigeria are getting new skylines, but is life at the street level improving?
Will new residential fortresses further divide populations along economic lines?
How benign a partner to African development will China prove to be?
The show's format is academic -- this is essentially a book spread over some walls -- but the questions it raises about the alliance of two of the globe's fastest-growing geographic entities are not.
Storefront for Art and Architecture
97 Kenmare Street, near Cleveland Place, SoHo
Through Aug. 
1
