
The giant yellow banner hanging on Thursday from Lion Rock, a rugged granite outcrop named for how it seems to crouch, lion-like, over the city of Hong Kong, carried a clear message: "I Want True Universal Suffrage."
It also conveyed an unmissable message about cultural identity.
In a video posted on YouTube, a group calling itself "The Hong Kong Spidie" said it had hung the banner, which echoed the key demand of the pro-democracy protests roiling Hong Kong. 
"Today we are occupying Lion Rock," it said. 
(The beginning is in Cantonese. 
The brief English section starts at 1.33.) It explained that its name was a hybrid of "spider" and "kiddie."
[Video: Watch on YouTube.]
The group said it wanted to show the world that Hong Kong was not about just money, but also spirit:
Through this action, "The Hong Kong Spidie" aims to redefine the beauty of the "Spirit of Hong Kong people" - not merely shown in the city's economic growth but in the recent Umbrella Movement to demand for democracy and universal suffrage.
The location of the banner was highly symbolic: Lion Rock, one of the hills that give Kowloon, the mainland part of Hong Kong, its name (Kowloon means "Nine Dragons"), has come to stand for Hong Kong's special identity, one that is stirring deep loyalty among the young people who form the backbone of the pro-democracy movement that has consumed the city since late September.
Starting in the early 1970s, a television series titled "Below the Lion Rock" expressed that identity. 
It ran on and off for decades, exploring daily life, migration, work and love. 
Its message was that life was bittersweet, with its ups and downs, but that Hong Kong people, forged by colonialism, economic struggle and the challenges of the approaching handover to Chinese rule in 1997, were all "in the same boat below the Lion Rock."
The theme song, sung by the late Roman Tam, became a Cantopop classic.
The cultural meme of the lion is figuring elsewhere in the protests:
I love the great Lion Rock memes. 
This one I found on October 2 in Mong Kok. 
#OccupyLionRock http://t.co/HakOkCvJkS
- Leo Weese 狮 草地 (@LeoAW)   23 Oct 14
The Hong Kong police moved quickly to remove the banner on Thursday:
#HK police quickly climbed the Lion Rock (in uniforms!) and is about to remove the #UmbrellaRevolution banner.... http://t.co/aVDne5Vrss
- Badcanto (@Badcanto)   23 Oct 14
Here's the written message on the "Spidie" video, explaining the group's aims:
Up on the Lion Rock: Universal Suffrage for Hong Kong!
22 Oct 2014 Today, a group of climbing enthusiasts, namely, 'The Hong Kong Spidie', unfurled a 6mX28m banner on the top of the Lion Rock. 
Symbolizing the toughness and persistence spirit of Hong Kong people, the Lion Rock is a famous Hong Kong hill located in Kowloon. 
Through this action, 'The Hong Kong Spidie' aims to redefine the beauty of the 'Spirit of Hong Kong people' - not merely shown in the city's economic growth but in the recent Umbrella Movement to demand for democracy and universal suffrage.
Hong Kong chief executive Leung Chun-ying recently reiterated his position that free elections were impossible, and said it would result in the city's many poor dominating politics. 
Andreas, one of the members of 'The Hong Kong Spidie' said, 'We were shock by C.Y. 
Leung's view point that the poor should not have equality in election, and hope this action would be able to call public attention on the importance of universal suffrage.'
'The Hong Kong Spidie' planned this action a week ago, and spent a few hours this morning to climb up the Lion Rock and unfurled the banner. 
'The Hong Kong Spidie' demands the Hong Kong SAR Government to listen to the voices of the Hong Kong people, to stand up and negotiate with the Chinese government on a true democratic universal suffrage for Hong Kong.
And here's a classic rendition of "Below the Lion Rock," sung by Ruby Wong. 
The video includes historic images of Hong Kong:
[Video: Watch on YouTube.]
Some close-ups of Lion Rock:
[Video: Watch on YouTube.]
