
HONG KONG -- Dong Jianguo, 25, a vegetable farmer from the hills outside of Beijing, cannot afford to ski, snowboard, play hockey or luge.
But for months, he has known what he would do if Beijing prevailed in its bid to host the 2022 Winter Olympics: Open an inn on the mountainside and cash in on tourism.
''The Games will make the local people rich, at least some of us,'' Dong said by phone Friday as he sold watermelons by the roadside in Chongli County. 
''I'm just happy.''
Cheers broke out across China on Friday as the International Olympic Committee announced that Beijing would become the first city to host both the Winter and Summer Games. 
People waved giant red flags at the Great Wall and performed dragon dances near the Bird's Nest stadium, built for the 2008 Summer Games.
While the celebration was more muted this time, many residents showed the same strident nationalism that prevailed in the run-up to the 2008 Summer Games, a milestone in China's efforts to be accepted as a world power. 
And for China's leaders, the decision provided another validation of the country's growing clout as it increasingly challenges the West's power and spends billions overseas to win allies.
''We will deliver every promise we made,'' President Xi Jinping said in a video played at a meeting of Olympic delegates in Malaysia. 
''The Chinese people will deliver a wonderful, extraordinary and remarkable Winter Olympics for the world.''
To win its bid, China made a serious of extraordinary promises. 
Officials said they would turn the dry hills outside Beijing into a winter wonderland, despite the fact that the region receives little snow. 
They also pledged to substantially reduce Beijing's air pollution, which remains a serious health risk, especially in the winter.
Chinese citizens on Friday reacted with cool confidence.
''Money can solve all the problems, and we have the money,'' said Zhang Zhaoshi, 76, a retiree.
China has estimated the Games will cost about $3 billion, though analysts expect the total will be much higher. 
The government is already investing in winter sports like snowboarding and skiing to build interest, as well as a reserve of talent.
Some residents said they were concerned the government might spend money on the Olympics at the expense of other programs. 
But mostly, people seemed giddy at the prospect of a jolt to China's economy, which has showed signs of slowing recently.
''They surely have to spend some money in their pockets to improve our lives,'' said Guo Yiwei, 55, a Beijing taxi driver, referring to government leaders. 
''We simply would not allow the foreigners to see how unhappy our Beijingers are, right?''
Guo said hosting the Winter Games would give China the opportunity to showcase its power.
''We can't always sit on the side and let the Americans dominate like a boss, since we also want to be the boss,'' he said. 
''It feels like a doormat when you are number two.''
Many people rejected criticism that Beijing lacked the climate and the infrastructure to host the Winter Games. 
And several dismissed suggestions by advocacy groups and others that China was unfit to host because of human rights abuses, including the recent detention of scores of lawyers.
''I'm sure these kinds of things happen in other countries as well, even democratic countries,'' said Li Xue Feng, 28, a photographer.
The reverie on Friday in Beijing was restrained compared with the celebration in 2001, when streets filled with the sounds of fireworks, car horns and cheering residents. 
But the hillside villages that will now undergo vast transformation were bustling.
''We are all quite excited now,'' said Hui Jiang, 24, a skiing coach in Chongli County, about 150 miles northwest of Beijing. 
''I can feel the motherland is very strong.''
