
GUANGZHOU, China -- Depending on one's point of view, the huge Qingping market here offers either one of China's largest selections of natural healing ingredients for traditional Chinese medicine or a vast array of desiccated and dismembered animal carcasses hawked by little better than snake oil salesmen, some of whom actually sell snake-based remedies.
Within the maze of stalls are dried serpents sold as a cancer cure, as well as vats of crawling scorpions, said to reduce fever, and deer penises, advertised as the answer to erectile dysfunction.
Then there are the plastic sacks stuffed with manta ray gill plates: feathery filaments of cartilage that the rays -- majestic cousins of the shark -- use to filter plankton from seawater as they swim. 
Retailers claim that the gills are a time-tested panacea for modern ills, that they can increase the amount of breast milk, detoxify the blood, cure chickenpox, heal tonsillitis and clear a smoker's lungs.
''I'm not sure how it works, but if you're sick, eat some in a soup and you'll immediately feel better,'' said Ji Songcheng, 25, whose large shop was jammed recently with bags of black and beige manta gills priced around $75 a pound.
But a rapid decline in the world's manta populations means that the gills may soon be going off the market. 
A save-the-mantas campaign appears to be nudging China toward a ban on the gill trade. 
It would be a rare success in an otherwise grim litany of ecological ruination tied to the country's demand for threatened plants and animals.
In part by cultivating support from the government, which is typically loath to take the lead in conservation efforts, the campaign has built up grass-roots and official backing for ending gill sales with a sobering message: The business is not just endangering a vulnerable species; it is also harming consumers.
Conservationists say the Chinese trade in manta ray gills has soared over the past decade, fueled not by a renaissance of tradition but by an unscrupulous network of traffickers looking for ever new ways to profit from the Chinese appetite for wildlife. 
The world's manta populations have dwindled as their gills have piled up in this balmy southern city, home to 99 percent of the trade, according to WildAid, a conservation group based in San Francisco that rolled out the current campaign in 2014.
The group, which uses the tagline ''When the Buying Stops, the Killing Can, Too,'' led two similar efforts that succeeded in reducing demand for both shark fin soup and elephant ivory. 
The campaigns employ tactics like having celebrities explain the direct link between consumption of a coveted natural ingredient and the calamitous impact on endangered wildlife, a concept for the most part unknown before in China.
Toxicology tests by WildAid have also revealed that many of the gills sold at the Qingping market contain dangerous levels of heavy metals and carcinogens, including arsenic, cadmium, mercury and lead, toxic substances that accumulate as the mantas filter plankton through their gills. 
The sale of such a hazardous and scientifically unproven cure-all online and in stores, often marketed to nursing mothers, highlights an alarming flaw in the government's tattered food safety system, which largely ignores traditional medicine.
Advocates say the manta campaign has one other advantage over previous efforts to stem the trade in endangered species: Ray gills have never been officially recognized as traditional Chinese medicine.
''I've read many pharmacopoeia, and none of them record the medical function of manta ray gills,'' said Li Junde, a traditional medicine researcher at the China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences in Beijing.
Mr. Li, who is also a member of China's Endangered Species Scientific Commission, said some villagers in the southern province of Guangdong used manta gills in tonics, although the practice was rare and was not backed by empirical data. 
''It's wrong to sell the gills and say they have a medical value, because there is no modern scientific proof to actually support it,'' he said.
Exactly how a fringe local superstition transformed over a few years into a nationwide industry whose value WildAid puts at $30 million is obscured by the shadowy nature of the trade. 
But researchers say the market has stemmed mostly from a decline in the availability of large shark fins, which led wildlife traffickers to look for new revenue sources across Asia and beyond. 
They found it in gill plates, a product so lucrative that sales more than doubled between 2010 and 2013, according to a WildAid report.
As a result, overfishing has wreaked havoc on not only the world's manta populations but also the $140 million tourism industry that depends on them. 
In some areas of Indonesia, the number of caught mantas declined by as much as 94 percent in about a decade, prompting the government to begin arresting fishermen in 2014 and to prohibit all manta fishing in the country's 2.3-million-square-mile exclusive economic zone. 
That same year, manta rays were given enhanced protections under the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, or Cites. 
The protections require certificates proving that the mantas have been caught and imported legally.
''If you have a permit and a boat, you can go and fish them,'' said Meng Xianlin, the director general of China's endangered species trade authority. 
''Then you can come back and sell them.''
The problem is that China's legal trade is driving illegal trafficking. 
The Li Sheng Ji Fins, Fish Maw and Seafood Shop in Guangzhou also sells manta ray gills on the e-commerce site Taobao. 
All the gills come from Indonesia, despite the ban there, said the shop owner, who would give only his last name, Li. 
''In China, manta ray is not listed as the first, second or third level of endangered species,'' he said. 
''So you don't need to worry about being arrested after buying gills from me.''
Still, conservationists, citing close collaboration with the Chinese authorities, say they are hopeful that the trade will soon end. 
Since the upgraded Cites listing, WildAid and other groups have cooperated with Chinese customs and environmental department agents to educate them about the ecological damage wrought by gill sales and to improve their methods of identifying endangered wildlife.
''As long as you're not vilifying the government, they are willing to work together,'' said Shawn Heinrichs, a wildlife campaigner working with WildAid. 
He said that the campaign's slew of commercials, billboards and Chinese celebrity endorsements had helped make it culturally acceptable for the authorities to crack down on the gill trade. 
''The grass-roots support gave them political cover.''
As things stand, the authorities in Guangzhou are quietly permitting vendors to sell their remaining inventory but are not allowing them to buy more gills. 
''We know they've been through the markets to inform vendors it's now going away,'' said John Baker, the managing director of WildAid, which sent undercover investigators to survey the market in December. 
''They're moving in the right direction.''
Indeed, the manta campaign has found some unlikely supporters among the Guangzhou gill vendors. 
Surrounded by bags of unsold gills at the Qingping market, Chen Jiawen, 40, said that while the government crackdown might have been bad for business, she had to respect the larger goal of conservation.
''Mantas are being killed off,'' she said. 
''So if there are no customers, there will be no slaughter.''
Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today's Headlines: Asian Morning newsletter. 
Sign up here.
