
FRANKFURT -- When the term ''industrial design'' was introduced to South Korea in the early 1960s, the country was desperately poor and scarred by decades of occupation by the Japanese and a brutal civil war against North Korea. 
The first design schools had barely opened, and Samsung was still a food manufacturer that had only recently ventured into electronics.
Half a century later, South Korea is one of the world's most dynamic design centers. 
It dominates the global markets for future-facing products like smart phones and liquid-crystal screens. 
Samsung is mooted as the likeliest contender to dislodge Apple as the alpha design brand of our time, and each year about 25,000 graduates leave South Korean universities having majored in design, more than any other country except China.
The role of design in transforming South Korea is the theme of ''Korea Power: Design and Identity'' running through Aug. 
25 at the Museum Angewandte Kunst here. 
Starting in the 1950s, at the end of the Korean War, the exhibition finishes by exploring how, after decades of globalization, South Korea is now developing a distinctive design culture, rooted in its rich artisanal history.
I must admit that I often groan when museums devote exhibitions to this, that or the other nation's efforts to define a design identity for the simple reason that they tend to be drearily jingoistic. 
South Korea is not the first struggling economy to have deployed design as a strategic tool: Italy and Denmark did so with resounding success after World War II, followed by Japan and, more recently, by China.
But the story of South Korea's design renaissance is told so compellingly by the Frankfurt exhibition and the accompanying catalog that, far from being dull, ''Korea Power'' acts as a timely study for all of the other ambitious Asian, African and East European countries striving to design their way toward economic growth.
The exhibition opens with an exquisite 17th-century lacquered porcelain jar that symbolizes one of South Korea's design assets: the tradition of fine craftsmanship that flourished throughout the Joseon period of its history from 1392 until 1910. 
Like so much of Korean culture, its craft heritage was abandoned during the Japanese occupation and the civil war. 
South Korea emerged from the conflict in an even weaker condition than the North, which was more heavily industrialized. 
As the designer Kim Young Se, the first Korean to study industrial design in the United States, wrote in the catalog, ''desperation'' was a powerful incentive for the country to change.
Political initiatives helped too. 
Having identified a number of industries, including electronics, where it could develop powerful positions, South Korea invested heavily in the resources required to do so, including design schools. 
Like many other developing economies, it began by importing components from other countries, and copying them on a sub-contracted basis for foreign companies.
South Korea's manufacturers then nurtured the necessary design and technological expertise to develop their own branded products, often focusing on fledgling markets, which their competitors had either overlooked or decided to ignore to protect their vested interests.
The exhibition traces the impact of design on South Korean consumer culture through a haunting series of photographs taken Kim Han-Yong in the 1950s of daily life throughout the country, followed by a succession of advertising campaigns starting in the 1960s. 
A collection of photographs taken by the German architectural photographer Dieter Leistner of similar types of buildings in both North and South Korea illustrates the growing economic and cultural gulf between the countries.
Yet the most intriguing aspect of ''Korea Power'' is the emergence of a singular design culture in South Korea, as its increasingly confident and sophisticated designers have drawn on their cultural history, just as postwar Italian designers were inspired by the vivid colors and flamboyant shapes of their rustic traditions and the voluminous folds of late 20th-century Japanese fashion evoked those of ancient kimonos and Asian peasant clothes.
One of the earliest design emblems of the newly assertive South Korea was Hodori, the mascot of the 1988 Seoul Olympic Games, which was a tiger, a familiar animal in Korean folklore, sporting a sangmo hat traditionally worn by peasant musicians. 
More recently, architects have revived the ancient Hanok style of Korean courtyard houses, which are fashionably energy-efficient, being designed to be cool in summer and warm in winter, but were demolished in large numbers from the 1960s onward to make way for high rises.
''Korea Power'' also shows how furniture designers, like Ha Ji Hoon and Song Seung-Yong, are reinventing historic forms, including portable tables that are low enough to be used by people sitting on the floor in the traditional way. 
Some of the most beautiful and ingenious objects in the exhibition are the delicate bowls and boxes made from paper, wood and ceramics by Choi Jungyou, Kim Yikyung and other designers, who reinterpreted ancient techniques and materials to produce them.
All of these works share the defining qualities of Korean craftsmanship -- simplicity, restraint, precision, flexibility and sensitivity to context -- that seem propitious at a time when designers are striving to imbue their work with nuance and meaning, to strike an emotional chord with consumers who are bored by globalization.
Such attributes are even evident on an industrial scale. 
One of Samsung's strengths has been its ability to produce injection-molded plastic of such high quality that the surfaces of its tiny digital devices like smart phones feel luxurious. 
Realizing that the smaller such products become, the more intimate our relationship with them will be, making their tactile qualities more important, Samsung planned its design strategy accordingly.
Yet another typically Korean quality has proved equally effective in design. 
It is identified in the catalog by Klaus Kemp, one of the exhibition's curators, as the ''optimistic approach to life, which is not simply a stereotype but is really embedded in the mind.''
Having fueled South Korea's design ascent so far, the same optimism bodes well for its future.
