
The sale of the luxury shoemaker Jimmy Choo is proof that private equity firms can make things happen. 
The company's backers have made a stellar return from their investment, in spite of buying the company at the height of the boom. 
Its new owner -- Labelux, owned by Germany's Reimann family -- may not make as fast a buck. 
But snapping up the maker of the heels synonymous with the hit show ''Sex and the City'' makes sense as a long-term bet on the Asian luxury market.
TowerBrook Capital Partners is selling Jimmy Choo for an enterprise value of $:500 million to $:550 million ($810 to $890 million), according to news reports. 
The precise financial terms of the buyout are not clear. 
But the exit generates a return of more than three times the initial investment. 
That's not bad for an acquisition made in 2007, a vintage that many buyout firms would rather forget.
At the top of that range, the deal values Jimmy Choo at about 15.7 times last year's earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization of about $:35 million. 
That's a reasonable multiple for Labelux to pay. 
The share price of the Italian shoemaker Tod's equates to an enterprise value of about 13.2 times historic Ebitda.
But that's just a market multiple. 
Acquisition valuations can be astronomical. 
Consider the eye-popping 27 times Ebitda that LVMH Moet Hennessy Louis Vuitton recently offered for a controlling stake in Bulgari. 
Moreover, Jimmy Choo is growing fast, with Ebitda now running at an annualized $:45 million.
The Reimanns have been steadily accumulating premium and luxury brands. 
The stable includes Bally shoes, Coty perfume and Zagliani handbags. 
Jimmy Choo further tilts the portfolio toward luxury, implying a potentially higher rating for the group if it were to be sold.
Labelux can probably reap operational synergies with Jimmy Choo. 
But the prize lies in further extending the brand beyond shoes, while taking it deep into China. 
Jimmy Choo has just a toehold there; Bally is in dozens of cities.
It will be hard for Labelux to repeat TowerBrook's quick gain, but Labelux hasn't overpaid and it has a credible strategy. 
The shoe seems to fit nicely.
Lagarde for I.M.F.?
Speaking fluent English and being European shouldn't be the only two qualities required of a managing director of the International Monetary Fund. 
Yet some of the I.M.F.'s major shareholders -- many European members, probably the United States and possibly China -- seem to agree that Christine Lagarde should lead the institution now that Dominique Strauss-Kahn has resigned. 
Yet after four years as French finance minister, it's hard to see what qualifies her for this job, save for the fawning by the international media.
Ignore the fact that there's no reason the job should go to a European in the first place, even if that has been the tradition. 
The notion of Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany that it takes an I.M.F. chief from the euro zone to deal with the region's debt mess can easily be shot down.
A non-European would have an advantage because he or she wouldn't be suspected of being an interested party in the heated debates over Europe's crisis. 
Sure, Mr. Strauss-Kahn did a stellar job of cajoling the Europeans into action, using the carrot of I.M.F. cash. 
But that had more to do with his own qualities than his passport.
Let's also forget the not-so-mundane problem that Ms. Lagarde could soon be placed under formal investigation on allegations that she misused her powers to help a friend of President Nicolas Sarkozy of France in a business dispute.
More important is that Ms. Lagarde lacks what is needed for the job. 
As French finance minister, she can be attached to no single reform, debate, decision or policy. 
She has done mostly Mr. Sarkozy's bidding. 
Throughout the debt crisis, she articulated France's position but didn't do much to define it. 
Finally, she hasn't even been the voice of fiscal discipline, as a finance minister should be in a deficit-prone country. 
Her voice has barely been heard.
Ms. Lagarde, who has no academic training in economics or finance, doesn't even seem to have a strong set of beliefs. 
She has mostly been the international face of Mr. Sarkozy's policies, which hasn't prepared her for a job she would get only after high-level diplomatic horse-trading. 
The I.M.F. needs a leader. 
She doesn't fit the bill.
QUENTIN WEBB
and PIERRE BRIANCON
For more independent financial commentary and analysis, visit www.breakingviews.com.
