
It's rare in this country for an actual political fight to break out over a filmmaker. 
The current squabble over Quentin Tarantino's remarks about police shootings stands out for its oddity -- we usually see controversy involving a director only when Michael Moore has a new documentary to promote.
In Japan in 1968, however, public demonstrations were held to protest the firing of a director from his studio contract. 
When Nikkatsu terminated its relationship with Seijun Suzuki, who had made 40 increasingly strange and striking B-pictures for the company in 12 years -- accusing him of making ''incomprehensible'' films ''understood only by an exclusive audience'' -- radicalized Japanese students, along with film critics and civilian movie lovers, rallied to his cause. 
(Their efforts were unsuccessful -- he wouldn't release another movie for nine years.)
It feels appropriate that Mr. Tarantino is in the news just as ''Action and Anarchy,'' a 21-movie retrospective of Mr. Suzuki's career, opens at the Film Society of Lincoln Center (Friday through Nov. 
17) in association with a new book, ''Time and Place are Nonsense: The Films of Seijun Suzuki'' by Tom Vick (Freer/Sackler). 
Mr. Tarantino is one of the most prominent filmmakers influenced by Mr. Suzuki's commitment to bringing his own style and his own sometimes whacked-out ideas to the production of commercial, genre cinema.
The Lincoln Center series emphasizes the films from Mr. Suzuki's Nikkatsu period, the gangster pictures, social-problem dramas (the problem usually being sex) and pop-music fantasies that made him a cult hero for Japanese youth at the time and, decades later, a symbol of Japanese cool for Western filmmakers. 
It includes the two best-known examples of his personal transmogrification of the American pulp aesthetic -- the films that got him fired -- ''Tokyo Drifter'' (1966) and ''Branded to Kill'' (1967).
These are stark, modernist shoot-'em-ups, shot and edited in a way that combines anomie with constant disorientation. 
It ultimately doesn't matter who lives or dies, or whether the fleeing gangster heroes survive -- the drama, and the entertainment, resides in how well Mr. Suzuki; his production designer Takeo Kimura; and his actors, particularly his regular player Jo Shishido, execute the existential, weirdly romantic poses that constitute the plot.
The breadth of the series means that the range of Mr. Suzuki's early assignment work can be seen, from the rock-musical opera gloss ''Carmen From Kawachi'' (1966) to the prostitution dramas ''Gate of Flesh'' (1964) and ''Story of a Prostitute'' (1965). 
One of the earliest films in the series, ''Smashing the O-Line'' (1960), embeds a theme of postwar corruption and moral laxity -- ''Tokyo is turning into Hong Kong,'' a disgusted observer says -- in a convoluted story (by Goro Tanada and Yasuro Yokoyama) involving rival newspaper reporters, drug gangs, a nefarious plastic surgeon and the trafficking of illegal immigrants.
Mr. Suzuki hasn't arrived at his mature action style in ''O-Line,'' but he already knows how to catch your eye. 
In one scene, a reporter's girlfriend is grabbed by gangsters who take her into a car that they drive in circles, so that while we watch a tight shot of the hero negotiating her release, every few seconds the car passes in the background with his lover screaming for help.
The subversive charge and eccentric formalism of the Nikkatsu films will always be the basis of Mr. Suzuki's reputation, but his post-'60s work, in which he mostly moves away from the B-movie strictures, is just as inventive and strange. 
Mr. Vick, in ''Time and Place Are Nonsense,'' says that one of his book's goals is ''to rescue Suzuki from his reputation in the West as a figurehead of 'extreme' cinema.''
Which is not to say that a movie like ''A Tale of Sorrow and Sadness'' (1977), Mr. Suzuki's comeback picture after the Nikkatsu debacle, isn't extreme in its own way. 
Anticipating ''The King of Comedy'' by five years, it's a pitch-black satire about the wages of fame. 
An attractive young woman is turned into a golf star and a pop-culture luminary by a coterie of men -- several of whom exploit her sexually -- and then finds herself the semi-willing victim of an obsessed fan who moves into her house and invites most of the neighborhood along. 
Chaotic and hard to follow, the film is also compulsively watchable, for its savage sendup of 1970s styles of commercialism and celebrity and for its wild expressionist touches.
The series also includes what appears to be Mr. Suzuki's last film, ''Princess Raccoon'' from 2005 (he's now 92). 
If it is his final effort, few directors will have gone out on a higher, or more offbeat, note. 
A fairy tale for adults, it's theatrical, musical (from hip-hop to operatic) and charmingly decorative -- characters emerge from or travel through brush paintings; a king demonstrates his extravagance by playing his scenes in front of huge mock-ups of old-master paintings. 
The Chinese actress Zhang Ziyi plays the title character -- actually a tanuki, the raccoon-dog that figures large in Japanese folklore -- and for the nonhuman tanuki language, Mr. Suzuki simply has her, for the most part, speak Chinese. 
It's the kind of adaptive, delightful decision he spent a long career making.
­''Action and Anarchy: The Films of Seijun Suzuki'' runs from Friday through Nov. 
17 at Walter Reade Theater, Lincoln Center; 212-875-5601, filmlinc.com.
