
The Australian economy, once considered a relatively save haven, is headed for a steep downturn in 2009, in part because of slower-than-expected growth in China, a leading forecaster said Monday.
In a starkly worded quarterly outlook report, the Australian research firm Access Economics warned that the mining-led economy ''will unwind scarily fast'' in 2009, sending the Australian dollar and interest rates crashing.
''This is not just a recession,'' the report said. 
''This is the sharpest deceleration Australia's economy has ever seen.''
The report predicted that the central bank would be forced to cut interest rates to 2.5 percent, from 4.25 percent, to stimulate growth.
About 300,000 jobs will be lost and corporate profits will be cut in half, it said.
''China's slowdown is Australia's recession,'' the report said. 
''Many businesses will fail, as demand gains shrink.''
It is the latest in a string of worsening predictions about the Australian economy, which has long regarded itself as relatively immune to the financial problems affecting the United States and Europe because of its dependence on commodities.
Australian banks have so far avoided crippling exposure to bad mortgage-related debts in the United States, and many economists had believed that continued, though weaker, demand from China for Australian mineral resources would save the country from recession.
In its last forecast in November, the International Monetary Fund predicted that China would continue to record strong growth and that Australia would be one of the few industrialized economies to grow in 2009, albeit at a modest 1.8 percent.
But the breakdown in financial markets last year shattered confidence around the world, leaving few corners of the world untouched. 
A sharper-than-expected fall in Chinese demand for resources exposed Australian vulnerability, the report said.
Justin Smirk, an economist with Westpac Banking, one of the biggest Australian banks, said the report was ''not far off consensus'' among analysts, who are busy revising their forecasts downward as the global economy continues to sour.
''The bottom line is that I would be expecting the I.M.F. to be downgrading its outlook for Australia,'' Mr. Smirk said.
Wayne Swan, the Australian treasurer, said the government, which has already thrown billions of dollars in stimulus money at the economy, was prepared to ''take further decisive action'' if necessary.
But how much more leeway Mr. Swan will have is open to debate.
The Australian government has enjoyed steady budget surpluses and is under political pressure to keep deficit spending to a minimum.
Access Economics predicted that falling commodities prices would drag company profits down, meaning fewer corporate taxes to fill federal coffers and inevitable budget deficits.
''There's no doubt that the slowing of the global economy -- the impact on commodity prices -- certainly has very significant ramifications for growth here,'' Mr. Swan told a national broadcaster Monday. 
''It will certainly impact upon the budget bottom line.''
