
HONG KONG -- A recruitment firm looking to track down Asia's most highly prized investment bankers would normally begin searching in their natural habitat -- Hong Kong.
Now, a headhunter would more likely book a flight to Manila, home to the one-man deal factory -- Lauro Baja of the Swiss bank UBS.
Mr. Baja is among Asia's highest-paid bankers, with estimated income topping $3 million, according to recruitment consultants and a former UBS colleague, and he personifies Southeast Asia's emergence as a major new center for deal makers.
The region has seen $46.5 billion in capital raisings and mergers and acquisitions during the past two years, up 9 percent compared with 2010-11, Thomson Reuters data shows. 
The data includes deals that have been announced but not yet closed.
That has created fevered demand for the few experienced, connected bankers who can make those deals happen.
''In Southeast Asia you have a minuscule pool,'' said Russell Kopp, managing director in Hong Kong at the executive search firm Correlate Search. 
''Everybody knows who they are, and there's probably only three people who could fill each of these very specific roles, so that drives up pay.''
Financial industry recruiters and hiring managers at investment banks say that some recent poaches of Southeast Asian bankers involve total compensation packages of about $1 million or more -- putting them on par with many Wall Street colleagues.
That would still be much less than what Mr. Baja earns in a good year at his post in the Philippines, which has seen a steady wave of stock, debt and merger deals since 2009.
Mr. Baja, who declined to be interviewed for this article, is known as a savvy and well-connected banker whose father was a Philippine ambassador who at one time also served as president of the United Nations Security Council.
Mr. Baja's 2002 wedding was a top story in Manila's society pages, attended by the former presidents Gloria Macapagal Arroyo and Fidel Ramos and an array of elite politicians and bankers.
Big contracts for connected bankers in Asia were once the realm of China deal makers, who earned premiums sometimes worth millions of dollars over their peers in New York and London to take on a vast and growing market.
As deal volumes in China have fallen, that premium has shifted to Southeast Asia, where they have steadily risen. 
As a result, investment banking fees jumped to an estimated $1.6 billion last year, up 23 percent from 2009, Thomson Reuters data shows. 
That compares with a 6 percent decline in fees for Chinese investment banking -- excluding local A-share deals, which are available only to mainland residents -- over the same period, Thomson Reuters data shows.
Among Southeast Asian merger and acquisition markets, the Philippines has brought down a shower of fees for rainmakers like Mr. Baja.
Through stock, bond, and merger and acquisition advisory and underwriting, UBS earned an estimated $28.7 million in fees in the Philippines this year, Thomson Reuters data shows, taking 17 percent market share -- or more than double its closest rival, Deutsche Bank. 
Those fees do not include work in areas like brokering and derivatives.
Bankers in a relatively small but active market like the Philippines benefit from fee distributions going to a small pot of advisers, as opposed to larger markets.
A managing director in the capital markets division at a top investment bank in Hong Kong can earn around half of Mr. Baja's estimated total compensation in a good year, according to banking recruitment specialists who declined to be identified because they were not authorized to speak to the news media.
Mr. Baja paid the third-highest individual taxes in the Philippines in 2011, according to a list released by the Bureau of Internal Revenue, when he paid 34.3 million pesos, or about $785,000. 
He was 26th on the 2012 list, paying 26.3 million pesos in tax.
Deal fees have also rained down on Thailand and Malaysia.
Deutsche Bank's hiring in July of UBS's veteran head of investment banking in Thailand, Phumchai Kambhato, nearly doubled his compensation, according to people familiar with the matter. 
One headhunter, also familiar with the matter, said that would mean a package of anywhere from $600,000 to $1.5 million.
In October, UBS hired Sufyan Abdul Jabbar from Malaysia's CIMB for a top banking role in that country. 
One person familiar with the matter said Mr. Jabbar's move handed him a compensation package of nearly $1 million. 
Like the others discussing compensation, the person was not authorized to speak to the news media.
Deutsche Bank and UBS declined to comment for this article, citing company policy not to talk about individuals' pay. 
Mr. Jabbar and Mr. Kambhato did not respond to calls seeking comment.
Estimated fee revenues in Malaysia for arranging bond, equity, debt and other deals amounted to $633.8 million last year, Thomson Reuters data shows, the largest haul in the region and 32 percent higher than the next-highest country, Singapore. 
This year, Goldman Sachs earned hundreds of millions of dollars from arranging debt offerings for a single Malaysian client, the state fund 1MDB, IFR reported. 
Goldman Sachs declined to comment.
''Everyone is fishing from the same pond, which puts pressure on salary expectations and leads to wage inflation,'' said Mark Ellwood, managing director for Southeast Asia at the recruitment firm Robert Walters.
