
FRANKFURT -- A main indicator of business sentiment in Europe unexpectedly fell deeper toward recession territory Thursday, compounding concerns about the global recovery after signs of slowing manufacturing in China.
The gloomy data provided a reminder that, despite the aura of calm in Europe after months of debt-crisis fever, the 17 European Union members that use the euro still have fundamental problems.
Major stock indexes in Europe fell broadly Thursday, and the euro slipped against the dollar, after a survey of purchasing managers suggested that growth in the euro zone declined in the first three months of the year. 
That would be the region's second consecutive quarter of negative growth, which would meet the broad definition of a recession. 
Stocks were also down in the United States. 
Reinforcing the survey results, manufacturing orders in the euro zone fell 2.3 percent in January from December, according to a report Thursday by Eurostat, the European Union's statistics office. 
That was a slightly bigger drop than expected.
The figures suggest that the euro zone is still struggling even after a flood of cash from the European Central Bank helped calm fears of a banking crisis and credit crunch.
''The easing of the sovereign debt crisis has apparently failed to bring about a lasting improvement in business sentiment,'' Christoph Weil, an economist at Commerzbank, wrote in a note to clients. 
Reports next week should offer more clues about the direction of the European economy.
On Monday, the Ifo Institute in Munich will release its monthly survey of business sentiment in Germany, seen as a reliable indicator of growth in the country, the euro zone's largest economy. 
On Wednesday, the central bank will release its monthly report on the euro zone's money supply, which economists will watch for signs of a recovery in bank lending.
A report by the European Systemic Risk Board, which monitors Europe's financial system, warned that banks remained under pressure as they tried to reduce risky assets and find new sources of capital.
''The main issue is how to ensure the provision of credit to the economy in the current environment,'' the board said. 
It includes representatives of the central bank, the European Commission and financial industry regulators.
In China, weak external and domestic demand continued to weigh on the manufacturing sector in March, a survey released Thursday showed, raising expectations that the Chinese authorities would step up measures to revive economic momentum.
The survey of purchasing managers in the Chinese factory sector, released by HSBC, showed that activity declined in March for the fifth consecutive month, as the Chinese economy felt the pain of feeble global economic activity.
China has become a major market for European products as varied as heavy machinery and luxury goods, so a slowdown there worsens problems in Europe.
The preliminary reading in the China survey for March dropped to 48.1 from 49.6 in February. 
Readings below 50 signal contraction, and even though the reading provides only an early insight into this sector of the Chinese economy, the decline was disappointing.
The Australian dollar, which is acutely affected by signs of weakness in China, dropped against the United States dollar after the economic figures were released. 
Oil and gold prices also declined.
In Europe, the purchasing managers' survey, compiled by Markit Economics, slipped to a three-month low of 48.7 in March from 49.3 in February. 
In that survey, too, a reading below 50 indicates a contraction in economic activity.
The Markit survey also pointed to a decline in German manufacturing. 
That is particularly worrisome, because German exports have helped to compensate for sluggishness in Southern Europe as countries like Italy and Spain cut government spending to reduce debt.
''Any hope that the manufacturing cycle is turning rapidly in the euro area is dashed by today's numbers,'' Stella Wang, an analyst in London for Nomura, wrote in a note. 
But she said the figures were unlikely to prompt the European Central Bank to cut its benchmark interest rate from 1 percent, because inflation remained above the official target of about 2 percent.
The Chinese and euro zone economies are closely linked because many German exports, including cars and heavy machinery, are sold there. 
China has become the largest market for Volkswagen and other German companies.
''With new export orders sluggish and domestic demand still softening, China's slowdown has yet to finish,'' Xiaoping Ma and Qu Hongbin, economists who follow China for HSBC, wrote in a research note.
Dariusz Kowalczyk, a strategist in Hong Kong for Credit Agricole, wrote in a research note about the purchasing managers' index, that ''the drop is quite large, especially given that March tends to bring an improvement.''
Although the reading is likely to reinforce fears of a hard landing for the Chinese economy, Mr. Kowalczyk emphasized that the slowdown in manufacturing activity was expected to be temporary and that he continued to believe China would have a soft landing, with overall growth this year of 8 percent.
The upside is that Beijing has a fair amount of firepower it can deploy to stimulate growth. 
May analysts say they expect the authorities to employ a range of these tools as the year progresses.
