
While most eyes were on the huge vigil in Hong Kong's Victoria Park to mark the 25th anniversary of the Tiananmen Square crackdown, a separate demonstration by more ardently anti-Communist Party protesters drew several thousand people across the harbor on Wednesday night, highlighting the different approaches to confronting Beijing's rule of the territory.
The rally in Tsim Sha Tsui, led by the political activist Wong Yeung-tat and the local legislator Wong Yuk-man, exhibited the more militant strand of Hong Kong politics: They set the Communist Party flag on fire and pledged to "occupy" the city's Legislative Council if Hong Kong's government does not grant "genuine" universal suffrage in devising electoral reforms later this year.
"We're about to reach a historical point for Hong Kong's future," said Mr. Wong, the political activist. 
"We must fight for the right for Hong Kong people to rule Hong Kong, for a high degree of autonomy."
While Beijing has agreed to let Hong Kong select its leader by a "one-person, one-vote" method in 2017, it is expected to exert control over who can be nominated for the job. 
The city's de facto constitution, the Basic Law, states that candidates are to be selected by a "nominating committee."
But the protesters in Tsim Sha Tsui demanded that the public should be able to decide whom to nominate, a position also taken by the group known as Occupy Central, which has planned disruptive protests if such measures are not enacted.
Organizers of the Tsim Sha Tsui protest said that the rally drew 7,000 people. 
But the police said there were 3,060 people at the peak of the demonstration.
The organizers derided the Victoria Park rally as being ineffective in pressing Beijing on democracy.
"We have to start our own rally because we're fed up with the ceremonial ritual," Mr. Wong, the activist, said, calling the 25 years of vigil a misguided effort. 
"Today we are Hong Kongese, not Chinese. 
We must fight the murderous regime."
The organizers made a distinction to suggest a growing strain of Hong Kong nationalism and pride: They said they did not identify themselves as Chinese and described Beijing's rule of Hong Kong as a form of Chinese colonialism. 
Their beliefs are reflective of a growing "localist" movement that calls for fewer mainland Chinese visitors to the city and the preservation of the local language and cultures.
China regained control of the territory in 1997 after more than 150 years of British rule, but under its handover agreement with Britain it granted Hong Kong autonomy on many matters of governance.
After the official end of the rally, the hosts asked the protesters to "take a stroll on Canton Road before going home" in an apparent call for a march in the popular shopping street.
Police officers scrambled to set up orange tapes to separate the marchers on the busy sidewalk from the road so they didn't block traffic. 
They told the marchers that they might be prosecuted for their acts because the march had not been approved.
"Down with the Communist Party," the protesters chanted on, before dispersing on the other end of the street.
