
SHANGHAI -- This can be a confounding city, with a constant chorus of traffic and construction noise, the chatter of passersby and the cries of street vendors.
So in 2010, when the Swedish expatriates Marie Wennberg and Magnus Romberg discovered Jiashan Market, a green-focused urban planning experiment tucked away in a quiet corner of the former French Concession, they were immediately attracted to its peaceful, courtyard-centered design.
Ms. Wennberg, then a branding consultant, and her husband, director of business development at the medical assistance company International SOS, had just finished renovating another rental property in the French Concession and were not really looking for a new place. 
But after the newlyweds spent some time talking to residents and soaking up the atmosphere, it was not long before they were convinced it was to be their new home.
''We just liked the feel of Jiashan Market as we were walking around and meeting people,'' said Mr. Romberg, 42. 
''It was a feeling of community that we felt.''
The Jiashan Market development, which opened in April 2010, was created by Brearley Architects + Urbanists, a practice founded in Australia that now has offices in China. 
It is run by the husband-and-wife team of James Brearley and Shirley Fang.
Ms. Fang said her love of the outdoors and Mr. Brearley's passion for designing spaces that mix residential and commercial use were the catalysts for the project, a development that she thinks is unique in Shanghai.
''We believe you can create a great atmosphere through design,'' Ms. Fang said. 
''Although design alone cannot create community, bad design can prohibit a community from forming. 
In Shanghai there are a lot of residential projects that have a lot of green space but it's not used, so you have to really design carefully to ensure that life will spread out into this space.''
The architects convinced the owner of a dilapidated former knitting factory to give them a long-term lease, so they could renovate its eight low-rise buildings using environmentally sound materials, like recycled wood, and creating sustainable elements, like three rooftop gardens, an unusual addition to any building in a major Chinese city. 
They covered most of the cost, though the owner paid for some work to ensure the buildings were sound before renovations began.
Mr. Romberg is quick to note that the sustainable aspect of Jiashan Market is of a different standard than that one might expect, for example, in Scandinavia, but added that the developers achieved their goal of promoting a real sense of community among residents.
Ms. Wennberg, 37, agreed. 
''We thought it would be better executed than it was'' in terms of sustainability, she said. 
''But it is, I think, quite unique in any bigger city that you know your neighbors. 
It is completely natural here to see someone having a glass of wine at one of the cafes and to sit down and join them, which is really nice.''
This community aspect of Jiashan Market has been particularly important to the couple since the arrival of their 15-month-old son Vidar, whom they hope will be able to play with the children who crowd the central courtyard on weekends when he is older.
The market's commercial area includes several restaurants and cafes as well as offices, a clothing store and hair salon.
Although some apartments are in mixed-use structures, Mr. Romberg and Ms. Wennberg's 150-square-meter, or 1,615-square-foot, two-bedroom apartment is housed in a residential-only building, which spans five floors and has two apartments per floor.
They pay 20,000 renminbi, or $3,200, a month in rent. 
Apartments within the complex vary from 90-square-meter studios to 200-square-meter apartments, with monthly rents ranging from 12,000 renminbi to 30,000 renminbi.
In the couple's two-bedroom apartment, four-meter, or 13-foot, high ceilings make the 60-square-meter central living and dining area seem larger than its actual size, and exposed concrete, overflowing bookshelves and parked bicycles add to the loft styling.
The vertical, floor-to-ceiling, timber-framed windows offer a lot of natural light, a major factor for Ms. Wennberg, who has struggled to find a well-lit space in the eight years she has lived in the country. 
She settled first in Beijing.
The décor is largely a collection of odds and ends from the couple's life in China, including a large, multihued felt rug in the Turkic style, picked up from Xinjiang Province, in northwest China, as well as a number of restored antiques from the country's dynastic past.
''Most of what you see here we had when we moved in, and everything had to find its place,'' Ms. Wennberg said. 
''I think that it was surprisingly easy because of this raw space, and all these great angles give you a lot of freedom. 
It creates a nice contrast with the traditional Chinese furniture in this apartment, which overall has quite an industrial feel.''
Favorite pieces cited by the couple include a custom-built walnut table and an antique Chinese medicine cabinet -- Mr. Romberg joked that he would fight hard to keep it if the couple were ever to divorce.
''It's never going to be finished,'' Ms. Wennberg said of their home decorating. 
''I was biking home from the gym the other day and I saw this old man on the street selling these woven baskets -- ''
''Uh oh!''
Mr. Romberg interjected with feigned horror before encouraging her to continue.
''And I've seen them before and thought they were really beautiful so I bought one of those,'' she continued, ''and next week I will probably see a beautiful tea jar and that will come home with me. 
The little stuff will constantly evolve.''
''This space here is full of stuff that we just love,'' Mr. Romberg said, adding that when his wife picked something up, ''I have no idea where we are going to put it, but everything finds a place.''
