
It is a Masters brimming with epochal change.
Augusta National Golf Club has female members at last, and for those understandably in need of definitive proof, there was Condoleezza Rice on Sunday making the rounds during practice in a green jacket.
This Masters also has its youngest competitor ever: the 14-year-old amateur Guan Tianlang, who comes from China, a country that once banned golf because of its bourgeois overtones.
But for all such sociological developments, there is a throwback feel this year with the perennials in bloom and Tiger Woods back atop the list of likely champions, his swagger restored in time for another year's first major. 
Woods was the golfer to beat for so long that it requires hardly any effort to renew old habits and place him back at the heart of the matter if no longer atop any pedestal.
But the proof is in the putting at Augusta with its famously fast greens. 
Woods is indeed back to winning tour events and back at No.1 at the expense of his would-be successor, Rory McIlroy. 
But Woods has not won the Masters since 2005 and had his worst finish at Augusta as a professional last year, tying for 40th. 
He has not won any major since he won his 14th by hobbling through the U.S. 
Open in 2008.
Nearly five years later, his ability to follow through on his boyhood plans to break Jack Nicklaus's all-time record of 18 major victories has become a question of if rather than when.
Woods's Masters drought began before knee problems, swing tinkering and the fallout from personal scandal derailed his dominance.
He won three of the first six Masters in which he played as a professional but has now won only one of his last 10 on a course that Augusta National, led by its former chairman Hootie Johnson, twice lengthened and strengthened in the early 2000s in an attempt to counter the effects of modern equipment and modern athleticism.
Outsiders labeled those changes ''Tiger-proofing,'' although Johnson never embraced the term and it was actually a booming Phil Mickelson drive that pushed him to embrace reconstruction.
The extra trees have generated more troubles for Woods and his driver than the extra length. 
Meanwhile, Mickelson has thrived like never before at the new Augusta, winning in 2004 and 2006 and then again in 2010 with his marvelously foolhardy final-round shot onto the green from the pine needles on the par-5 13th.
It has been a golden age for such Masters-strokes: see Bubba Watson's snap-hook recovery shot during the playoff on his way to the title year.
It has also been a great decade for left-handers, with Canadian Mike Weir becoming the first lefty to win in 2003 and Mickelson and Watson subsequently joining the club.
''Those two guys are a different player than me,'' Weir said at a recent news conference. 
''They're very long, so obviously that's helpful. 
But I think there's some value in being able to fade the ball off a lot of those holes for us, being left-handers, and there are a number of examples, especially on the back nine: 10, 13, 14, 17, all those holes, if you can get the ball working right to left it's a big advantage. 
And sometimes it's a little easier to control a fade, so there might be some value in that and why we've done a little better.''
During the same stretch at the three other majors, the only left-hander to win was Mickelson at the 2005 U.S. 
P.G.A. at Baltusrol in New Jersey.
''I think that for me it sets up really good for my game; I like to cut the ball off the tee,'' Watson said of Augusta. 
''Really there's only three tee shots that really scare me or can get to me on the whole golf course.''
Watson, a popular champion, has not won another tournament since last year's Masters, and despite Woods's resurgence, the numbers are still an eloquent argument for parity.
In the last 17 major tournaments, only one man has managed to win twice. 
That is McIlroy, who won the 2011 U.S. 
Open and last year's P.G.A. 
Championship but has been searching for his best form this year after making a lucrative switch to new clubs and then playing a light early-season schedule.
''He won the last major we played; that says he's a man in current form,'' said the Irish star Padraig Harrington at the Valero Texas Open in San Antonio. 
''It's only the media that thinks that golfers can peak every week.
''All Rory has to worry about is peaking the right weeks, and his game is plenty good enough as he's shown when he does peak,'' Harrington added. 
''He can lap fields. 
Wouldn't you love to just be patient and wait for those weeks to turn up?''
McIlroy looked closer to his peak in San Antonio, shooting a final-round 66 and finishing second to Martin Laird.
''I guess I was more hopeful than expecting going into the last couple of tournaments,'' McIlroy said Sunday. 
''But I think I know now where my game is at, and I'm happy with it.''
McIlroy already knows he has the tools to thrive at Augusta. 
Though he has not finished better than 15th, he had a four-shot lead heading into the final round in 2011 before crumpling with an 80.
Even in questionable form, he clearly belongs somewhere on the Masters short list. 
In total, there are 93 players in the field this year: 44 from the United States, which once held a clear majority at Augusta.
Guan's appearance at age 14 certainly looks like a harbinger of more globalization, and golf's inclusion in the Olympics will only increase China's interest.
But the reality is that there is no Asian golfer in the top 50 in the world rankings. 
Only six Asians are in the Masters field, and the only South American in the field is the former champion Ángel Cabrera.
As international interest and access to the game expands, men's golf remains -- for the moment -- a game in which Europeans, Americans and a handful of South Africans and Australians are the major factors; a game where the burning question is once again: Can Woods win another one?
