
British officials discussed a plan in the early 1980s to resettle the population of Hong Kong, then still a British colony but facing a 1997 deadline for return to China, to Northern Ireland.
The plan, which was outlined in a 1983 file released by the National Archives in Britain on Friday and first reported by   the BBC and   The Guardian, appears to have been meant in jest. 
But it highlighted concerns in Hong Kong about the impending handover and in Northern Ireland about ongoing sectarian unrest.
The idea was first discussed by Christie Davies, a sociology professor at the University of Reading, who wrote an article that appeared in October 1983 in The Belfast News Letter about creating a new city-state that would be populated by 5.5 million former Hong Kong residents, the BBC reported.
The proposal was then taken up by George Fergusson, a junior official in Northern Ireland. 
He wrote to the British Foreign Office that such a resettlement would help reassure unionists, or those in Northern Ireland who support the union with the United Kingdom.
"If the plantation were undertaken, it would have evident advantages in reassuring Unionist opinion of the open-ended nature of the Union," Mr. Fergusson wrote in a letter to the Foreign Office, The Guardian reported. 
He added that American resistance to the plan might be eased by a "possibly happy outcome to the uncertainties currently surrounding Hong Kong."
The proposal and the term "plantation" recall the 16th- and 17th-century resettlement of Scots, Welsh and English on Irish land.
There is no sign the proposal went very far, and the messages between officials indicate that it was not taken very seriously. 
"My mind will be boggling for the rest of the day," one official wrote.
Mr. Davies, who studies humor, said his article was meant to be funny. 
"At the time, the piece was well received in Hong Kong, but it was recognized as humorous," he said by email. 
"The Irish do not understand satire and have no sense of humor so I guess some of them took it seriously."
David Snoxell, a former official with the Republic of Ireland Department of the British Foreign Office who received the file from Mr. Fergusson, told the BBC that it was "a spoof between colleagues."
"You can see it wasn't intended seriously," he said. 
"Sadly, it's impossible to make jokes like this anymore. 
The diplomatic service has lost its sense of humor."
Patrick Boehler contributed reporting.
