
The Treasury Department said on Wednesday that China was not manipulating its currency to increase its exports, a big retreat from the criticism expressed by Timothy F. Geithner in January during his Senate confirmation hearing to become the Treasury secretary.
The new report highlighted the political and diplomatic constraints that the Obama administration faces in dealing with China.
American officials remain frustrated that China's currency policies lower the cost of Chinese goods and make American products more expensive in foreign markets. 
But they are relieved that China is fighting the global recession with an enormous fiscal stimulus program to spur domestic growth.
American officials and lawmakers have complained for years that China deeply undervalues its currency, the yuan, in order to increase its exports at the expense of American producers.
President Obama repeatedly accused China of outright currency manipulation during the presidential campaign, and Mr. Geithner echoed that opinion during his confirmation proceedings.
But in a new report to Congress, Mr. Geithner not only refrained from such accusations, but praised China for its economic stimulus program and its move toward a more realistic exchange rate for the yuan.
''China has taken steps to enhance exchange rate flexibility,'' Mr. Geithner wrote in a statement accompanying the new report.
He said that the yuan had climbed 16.6 percent against other currencies from June through February, even as the financial crisis intensified and other currencies lost value against the dollar.
Treasury officials placed even greater emphasis on China's $586 billion fiscal stimulus program. 
They couched the entire discussion of currency manipulation in the context of fighting the global downturn, adding that China's stimulus program was bigger than that of any other country except the United States.
The substance and tone of the new report contrasted sharply with Mr. Geithner's written response to questions posed by the Senate Finance Committee as it was weighing his nomination to be Treasury secretary.
''President Obama -- backed by the conclusions of a broad range of economists -- believes that China is manipulating its currency,'' Mr. Geithner wrote at the time. 
Though he stopped short of charging that China was intentionally manipulating its currency to gain an unfair trade advantage, as the law requires for an official citation of currency manipulation, Mr. Geithner's mere use of the word infuriated Chinese leaders.
Mr. Geithner tried to head off angry reactions from Congress by calling numerous lawmakers on Wednesday morning, before the report was issued. 
Several leading Democratic critics of China made it clear they were unhappy about Mr. Geithner's new report, but said they understood why Mr. Geithner wanted to avoid a heated conflict.
''I believe the Chinese are manipulating their currency, but given the times and the exigencies, I understand why the administration didn't want to call them a manipulator,'' said Senator Charles E. Schumer of New York, who has repeatedly proposed punitive tariffs on imports from China.
Senator Max Baucus of Montana, chairman of the Senate Finance Committee and another prominent critic of China, said that it needed to ''continue reforms'' and that Mr. Geithner should ''set out clear milestones to measure our progress.''
Some business groups that have complained about China's exchange rates for years were not assuaged.
''While we recognize the delicacy of the global financial situation, today's decision was a missed opportunity,'' said John Engler, president of the National Association of Manufacturers, in a statement.
Mr. Engler said that the International Monetary Fund had already declared China's currency ''significantly undervalued.''
But, he added: ''The I.M.F. is unlikely to take up China's currency as long as the Treasury Department says nothing is amiss.''
