
The decision by the Danbury Mint last month to stop selling die-cast model cars was symptomatic of a more serious shrinkage in a market where the vehicles are already pretty small.
The Connecticut company, which still produces jewelry and collectible plaques and figurines, left the market when its last die-cast car factory in China closed down; another of its Chinese factories closed two years earlier.
According to Mark Fothergill, who owns Replicarz, a die-cast-model seller in Rutland, Vt., the Danbury Mint wasn't the only one to get out of the field in the last few years.
''The Franklin Mint is another one,'' Mr. Fothergill said, referring to the collectibles company that continues to produce coin sets and ceramics, among other items. 
''There's been quite a few in the last five to seven years that have been mainstays in the industry that are gone.''
The models made by Danbury Mint and Franklin Mint are distinguished from the offerings of Matchbox and Hot Wheels by their finer details (doors, trunks and hoods that open, for example) and bigger size, typically 1/18 scale, although there are some well-detailed model cars produced in 1/43 scale. 
Danbury's fleet was in 1/24 scale, a size typical of most build-it-yourself car-model kits.
The Matchbox and Hot Wheels cars, meant primarily as toys rather than display items, still have their fans among adult collectors, and they seem to be generally unaffected by the ills of the larger-scale market.
Mr. Fothergill, who said that he has been selling collectible die-cast cars to individuals and stores for 24 years, pointed out that much of the rollback happened during the years of economic downturn.
''A lot of the manufacturers did not adjust their production runs,'' he said. 
''They would still make 5,000 pieces. 
Now, you have production runs as low as 500 pieces. 
Nobody wants excess stock nowadays.''
Most die-cast models are made in China, Mr. Fothergill said, where one factory can produce cars for a number of brands, adjusting the levels of quality and detail to meet the seller's desired price points. 
But when one of these factories runs into financial difficulties and cannot pay its workers, he said, the Chinese government will step in and shut it down.
''We've seen one factory in the last six months that was a mainstay for 20 years, and they ran into some problems and now they're gone,'' Mr. Fothergill said. 
Part of this can be traced to the upward pressure on wages in Chinese factories.
The added labor costs, as well as a jump in the cost of materials, have raised prices on larger die-cast collectibles by 30 to 35 percent in the last two years, he said. 
Zinc, the metal used for the bodies, has risen in price significantly over the last five years. 
The Danbury Mint cited an increase in prices, to $250 from $150, in its announcement, according to a collector-car website, Hemmings Daily.
But based on his sales, Mr. Fothergill said, collectors have absorbed the price increases. 
''I'd say the collectors have just accepted this as part of the deal.''
In a recent visit to Time Machine Hobby, a Manchester, Conn., store that is one of the biggest in the Northeast, several high-detail die-cast model cars were on display. 
Steve Maynard, the store's owner, said that one way Time Machine kept its shelves stocked was by buying the collections of other hobbyists.
