
LONDON -- For Aly Raisman, waiting was the worst part.In the all-around finals last week, she waited for the final standings after receiving the same score as Russia's Aliya Mustafina. 
Then she lost the bronze medal in a tiebreaker.
On Tuesday, in the balance beam final, she waited as the judges debated if they had erred and scored her too low. 
When they decided they had, then raised her score, she moved into a tie for third with Romania's Catalina Ponor. 
Bracing herself, she waited again to see who would come out on top.
As it turned out, Raisman, the 18-year-old captain of the United States women's team, had spent her life waiting for a day like Tuesday.
She won the bronze medal on balance beam after winning the tiebreaker. 
Less than two hours later, she won the gold medal in the floor exercise, ending her Olympics atop the medals stand singing the national anthem.
''That was the best routine I've ever done,'' said Raisman, who is from Needham, Mass. 
''To have that come the day of the Olympic final, that's what you work for your whole life.''
Raisman's gold allowed the United States women's team to finish the Olympics on a high note. 
Last week, it won the sport's biggest prizes, but medals in individual events had been few.
The Americans won their first team gold in 16 years, with Gabby Douglas stealing the stage as the newest star. 
Two days later, Douglas became the first black woman to win the all-around.
Raisman's two medals Tuesday gave the United States women five medals at these Games. 
McKayla Maroney was the only other American woman to win a medal in an apparatus final, taking silver on the vault.
Even though the medal count is down from the 2008 Beijing Games -- when the American women gymnasts won eight medals -- Martha Karolyi, the women's national team coordinator, said she was thrilled with the team's performance. 
She said it is leaving London with ''the two biggest medals that any country can wish for.''
''The extra individual medals?'' she said. 
''We're happy with what we've got.''
The United States men were much less successful, winning just one medal -- Danell Leyva's bronze in the all-around. 
For the first time since 2000, the United States men failed to win a medal in the team event. 
It finished fifth after leading the qualifying.
Leyva and Jonathan Horton had one last chance Tuesday to add to the team's medal tally when they competed on the horizontal bar. 
Their routines were daring, just not daring enough.
With a routine that prompted the crowd to let out several loud aahs and even more aahs because it contained so many consecutive release moves, Epke Zonderland of the Netherlands won the gold medal. 
Germany's Fabian Hambuchen won the silver. 
Zou Kai of China won the bronze. 
Leyva was fifth, and Horton was sixth.
Both Americans said they were proud of how their team had fared in London.
''The great thing about having a young team, with the exception of myself, is that everybody's going to be back,'' said the 26-year-old Horton, the veteran of the team. 
''You've awoken the sleeping giant, and I feel like our country has the talent to kind of be a giant in this sport.''
For now, though, the spotlight of gymnastics in the United States is on the women and Douglas. 
But Tuesday did not turn out to be her day.
Less than 24 hours after finishing last in the uneven bars final, she placed seventh out of eight gymnasts on the balance beam. 
Halfway through her routine, she found herself hanging upside down on the wrong side of the beam.
Douglas, looking angelic in a sparkly all-white leotard, had slipped on the landing of a leap with a half turn, but she caught her leg on the beam to save herself from falling. 
Her face was frozen in a grimace as her score of 13.633 popped up on the board.
It was not the way Douglas had envisioned finishing her Olympics. 
But winning the team event and the all-around had taken too much out of her, both mentally and emotionally, she said.
''I hit my routines when it most counted and when I needed to,'' she said.
Douglas said she is looking forward to heading home to Virginia Beach, Va., after spending more than two years training in Iowa. 
She can't wait to go to the beach, see her dogs and eat caramel-coated popcorn from her favorite store on the boardwalk.
''There's going to be like parades and it's going to be insane, but I'm ready for it,'' she said. 
''My life is going to change so much. 
I made the history books.''
But for Jordyn Wieber, the reigning world champion, the post-Olympics celebration is unlikely to be as fun. 
After failing to qualify for the all-around final, she walked away with only one medal -- the team gold. 
She also is nursing a suspected stress fracture in her right leg and will be in a boot for six weeks.
Wieber still competed in the floor exercise final but stepped out of bounds on her second tumbling pass. 
She finished her routine fighting off tears.
As Wieber explained what went wrong with her Olympics, Raisman was standing on the medals stand, basking in the moment.
Minutes before, she was pacing, grasping her hands and sneaking peeks at the five gymnasts who competed on the floor exercise after her.
And, yet again, she waited.
Earlier, China's Deng Linlin had won gold on the balance beam and Deng's teammate, Sui Lu, had silver.
But this was Raisman's moment. 
As ''Hava Nagila'' blasted from the speakers, she tumbled, twisted and danced her way to the top of the scoreboard. 
Her coach, Mihai Brestyan, said, ''Aly deserves this,'' particularly because she spent most of the year in the shadow of Wieber and Douglas.
Afterward, she was stunned that her time had finally come.
''I'm so excited,'' she said. 
''I'm speechless.''
CHINA WINS PARALLEL BARS China's Feng Zhe, the 2010 world champion, beat Germany's Marcel Nguyen by 0.166 point to win the men's gold medal on parallel bars. 
The Frenchman Hamilton Sabot won the bronze, 0.400 back.
2012 LONDON
