
THE YEAR SHE LEFT USBy Kathryn Ma
326 pp. 
Harper. $25.99.
At the heart of Kathryn Ma's haunting first novel, ''The Year She Left Us,'' is a young woman who loses her way. 
Ari is 18 and home from a summer in China, where she worked for a company that takes Western families with adopted Chinese girls on ''heritage tours.''
They visit the orphanages and, sometimes, the places where the abandoned babies were first found: police stations, department stores and random patches of dirt by the side of the road. 
For these orphans, their ''Finding Day'' may be the closest approximation to the simple commonplace most of us take for granted -- a birthday.
Ari was one of those girls. 
She was left in a Kunming department store and later adopted by a Chinese-American lawyer called Charlie, a single woman whose sister and mother also play a big part in her daughter's life. 
Ari has been told that she's lucky -- ''Lucky girl'' are the first two words of the book -- but she's not feeling it, despite her grandmother's reminder that ''nobody has to know'' she's adopted; the ''skin tone'' of her adoptive mother ''was exactly the same.''
''It must be so much easier for you, having a Chinese family,'' Ari hears again and again. 
''It should have been easier, but it wasn't,'' she thinks. 
''I felt stupid, alone and defective.''
Yet she inhabits a populated, socially connected world. 
Ari -- her full name is Ariadne Bettina Yun-li Rose Kong -- grew up in the Bay Area as a member of the Whackadoodles, a collective of ''Western-Adopted Chinese Daughters, corralled on a monthly basis at a playground or a park so that the girls with white parents could see girls who looked like themselves.''
The Whackadoodles go on field trips to San Francisco's Chinatown ''to watch lion dancers or eat special cakes or buy willow or forsythia or flowering quince branches for Lunar New Year and the Lantern Festival and Qingming and the Moon Festival too.''
None of which Charlie's Chinese-American family ''had ever bothered to celebrate growing up in Palos Verdes.''
Groups make their own idioms, and one of the pleasures of ''The Year She Left Us'' is the exuberance of the Whackadoodles' expressions, like ''Gotcha Day'' and ''forever families.''But there are forbidden words too. 
When Ari ventures to talk about how her parents abandoned her, ''The A-word in my mouth felt dangerous and thrilling.''
The foundling may be a familiar figure in the history of the novel, most prominently in Dickens and the Brontës, but Ma gives us a striking 21st-century iteration. 
In 1992, China passed a law allowing foreign adoptions. 
Since then, Americans have brought home more than 80,000 Chinese children -- most of them girls, because of China's infamous one-child policy and a cultural prejudice that favors sons.
Most of Ma's Whackadoodles are doing fine. 
''A Mandarin tutor came weekly to Whackadoodles to teach us driblets of vocabulary and once in a while a song,'' Ari says. 
A handful had after-school immersion. 
A couple of girls, adopted by Jewish families, were bat mitzvahed. 
By the time we meet them, many of the Whackadoodles are about to go off to college, including Ari, who's been accepted to Bryn Mawr, her grandmother's beloved alma mater.
Yet our heroine remains tormented by her origins. 
Her ''forever family'' of three smart, uncoupled women is unconventional but loving: Her mother is a public defender who's read all the books about adoption, and her aunt, Les, is an ambitious judge. 
Both go by men's nicknames, and neither has ever married. 
Ari's grandmother is a hoot -- and a liability for her politically correct daughters: ''Gran had scrutinized Ari, wondering aloud if she came from one of the ethnic minority populations scattered over the poor rural areas outside of Kunming. 
No, she decided, Ari was Han Chinese. 
They would never know for sure, of course, but she had classical features. 
A delicate face, a smooth brow. 
A neck of the proper proportion.''
Like Philip Roth and, more recently, Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie, Ma is unafraid to generalize about her culture and explore its snobberies and social codes. 
''We're not Chinatown Chinese,'' Ari's grandmother declares. 
''We speak Mandarin, not Cantonese. 
The people who live in Chinatown came from mostly one part of China. 
Through no fault of their own . . . their ancestors were uneducated and they speak a different language.''
Ma also has fun revealing how racially clueless many of us are. 
''She looks just like you,'' people often tell Charlie. 
Ma notes dryly: ''A Chinese person never said that.''
Ma, who practiced law in California, writes with authority about racial politics in San Francisco, a city where, not long ago, ''all the Asian lawyers in town fit into five or six tables.''
Now Chinatown power players can block or tip a judge's promotion, and the annual luncheon of the local Asian bar association fills the banquet floor. 
Ma's satirical talent shines in tart, seemingly throwaway lines: ''His wife was surprisingly ugly, a point in the man's favor,'' or ''She's deliberately overlooking a perfectly good social slight.''
Gran, for her part, hates her daughters' hybrid cars, with ''no pickup and precious little style,'' complaints that might extend to the daughters themselves. 
And there's no question that the most vivid characters in the book are Gran and the troubled Ari. 
They're shimmering and unforgettable. 
Ari would be a difficult teenager for any parent. 
Once a baby ''as light as a teacup, with a big cartoon smile,'' she grows into an 18-year-old who drinks, smokes, sleeps around and has tattoos and a ''metal shank'' piercing her eyebrow. 
And it gets worse. 
In China, she mutilates herself. 
''I didn't purge or binge or pull out my hair,'' she says, comparing herself with the other girls, ''but I was the only one who had used a butcher knife.''
Ari's self-destruction is not as original as she first pretends; she admits she was copying an artist who chopped off a digit. 
After she returns home, she bags Bryn Mawr, starts sleeping with an older boss who repels her, decamps from her mom's apartment and leaves for Alaska, in search of a man she saw in a picture who was holding her as a baby.
One might ask where the men are in Ma's world. 
Gran had two husbands, but they're dead. 
Les, Ari's aunt, has had a long affair with a married man -- ''broken off twice, and resumed in urgent surrender.''
Charlie fell in love once, and then the man she'd hoped to make a life with drifted away and died. 
In a lovely plot twist reminiscent of Alice Munro, her daughter's odyssey unravels the mystery of that abandonment.
Ma writes about the darker side of Chinese adoption, her social commentary less jaunty and sentimental than Dickens, more like Dreiser in its harsh realism. 
Ari hears whispers that plague her: Who were my mother and father?
Did they ever think about me?
One of the stunning accomplishments of this book is Ma's tonal range: Amid the sharply observed social world, we watch Ari slide into dangerous instability. 
Why Ari suffers more than the other Whackadoodles remains ambiguous, although it seems clear that Ma doesn't believe ethnic matching in adoption improves the chances for happiness. 
Urgently driven quests can come up empty, with no treasure at the end. 
''There's nothing to find out,'' Ari's grandmother warns. 
''There's no one to tell her.''
Some of us, Ma suggests, may never find what we're searching for and have to settle for ill-fitting real life.
Long ago, on their first trip to China, Ari was already aware that her mother was looking for something, too. 
''I understood what she was asking: Am I a good mother?
Are you glad it was me who got you?''
It takes Ari an epic journey -- a gap year from hell -- to find a response to that primal question, and the answer she comes up with is equivocal.
''I could have told her that I missed her, for it was true, some of the time.''
