
THE NEWSBarack Hussein Obama was sworn in as the 44th president of the United States on Tuesday as tens of millions of people watched.
BEHIND THE NEWS The son of a black man from Kenya and a white woman from Kansas, Mr. Obama inherited a White House built partly by slaves and a nation in crisis at home and abroad. 
He recited the oath with his hand on the same Bible that Abraham Lincoln used at his inauguration 148 years ago. 
Vowing to usher in ''a new era of responsibility,'' Mr. Obama cautioned that the challenges facing the country ''are serious and they are many'' and ''will not be met easily or in a short span of time. 
But know this, America, they will be met.''
THE NEWS On his first full day in office, the president barred officials of his administration from lobbying former colleagues ''for as long as I am president,'' prohibited agencies from hiring anyone who had lobbied the agency in the past two years and ordered all departments to be less resistant to Freedom of Information Act requests.
BEHIND THE NEWS The steps all broke from practices of the Bush era, when regulatory posts were often filled by industry advocates -- though one of Mr. Obama's own Defense Department nominees apparently needs a waiver. 
The open-records policy may bring to light information the Bush administration strove to keep from public view.
THE NEWSTimothy F. Geithner survived his confirmation hearing for Treasury secretary despite tax problems but raised eyebrows when he said that the new administration believed China was ''manipulating'' its currency.
BEHIND THE NEWS His comment suggested a more confrontational approach to China. 
Beijing manages its currency in a way that keeps it from appreciating as fast as Western economists think it should. 
But is China doing so to gain an unfair price edge for its exporters?
Beijing says no, and the Bush administration declined to formally accuse China of such ''manipulation,'' which could have led to the imposition of trade barriers by the United States.
THE NEWS President Obama signed executive orders on Thursday to close the detention camp at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, within a year; to shut down the Central Intelligence Agency's system of secret overseas prisons; and to require that all interrogations of detainees follow the noncoercive methods of the Army Field Manual.
BEHIND THE NEWS Mr. Obama's orders reversed, and implicitly repudiated, measures taken by the Bush administration after Sept. 
11, 2001, attacks, in the name of fighting terrorism, that had been bitterly criticized both at home and abroad. 
''We intend to win this fight,'' Mr. Obama said. 
''We are going to win it on our own terms.''
THE NEWS The president gave his national security team, including his top generals, a new mission to end the war in Iraq. 
United States-led forces invaded the country nearly six years ago.
BEHIND THE SCENES Mr. Obama promised as a candidate to remove combat troops from Iraq within 16 months. 
But he held off ordering an exit right away so the military could draw up plans for a ''responsible'' drawdown and review the situation in Afghanistan. 
He also went to the State Department, where he signaled his intention to use diplomacy to address conflicts. 
Towards that end, he appointed emissaries to handle the Arab-Israeli conflict and Pakistan and Afghanistan.
