
Lenovo, the big Chinese computer maker, reported a sharp decline in its third-quarter sales and profit on Thursday and said its chief executive, William J. Amelio, had stepped down as part of a management shakeup.
The company, which said it was reeling from the effects of the global financial crisis, severed ties with Mr. Amelio, a former Dell executive who was hired in 2005 to help remake Lenovo after the company acquired I.B.M.'s personal computer business.
Mr. Amelio, an American, had pushed to transform Lenovo into a global company and brought in at least five other Dell executives to help operate the company. 
But after what analysts say were significant strides in making the company profitable, Lenovo lost some ground in the personal computer business and then got hurt badly by the global economic downturn.
Lenovo's decision to hire Mr. Amelio was considered by many analysts part of a bold experiment in having a foreign executive run one of China's best-known companies.
Lenovo was for a time the world's third-largest personal computer maker, behind Hewlett-Packard and Dell. 
But last year it fell into fourth place behind Acer, a Taiwanese manufacturer that acquired Gateway and Packard Bell.
Shares of Lenovo, which fell about 2.6 percent Thursday, are down about 70 percent in the last year. 
Earlier this month, the company announced an overhaul and said it planned to lay off 2,500 people, or about 11 percent of its work force.
The company also said that it would sharply reduce executive compensation as part of its restructuring effort. 
At that time, Lenovo said two other senior executives with experience at Dell and Microsoft were departing.
In a statement Thursday, Lenovo said Mr. Amelio was stepping down at the end of his three-year contract. 
He was succeeded by the company's chairman, Yang Yuanqing, who had previously served as chief executive.
The company also said it was bringing back its founder and former chairman, Liu Chuanzhi, to serve again as chairman.
Analysts said the company needed to make a change because the personal computer business is being reshaped by lower-cost products that are increasingly outsourced for manufacture.
''This is a necessary evil in this kind of environment,'' said Arthur Hsieh, a technology analyst at UBS. 
''The PC business is now a commodity business and Lenovo still does a lot of its production in-house. 
The trend is to outsource.''
For its fiscal third quarter, which ended in December, Lenovo reported a pretax loss of $90 million and said revenue was $3.59 billion, down about 20 percent from a year earlier.
In its statement on Thursday, the company said it suffered from a sharp drop in global demand for personal computers, a situation that is hurting the entire industry. 
The company said it would now focus on its China business, an area that Mr. Yang had helped develop.
''Lenovo has grown successfully on the international stage, but at this important time, we want to pay particular attention to our China business as it represents the foundation of our global business and growth strategy,'' Mr. Liu, the new chairman, said Thursday in a statement.
