
The top American energy and commerce officials called in speeches here on Wednesday for China to do more to address global warming, contending that the country was particularly vulnerable to a changing climate.
Energy Secretary Steven Chu warned in a speech at Tsinghua University, China's top science university, that if humans did not reverse the rising pace of their emissions of greenhouse gases, more people would be displaced by rising sea levels in China than in any other country, even Bangladesh.
If China's emissions of global warming gases keep growing at the pace of the last 30 years, the country will emit more such gases in the next three decades than the United States has in its entire history, said Mr. Chu, a winner of the Nobel Prize in Physics.
While Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton and other Obama administration officials have mentioned China's contribution to global warming during visits here this year, the remarks by Mr. Chu and Commerce Secretary Gary Locke were by far the strongest public criticisms yet, and the clearest demands that China take action.
Mr. Locke said in a speech to the American Chamber of Commerce that China shared a special responsibility with the United States to address global warming. 
China passed the United States two years ago as the world's largest emitter of greenhouse gases, and together the two countries account for 42 percent of emissions caused by humans.
''Fifty years from now, we do not want the world to lay the blame for environmental catastrophe at the feet of China,'' Mr. Locke said.
Mr. Chu and Mr. Locke, who are both of Chinese heritage, called for the United States and China to work together to develop new technologies to generate clean energy and to improve energy efficiency.
After meeting Wednesday afternoon with senior Chinese officials, they announced that each country would put up $15 million for a joint research center on clean energy, with headquarters in each country at locations not yet decided.
They are to meet again with Chinese officials on Thursday.
Xinhua, China's official news agency, from which the other news media in China tend to take their cue, carried a long article on the two cabinet secretaries' speeches and a shorter one on the creation of the joint research center.
But while the long article included a quotation from Mr. Locke in which he acknowledged that the United States had been emitting greenhouse gases for 150 years, neither Xinhua article included any mention of China's role or of the American criticisms of that role.
The longer article made only a passing mention that China and the United States were the top two emitters, but did not say that China had surpassed the United States in that regard. 
Chinese officials issued no response to any of the secretaries' remarks.
In separate interviews, Mr. Chu and Mr. Locke also said they wanted China to show respect for American intellectual property and to remove trade barriers to American energy technologies.
As China seeks to develop and shelter its own energy industries, its growing trade restrictions are a potentially serious obstacle to such cooperation, a factor underlined by the signing of a General Electric contract that Mr. Locke attended in Beijing.
G.E. signed a contract with the Pucheng Clean Energy Chemical Company to license G.E.'s technology for turning coal into a gas for use in a Chinese chemical factory.
The Chinese government prefers technology licensing agreements, in which Western companies transfer technology to Chinese factories, to buying finished goods from factories abroad.
The chemical factory licensing agreement is also a small transaction, estimated at $20 million, compared with the construction of a $375 million power plant China recently started on the outskirts of Tianjin, 90 miles from Beijing, that will turn coal into a gas before burning it.
G.E. executives spent more than a decade trying to win a contract to build such a power plant in China, sharing extensive technical information with Chinese power engineers on how they would go about it.
But at a ceremony in Tianjin on July 6, Chinese officials announced that they were ready to build the 250-megawatt power plant themselves and that they would no longer need to buy Western technology.
Jack Wen, the president of G.E.'s China energy division, welcomed the Pucheng contract and said his company was interested in working with China to build a similar power plant even bigger than the one now under construction in Tianjin.
Chinese officials have strenuously opposed binding limits on emissions of greenhouse gases by developing countries, most recently at the Group of 8 meeting in Italy last week. 
They have emphasized that industrialized countries are responsible for most of the emissions already in the atmosphere, and that emissions per person remain higher in rich countries than in developing ones.
Mr. Chu acknowledged these points by presenting charts showing that Chinese emissions per person were still roughly a quarter of American emissions per person and showing that the United States had put three times the amount of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere as China since the beginning of the Industrial Revolution. 
He also acknowledged that China had more stringent automotive fuel economy standards than the United States.
But Mr. Chu and Mr. Locke were clearly trying to hone counterarguments, based mainly on the dangers to China and the world if Chinese emissions continued to rise quickly.
''We're not talking about their giving up prosperity; we're talking about their using energy in a more efficient way,'' Mr. Chu said in an interview.
