
At the fifth Republican presidential debate, held Tuesday in Las Vegas, national security dominated the discussion and led to factual and less-than-factual assertions by candidates. 
Here is an analysis of some of their claims:
Carly Fiorina said Stanley A. McChrystal and David H. Petraeus were ''retired early because they told President Obama things that he didn't want to hear.''
NOT THE REASON Mrs. Fiorina said she wanted to bring back several generals whom she asserted had been forced out of their jobs for speaking their minds, including General McChrystal and Mr. Petraeus.
But she left out the memorable episodes that prompted the departures of those two men.
Mr. Obama fired General McChrystal in 2010 after the publication of an article in Rolling Stone in which the general and his aides spoke critically of senior administration officials. 
At the time, General McChrystal was the top commander in Afghanistan.
Mr. Petraeus stepped down in 2012 from his position as director of the Central Intelligence Agency.
His decision to resign came after an investigation by the F.B.I. found evidence that he had been involved in an extramarital affair. 
THOMAS KAPLAN
Donald J. Trump said that he ''certainly would never have made that horrible, disgusting, absolutely incompetent deal with Iran, where they get $150 billion. 
They're a terrorist nation.''
DOLLAR VALUES IN QUESTION The world powers are not giving Iran money, but by easing or ending sanctions, they would allow Iran to have access to billions of dollars of its own money that has been frozen in overseas accounts. 
Much of the money came from Iranian sales of oil and other goods and has been frozen in China, India, South Korea and other countries for years.
Whether the sum would be as high as $150 billion is unknown. 
The Treasury Department has estimated that Iran has between $100 billion and $125 billion in foreign exchange assets worldwide, but that its usable liquid assets after sanction relief would be more like $50 billion. 
Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew told Congress that after Iran's financial obligations, it would have roughly $56 billion left.
The governor of Iran's central bank said last week that of roughly $77 billion held abroad, only $29 billion would be usable because the rest had already been committed to petrochemical investments or as collateral for Chinese-financed development projects.
But critics said those estimates are too low and are an attempt to shape the political debate.
PETER BAKER
Gov. Chris Christie said, ''What's reckless is inviting Russia into Syria.''
MR. CHRISTIE WAS JUST 9 AT THE TIME Russia's big naval base in Syria dates to 1971 -- it has had a far larger military presence in the country than the United States has. 
DAVID E. SANGER
Mr. Cruz: ''Do you know how many illegal aliens George W. Bush deported?
10 million.''
BAD MATH President Obama holds the record for formal deportations: just over two million since he has been in office.
Mr. Obama and Mr. Bush -- who deported about 1.8 million -- did not deport 10 million people even when their figures are combined. 
JULIA PRESTON
At Hewlett-Packard, Mrs. Fiorina said she provided equipment to assist the National Security Agency.
'PRECISELY THE EQUIPMENT' As Mrs. Fiorina spoke of her credentials in fighting terrorists, she invoked an anecdote about how, while she was the head of Hewlett-Packard, she provided a truck full of equipment that the National Security Agency needed.
The agency's general counsel at the time, Robert Deitz, backed up her account in an interview this year with National Review. 
''HP made precisely the equipment we needed, and we needed in bulk,'' Mr. Deitz said.
STEVE EDER
Senator Ted Cruz said the Obama administration had toppled former President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt.
NOT OBAMA'S DOING In reality, Mr. Mubarak stepped down in 2011 as his own people rallied against his rule. 
STEVE EDER
Senator Rand Paul on Senator Marco Rubio: ''He is the one for an open border that is leaving us defenseless.''
WAY OFF The comprehensive immigration reform bill that Mr. Rubio helped write in 2013 included $40 billion to strengthen border security, including adding 20,000 Border Patrol agents.
Mr. Rubio has since said that he does not support fixing immigration in one bill, but he has called for even more border security. 
JULIA PRESTON
Mrs. Fiorina said Silicon Valley companies ''do not need to be forced, they need to be asked'' to help law enforcement get access to encrypted data.
ASKED AND ANSWERED They have been asked -- and they have resisted. 
When Apple instituted end-to-end encryption in the operating system for the new iPhone, its chief executive, Tim Cook, said he would not create a back door or a front door for law enforcement or the N.S.A. to gain access to such data.
Apple, Google and Microsoft have said that to do so would create a hole in the system that the Russians, the Chinese and others would exploit. 
The world would be less safe, they argue, by making all of us more vulnerable to state-sponsored and private hackers. 
DAVID E. SANGER
Mr. Rubio said that the Islamic State took root because of Bashar al-Assad's decision to bomb his own people, and because of President Obama's unwillingness to arm the rebel groups.
TRUE IN PART, BUT . . . Certainly the civil war in Syria helped the Islamic State spread its influence from Iraq into much of Syria. 
President Obama's reluctance to arm the rebels may or may not have contributed; however, it is far from clear that they were ready to be an effective fighting force.
And there were many other factors: The incompetence of the military in Iraq, which could have contained the Islamic State early on; bad intelligence about the Islamic State's abilities and intentions; and the reluctance of Sunni Arab states to join the fight.
DAVID E. SANGER
