
BEIJING -- Ai Weiwei, the Chinese artist who has emerged as one of the government's most nettlesome and high-profile critics, has lost his appeal of a $2.4 million tax evasion case that was widely seen as an effort to derail his antigovernment activism.
In a verdict that surprised no one, the Chaoyang District Court on Friday rejected Mr. Ai's argument that Chinese tax authorities had violated their own procedures when they raided his home studio last year and then bundled him off for nearly three months of interrogation. 
Mr. Ai's disappearance, and the details of his solitary confinement, provoked international condemnation. 
It also failed to silence him.
The police prevented Mr. Ai from attending the brief hearing, but they were unable to stop him from speaking with reporters who made their way to his home studio on the outskirts of the capital.
He said he was disappointed by the decision to reject his appeal of a ruling by the Beijing tax authorities in November, but expressed characteristic resolve, saying he would continue to battle against the authorities by filing lawsuits in other courts.
''If we don't keep suing them, we're giving up our basic responsibility as citizens,'' he said.
Foreign journalists and diplomats were barred from the proceedings, but a handful of supporters managed to gather outside the courthouse. 
Only Mr. Ai's wife and two lawyers were allowed to attend. 
A city bus that normally serves the area bypassed the courthouse.
The government's case against Mr. Ai began in April 2011, when the authorities detained him at Beijing International Airport just before he was to board a plane for Hong Kong. 
He was taken to a secret detention center on the city's outskirts and spent the next 81 days watched round the clock by rotating pairs of young soldiers. 
He was released in June of last year, having lost much of his familiar girth.
In their public statements, the government claimed that Mr. Ai's design company, Beijing Fake Cultural Development, had evaded 15 million renminbi, or $2.4 million, in taxes. 
Beyond objecting to procedural violations, his lawyers have maintained that Mr. Ai was not liable to prosecution because his wife, Lu Qing, is the company's legal owner. 
The lawyers also say they have been unable to review the thousands of pages of financial documents that were seized during the raid and were barred from photocopying transcripts from an earlier hearing.
Given how tightly the Communist Party controls the judiciary, Pu Zhiqiang, one of his lawyers, said he had no illusions Mr. Ai would win, but he said he was still infuriated by the way the court handled the case.
''We're fully aware that China is a morbidly ill society, one in which rules and regulations are willfully ignored, but it's appalling how shamelessly the regime acted in this case,'' he said. 
''The loss is a blow, but we're just going to have to work harder to obtain justice.''
As part of the terms of his bail, Mr. Ai was forbidden to leave Beijing for a year. 
He was also told not to resume his prodigious use of social media or to speak to the media. 
He held up his end of the bargain for a few short weeks, breaking it to denounce via Twitter the treatment of business colleagues who had been detained with him and expressing support for two other incarcerated dissidents.
Despite the government's public stance that their prosecution was solely focused on financial crimes, Mr. Ai later told journalists his inquisitors were uninterested in taxes. 
He said the interrogations sought to uncover his role in what overseas Web sites had titled the Jasmine Revolution, a call for Chinese to take to the streets in an Arab Spring-style protest movement. 
Mr. Ai denied any role in what turned out to be a nonevent.
The government did not issue any public statement on Friday. 
But its legal victory is unlikely to dent Mr. Ai's finances. 
In November, his supporters donated $1.4 million to pay the bond for the tax appeal; Mr. Ai has also become one of China's most sought-after and well-remunerated artists, in part because of the notoriety he has gained as a dissident.
His celebrity is likely to be burnished even more in the coming weeks, when a documentary about him, ''Ai Weiwei: Never Sorry,'' opens in theaters across the United States.
