
SEOUL, South Korea -- The United States and South Korea began their largest joint war games in years on Sunday, with a nuclear powered American aircraft carrier prowling off the east coast of South Korea while North Korea threatened to retaliate and reportedly put its military on alert for war.
The rising tensions demonstrated just how tenuous peace has been on the divided peninsula since the Korean War was halted, 57 years ago on Tuesday, by a cease-fire between the United States-led forces of the United Nations and the Communist troops of North Korea and China.
The latest escalation of tensions began in March when a South Korean warship was sunk and 46 sailors died. 
A team of investigators from South Korea, the United States and several other countries determined in May that North Korea had torpedoed the ship.
North Korea denied the allegation and called the investigation a ''fake.''
China, North Korea's main ally, also rejected it.
The United States and South Korea announced new sanctions against North Korea last week when their foreign and defense ministers traveled together to the inter-Korean border in a gesture of confronting the North.
On Sunday, in a show of the allies' military power, a fleet of American and South Korean ships and submarines sailed into waters off the east coast of South Korea, led by the nuclear-powered aircraft carrier George Washington, one of the biggest ships in the United States Navy. 
Japan, a historical rival of Korea but an ally of South Korea and the United States in their confrontation with the North, sent observers to the four-day exercise.
The drills mobilized 20 ships, a combined 8,000 troops and an unusually large number of warplanes: more than 200 aircraft, including the F-22 Raptor fighter, which was part of an exercise in South Korea for the first time.
The exercises this week are the first in what is scheduled to be a series of joint United States-South Korean maneuvers over the coming months. 
United States officials warned last week that a power struggle over who will succeed the ailing North Korean leader, Kim Jong-il, might prompt the North to attempt further military provocations.
On Saturday, North Korea vowed to start a ''sacred war'' against the United States and South Korea at ''any time necessary'' to counter their ''largest-ever nuclear war exercises'' with its own ''powerful nuclear deterrence.''
Radio Free Asia reported that the North had put both its military and its people on high alert. 
North Korea often uses tensions with the United States to rally solidarity at home and to justify development of nuclear weapons.
Kim Yong-hyun, a North Korea analyst at Dongguk University in Seoul, said the North would probably test short-range missiles and fire artillery in waters near the disputed western sea border, and might even try to test a long-range missile or a nuclear device.
''North Korea will try to fend off the mounting joint pressure from the United States and South Korea by ratcheting up tensions in stages,'' Mr. Kim said. 
''For now, both Washington and Seoul seem to believe that they've got nothing big to lose by continuing the pressure. 
What worries me is that the tension is not just between the two Koreas, but also between the biggies, the United States and China.''
China has been unusually vocal in criticizing the joint maneuvers, prompting the allies to relocate the drills from the Yellow Sea, west of the Korean Peninsula, to the Sea of Japan on the east.
