
The owner of eight Asian restaurants in Manhattan, including Ollie's Noodle Shop and Grill, agreed to pay $2.3 million to 813 workers in what the State Labor Department called the largest amount ever collected in a single case of minimum-wage and overtime violations.
The owner, Tsu Yue Wang, also agreed to allow the Labor Department's staff to conduct seminars at the restaurants to educate the workers, who are mostly Chinese, about their rights under state labor law. 
The settlement is the culmination of an investigation that began in 2006.
The department said the settlement covered three restaurants named Ollie's Noodle Shop and Grill and five others: Ollie's, Ollie's Brasserie/Mainland, Japanese Restaurant, Chao Zhou Restaurant and Central Kitchen. 
(A ninth restaurant under investigation, Ollies Noodle Shop and Grill at 200 West 44th Street near Broadway, has since closed.)
During the investigation, the Labor Department found that one additional restaurant, Tomo, owed 100 workers about $1 million. 
Mr. Wang maintained that he had no affiliation with Tomo, which has since closed, but corporate documents suggested otherwise, and the Labor Department is continuing to try to recoup those wages.
Mr. Wang also faces a federal lawsuit begun by the Urban Justice Center, a nonprofit advocacy organization, on behalf of 44 employees at three of the restaurants.
M. Patricia Smith, the state labor commissioner, said Mr. Wang's restaurants had violated numerous labor laws. 
Workers were paid less than minimum wages, were denied overtime, were paid late and often received checks without stubs, she said.
The Labor Department discovered that full-time kitchen helpers who worked up to 60 hours per week earned $1,200 a month, or less than $5 an hour. 
Under state law, an employee working 60 hours per week must be paid at least $500.50 per week, or about $8.34 an hour.
''You start to see a pattern, and it starts to get sickening,'' Ms. Smith said, adding that some workers were owed as much as $30,000.
She added, ''Under no circumstances can a company cheat its workers out of the money they have worked for and they have earned.''
So far in 2009, 250 cases involving restaurant violations have been filed with the Labor Department; in 2008, 1,175 such cases were filed.
Of the $2.3 million Mr. Wang must pay, a third is to be distributed in the next few weeks, and the remainder by July.
A 28-year-old woman from China, who identified herself only by her last name, Chen, and said she worked at the Ollie's at 84th Street, said of the settlement: ''I feel satisfied. 
They used to pay us so little. 
I never thought I could get back the money I should have earned years ago. 
A lot of cases like these take a long time.''
Ms. Chen worked 12-hour days, six days a week, as a waitress for two years, earning $350 a month, not including tips.
