
After years of tepid earnings and turmoil, the cosmetics giant Avon Products announced late Tuesday that it planned to look for a new chief executive to replace its longtime leader, Andrea Jung.
Ms. Jung, who is chairwoman and chief executive, will remain in both positions until a new chief executive is found. 
She will then continue on at the company as executive chairwoman.
''The time is right to separate the chairman and C.E.O. roles,'' said Ms. Jung, who has been chief executive since 1999. 
She noted that during her tenure, the company's revenue and its number of sales representatives have doubled.
But shares of Avon stock have declined 45 percent since the first of the year, even as many of its competitors have flourished. 
The company has also faced several issues, including inquiries by the Securities and Exchange Commission. 
The stock closed Tuesday at $16.14, but it rose more than 6 percent in after-hours trading.
Several analysts said they were relieved that the company was finally seeking a new chief executive. 
In the last year, Ms. Jung has had unusually combative earnings calls with analysts who follow her company.
Ms. Jung's departure as chief executive was ''expected in people's dreams and wishes and hopes,'' said Linda Bolton Weiser, an analyst at Caris & Company. 
''Somehow I thought she was going to hang on longer. 
It seemed like the board was giving her a chance for another comeback.''
Lauren Lieberman, an analyst at Barclays Capital, said she was also glad to see the company making a leadership change. 
''From an investor's standpoint, it is a good thing,'' she said, but added that she did not expect a quick turnaround.
''I think this is the start of a long and bumpy road,'' Ms. Lieberman said. 
''At least we are on that road.''
In her early years as chief executive, Ms. Jung was hailed as a visionary leader with a keen eye for detail and charisma that energized its force of door-to-door sales representatives, who were once known as ''Avon ladies.''
Ms. Jung was among the first to rush into developing markets like Russia and China, giving Avon an early edge on competitors, analysts said.
''She is really adored internally,'' Ms. Lieberman said. 
''She lights up a room. 
She is all the things you would want a C.E.O. to be.''
Nonetheless, Ms. Jung lacked the day-to-day operational skill to run the company and did not hire a president or chief operating officer to fill that role, Ms. Lieberman said.
The company's problems began in 2005, when years of double-digit sales growth began to wane. 
Ms. Jung has since tried two turnaround efforts, but neither has taken hold.
In 2008, Avon disclosed that it was investigating whether its employees had bribed Chinese officials, and now the Securities and Exchange Commission is investigating the issue as well.
Then in October, the company said there was another S.E.C. inquiry into whether Avon officials improperly disclosed information to Wall Street analysts. 
At a conference call with analysts that month, frustration boiled over.
''It strikes me that you guys are so totally screwed up in so many ways, the change has to be radical,'' Wendy Nicholson, an analyst at Citigroup, told Ms. Jung.
On Tuesday, Ms. Jung said in a statement that as executive chairwoman of the company, a new title, she would work closely with the new chief executive and continue to be involved in ''maintaining strong relationships with Avon's key constituencies, including her role in motivating the company's millions of representatives.''
Ms. Jung came to Avon in 1994 from Neiman Marcus, where she was executive vice president. 
She serves on the board of Apple and General Electric.
