
Athletic, charismatic and with a sexy sneer, the Hong Kong actor Chow Yun-fat has long been wildly popular in Asia. 
His association with the film director John Woo in hard-boiled thrillers and with Ang Lee in "Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon" has brought him Hollywood fame, too.
Now another quality appears to have been added to Mr. Chow's repertoire: political courage.
Chow Yun Fat on China's alleged ban on pro-Occupy celebrities: "Then I'll just make less!" http://t.co/4mSjrLfAYM   http://t.co/vFx9oRs4Vb
- Coconuts Hong Kong (@CoconutsHK)   28 Oct 14
With Hong Kong roiled by demonstrations calling for more open elections, which the government in Beijing opposes, local entertainment celebrities who have spoken out in support of the protesters have been criticized in the Communist Party-run media, and some have reportedly been blacklisted on the Chinese mainland. 
Some have received warning telephone calls of unclear origin expressing the views of Beijing, according to an entertainment industry source who asked not to be named because of the political sensitivity of the issue.
The aim: to get the entertainers, who have many fans on the Chinese mainland, to withdraw their support for Occupy Central With Love and Peace, as the group helping lead the democracy movement in Hong Kong is known.
Early targets of the Beijing government's ire were the singers Denise Ho and Anthony Wong, and the actor Chapman To. 
Other Hong Kong artists who support the movement, including prominent movie directors, are understood to be following events closely but keeping their heads down, the industry source said.
Mr. Chow, too, has been a target of criticism, but that apparently failed to intimidate "Fat goh," or "elder brother Fat," as he is affectionately known in the city of his birth, according to the Hong Kong-based Next Magazine.
When asked recently what he would do if China banned his films, Mr. Chow replied: "Then I'll just make less!" the magazine reported on Sunday.
Mr. Chow, 59, also said he hoped that the government and the democracy movement, a group gathered under the rubric of student unions and Occupy Central, which is led by two university professors and a pastor, would get together and resolve their differences, Next reported. 
The Hong Kong government has so far refused to hold substantive negotiations with the demonstrators.
A response from China's political authorities was swift, according to China Digital Times, a website based in Berkeley, Calif., that regularly publishes censorship orders from the Beijing government.
On Tuesday, the websiteposted an order, dated Monday, that it said was aimed at the Chinese media: "All websites must find and delete the article 'Chow Yun-fat Responds to Potential Ban from Mainland: I'll Just Make Less, Then.'"
On Wednesday, Ivan Tan, Mr. Chow's agent and brother-in-law, said, "There is no comment at the moment."
In a telephone interview, Mr. Tan did not deny that Mr. Chow had made the comment, but said, "I really don't know where the interview was made. 
It was not an official interview."
He added, "Perhaps it was just a casual talk."
Hong Kong's film industry, once independently thriving, has been increasingly drawn into China's business orbit and is by now heavily dependent on Chinese box office revenues and locations for shooting. 
Hollywood is trying to penetrate the Chinese film market, and nervousness about angering Beijing has spread to other overseas entertainment stars.
Last week, the American jazz saxophonist Kenny G deleted social media photos of himself at the Hong Kong protests and issued statements saying they had not been intended to show support for the demonstrators. 
His statements were seen as a bow to China, where he had an engagement at a golf club.
Mr. Chow is currently filming "The Man From Macau 2″ with the Hong Kong director Wong Jing, Next Magazine reported. 
Mr. Wong recently publicly severed social media contact with Ms. Ho, Mr. Wong and Mr. To because of their political stances, something Mr. Chow said he had the right to do as "everyone has freedom of speech."
"It's not a big deal," Next quoted Mr. Chow as saying.
"The Man From Macau" was released on the Chinese mainland this year, and the sequel is set to be released next year.
On Sunday, Mr. Wong said on his Sina Weibo microblog account that Mr. Chow was "a nice guy, and all Hong Kong knows it."
He bemoaned the fact that "some media" were trying to "drag him" into politics, an apparent reference to the Next Magazine report.
Chen Jiehao contributed research.
