
School was back in session across China last week, and in addition to the chaos seen in many countries - excitement over new friends and bags, horror at school lunches and having to wake up early - there were some uniquely Chinese elements.
For example: ''school-entry cesareans.''
This is the annual surge in demand from couples hoping to have their babies by Aug. 
31. A child born on that date will be the youngest in his or her class. 
Born one day later, and the child will have to wait another year to enter school.
Timing births to external events such as auspicious dates - even ones without the practical significance of this one - is commonplace in China. 
But there is some exasperation with this trend, which is seen as reflecting excessively competitive behavior.
''Your baby hasn't graduated from your tummy yet and you want it in school early?'' a news anchor on Hebei TV asked in a report on the phenomenon.
''Every year at the end of August this happens,'' Wang Yanli, the head of obstetrics at the Shijiazhuang No. 3 Hospital in Hebei Province, said in the report. 
The hospital sees two to three times the average number of births in the weeks before Sept. 
1, she said.
''This year it's even clearer,'' Dr. Wang said of the trend. 
China has the highest rate of C-sections in the world, the newspaper China Daily reported, at 47 percent of births.
There were other developments as school began last week - perhaps less dramatic than a rush of cesarean sections, but nonetheless suggestive of how Chinese society is changing, such as more military-style marching for first graders.
Most of my 6-year-old daughter's first 45 minutes in class last week were spent learning how to march. 
Six years ago, when my son started at the same school, there was marching, but not as the first order of the first day. 
Other schoolchildren in Beijing also did marching drills early on their first day last week. 
Perhaps it is a sign of increased order in all areas under the leadership of President Xi Jinping, who has said he wants not just clean government but also social and personal discipline?
''One!
Two!
Left!
Right!'' barked my daughter's teacher, after lining up the children into two columns, one for boys, one for girls, shortest at the front, tallest at the back.
A maelstrom of little flailing arms ensued - most didn't know their left from their right. 
Those children were ordered back into the classroom to figure it out, although it wasn't clear how they would learn, since the teacher remained outside.
Next up: ''At ease!''
A few children whipped their hands behind their backs and stamped their legs on the ground, but most looked around uncertainly.
Some parents in Beijing have also been subjected to a surprising new regimen. 
This year, school officials said, the police demanded that every foreign child attending a state school have an independent student visa. 
Previously, minors were on their parents' visas.
The order arrived in late May, catching parents off guard. 
Obtaining a visa would require returning to the country of the child's citizenship and applying at the nearest Chinese Embassy or consulate. 
But many families had already made vacation plans, and paid for them.
Trying to help, my children's school came up with a workaround: Find a Chinese citizen to be your child's legal guardian.
It sounded odd, but the school insisted this would meet police requirements. 
Uneasily, off we trekked, a Chinese friend and I, to a trustee agency where I was asked to sign a document, in Chinese. 
I read it first - luckily.
''Because I am too busy to care for my child, I am requesting a Chinese guardian,'' it said.
I refused to sign, wondering what mother in her right mind would - but thinking, too, that it accurately reflected the attitudes of many Chinese friends, even well-off ones, who endure, even volunteer for, long separations from their children for the sake of a job.
The trustee agency agreed to change the wording. 
And school has started - with the new, tighter tone that seems to be in the air in China, and not just in the classroom.
