
HONG KONG -- An unauthorized addition to a luxury home may be sinking the hopes of the man China is thought to favor as Hong Kong's next leader.
That man, Henry Tang, a former senior official, is facing increasing public pressure to end his campaign to become chief executive, Hong Kong's top government position.
Long seen as Beijing's preferred candidate, Mr. Tang has plummeted in popularity during months of missteps, capped last week when he acknowledged that a basement had been built at his home without a government permit. 
Mr. Tang insists on continuing his candidacy, but the unauthorized construction, a favorite topic in local news coverage of public figures, was seized on by his political opponents.
''I don't think he can hope to salvage his credibility,'' said Alan Leong, a lawmaker on Hong Kong's Legislative Council and the leader of the Civic Party. 
''If he can't handle his own affairs, how can he run a government?''
Political observers say that the concerns dogging Mr. Tang reveal growing belief by a frustrated public that Hong Kong's political and economic system is ruled by a small elite out of touch with the rest of the population. 
His candidacy, analysts add, suggests a need to rethink the vetting process for candidates and has fueled a growing anxiety over Hong Kong's relationship with mainland China.
The challenge facing all Hong Kong candidates ''is whether they can be seen defending Hong Kong's interests and autonomy,'' said Jean-Pierre Cabestan, head of government and international studies at Hong Kong Baptist University. 
''One of the themes of the campaign should be addressing social inequalities and creating a fair-competition law. 
I don't know if there's anyone willing to fight these forces, any politician with the courage to speak out.''
This year's election for chief executive was expected to be like all the other campaigns since the territory was returned to China in 1997, buttoned-down affairs with little drama.
On March 25, the Hong Kong Election Committee, whose 1,200 members represent various business and social constituencies, will elect the chief executive. 
A majority of the members are seen by many political observers and academics as taking their cues from Beijing on whom to support.
Both Mr. Tang and his main rival in the campaign, CY Leung, the former senior member of the Legislative Council, are viewed by the mainland establishment as acceptable candidates. 
A third candidate, Albert Ho, is seen as having little chance of winning.
Last week, Mr. Tang labored to explain the unauthorized work done at his home. 
He said that the house was owned by his wife, not by him, and that she had done work without his knowledge. 
News reports said that the new, 2,200-square-foot basement included a wine cellar, a home movie theater and a Japanese-style bath. 
Mr. Tang denied the reports, saying that the basement was used as a storage space.
But the reports, and Mr. Tang's explanation, have sharply influenced public opinion. 
A poll conducted last week by the University of Hong Kong and published by The South China Morning Post showed that more than half of 516 people surveyed said that Mr. Tang should quit the race and that nearly 80 percent had doubts about his integrity.
The ratings reflect the effect of months of gaffes by Mr. Tang, 59, a scion of a wealthy Shanghai family who is not affiliated with a political party. 
In September, he resigned as chief secretary, the government's No. 2 position, to run for chief executive. 
In October, amid public speculation about an extramarital affair, he acknowledged that he had made a mistake in his romantic life.
Last May, after Hong Kong residents staged several demonstrations to protest housing prices and what they said was an economic system run by the elite, Mr. Tang said that Hong Kong's youth should try to emulate Li Ka-shing, Hong Kong's wealthiest tycoon, rather than complain about the growing gap between the rich and the middle class.
Analysts say those protests were part of a larger movement reflecting growing frustration among Hong Kong residents over having a voice in the political system and access to housing and public services.
''In Hong Kong, you have a coterie of people who are rich and powerful,'' said Michael E. DeGolyer of the Hong Kong Transition Project, an independent research organization. 
''You have a rigged economy that is full of cartels, not truly open and competitive. 
People are concerned by that.''
That sense of frustration has spilled into public perception of mainland China. 
Many observers say that Hong Kong residents fault people from China for driving up the costs of housing and clogging public services. 
The number of mainland women coming to Hong Kong to give birth has grown so much that the local government placed a cap on how many pregnant mainland women can be admitted to hospitals.
Surveys by both the Transition Project and the University of Hong Kong have shown that a growing number of people here identify themselves as Hong Kong residents rather than Chinese. 
Such studies do not surprise local analysts and politicians, who say that the existing system for choosing Hong Kong's chief executive presents many challenges for the mainland leadership.
''Beijing has to be careful,'' said Mr. Cabestan, of Hong Kong Baptist University. 
''Local society is more frustrated than ever, and an increasing number of people feel sidelined by the mainland nouveaux riches coming here.''
Mr. Leong, the Civic Party leader, added: ''The cultural differences between Hong Kong and the mainland have not been properly addressed for the past 15 years. 
Beijing should bring some humility when dealing with Hong Kong.''
