
RIO DE JANEIRO -- In the hours before the preliminary round of Olympic gymnastics, members of the United States women's team were at the cafeteria in the athletes' village, goofing around. 
Telling jokes. 
Making funny faces. 
Laughing so hard that Martha Karolyi, the women's national team coordinator, approached Aly Raisman, the team captain, to tell them to quiet down.
''Today is the Olympics,'' Karolyi said. 
''You have to be more serious.''
Karolyi, of course, was right. 
The team should have been more focused. 
But when a squad's star is Simone Biles -- the best gymnast in the world and the best in history, for that matter -- that team can afford to relax. 
Biles has set the tone for that.
She is good at what she does, so good that she won the last three world championships in the all-around, collecting 10 gold medals at the worlds along the way. 
That's the most ever won by a female gymnast.
So incredibly good that Biles finished first on Sunday in the preliminary round here at the Olympics, 1.76 points ahead of the No. 2 gymnast, Raisman. 
She also finished first in three of the four events: floor exercise, vault and balance beam.
''Obviously, as expected,'' said Raisman, who added that she would be happy to finish second to Biles in Thursday's all-around final because that's the first spot up for grabs.
The United States team won qualifying by nearly 10 points, over China -- a chasm in a sport in which top competitors are often separated by tenths, or even hundredths.
You can guess what the United States gymnasts did to celebrate. 
Yes, they hugged. 
Certainly, they laughed.
Biles's joy is contagious. 
To end the team's qualifying, she performed on the balance beam, then ran off to embrace her teammates in a happy, sparkly huddle.
''She's a huge role model of mine, honestly,'' Danell Leyva, who is on the United States men's team, said of Biles. 
''Like, huge. 
I've been trying to emulate the way she goes about her gymnastics. 
She enjoys it. 
The last two years, just watching her really helped me enjoy my gymnastics more.''
Biles, 19, is not unique in the sport. 
At least when it comes to dominating it. 
And that's what makes the gymnastics at these Rio Games such a massive draw. 
It is one of the Olympic sports I've been looking forward to seeing for months and months now.
Here in Rio, there are two gymnasts who are the best ever. 
Biles is one. 
Kohei Uchimura, of Japan's men's team, is the other.
Even people who don't know a thing about the sport can appreciate the uniqueness of Biles and Uchimura. 
They perform exceptionally difficult skills while making those dangerous skills look so simple, and even fun.
Uchimura's résumé is even more impressive than Biles's. 
At 27, he is the defending Olympic gold medalist in the all-around and a six-time world champion. 
He is a 10-time world gold medalist, too.
''You don't see two gymnasts like this very often, if ever, so this Olympics is pretty amazing,'' said Mark Williams, the gymnastics coach at the University of Oklahoma, who is the United States men's Olympic team coach in Rio. 
''It's some of the best gymnastics you'll ever see in your lifetime.''
In men's qualifying, Uchimura uncharacteristically fell off the high bar. 
Yet he still finished second in the all-around, about 1.5 points back from first. 
No matter. 
Other top gymnasts are still in awe of him.
Louis Smith, a British pommel horse specialist, called Uchimura ''the perfect gymnast'' and said he made magic.
''It's a privilege to watch him,'' Smith said.
Kristian Thomas, also of Britain, said he based some of his training on how Uchimura performs. 
That means Thomas makes sure to put on a show when he does his sport, and not just go through the motions. 
He makes an effort to play to the crowd and make gymnastics beautiful.
''Uchimura always looks relaxed and seems to enjoy every minute of being in front of the crowd,'' Thomas said. 
''But his gymnastics is so clean, so amazing. 
He's so good that you can't really describe it.
During qualifying, Uchimura smacked the ground hard when he fell during his high bar routine. 
But he calmly rose, walked away to rechalk his hands, walked back to the bar and started again. 
Ho, hum. 
Seemed like no problem.
Biles admires Uchimura's carefree attitude. 
It's alluring, but she knows he is fierce somewhere deep inside. 
Could be that she considers herself the same type of gymnast. 
But she is careful not to go too far with the comparison.
''He's a legend, and it's awesome seeing him around the village, because he's just so chill,'' Biles said, explaining that the women's team calls out, ''Hey, Kohei!'' when it sees him, and he just nods in return.
''Literally everyone knows who he is,'' she said. 
''We just all look up to him. 
But he's a normal human being just like the rest of us.''
When asked if she was the Uchimura of women's gymnastics, or Uchimura was the Biles of men's gymnastics, Biles smiled.
''Gosh, no, I haven't accomplished as much as he has,'' she said.
Yet.
In her red, white and blue leotard covered with bling, Biles walked onto the floor for her floor exercise on Sunday. 
Her Olympics would now, finally, begin.
Thousands of fans in the Rio Olympic Arena snapped to attention. 
Smartphones rose and pointed her way. 
Cameras began clicking away. 
Fans moved to the edge of their red plastic seats.
What they saw was Biles leaping higher and twisting and tumbling in such dynamic, unique ways that other gymnasts can only envy her. 
(Including one tumbling pass that is called the Biles, which is a double flip with a half turn.) Then, as she moved from event to event, those countless sets of eyes followed her.
Just another day for this newest Olympic star.
The team final is Tuesday. 
The all-around final is Thursday. 
Event finals are next week. 
Plenty of reasons for Biles and her team to stay serious and focused. 
Yet on Sunday, she spoke with reporters and joked and laughed.
When Karolyi saw it, she frowned.
''Come on, this is Simone, and this is the Olympics,'' she said to Biles's handler from U.S.A. 
Gymnastics. ''So, Simone, you have to go now.''
