
Ding ding noodles do not look like noodles. 
A better description may be nubs, knots, lumps: on a spectrum with spaetzle and frascatelli, but rougher, more unpredictable in shape and fantastically chewy.
They come from Xinjiang, in China's far northwest, as does Andrew Ding (the name is a coincidence), who opened the Handpulled Noodle, a small, counter-seating-only restaurant, in Harlem in February.
Here ding ding noodles start out as a snake of dough that is folded in half and half again, then looped around the backs of the hands, stretched, slapped on a counter, chopped at approximate quarter-inch intervals and tossed in boiling water.
Unchopped, the same dough may wind up as lagman, long strands slightly thicker than Japanese udon, or they may be flattened into ribbons as wide as rodeo belts. 
All three types of noodles are denser than the Lanzhou-style hand-pulled noodles found in Chinatown, whose extra extensibility traditionally derives from peng hui (mugwort ash). 
Without peng hui in the dough, the noodles can't be pulled to a cook's full wingspan or achieve Rapunzel length. 
Instead, they're rugged, which is part of their appeal.
Mr. Ding, a classical violist without professional culinary training, moved to New York four and a half years ago. 
(His first apartment was a fifth-floor walk-up with slanting floorboards on 149th Street, around the corner from where the Handpulled Noodle now stands.)
Born in Urumqi, Mr. Ding grew up mostly in Sydney, Australia. 
Both parts of the world share a love of lamb, and that meat is what gives contour and depth to the finest dishes here. 
It's packed inside dumpling skins time-consumingly made by hand. 
It's wedged in a pale English-muffin-like bun (also house-made), a version of rou jia mo, the Chinese burger. 
It's steeped overnight with little more than onions, then seared with cumin (added at the end, so as to barely take the edge off its sun-and-earth scent) and muddled with a Chinese ''pesto'' of scallions, garlic and Shaoxing rice wine. 
And it's set afloat in a soup labeled ''tingly'' -- an advisory against the (very faint) presence of numbing Sichuan peppercorn -- whose dimension comes from a stock of lamb bones slow-cooked for half a day.
The menu is mostly mix and match, pairing your choice of noodles with different stir-fries and soups. 
It's not a strictly authentic approach, but rather inspired by Mr. Ding's childhood memories of his mother's cooking.
One of two composed dishes, listed under the heading ''Native Picks,'' is a fine rendition of dapanji, which translates as ''big plate chicken.''
Mr. Ding calls it ''trucker food.''
The chicken arrives still on the bone, in a sloppy stew with twisting ribbon noodles and an aggressive nimbus of fragrance from cardamom (both black and white), star anise and five-spice. 
After this, tiger salad, a wild fistful of cilantro, scallions, celery and pickled onions, makes for a nice recalibration of the palate.
Stray from northwestern China, and the food gets less reliable. 
A sticky dish of ''old Beijing Bolognese'' -- zha jiang mian, ground pork cooked with savory and sweet black bean pastes into a caramelly sauce -- veers too close to syrup. 
And the kitchen can lose focus, most likely because there is no official chef. 
Mr. Ding, who apprenticed for two months at a Chinese restaurant in Sydney run by a family friend, taught the staff to cook his family's recipes. 
None of them had previous experience with Xinjiang cuisine, and sometimes it shows.
The space, squeezed between a tattoo parlor and a unisex hair salon, has an unpretentious downtown air, with a raw-concrete floor, vintage chicken feeders turned lampshades and the legend ''We Pull Your Noodles'' graffitied over exposed brick. 
Chubby babies frolic in Chinese New Year's posters beside a wall covered in pages from The People's Daily, circa the Cultural Revolution.
A note at the bottom of the menu admonishes: ''Noodles are best eaten immediately!''
This is serious. 
With each passing minute, hand-pulled noodles start to die. 
I tried takeout: the ribbons went limp; the lagman stiffened. 
Only the ding ding noodles, little kinks and tatters like a heap of errata, stayed true.
The Handpulled Noodle
3600 Broadway (West 148th Street), Hamilton Heights, Harlem; 917-262-0213; thehandpullednoodle.com
Recommended Dapanji (bone-in chicken stew with ribbon noodles); ding ding (chopped) noodles with spicy cumin lamb; Chinese slider with cumin lamb; lamb and carrot pot stickers; tiger salad.
Drinks and wine No alcohol.
Prices $3.50 to $11.50.
Open Daily for lunch and dinner.
Reservations Not accepted.
Wheelchair access The entrance is accessible but there is no public restroom.
