
Ford Motor stands alone among Detroit's Big Three in dodging a shareholder-crushing government bailout. 
If automobile sales continue to slide, that may be a short-lived accolade. 
If not, it is a testament to the carmaker's hard work, smart financial planning and competent management.
So what does it get for its virtue?
So far, not much. 
President Obama gave Ford's products a plug and its chief executive, Alan R. Mulally, a slap on the back when announcing new emissions standards last month. 
But the competitive advantage the government's life-support package would give General Motors, as well as the billions it has injected into Chrysler, must worry Ford.
After Ford's two domestic rivals emerge from swift trips through the Chapter 11 car wash, they will have cleaned up their legacy cost problems and scaled back their dealer networks in ways Ford, outside of bankruptcy, cannot. 
As G.M.'s majority shareholder, the government has an incentive -- perhaps even a fiduciary obligation -- to favor G.M.
To dispel that notion, the government would have to level the playing field. 
But there's not much it can do. 
The White House could expedite the ''cash for clunkers'' bill now slowly wending its way through Congress and speed up the arrival of cheap Energy Department loans to help develop fuel-efficient vehicles.
And it should continue to bolster the financing markets that Ford Motor Credit depends on to make loans to buyers. 
These measures would help all carmakers. 
But if Ford is smart, it can use its status as the only financially virtuous domestic carmaker to good advantage in its advertising as a way to scoop up greater market share.
The government can do one thing to specifically help Ford: give fast-track approval to its finance unit's application to open an Industrial Loan Corporation. 
That would allow Ford Motor Credit to collect deposits and lower its financing costs -- matching the advantage that Chrysler's and G.M.'s financing partner GMAC has as a bank holding company.
Aside from that, Ford is on its own. 
The good news is that its executives have already demonstrated restructuring savvy. 
Combined with what little help the government can give, Mr. Mulally may be confident enough to keep Ford competitive without resorting to the bankruptcy court. 
If not, all the company's virtuous diligence will be for naught.
Geithner in China
Treasury Secretary Timothy F. Geithner visits Beijing this week for the first time since taking office. 
But don't expect a reprise of the angry tone in January, in which he invoked ''manipulation'' in describing how China had managed the value of its currency. 
This time, Mr. Geithner is likely to leave the verbal grenades at home.
He will ask China to accelerate its transformation from a country driven by exports into one driven by private consumption. 
That's a bit like shouting at the moon. 
Private consumption in China is growing, but remains tiny for such a large economy. 
China's previously announced fiscal stimulus of 4 trillion renminbi ($585 billion) is a temporary stopgap.
Premier Wen Jiabao will no doubt ask that the United States act responsibly on the value of the dollar, in which China holds some $1.7 trillion of foreign exchange assets. 
Trillion-dollar deficits mean there is little chance of that, but Mr. Geithner will no doubt agree anyway.
Nice-guy diplomacy is fine, as far as it goes. 
There certainly is not any point in either side lashing out at the other. 
America needs China to keep buying bonds to fuel its giant deficits, and China needs an export market.
But this should not disguise the fact that the China-United States trade relationship needs rebalancing. 
Eventually, the Chinese export sector has to slim down, with painful consequences for its displaced workers.
The adjustment should also include a further rise in the renminbi against the dollar. 
Beijing's previous policy of gradual appreciation, which had the currency rise 20 percent in three and a half years, was suspended when the crisis hit. 
A costlier renminbi would help reduce the trade deficit and spur Chinese consumers to import cheap goods.
Mr. Geithner has learned that lashing out is pointless. 
Turning around supertanker economies during a recession takes a long time. 
But turn around they must.
ROB COX, ANTONY CURRIE and JOHN FOLEY
For more independent financial commentary and analysis, visit www.breakingviews.com.
