
LONDON -- After delaying a project to build a nuclear power plant with Chinese investment, Britain's government on Thursday gave the go-ahead for the plant, but insisted on new conditions designed to protect the security of critical infrastructure.
The decision ended weeks of uncertainty that had strained relations with China, which is financing more than a third of the $23.7 billion power station, and with France, whose largely state-owned energy giant EDF is paying for the bulk of the project.
By pressing ahead with the Hinkley Point C nuclear power plant on the Somerset coast of England, Prime Minister Theresa May appears to be open to greater involvement by China in Britain's energy industry. 
China also wants to build and operate a nuclear plant of its own design at another British site, at Bradwell-on-Sea, in Essex.
Mrs. May said in July that her government would not yet sign off on the Hinkley Point deal, reportedly on security and economic grounds, deciding instead to review the plans for the new power plant. 
It was one of her first big political moves after succeeding David Cameron as prime minister, and was seen as a sign that she was uncomfortable with some aspects of Mr. Cameron's aggressive pursuit of an economic partnership with Beijing.
In recent weeks, Mrs. May has upended a variety of Mr. Cameron's domestic policies. 
She has abandoned his financial targets and, most recently, overturned his education policy by advocating for allowing selective admissions in schools.
Thursday's decision suggested that the price of any significant policy shift on the Hinkley project would simply have been too high.
If the project did not proceed, the French energy firm, EDF, would have made claims to be compensated for development and construction; trade with China would have almost certainly suffered; and Britain would have lost out on the Hinkley plant's production, expected to be able to cover 7 percent of the country's electricity needs. 
And with around 26,000 jobs at stake, British trade unions were campaigning for the power station to go ahead.
Britain's energy secretary, Greg Clark, promised on Thursday that the government ''will introduce a series of measures to enhance security and will ensure Hinkley cannot change hands without the government's agreement.''
''After Hinkley, the British government will take a special share in all future nuclear new build projects,'' he added.
That announcement seemed designed to increase British control over critical aspects of national infrastructure, similar to those exercised by the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States.
After the delay to the Hinkley project's approval was announced in July, Xinhua, the official Chinese news agency, said in a commentary that it added ''uncertainties to the 'Golden Era' of China-U.K. ties.''
''China can wait for a rational British government to make responsible decisions,'' the editorial said, ''but cannot tolerate any unwanted accusation against its sincere and benign willingness for win-win cooperation.''
With its huge economic muscle, China is a formidable trade partner for Britain, particularly after Britain's vote to quit the European Union. 
Mrs. May's government is hoping to boost trade with non-European partners. 
She and President Xi Jinping of China met at the gathering of Group of 20 leaders this month in Hangzhou, China.
On Thursday, China's CGN, which is one of the partners in the Hinkley deal, said it was ''delighted that the British government has decided to proceed with the first new nuclear power station for a generation.''
Michel Sapin, the French finance and economy minister, said in a statement Thursday that the decision was ''a major step in French-British industrial and energy cooperation.''
However the opposition Labour Party in Britain dismissed the new security safeguards announced by the government as ''window dressing,'' saying that most of the protection they afforded could already be achieved under existing legislation.
Critics of the Hinkley project said the British government had ignored the biggest failing of the project: It is a bad deal for the money.
In exchange for building the plant, EDF has been guaranteed 92.50 pounds (about $120) for every megawatt hour of electricity produced, rising with inflation, for 35 years -- equivalent to more than twice the current wholesale price of electricity.
In a Twitter post, Caroline Lucas, a lawmaker and co-leader of the Green Party, described the decision as ''stunningly short sighted,'' adding: ''We need clean, renewable energy not an outdated, overpriced white elephant.''
