
It's got hot caldrons, sour plum juice and sliced lotus roots and it seats up to 200 people. 
Little Sheep Mongolian Hot Pot, which opened in Edison last month, might be a novelty in New Jersey, but some consider it the Applebee's of China.
Anyone who has traveled to China in the last 10 years ''definitely knows who we are,'' said Peter Yang, East Coast operations manager for the restaurant chain, which has more than 300 locations there. 
The franchise is less ubiquitous in America. 
But now adventurous eaters in Middlesex County can try everything from house-made pot stickers to sweet corn pancakes in the sleek, new, roughly 6,500-square-foot restaurant.
New Jersey's inclusion in the stateside mushrooming of Little Sheep, which has 16 American outposts but only two on the East Coast (a Queens restaurant opened in 2012), owes itself to Edison's demographics. 
''There's a strong Asian population. 
We felt like it was the right neighborhood for our brand,'' said Mr. Yang, 27, of Queens.
That is not to say that those who have no experience with hot pot cooking will have trouble navigating Little Sheep's menu.
Like Swiss fondue or Japanese shabu-shabu, hot pot dining is a collegial experience. 
''Very social,'' Mr. Yang said.
After choosing from a smorgasbord of more than 100 add-ins -- everything from pork belly ($6.95) to quail eggs ($2.25 for a half plate, $3.95 for a full) -- diners are presented with a fragrant, roiling pot of broth studded with herbs, twigs and pods. 
Soup bases, which also have vegetarian versions ($3.75 per person), include spicy and non-spicy options, as well as half spicy and half not, or ''yin-yang,'' with the pot divided down the middle. 
Menus come with stubby pencils for diners to check off selections.
During a recent Sunday lunch, servers seemed to sense some first-timers. 
Instead of a full plate of tong ho, or chrysanthemum greens ($2.75 or $4.95), a half plate was recommended. 
Instead of five add-ins, eight were suggested. 
Hand-holding is also available during the cooking process; servers will suggest whether tiger shrimp ($4.25 or $7.95) should go for a dunk in the pot before seaweed knots ($2.25 or $3.95), for example. 
Experimenting, though, is encouraged.
To a point.
''Finish off with our fresh noodles,'' advised Mr. Yang. Once everything else is cooked, he said, they will absorb the flavorful liquid left in the pot.
Little Sheep Mongolian Hot Pot, 1737 Route 27, Edison. 
BYOB. Wheelchair accessible. 
Reservations accepted for parties of six or more. 
(732) 626-5991 or littlesheephotpot.com.
Little Sheep Mongolian Hot Pot, 1737 Route 27, Edison. 
BYOB. Wheelchair accessible. 
Reservations accepted for parties of six or more. 
(732) 626-5991 or littlesheephotpot.com.
