
BEAUNE, FRANCE -- Is it time for Burgundy lovers to panic?
Are the prices of these most exquisite and expressive wines about to spiral into the stratosphere, propelled by a burgeoning generation of Burgundy fans from China?
In short, is Burgundy about to go the way of Bordeaux?
Those fears were weighing on many people's minds last weekend -- at least, those who spend euros, dollars, pounds or yen, rather than renminbi -- at the biggest annual wine party in Burgundy, three days of not-always-fine dining and drinking that surround the Hospices de Beaune charity auction.
At the auction, the latest vintage of wine from the Hospices, a hospital and former almshouse that is also one of the most prominent vineyard owners in Burgundy, is sold. 
The sale serves as an early indicator of interest in a vintage, as well as broader gauge of the state of the Burgundy wine economy.
Over the past decade, Burgundy vintners have watched with a mixture of envy, anxiety and bemusement as the price of grand cru Bordeaux soared. 
Aside from the most famous wines -- those of the Domaine de la Romanée-Conti, Leroy, Armand Rousseau and a handful of others -- Burgundy prices have remained more stable.
Lately, however, there have been signs that this could change. 
Prices of high-end Bordeaux have eased as Chinese investors, and those who hope to profit from their interest in wine, move to diversify their cellars.
Then, in August, word came that a Macau casino magnate, Louis Ng, had acquired the Château de Gevrey-Chambertin, a wine-producing estate in the Burgundy village of that name. 
It was the first big Chinese purchase of a Burgundy wine-making property.
In Bordeaux, by contrast, several dozen châteaux have been snapped up by Chinese buyers. 
But Bordeaux, open to the Atlantic and conditioned by centuries of ocean-borne trade in its wines, is a more cosmopolitan, more mercantile place than the landlocked, family-dominated Burgundy. 
Let the Bordelais have their showy, neo-Renaissance châteaux (many of them owned by absentee retail tycoons or insurance companies), the Burgundians said; we're happy with our farmhouses, built from rough-hewn stone.
While there seems to be an element of xenophobia in Burgundian complaints about Mr. Ng and his money, Burgundy drinkers everywhere do have reason to fear a surge of speculative interest in the region and its wines.
For starters, there is a lot less Burgundy than Bordeaux -- about a quarter as much, in an average year. 
Burgundy represents only 3 percent of total French wine production.
Recent years have been anything but average. 
Burgundy harvest volumes have been below normal for three straight vintages, substantially so in 2012 and 2010. 
Meanwhile, exports continue to rise; in China and Hong Kong, they are up sixfold since 2007, according to the Burgundy wine producers' association.
The group insists in a report on the 2012 vintage that producers ''want to preserve their markets by controlling price rises and avoiding external speculation.''
''While a price increase is inevitable, it will be controlled, in order not to put off consumers in either traditional or new markets,'' said the association, the B.I.V.B. 
''This is a crucial factor in an ever-more competitive sector.''
We'll see about that when 2012, already being talked up as a great vintage despite its minute quantities, arrives on the market.
In a move that raised further alarms that Burgundy was casting off its parochial conservatism in the pursuit of worldly glitz and lucre, the Hospices de Beaune this year invited Carla Bruni-Sarkozy, the singer, model and wife of former President Nicolas Sarkozy, to serve as president of the auction. 
(Another headliner, the actor Gérard Depardieu, canceled only hours before the event, for unexplained reasons.)
As it turned out, French paparazzi appeared to outnumber Chinese billionaires by a sizable margin. 
While Asian buyers accounted for 12 percent of the value of wine sold, that was actually down by one percentage point from last year. 
The single most expensive lot, a barrel of Corton Grand Cru, was bought by a Ukrainian businessman, Igor Yankovsky. 
It soared to &#x20ac;270,000, or $345,000, after Ms. Bruni-Sarkozy announced that she and her husband would personally deliver it.
Over all, the auction raised &#x20ac;5.9 million for charity -- a record amount, despite the fact that the volume of wine sold was down substantially. 
Further cause for Burgundy drinkers to worry.
True, Burgundy never will be cheap. 
It is made in small quantities by small producers, many of whom work by hand. 
Burgundy is a relatively northerly wine region, exposed to the caprices of a continental climate.
But the recent developments in the Burgundy market may mean that bargain hunters will have to look further than ever before.
One strategy is to seek out unheralded vintages, avoiding hyped-up years like 2005, 2009, 2010 and, if the early buzz is any indication, 2012. 
This can be risky. 
Some vintages, like 2008, produced racy, exciting white Burgundies but inconsistent reds. 
Others, like 2006, yielded supple, pleasing reds but clumsier whites. 
In 2007, both colors were pretty thinly endowed.
Happily, 2011, whose lesser wines are just coming onto the market but which looks like it will be overshadowed by the vintages that immediately precede and follow it, looks very much like the kind of red Burgundy year that I love.
Tasting dozens of samples of nascent 2011 reds last weekend, I was struck by the number of times I wrote down ''pure pinot noir fruit,'' ''fresh'' or ''nicely balanced.''
The 2011s lack the richness of the 2009s and the structure of the 2010s or 2005s. 
And the whites, made from chardonnay, are less impressive than the reds. 
But unlike the 2010s, which need to be forgotten in the cellar for a few years, the 2011 reds should be drinkable right away.
Another approach is to look for underrated appellations. 
It is growing ever-harder to find good, affordable wines from the classic villages of the Côte-de-Beaune and the Côte-de-Nuits -- names like Vosne-Romanée, Gevrey-Chambertin, Volnay, Meursault and Puligny-Montrachet. 
The best wines of Chablis can also be expensive.
Yet there are several other Burgundy appellations that border on more famous neighbors, and that, in skillful hands, yield wines of a similar character. 
Monthélie, for example, is sandwiched between Meursault and Volnay on the Côte-de-Beaune. 
True, there are subtle differences in the terroir, but it seems odd that it is so hard to find a red or white Monthélie for more than &#x20ac;20 a bottle, while it is equally tough to buy a Meursault or a Volnay for less than that.
Further north, on the Côte-de-Nuits, the appellations Fixin and Marsannay are similarly underappreciated. 
These vineyards are a direct northward extension of the sliver of great pinot noir terroir that takes in Vosne-Romanée and Gevrey-Chambertin.
While the suburbs of Dijon have started to encroach on Marsannay, marring its visual charms, this village and its neighbors, Couchey and Fixin, house a growing number of up-and-coming producers making some of the best-value pinot noir you'll find anywhere. 
These are true Côte-de-Nuits reds, mostly for less than &#x20ac;25, often for less than &#x20ac;15.
Even more affordable are the wines of outlying areas like the Hautes-Côtes-de-Nuits and the Hautes-Côtes-de-Beaune, in the cool hills above the more prestigious villages below. 
Global warming has made it easier to ripen the grapes here, which used to be a problem.
Farther south, the Côte Chalonnaise (reds and whites) and the Mâconnais (mostly whites) offer plenty of good value wines, sometimes at less than &#x20ac;10 a bottle. 
The reds and whites of the Givry appellation, on the Côte Chalonnaise, seem to grow more polished every year.
In the Mâconnais, the most prestigious appellation, Pouilly-Fuissé, has begun an effort to classify its best terroirs, as its counterparts on the Côte-de-Nuits and the Côte-de-Beaune did long ago. 
Some of them deserve the distinction, though it's probably worth snapping them up before they gain the additional prestige.
And then there is the broader, regional Bourgogne designation, for reds and whites alike. 
These are the Burgundies you are most likely to come across in the supermarket. 
Buyer beware. 
But the Bourgognes from great producers like Arnoux-Lachaux or Arlaud, for reds, and Henri Boillot or Michel Bouzereau, for whites, are true bargains.
So don't despair. 
Despite the display of bling-bling in the Beaune market hall last weekend, it is still possible for those of us who are not billionaires to drink Burgundy. 
For now.
