
Wall Street has always been more concept than place. 
By the late 18th century, a couple of blocks in Lower Manhattan had already become synonymous with stock trading. 
Later, they became shorthand for the entire American financial system.
But even those broad definitions have become too parochial. 
In an era of globalization, Wall Street finds itself at the center of the world economy.
It makes for uncertain times. 
Four years after the financial crisis, the fortunes of Wall Street - and the broader business world - are inextricably tied to myriad issues beyond financiers' control.
President Obama and Congress are debating tax increases and spending cuts that have implications for companies, consumers and investors. 
The European debt crisis is smoldering, dimming the region's prospects. 
The Chinese economy, the global engine of growth, is moderating.
Those macroeconomic conditions are weighing on stocks. 
In this environment, investors are more interested in the next Federal Reserve Board meeting than the next earnings report from Coca-Cola.
"Policy issues have joined and in many cases overly displaced corporate fundamentals in driving intraday price movements and volatility," said Mohamed El-Erian, the chief executive and co-chief investment officer at Pimco, one of the largest money managers in the world. 
"Part of this is warranted, as corporate behavior is being influenced by policy uncertainty in a meaningful manner, be it here, China or in Europe."
As lawmakers and policy makers across the globe debate the future, business and financial leaders are trying to influence the decision-making. 
In the United States alone, companies, trade organizations and consumer advocacy groups have spent more than $2.5 billion this year on lobbying and have deployed an army of 12,000-plus lobbyists, according to the Center for Responsive Politics.
Few issues have captured the attention of business leaders like the so-called fiscal cliff, the combination of spending cuts and tax increases that will take effect at the first of the year barring action in Washington to forestall it. 
President Obama and Congress face a delicate balancing act as they try to cut the deficit while preserving economic growth.
Everything is on the table in the budget debate. 
Tax policies. 
Financial regulation. 
Health care coverage. 
Immigration reform. 
Entitlement benefits. 
Housing. Education. 
Energy.
Wall Street and corporate America are increasingly pushing for a "balanced approach," with loud calls for compromise on both sides of the aisle. 
Support for the Simpson-Bowles proposal - the bipartisan fiscal plan put together in 2010 by the National Commission on Fiscal Responsibility and Reform headed by Alan Simpson and Erskine Bowles - is resurfacing.
But even as business broadly backs Simpson-Bowles, few executives have read the 65-page document. 
The details could make a budget bargain difficult.
The banking and real estate industries are hardly expected to support a plan to rethink the home mortgage interest deduction, a core proposal in Simpson-Bowles. 
Health care companies aren't in favor of capping and eliminating the deduction for employer-provided insurance. 
The big mutual fund players won't be happy if capital gains and dividends are subject to the same tax as normal income. 
And military contractors don't want to accept significant cuts to Pentagon spending.
It's all part of the great uncertainty that is paralyzing some businesses. 
Companies say they're not willing to invest and hire without a clearer picture of public policy. 
Wall Street banks complain that the new regulations, some yet to be completed, make it difficult to develop a long-term strategy.
For all this sturm und drang, the talk may be harsher than the reality. 
Businesses have long operated in uncertain times, capitalizing on the weakness to uncover opportunities.
When Ben S. Bernanke wrote his doctoral thesis in 1979, he could have been channeling the quandary that C.E.O.'s face today. 
"Uncertainty about the long-run environment which is potentially resolvable over time thus exerts a depressing effect on current levels of investment," he wrote at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 
"Uncertainty provides an incentive to defer such investments in order to wait for new information."
But deferral need not be paralysis. 
They may complain, but businesses keep running and executives muddle through, if burdened by the weight of diminished expectations.
"You know, all time is uncertain," Warren E. Buffett once said. 
"I mean, it was uncertain back in 2007; we just didn't know it was uncertain. 
It was uncertain on Sept. 
10, 2001. 
It was uncertain on Oct. 
18, 1987, you just didn't know it. 
We always live in an uncertain world."
What to expect in the malaise of the months ahead?
Little in the way of bold, strategic moves. 
Look for smaller, more defensive bolt-on deals rather than big, splashy transactions that put companies into new kinds of businesses. 
Companies will step up hiring and expansion, but only slowly and with caution.
As confidence rebuilds, so should the economy.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
