
Canada has agreed to negotiate a bilateral extradition treaty with China, breaking with a longstanding opposition over concerns about China's lack of due process and other human rights violations, according to a joint communiqué quietly posted on the website of the Canadian prime minister's office.
The announcement, which has prompted criticism by human rights advocates, came a day before Beijing deported a Canadian missionary, Kevin Garratt, who had been detained in China on espionage charges for more than two years. 
The government of Prime Minister Justin Trudeau last week denied that it had made any concessions for Mr. Garratt's release, though the timing has led many to believe the deportation was part of a deal that will also grant the Chinese authorities an official role in identifying Chinese nationals who entered Canada illegally.
China has long wanted bilateral extradition treaties with Western nations that it claims have become havens for corrupt officials who have fled. 
Beijing has increased diplomatic pressure in recent years amid a series of anti-corruption campaigns led by President Xi Jinping, which critics say are more about settling political scores and bolstering public loyalty for the governing Communist Party than ending endemic graft.
The United States, Britain and New Zealand have refused to negotiate such treaties, and Australia has not ratified one that it signed with China in 2007, largely over concerns including the systemic use of torture to extract confessions, show trials and the imposition of the death penalty for noncapital crimes.
Under Mr. Xi, China has detained hundreds of human rights lawyers, has given a life sentence to Ilham Tohti, a Uighur economics professor critical of Beijing's ethnic policies in the troubled Xinjiang region, and has been accused of abducting Hong Kong booksellers.
''The extraordinary weaknesses in China's due process and fair trial rights are well documented,'' said Sophie Richardson, China director for Human Rights Watch. 
''China wants this treaty to create a veneer of legality for fundamentally abusive tactics. 
Beijing will then also be able to say to other governments, 'Canada signed one, why won't you.'''
In-depth talks on an extradition treaty will occur in the coming months, according to an article published last week in the state-controlled China Daily newspaper. 
''The two countries do not have major political or legal obstacles and have established good cooperative foundation,'' it said.
Canadian officials did not publicly mention that the two countries had agreed to begin discussions on an extradition treaty as part of a high-level national security dialogue established during Mr. Trudeau's recent visit to China.
The agreement was signed on Sept. 
12 by Daniel Jean, the Canadian national security adviser, and Wang Yongqing, secretary general of the Central Political and Legal Affairs Commission of the Chinese Communist Party. 
It established short-term objectives that include allowing both countries to share the ill-gotten financial assets of suspected Chinese fugitives in Canada and completing negotiations on a one-year pilot project ''where Chinese experts will be invited to assist in the verification of the identity of inadmissible persons from mainland China'' to prepare for their repatriation.
In 2011, Canada extradited a Chinese billionaire accused of corruption, Lai Changxing, after a 12-year legal battle in Canadian courts, but only after Ottawa received assurances he would not be tortured or executed. 
Mr. Lai was sentenced to life in prison in China. 
The United States last year returned a Chinese businessman accused of bribery.
In an emailed statement, Canada's Foreign Affairs Ministry said the promotion and protection of human rights were a priority in Canada's relationship with China, and that the recent discussions included extradition and transfers of offenders, ''where we have stressed that Canada is governed by very high standards,'' it said.
Yet critics of the agreement say it is another sign of Mr. Trudeau's capitulation to China that ultimately does little to protect Canadian interests or values, while strengthening Beijing's hand.
''It really confirmed my worst worries about what we would have to do to get the concessions from China that we want,'' said Charles Burton, a former Canadian diplomat, who accused Beijing of using Mr. Garratt as a bargaining chip for negotiations on an extradition treaty, the pursuit of a free-trade deal and greater access to Canadian mining resources.
While Mr. Trudeau has championed Mr. Garratt's return as a result of closer engagement with Beijing, the outcome has highlighted a lopsided relationship in which China has the leverage, whether by halting $1.5 billion in Canadian canola exports or having unjustly detained Mr. Garratt, Mr. Burton said.
''We don't seem to have the linguistic and cultural expertise and political knowledge to defend our interests against a very sophisticated diplomatic engagement by China, which seems to always come out on top,'' he said.
