
He is known for imprisoning political dissidents, facing down President John F. Kennedy over Soviet nuclear-tipped missiles and repelling an invading force of Cuban exiles trained by the C.I.A.
This week, Fidel Castro, the 88-year-old Cuban Communist revolutionary, added another line to his résumé when a Chinese group awarded him with this year's Confucius Peace Prize, according to Chinese state media reports on Thursday.
The presentation of the award took place on Tuesday in the Boya Hotel on the campus of Peking University in Beijing. 
Mr. Castro was not on hand to accept it, so the presenters were not subjected to one of his famously long speeches. 
Instead, Cuban students studying in China accepted the award and said they would give it to Mr. Castro in a timely fashion.
"When Castro was the leader of Cuba, he never used any violence or force when faced with problems and conflicts in international relations, especially in Cuba's relationship with the United States," Liu Zhiqin, a member of the award's organizing committee, told Global Times, a state-run newspaper. 
"It has important inspirational value in dealing with current international conflicts. 
After Castro retired, he engaged in positive meetings with world leaders and organizations. 
Castro also contributed greatly in speaking out against nuclear warfare."
The Confucius Peace Prize was first given out in late 2010 as a rejoinder to the Nobel Peace Prize. 
That year, the Norwegian Nobel Committee awarded its Peace Prize to Liu Xiaobo, the Chinese dissident writer who was detained in 2008 and convicted by officials for the crime of "inciting subversion against the state."
Mr. Liu had been the main author of an online petition, Charter 08, that called for gradual political liberalization.
Mr. Liu is now serving a 11-year prison sentence in northeastern China, and his wife, Liu Xia, is in poor health while effectively being under house arrest in Beijing. 
On Wednesday, a Chinese writer in exile and critic of the Communist Party, Liao Yiwu, said in an interview from Berlin that he had just received a message from Mr. Liu smuggled out of prison that began with the line, "I am O.K."
That same day, the Nobel Peace Prize was handed out in a ceremony in Oslo to Malala Yousafzai, a 17-year-old girl from Pakistan, and Kailash Satyarthi, a 60-year-old Indian man. 
Both are advocates for children's rights.
The presentation of the Confucius Peace Prize has occurred around the same time as the awarding of the Nobel Peace Prize every year since 2010. 
Mr. Liu said the selection process this year went through several stages aimed at winnowing done an initial field of 20 nominees. 
At the final stage, nine out of 12 judges voted for Mr. Castro, he said. 
Other candidates included President Park Geun-hye of South Korea; Ban Ki-moon, the United Nations secretary general; the Shanghai Cooperation Organization; and the Chinese religion of Taoism.
Previous winners of the Confucius Peace Prize are Yi Cheng, head of the Chinese Buddhist Association, in 2013; Kofi Annan, the former United Nations secretary general, and Yuan Longping, a Chinese scientist working on hybrid rice, in 2012; President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia in 2011; and Lien Chan, former chairman of the Kuomintang in Taiwan, in 2010.
Who needs the Nobel Peace Prize?
This year's Confucius Peace Prize awarded to Fidel Castro, who joins 2011 winner Vladimir Putin.
- Hannah Beech (@hkbeech)   11 Dec 14
A spokesperson for Mr. Lien, the first recipient of the award, which came with 100,000 renminbi, about $15,000, in cash, said at the time of the award's announcement in 2010 that Mr. Lien, who was living in Taipei, had never heard of the prize and that no one had contacted him about it other than journalists.
Almost from its inception, the Confucius Peace Prize has been mired in discord and political intrigue. 
Competing groups in China have claimed to be its founders, and some of the organizers have had tenuous ties to the Ministry of Culture. 
One group has even tried to start up a rival award, the Confucius World Peace Prize. 
In late 2011, the Ministry of Culture, perhaps at the urging of that group, tried to halt the awarding of the Confucius Peace Prize, but failed.
Mia Li contributed research.
