
HONG KONG -- The former head of the National Energy Administration of China, whose downfall followed a public denunciation from an investigative journalist, will face trial on charges of taking huge bribes, prosecutors said on Monday.
The prosecutors did not give a date for the trial, but the fallen administrator, Liu Tienan, is likely to be the next former senior official displayed by state media before a court as a show of President Xi Jinping's moves to head off corruption.
In a succession of economic policy jobs, Mr. Liu ''sought to make private gains for others and illegally accepted wealth and goods from others, in amounts that were particularly huge,'' said the announcement of Mr. Liu's indictment from the Supreme People's Procuratorate, China's national prosecution office.
The trial of Mr. Liu, 59, is likely to attract particular public attention in China because of his dramatic public fall and the lurid accusations against him that have surfaced in Chinese media reports.
In December 2012, a Chinese investigative journalist, Luo Changping, seized on Mr. Xi's pledge shortly after taking office to tackle official corruption. 
Mr. Luo issued a series of accusations against Mr. Liu on the Internet, including claims of involvement in crooked business deals and of threats to kill a mistress.
Since 2008, Mr. Liu had been a deputy director of the National Development and Reform Commission, which steers economic policy, and in 2011, he became the head of the energy administration, which falls under the authority of the commission. 
Initially, the National Energy Administration dismissed Mr. Luo's claims as baseless slander, and Mr. Liu appeared to have survived the tempest.
In March last year, however, Mr. Liu left his job at the energy administration, while formally at least keeping his deputy director position at the commission. 
Almost two months later, the Communist Party's central agency for investigating corruption said he was under investigation. 
His dismissal from the deputy director position was announced in August, at the same time that he was expelled from the Communist Party.
Chinese newspapers have reported claims that Mr. Liu and his wife took bribes worth many millions of dollars, and helped cronies and relatives win lucrative deals.
The prosecutors said Mr. Liu would stand trial in Langfang, a city wedged between Beijing and the port city of Tianjin. 
In theory, former officials found guilty of taking large bribes can be sentenced to death, but party-run courts have tended to give long prison terms to those who show remorse.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
