
Once again, the stock market swung wildly on Thursday -- only this time, it swung up, rather than down.
After days of sudden losses and reversals in the markets, investors rallied around a rare bit of good news: The Chinese government dismissed reports that it might pare its European investments given the debt problems gripping Europe.
That stocks managed to hold on to their gains -- the broader market was up 3.3 percent, one of its biggest advances this year -- heartened investors unnerved by the recent volatility in the markets.
''We held today,'' said Howard Silverblatt, senior index analyst for Standard & Poor's. 
''We did have those turnarounds. 
Not today. 
We followed through with the increase.''
The flight to safety that has characterized the markets in recent days -- investors have sold stocks and bought safe investments like Treasury securities -- reversed itself Thursday.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 284.54 points, or 2.85 percent, to 10,258.99. 
The broader Standard & Poor's 500-stock index rose 35.11 points, or 3.29 percent, to 1,103.06, and the Nasdaq was up 81.80 points, or 3.73 percent, to 2,277.68. 
Global markets have been volatile and skittish because of the uncertainty in the financial markets, with only occasional short-lived rallies interrupting a generally downward trend. 
The reasons for the slide -- concern about the wider fallout from the European debt crisis and worries about China's efforts to control the pace of its booming growth -- are likely to keep dogging the markets.
The American market has seemed particularly unnerved recently as investors have been reluctant to hold their positions and have dumped equities, sometimes late in the day, knowing that they will be subject to the dictates of Asian and European markets overnight.
On Wednesday, for example, trade was higher for most of the day until the last hour, when the market started falling, sending the Dow to its lowest close since February. 
Some analysts cited reports of officials in Beijing meeting with foreign bankers to discuss China's investment in euro zone debt.
But on Thursday, a statement by the People's Bank of China dismissed reports that the State Administration of Foreign Exchange, which is responsible for assets of more than $600 billion, was evaluating its investment in euro zone debt, reflecting concerns that some European nations might eventually default on their debts.
In its statement, China's central bank said it was committed to long-term investment in Europe. 
It also said it supported the European integration process and the stabilization measures worked out this month by the European Union and the International Monetary Fund, and that the euro zone would be able to overcome its difficulties.
As the day wore on, American equities rallied and strengthened.
''It definitely helped the equities market,'' Kevin Giddis, president of fixed-income capital markets at Morgan Keegan, said of the Chinese statement. 
''You saw it in the futures run-up. 
And it had an impact on Treasuries.''
Mr. Silverblatt said it was only the second time this year that the Standard & Poor's index closed 3 percent higher. 
Intraday index movements have averaged about 2.8 percent over the past 20 days, or 2.4 percent when removing the unusual market movements of May 6.
''People have been waiting for this correction, and it is here,'' Mr. Silverblatt said. 
''You've got more buying and selling matching up. 
The bulls and the bears are coming out.''
Since the American market will be closed on Monday for Memorial Day, investors on Friday might be asking themselves whether they want to hold on to their positions over the long weekend, particularly since markets will be open in Europe and Asia.
''That adds a little bit of uncertainty,'' Mr. Silverblatt said.
Thursday's rise was broad, with energy, technology, financial and materials shares all substantially higher. 
Citigroup shares were up 16 cents at $4.02 after the Treasury announced that it had sold 1.5 billion shares of Citigroup, or about a fifth of its holdings, at a profit of $1.3 billion. 
Most Citibank rivals were up at least 3 percent.
Microsoft led the Nasdaq higher, closing up 99 cents at $26. 
Apple shares rose 3.8 percent to $253.35.
''We were due for a bounce,'' said Philip J. Orlando, chief equity market strategist at Federated Investors. 
''We had some strength overseas in Asia and Europe overnight and we just sort of took our cues from there.''
Before the open in New York, the government reported that the economy grew at a 3 percent annual rate in the first quarter, slightly less than the initial estimate of 3.2 percent. 
Economists had expected growth of 3.4 percent. 
In addition, filings for first-time unemployment claims dropped less than expected.
But it was the report about Europe, rather than economic indicators that some described as a disappointment, that the market seemed to respond to. 
While the support from Beijing helpedlift the euro and stocks, it also served to remind that global confidence in Europe's ability to solve its debt problems remains fragile.
In Berlin, the Treasury secretary, Timothy F. Geithner, told a news conference attended by Wolfgang Schauble, his German counterpart, that the United States and Europe were working closely together to ensure that problems in countries like Greece would not spread.
The Treasury's 10-year note fell 1 14/32, to 101 6/32. 
The yield rose to 3.36 percent, from 3.19 percent late Wednesday.
European and Asian shares also rose. 
The Euro Stoxx 50 index, a barometer of euro zone blue-chip companies, gained 3.5 percent, while the FTSE 100 index in London rose 3.1 percent. 
All major sectors advanced, led by shares of banks and industrial companies.
