
BEIJING -- China will increasingly manage its troubled property sector locally, as the nation seeks to avoid causing either an abrupt slowdown that undermines the economy or another surge in prices, according to government economists involved in policy discussions.
After increasing at double-digit rates through most of last year, home prices started easing in late 2013 as a sustained campaign to clamp down on speculative investment and easy credit gained traction.
The annual growth in average prices for new homes slowed to an 11-month low in April, official data showed Sunday. 
Existing home prices dropped from a month earlier in 22 of 70 cities in April, compared with 14 in March.
Data last week showed property sales dropped 6.9 percent in the January-April period from a year earlier in terms of floor space and fell 7.8 percent in terms of value.
The authorities know that a severe property crunch could worsen a buildup of debt but also that a blanket easing of restrictions could set off another round of credit-fueled increases in home prices.
''There is no sign that the central government will relax property controls on a nationwide scale, even though the economy is slowing,'' said Zhao Xijun, deputy head of the Finance and Securities Institute at Renmin University in Beijing. 
''The pressure is mainly on local governments, because some of their debts are maturing and they need to repay.''
Local governments rely heavily on revenues from land sales to pay debts that official data show total 17.9 trillion renminbi, or about $2.8 trillion, so price declines and slowing sales have raised concerns about their ability to service the debts.
The government economists expect the restrictions on property that were introduced over the past five years to largely remain in place, particularly in major cities, but with some local authorities given leeway to support their markets.
Some smaller cities, including Tongling in Anhui Province; Ningbo in Zhejiang Province; and Nanning in Guangxi Province, have started to loosen restrictions on home purchases.
In 2012, Beijing forced governments in areas including Wuhu, Foshan and Chengdu to withdraw plans to ease controls on real estate, but there has been no such response this year.
''They are still watching. 
Property prices have started to fall, but they still don't see any serious problems,'' said a senior economist at a government research organization in Beijing.
''The bottom line is that a property slowdown doesn't trigger financial risks,'' said the economist, who was not authorized to speak to the media.
President Xi Jinping has said that the country should adapt to a ''new normal'' of slower growth as the government pushes market-based overhauls to cut debt levels in the economy and generate more sustainable long-term growth.
The cooling real estate market helped drag annual economic growth to an 18-month low of 7.4 percent in the first quarter, and a sustained decline would put China at risk of missing its economic growth target -- 7.5 percent -- for the first time in 15 years.
Standard Chartered said that official figures showed there was 17 months of stock of apartments in China's major metropolises, including Beijing and Shanghai.
''The momentum is clearly negative. 
This downturn appears worse than previous episodes -- the scale of oversupply is likely to be larger, and policy makers are understandably more hesitant to step in with immediate support,'' Standard Chartered economists said in a report.
The government is still trying to deal with the effects of a four trillion renminbi stimulus package implemented in 2008-9, which insulated China from the global crisis but also created piles of local debt and record house prices.
''It's natural to relax controls if property prices fall. 
Our purpose is to curb price rises and we should relax if prices no longer rise,'' said Zhu Baoliang, chief economist at the State Information Center, a top government research body. 
''I don't think property prices will rise further. 
On the contrary, the downward pressure is big.''
Last week the central bank called on banks to speed up the granting of home loans to first-time home buyers, although that is seen having only a limited impact.
''We doubt that banks will rush out with mortgages,'' analysts at Bank of America Merill Lynch said in a research note. 
''Even a meaningful increase in mortgage supply shouldn't fundamentally change the worsening property market conditions.''
Kevin Yao is a Reuters correspondent
