
HONG KONG -- Premier Wen Jiabao of China warned on Sunday of ''huge downward pressure'' on the Chinese economy, in the clearest expression yet of concern at the top of the country's leadership about a sharp slowdown in recent months.
During a weekend inspection tour of east-central China, Mr. Wen called for the government to ''preset and fine-tune its policies in a more aggressive manner,'' using fiscal and monetary tools to offset the economic slowdown as much as possible. 
But he also tried to reassure the public, saying the economy was ''running at a generally stable pace,'' said Xinhua, the official Chinese news agency.
Mr. Wen largely attributed the slowdown to weak demand from overseas, particularly Europe with its faltering economies. 
But in separate remarks on Saturday, he reaffirmed a government policy of making real estate prices more affordable by banning real estate speculation.
That policy has played a central role in China's economic slowdown, as housing construction has slowed to a crawl except for subsidized housing for lower-income families. 
Developers across the country have laid off huge numbers of workers.
Construction sites from the steamy factory cities of Guangdong in the southeast to manufacturing and logistics hubs like Xi'an in the northwest have cut back this year from three shifts working around the clock, seven days a week, to one day shift on weekdays.
Scant accurate data is available on the extent of the decline in real estate prices. 
Brokers say prices have fallen 20 percent or more in the last year. 
A monthly government survey of older neighborhoods where few transactions take place shows a much smaller decline, however, while a separate survey of real estate developers shows that few acknowledge the steep discounting described by brokers.
Broader price gauges are starting to show signs of deflation, as the supply of goods overwhelms weak demand. 
The Chinese government announced on Monday morning that producer prices fell 2.1 percent in June from a year earlier. 
Consumer prices were only up 2.2 percent in June from a year ago, and actually dropped 0.6 percent from May.
The Chinese central bank announced on Thursday that it was cutting the country's regulated bank lending and deposit rates for the second time in four weeks, an uncharacteristically brisk pace. 
The cuts have started to rekindle the Chinese public's enthusiasm for real estate investments, with the number of transactions starting to quicken in recent weeks.
But the central bank warned banks on Thursday to keep a tight rein on mortgage lending, and Mr. Wen said on Saturday that the government's policy of improving the affordability of real estate had not wavered. 
''To further implement the regulation,'' Xinhua said, ''Wen urged unswerving efforts to ensure prices return to reasonable levels, and block a price rebound that would undermine the effects of previous efforts.''
Informal tallies suggest that about a third of China's 100 largest cities have loosened the ban on real estate speculation in recent weeks to revive local markets. 
Mr. Wen warned that these loosening moves must be halted and reversed, and even threatened punishment for officials who tried to ''cheat'' on the restrictions.
Sales of land leases are a critical source of revenue for local governments, so the downturn in real estate markets has hurt their finances. 
Many of these governments are deeply in debt after spending lavishly in 2009 and 2010 on infrastructure projects like airports, highways and high-speed rail to offset the effects of the global economic slowdown.
The Chinese government has already adopted policies to support the rest of the economy. 
In addition to the interest rate cuts, the government has freed banks to lend a larger share of their deposits, subsidized the sale of energy-saving home appliances and accelerated the approval of large construction projects.
During his inspection tour over the weekend, Mr. Wen hinted at further measures, including tax credits for companies that invest in research and development. 
He urged Chinese businesses to pursue export opportunities in Southeast Asia, Central Asia and South Asia as alternatives to industrialized countries where protectionist pressures might build.
Despite these efforts in recent weeks, economic data for June and for the second quarter, scheduled to be released this week, is expected to show further weakness. 
April and May data showed unusually slow growth in retail sales, investment, electricity consumption and other barometers of economic growth.
As electricity demand has slowed, so much unneeded coal has accumulated that storage areas at major Chinese ports are at record levels and arriving ships full of coal must wait many days to unload. 
Piles of mined coal fill empty lots and line roadsides in some mining areas in northern China, as mine owners maintain production while hoping prices will recover.
