
"However many people take part in Hong Kong's illegal public vote, there will never be as many as 1.3 billion," the headline in the state-run newspaper Global Times declared on Monday.
That defiant line toward "Occupy Central with Peace and Love," a   movement that is holding an informal referendum on how the next leader of the semi-autonomous Chinese territory should be chosen, was comparing the number of votes cast, now   surging past 700,000, to the size of China's population. 
It suggested that no matter what Hong Kong people want, the Chinese mainland will always trump them. 
And it was contained in one of very few online posts about the democratic movement in Hong Kong that made it past heavy censorship in the rest of China.
In fact, on Monday morning, a search for "Occupy Central" on the Sina Weibo microblog platform produced a notice saying that it was not a lawful search and was quickly replaced by posts unrelated to the movement. 
Further searches didn't even display the censorship sign, taking a reader straight to the other posts.
Senior Chinese officials have declared Hong Kong's unofficial poll, which began on Friday and runs through June 29, "unlawful."
The vote, whose organizers are pushing for universal suffrage and the public's right to nominate candidates in open elections for Hong Kong's leader in 2017, is a bête noire of the Beijing government, which has declared that only "patriots" can lead and that Hong Kong people cannot directly propose candidates.
What impact the Hong Kong vote is having within the Chinese mainland is unclear. 
But there are indications that some people are aware of it, and there is potential for the debate to spread, given the often intense interest in more democracy in China.
"Hong Kong" was the most censored term on Sina Weibo on Sunday, according to Weiboscope, a Chinese social media data collection and visualization project run by the Journalism and Media Studies Center at the University of Hong Kong. 
The terms "voting" and "democracy" followed closely.
There were signs of mainland interest on Free Weibo, a site that collates censored posts. 
There, You Fei Zhu, a name that translates as Travel Fly Soar, wrote, "Hong Kong's vote: A big deal under heaven."
A user with the name Lulu Nini wrote, "Come on, Hong Kong people!
You are not alone!"
That comment was on a thread that also contained this: "(Surprise) Wah. 
Will Hong Kong start World War III?"
Lu Weimin, a lawyer, wrote of the former British colony, "In the past, Hong Kong people didn't care about politics, because the Hong Kong British rulers played by the rules honestly. 
Why do they care about politics now?
Because they have no sense of security."
Among the censored posts collected by Weiboscope were these:
"The Global Times is ready to give China's 1.3 billion people the right to vote?
What exciting news!"
"We should let the 1.3 billion mainland people try to vote."
"When has the demand of an unfiltered universal suffrage become a question of sovereignty?
The Global Times is really good at poisoning the well."
Meanwhile, Global Times denounced the vote as "an illegal farce" and "ridiculous" and said its organizers, two university professors and a Christian minister, suffer from "a gambling mentality."
In fact, it wrote in its English-language edition, the entire ballot, much of which is being conducted online, is an "invention" that is "tinged with mincing ludicrousness."
In the same sentence in the Chinese-language edition, on the chance this offers some linguistic, if not conceptual, clarity, Global Times accused the Hong Kong "opposition faction" of "bluff and bluster" with the vote.
Additional reporting by Alan Wong.
