
China said Sunday that it had evidence showing that for at least six years, employees working for the British-Australian mining giant Rio Tinto engaged in commercial espionage, costing the country about $100 billion.
The sensational allegation was published on a Web site affiliated with China's State Secrets Bureau, which detained four Rio Tinto employees -- three Chinese citizens and one Australian -- in Shanghai last month on suspicions of stealing confidential documents from the country's huge, government-controlled steel industry. 
The comments were the first time that China had suggested that the case involved a long-running conspiracy.
China said computer data had revealed that Rio engaged in extensive spying on the industry, allowing it and other suppliers to vastly overcharge China for iron ore, a central ingredient in steel.
The case has strained China's relations with Australia and rocked China's steel industry, which purchases billions of dollars worth of iron ore every year from Rio Tinto and other global mining companies.
The detentions have also thrown China's annual negotiations with the world's biggest iron ore producers into chaos at a time when demand for iron ore and steel is soaring in China because of an economic recovery.
Rio Tinto officials could not be reached Sunday for comment. 
But the company has strongly denied any wrongdoing in the case.
The British-Australian company BHP Billiton, the world's biggest mining company and also a major supplier of iron ore to China, declined to comment.
The new allegations, published by China's National Administration for the Protection of State Secrets, named only Rio Tinto but suggested that all foreign iron ore suppliers benefited.
The major iron ore producers generally follow the same benchmark price set during annual negotiations.
The article offered few details, but said evidence China had found on Rio Tinto computers showed that the company gathered extensive intelligence on China's steel industry, giving it an edge in setting annual benchmark prices for iron ore over the past six years.
''The computer data Rio Tinto staff held showed that they have gained extensive, detailed inside information on the steel industry,'' the article said, ''and were definitely spying on China's economic interests and security.''
The price of iron ore has skyrocketed in China during that period, peaking in 2008 at more than $200 a ton. 
Analysts generally attribute the price increase to industry concentration among iron ore producers and soaring demand for iron ore from China's fast-growing steel industry, which is now the world's largest.
China's government, however, contends that the price was manipulated during those six years, costing the country's government-controlled steel industry an additional $100 billion.
The Web site article did not make clear how the government came to such a figure. 
China's iron ore imports over the past six years amounted to about $100 billion, not including freight costs, according to Philip Kirchlechner, a former Rio Tinto executive and now an industry consultant.
In a statement released on the Internet last month, China also accused the four Rio Tinto employees of bribing Chinese steel mill executives to get hold of the confidential information. 
Australian officials said recently that the employees were detained largely because of their role in this year's iron ore negotiations.
Legal scholars have expressed surprise that China detained the employees on state secrets suspicions rather than commercial spying. 
Under Chinese law, violating state secrets is much more serious and very difficult to defend against, partly because the cases are highly secret.
