
NEW DELHI -- Still bruised and somewhat bewildered by a recent border dispute with China, Indian government officials welcomed the Chinese prime minister, Li Keqiang, on Sunday for his first trip abroad since assuming office in March.
Mr. Li and his counterpart here, Manmohan Singh, held private talks followed by a dinner at Mr. Singh's official residence. 
Many of India's top political leaders, including opposition figures, were on the guest list.
An account of Mr. Li's meeting with Mr. Singh published by China's state-run news agency, Xinhua, cast an upbeat glow on relations, despite the border dispute. 
''My visit to India is meant to tell the world that mutual political confidence between China and India is growing, that our practical cooperation is expanding, and that our common interests far outweigh our disagreements,'' Mr. Li told Mr. Singh, according to Xinhua. 
''Our two countries fully possess the will, wisdom and ability to together nurture a new bright spot in Asian cooperation.''
Mr. Li was leading a large delegation of Chinese business leaders, including bankers and executives from two Chinese telecommunications giants, Huawei and ZTE. 
He is expected to try to keep the three-day trip focused on economic ties between China and India, which have grown rapidly over the past decade. 
The Chinese Ministry of Commerce said last week that bilateral trade reached $66 billion in 2012, setting a goal of $100 billion by 2015.
India is now the world's biggest arms buyer, and China, its largest trading partner, has hopes of supplying some of those defense needs.
However, there are a host of irritants between the countries, most prominently the border dispute. 
On the morning of April 15, pictures from an unmanned aircraft alerted the Indian military that a contingent of about 50 Chinese soldiers had pitched tents in the Ladakh region of eastern Kashmir, about 13 miles into Himalayan territory claimed by India. 
The soldiers unfurled a sign in English saying that they were in China. 
India sent a contingent of soldiers to set up an encampment about 300 yards from the Chinese.
The standoff was resolved just before India's external affairs minister was scheduled to fly to Beijing to help prepare for Mr. Li's arrival.
''We haven't come to terms with why this happened,'' a senior Indian government official said in a briefing on Friday. 
''It has certainly induced a great deal of realism on our part.''
The Xinhua account of the meeting did not mention any remarks that Mr. Li might have made on the territorial dispute. 
But it summarized Mr. Singh as telling him that India was ''willing to work with China to promote practical cooperation and to manage and control the border dispute.''
Some Indian commentators have said India's government meekly conceded to Chinese demands to demolish some newly constructed bunkers and reduce patrols in the area as part of the dispute's resolution, claims that a senior Indian official denied.
But there is a widely held view among officials and defense experts in India that the encroachment served as a reminder that China has grown far more powerful than India in recent decades, a reality that top Indian officials quietly concede.
Still, Indian officials said they appreciated Mr. Li's decision to make India his first foreign visit. 
The Chinese leader is scheduled to fly to Pakistan, India's bitter rival, on Tuesday. 
Pakistan and China have long had strong military ties, but growing internal turmoil has cost Pakistan some of its international clout. 
China is building a port in Pakistan, a source of concern for India.
In addition to trade, China and India will discuss Afghanistan and how to handle the expected departure of international troops in 2014, Indian officials said. 
The Afghan president, Hamid Karzai, is scheduled to visit New Delhi this week.
India is also expected to express concerns over a series of dams that China intends to build on the Brahmaputra River, which flows into India's northeast provinces.
Chinese diplomats appeared eager to signal that the border dispute, which received little attention in the Chinese news media but widespread coverage in India, should not cloud the visit.
Qin Gang, the director general of the Foreign Ministry's Information Department in Beijing, who was in New Delhi to prepare for the visit last week, said that the episode was ''isolated'' and that it should not be allowed to affect the overall relationship.
China sees the growing American focus on Asia as an effort to contain China's growing assertiveness, and is in a quiet tug of war with the United States over India. 
Secretary of State John Kerry is to visit India in June in hopes of further strengthening ties.
China, meanwhile, has strengthened ties with Sri Lanka and Nepal, countries where India has long played an important role.
Among the irritants between India and China is that India has long given sanctuary to the Dalai Lama and the self-declared Tibetan government in exile.
