
If the initial summary of China's highly anticipated economic policy plan disappointed analysts last week, the far more detailed plan that was released by the Chinese authorities late on Friday more than made up for it.
The reaction among investors and analysts to the more than 21,000-character document that laid out the Chinese Communist Party's decisions on how to overhaul the Chinese economy was overwhelmingly positive.
''The breadth of the reform plan has certainly exceeded most expectations,'' commented Wang Tao, chief China economist at UBS.
The document, said the China economists at Goldman Sachs, ''showed high reform conviction and lifted reform expectations and targets.''
And Yao Wei, an economist in the Hong Kong office of Société Générale, said, ''The new leaders really delivered and promised a number of concrete changes. 
China's reform boat has finally set sail.''
The stock markets echoed the sentiment: On Monday, the Shanghai composite index closed 2.9 percent higher, while the Hang Seng index in Hong Kong, where many mainland companies are listed, climbed 2.7 percent. 
On Friday, both had risen 1.7 percent in anticipation of more details on the meetings.
In part, the cheer stemmed from the fact that the initial communiqué from the closed-door meeting of top party policy makers released on Tuesday -- about 5,000 characters shorter than the final ''decisions'' document -- had been vaguely worded, replete with platitudes, short of detail and almost bound to disappoint.
The longer outline released three days later ''swept away the haze of disappointing ambiguity'' of that initial communiqué, said Zhu Haibin, the chief China economist at JPMorgan.
It addresses a wide range of issues -- including changes to the long-standing one-child policy, land rights, price liberalization and the role of the markets in the largely state-dominated economy.
For our full coverage, click here.
Many of these topics had been discussed at great length and widely telegraphed in the months before the party meeting.
''But seeing them all in one document, backed by a clear sense of urgency, is heartening,'' Stephen Green, an economist at Standard Chartered, wrote in a note on Monday.
There were some disappointments. 
Many economists highlighted an apparent lack of determination to reduce the dominance that state-owned enterprises, or S.O.E.'s, hold in many areas of the Chinese economy.
''S.O.E. reform appears timid, reflecting the old thinking that the state ownership should remain as the mainstream,'' the team at Citigroup said in a note. 
''Without forcing S.O.E.'s out of the competitive industries, private companies will continue to find themselves at a disadvantaged position in acquiring natural and financial resources.''
And the usual cautions on the challenges of actually implementing the mandated changes remain firmly in place, analysts said.
Many of the overhauls will take months, if not years, to put into effect, and many could run into opposition from officials and businesses that are eager to preserve the status quo.
''Whether or not the Plenum ends up a turning point in China's development depends on how well reforms are implemented,'' said the team at Capital Economics.
Over all, though, they added, ''we can't help feeling more upbeat about the prospects for China's long-term economic future than we have ever been.''
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
