
As a murder and corruption scandal enveloping a former member of China's elite leadership continued to snowball, Prime Minister Wen Jiabao issued a new call on Monday for the government to end a culture of graft lest it lead to the end of Communist rule.
In an article in the conservative Communist Party journal Qiushi, or Seeking Truth, Mr. Wen said the government must hold officials more strongly accountable for corruption that occurs on their watch and make the results of corruption investigations open to public inspection.
The article, titled ''Let power be exercised in the sunshine,'' is the latest in a string of anticorruption broadsides aired since the former Politburo member Bo Xilai was ensnared in February in a murder investigation involving his wife.
Mr. Bo was removed from the Politburo after party officials issued a report accusing him of ''serious disciplinary violations'' and accusing his wife, Gu Kailai, of arranging the killing of Neil Heywood, a British businessman and onetime friend of the Bo family, after a financial dispute.
China's official news media have maintained a high-level drumbeat of warnings against corruption since the scandal became public, including a speech by President Hu Jintao that urged the military to rid itself of graft, and a prominent commentary last week on Xinhua, the state-run news service, that bemoaned efforts by the spouses and children of high officials to seek personal gain through official power.
''We must have a profound understanding of this: That the biggest danger to a political party in power is corruption,'' the article said. 
''If it is not handled properly, the nature of the regime may change, and its rule may end. 
It is an extremely difficult and important challenge we are facing right now.''
Mr. Wen's article cast the investigation of Mr. Bo and his wife as proof of the party's determination to weed out graft no matter where it is found.
''China is a socialist country ruled by law, and the dignity and authority of the law cannot be trampled,'' Mr. Wen said in the article. 
''There is no special citizen before the law. 
It does not allow any special party members to override the law within the party.''
Communist Party officials regularly issue anticorruption attacks and frequently make public reports listing the number of bureaucrats who have been prosecuted, or the amount of money recovered from graft investigations. 
Mr. Wen's article was somewhat different because it placed new emphasis on fighting graft by making the results of the investigations public, and because of its unusually harsh tone, said Zhang Xiaojin, who heads the political science department at Tsinghua University in Beijing.
Mr. Wen's toughness ''is no exaggeration,'' he said. 
''We can see that the problem is actually getting worse every year.''
