
LONDON -- The Aluminum Corporation of China agreed on Thursday to invest $19.5 billion in the mining group Rio Tinto, taking advantage of lower valuations to guarantee access to iron ore resources. 
It was China's largest purchase overseas.
Under the deal, the company, known as Chinalco, will buy $7.2 billion worth of bonds convertible into Rio Tinto stock and pay $12.3 billion in cash for stakes in Rio Tinto's aluminum, iron ore and copper assets in the United States, Australia and Chile.
Chinalco, which is state-controlled, would own 18 percent of Rio Tinto if the bonds were converted, but the transaction, which is subject to the approval of regulators in five countries, is likely to confront opposition from politicians worried about the Chinese group's influence on the company.
For Rio Tinto, the deal provides a much-needed cash injection as it seeks to reduce $39 billion of debt amassed through its 2007 purchase of the Canadian aluminum maker Alcan. 
The company pledged to reduce debt by $10 billion this year, but efforts have been hampered by sagging profits and lower raw material prices.
For China, which is the biggest consumer of iron ore and is always interested in guaranteeing an advantageous price for its steel industry, the deal offers direct access to raw materials at a time when prices are low but might rebound once demand recovers.
''This is all part of the recycling of financial reserves around the world,'' said Justin Urquhart Stewart, co-founder of Seven Investment Management in London. 
''Rio shareholders may feel upset as they're being bypassed for people who have money but in the long run it's good news to have a large client as a shareholder.''
The investment illustrates China's ability to invest large sums at a time when other investors are limited by recession. 
China's government agreed to pump more than $580 billion into its economy to sustain growth, an investment that is also likely to keep demand for steel and iron ore high.
''With the portfolio of these global assets, Chinalco will be better positioned to serve its customers in China and globally,'' Xiao Yaqing, Chinalco's president, said in a statement.
Chinalco already owns 9 percent of Rio Tinto, which is based in London. 
The two companies started discussions about a further investment in the middle of last year, Rio Tinto's chief executive, Tom Albanese, said on Thursday. 
Mr. Albanese said that it would have been ''extremely challenging'' to raise the same amount of cash through a rights issue in the current markets.
But some analysts criticized Rio Tinto's willingness to give up more of the company to Chinalco, saying it would limit the company's flexibility in the future and upset some shareholders, whose investments suffered after Rio's stock plummeted 64 percent over the last 12 months. 
Rio Tinto's shares dropped 1.8 percent in London Thursday morning.
Separately on Thursday, the company reported a 50 percent drop in its net income last year after taking a write-down at its aluminum unit because of falling prices.
Even though Thursday's deal with China received unanimous support from Rio Tinto's board, it provoked a row earlier this month when Rio's chairman-elect, Jim Leng, quit less than a month after his appointment because of a disagreement over ways to reduce debt.
Mr. Albanese defended the agreement with Chinalco, saying that the investment ''would have been attractive before the downturn and is double so today.''
He said the investment represents a premium of 124 percent to the current market enterprise value and represents ''superior value for Rio shareholders.''
Mr. Albanese embarked on a cost-cutting program last year that included job cuts, asset sales and the reduction of capital investments. 
But he came under attack from some investors last year for not pursuing a takeover offer by an Australian rival BHP Billiton, which ultimately withdrew its offer in November, citing Rio Tinto's debt. 
The bid prompted Chinalco's initial investment last year as the Chinese company grew increasingly concerned about a possible combination of Rio Tinto and BHP, which would have created an iron ore giant with larger pricing power.
Mr. Albanese said on Thursday that Chinalco's investment was as attractive as BHP's offer last year. 
But concerns remain about how much control Chinalco will ultimately have over Rio Tinto and its assets.
Rio Tinto sought to address some of these concerns Thursday, stressing that although Chinalco would be entitled to nominate two new nonexecutive directors to add to Rio's current 15-member board, ''independent nonexecutive'' directors would continue to make up a majority of the Rio Tinto board.
In addition, Rio Tinto said it ''retains operational control of the joint venture assets, with clear governance arrangements and continued commercial marketing of joint venture product while maintaining its commitment to best practice and sustainable development.''
Meanwhile, the Australian government signaled a degree of opposition to the deal.
Australia's treasurer, Wayne Swan, said Thursday that the government would revise its foreign ownership laws to treat convertible debt as though it were equity, a change that effectively tightens the regulations. 
Chinalco and Rio Tinto said they did not take the move as a ''negative signal'' and declined to comment on how confident they were that the transaction would receive government approval.
Rio Tinto's net income fell to $3.7 billion last year, from $7.3 billion in 2007. 
Excluding some one-time items, underlying earnings rose 39 percent, to $10.3 billion, from $7.4 billion.
For the deal, Chinalco hired advisers from Nomura Holdings, the Blackstone Group, China International Capital and JPMorgan Chase, while Rio Tinto worked with the Credit Suisse Group and Morgan Stanley.
