
BEIJING -- China, which has long been North Korea's benefactor, will signal its displeasure with Pyongyang again on Thursday when it welcomes President Park Geun-hye of South Korea for an elaborate banquet and a highly anticipated meeting with China's leader, President Xi Jinping, who has called her ''an old friend.''
Ms. Park's visit will contrast with the furtive, hastily arranged appearances in Beijing recently of two North Korean officials, a senior military officer and a diplomat, who were scolded by their Chinese hosts for North Korea's growing arsenal of nuclear weapons.
And Ms. Park, 61, the daughter of an anti-Communist dictator, is coming to China before the leader of North Korea, Kim Jong-un, who is supposed to be China's ally.
At the top of the agenda for her visit, according to both sides, will be North Korea and, specifically, how South Korea and China can together push Mr. Kim toward giving up his nuclear weapons.
The symbolism of a frustrated China, which is North Korea's benefactor, joining hands with South Korea, an ally of the United States, in calling for a Korean Peninsula free of nuclear weapons will send a clear and unpleasant message to the North, analysts say.
''When the leaders of the two countries meet reporters, they will say they have reached some consensus on denuclearization of the peninsula,'' predicted Wang Junsheng, professor of Asian affairs at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences.
That would be a demonstration of a new solidarity in the relationship between China and South Korea. 
The previous president of South Korea, Lee Myung-bak, did not have China's support, Mr. Wang said.
Ms. Park, who speaks Chinese and has shown an admiration for Chinese culture, will be arriving at a time of turmoil among China's foreign policy specialists, who are debating whether North Korea should be considered an ally or a liability.
The constituencies in China's hierarchy who stand by North Korea appear to be dwindling, but the People's Liberation Army and segments of the Communist Party remain in favor of keeping North Korea on Beijing's side, Chinese experts say.
After North Korea conducted a third nuclear test this year, China voted in favor of economic sanctions against North Korea at the United Nations. 
Since then, Beijing has called for the resumption of the six-party talks -- involving China, Japan, Russia, the United States, South Korea and North Korea -- that are aimed at ridding North Korea of its nuclear weapons.
Those talks collapsed in 2008 when North Korea walked out, and though Ms. Park has shown more warmth to China on North Korea than her predecessor, she has said she is not in favor of ''talks for talks' sake,'' a position that coincides with the view in Washington.
Indeed, as a leader well regarded by President Obama -- Ms. Park made her first overseas visit to Washington after assuming the presidency this year -- she could well become a channel between the United States and China on North Korea, experts say.
''The Chinese leaders will try to tell her that China is firm on denuclearization and will encourage a return to six-party talks,'' said Sun Zhe, director of the Center for U.S.-China Relations at Tsinghua University in Beijing. 
''We need to have some more joint South Korea and China efforts. 
Strengthening the South Korean-China relationship will send a clear message to North Korea.''
On the eve of Mrs. Park's arrival, The Beijing Morning Post flattered her with a profile headlined ''China Hand.''
It told how Zhao Yun, a Chinese military general of the early third century, is one of her favorite characters. 
She can sing Chinese songs and likes Sichuan cuisine, the profile said. 
Her autobiography, ''Steeled by Despair, Motivated by Hope,'' leads the Chinese Amazon list of biographies of political figures.
