
PARIS - The Chinese conglomerate Fosun International ensured that the battle for Club Méditerranée would continue into the new year, raising its bid for the resort operator just hours before the expiration of a Friday deadline set by the French market regulator.
Fosun's Gaillon Invest II consortium, which is led by the Fosun chairman, Guo Guangchang, and backed by Club Med's management, said it was now offering 24.60 euros for each share of the company. 
That offer, which also includes Club Med's convertible securities, values the French company at (EURO)939 million, or nearly $1.2 billion.
The French market regulator, the Autorité des Marchés Financiers, had set a deadline of Friday for Fosun and its allies to raise their bid or walk away. 
The new offer narrowly trumped the   (EURO)24-a-share bid made on Dec. 
5 by the Global Resorts consortium led by the Italian investor Andrea C. Bonomi.
Mr. Bonomi did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
The takeover battle is already the longest such bidding war in French history. 
The market regulator has been seeking to bring the process to an end by reducing the deadline period after each new bid, increasing the pressure on the rivals to raise financing quickly. 
The regulator said on Friday that it was setting a new deadline of Jan. 
7 at 6 p.m. for Mr. Bonomi's group to raise its offer. 
If the regulator feels the process has gone on too long, it could choose to ask for final, sealed bids.
Shares of Club Med closed on Thursday at (EURO)24.90, suggesting that investors had been expecting another bid. 
Trading in the stock was suspended on Friday morning and was to resume at noon, the market regulator said.
The new, higher offer was made possible by the bidders' "long-term vision and growth perspective," Gaillon Invest II said in a statement. 
The offer gives Club Med the resources it needs for "reinforced presence in France," it noted, and highlighted the advantages of its deep-pocketed Shanghai investor, saying the offer was the only one on the table that values Club Med's growth potential in China.
Club Med became the subject of market attention in May 2013, when its management announced that it was teaming up with Fosun and AXA Private Equity, now known as Ardian, to take the company private. 
Their initial offer of (EURO)17 a share was seen by many as grossly inadequate, a view that was subsequently vindicated when Mr. Bonomi torpedoed the Fosun-led deal with a (EURO)21-a-share offer.
An earlier version of this article misstated the activity of Club Med shares. 
Trading was suspended on Friday morning. 
It is not the case that shares were trading at 24.90 euros early Friday.
