
One of China's best-known dissidents, Liu Xiaobo, has been arrested for ''activities aimed at subversion,'' state media and human rights groups said on Wednesday, in the latest sign of a hardening of government policy toward dissent.
Mr. Liu has been in detention since Dec. 
8, after he signed a document, Charter 08, which calls for multiparty democracy in China. 
The document was released two days after his arrest.
Citing the Beijing Public Security Bureau, the official Xinhua news agency said that Mr. Liu, 53, had been formally arrested on Tuesday for ''alleged agitation activities aimed at subversion of government and overthrowing of the socialist system.''
It was not immediately clear if Mr. Liu had been formally indicted as well.
Human rights activists are commonly accused of seeking to subvert the state but it is unusual for the government to include an allegation that someone is seeking to overthrow the socialist system as well.
The decision to formally arrest Mr. Liu is the latest sign that China is becoming less willing to tolerate dissent, human rights specialists said. 
More than a dozen human rights lawyers were banned from practicing law earlier this month for representing clients against the government.
''When you jail the most prominent intellectual dissident of the country, whose writing activities had effectively been tolerated for many years, it sends an unambiguous signal of political hardening,'' said Nicholas Bequelin, a researcher for Human Rights Watch. 
Mr. Liu's case has become a public relations dilemma for Beijing officials because of his international prominence.
Xinhua said that Mr. Liu had confessed to police during a preliminary investigation. 
Prisoners in detention have few legal rights and are subject to pressure.
China Human Rights Defenders, a human rights advocacy group, said in a statement that it had learned from Mr. Liu's wife, Liu Xia, that Mr. Liu had arranged in advance for Mo Shaoping, one of China's best-known human rights lawyers, to defend him. 
But Mrs. Liu was told that Mr. Mo would not be allowed to defend Mr. Liu because he had also signed Charter 08, the group said.
Another prominent lawyer, Shang Baojun, has not been barred from representing him and so might be allowed to do so, the group added.
Charter 08 initially had 303 signatories and now has more than 8,000. 
Some Western experts have suggested that Mr. Liu played a role in drafting the document, but that has not been confirmed and he was reportedly under police surveillance long before his detention in December.
Charter 08 specifically calls for the abolition of the crime of ''incitement of subversion of state power'', the offense for which Mr. Liu appears to have been arrested, although Xinhua did not cite the specific section of China's criminal code that was invoked for the arrest.
Prominent human rights activists like Mr. Liu are generally not prosecuted unless top levels of the government have already decided that a conviction will be handed down by the courts.
Mr. Liu spent three years undergoing ''education through labor'' in the mid-1990s, after calling for new policies toward Taiwan. 
But that is an administrative procedure in China and distinct from the kind of criminal case that Mr. Liu now faces. 
Subversion is punishable in China by up to 15 years in prison.
Mr. Liu's activism in the months leading up to the Tiananmen Square military crackdown in 1989 was followed by 19 months in prison, although he was never convicted and sentenced then.
Liu Xia has only been allowed to see her husband twice during his current detention, on Jan. 
1 and March 20, China Human Rights Defenders said.
Amnesty International strongly criticized the decision to prosecute Mr. Liu.
''This use of state security charges to punish activists for merely expressing their views must stop,'' said Roseann Rife, the group's deputy program director for Asia and the Pacific. 
''This is another act of desperation by a regime that is terrified of public opinion.''
