
PITTSFORD, N.Y. 
-- Shanshan Feng of China says she has always chased Yani Tseng of Taiwan, since the two were 13-year-olds competing in Asia. 
Tseng was always better when they were juniors, and that didn't change years later when the two women found themselves half a world away competing on the L.P.G.A. 
Tour.
But after last year's L.P.G.A. 
Championship, Feng was the one holding the trophy. 
It was her first L.P.G.A. win and her first major championship, and Feng was the first woman from China to win an L.P.G.A. tournament. 
This time, Tseng got to watch.
The 23-year-old Feng acknowledged that Tseng had always been her target. 
''She was always ahead,'' Feng said, ''but now I'm getting closer. 
I still haven't caught her. 
Well, I'm still trying.''
When Feng arrived at Locust Hill Country Club earlier this week, she said her memories of last year's win came flooding back. 
She is coming off a runner-up finish last week at the ShopRite L.P.G.A. 
Classic in New Jersey and has risen to No. 7 in the Women's World Golf Rankings, two spots behind Tseng.
Feng did not cause a nation to suddenly embrace the game, as Tseng did when she ascended to the world's top ranking and dominated the L.P.G.A. in 2010 and 2011, becoming the youngest player to win five major championships. 
But Feng's win last June raised awareness about golf in China.
Feng's countrymen noticed, but instead of parades, fanfare and a crush of autograph seekers wanting time with her, she was named China's best non-Olympic athlete last year. 
It was the first time a golfer had been nominated for the award.
She was surprised to be greeted by fans and members of the news media when she arrived at the airport after her win, and she said she was happy to sit through news conferences in Beijing and her hometown, Guangzhou, carefully explaining golf to anyone who would listen.
''People don't know much about golf in China, so we had a great chance to promote it,'' Feng said. 
''They didn't really know what a major was or what it means, so it wasn't like a big deal.''
Her countrymen knew that she had won, that she had defeated Tseng and that she had done it in the United States. 
But her homecoming did not significantly alter Feng's stature as a sports figure back home.
''I would say that my life hasn't really been changed,'' she said. 
''But with golf in the 2016 Olympics, if somebody from China can do well, I'm sure it's going to change everybody.''
That needle of enthusiasm for golf moved a little more this spring when the 14-year-old amateur Guan Tianlang made the cut at the Masters. 
He is from the same city as Feng, and she watched him play as a junior.
Feng's 2013 season has featured four top-10 finishes, as well as a bit of a roller-coaster ride. 
Throughout the season, she found herself trying to please her club sponsor while trying to play consistently with her new equipment.
Two weeks ago she switched to Honma, a Japanese brand she had used once before, and competed with them at the New Jersey tournament. 
The runner-up finish kept the clubs in her bag.
It was a solid return to the tour after Feng had skipped the two L.P.G.A. tournaments leading to last week's ShopRite L.P.G.A. 
Classic. Rather than playing the tour's event in Mobile, Ala., she flew to Asia and played a tournament in Japan.
Feng had planned to fly to the Bahamas for the L.P.G.A.'s event the next week but unexpectedly ran into trouble with her visa and decided to skip it.
She learned to roll with the punches long ago. 
A tour rookie in 2008, she did a lot of listening that first year.
As her English improved, she said she began to ''feel more comfortable.''
As the years passed, she added some words and phrases in Korean and Japanese.
''No Spanish yet, because I can't really roll my tongue,'' Feng said.
But Feng can roll her putts, and she hits 72.3 percent of her fairways and nearly 73 percent of her greens in regulation.
She says she likes the narrow fairways and high rough she will see at the L.P.G.A. 
Championship. It is a major championship, and what she taught her compatriots last year was that majors take the measure of the best in the world.
