
HONG KONG -- A surprisingly large increase in imports caused China's trade surplus to narrow in August, data released Friday showed.
But at $20 billion, the surplus remains a huge bone of contention in relations with the United States, which has long argued that the renminbi's value has been kept low, giving Chinese companies a competitive advantage over American manufacturers.
The trade statistics showed the pace of Chinese export growth moderating from the previous month -- though a rise of 34.4 percent from a year earlier was robust and in line with analysts' expectations.
But economists were surprised by the size of the growth in China's imports -- up 35.2 percent from August 2009. 
That appeared to signal that domestic demand had rebounded despite Beijing's efforts in recent months to rein in the pace of Chinese economic growth and to slow the inflationary pressures that had built up as a result.
China's government is scheduled to release additional economic data, including the latest inflation figures, on Saturday.
In the Friday data, the combination of somewhat slower export growth and strong imports caused the Chinese trade surplus to shrink much more than expected. 
At $20 billion, the August surplus was well below the $28.7 billion recorded in July.
But looking at the national breakdown, economists noted that China's trade surplus with the United States was still the second-largest at $18.1 billion, though down by $1.3 billion. 
Analysts said the slight narrowing of that trade gap was unlikely to stop American policy makers from calling on China to let the renminbi rise against the dollar. 
On the other hand, the softer pace of export growth might stiffen the resolve of Beijing to resist pressures for a stronger renminbi.
In June, China said it would allow more flexibility in the renminbi's exchange rate with the dollar, but the rise in the renminbi so far has been minimal -- to 6.77 renminbi to the dollar Friday from about 6.83 renminbi in June.
''As political frictions ramp up ahead of the U.S. midterm election, expect every nuanced movement in China's deficit to be used by both Beijing and Washington to further their stance on the reminibi,'' economists at HSBC wrote in a note.
The picture is further clouded by uncertainties over how the global economy -- and Chinese exporting prowess and import demand -- will develop in coming months.
Some economists say the rise in imports shows that the authorities are easing off the brake pedal. 
Analysts at Goldman Sachs wrote in a note, ''We have been highlighting over the past month that there has been a stealth loosening of policy since July, which probably started to show its impact on economic data in August.''
Others, however, cautioned that import growth would moderate again in coming months, bringing a renewed widening of the trade surplus.
''We expect both export and import growth to return to a downward trend,'' two economists at Citibank, Ken Peng and Minggao Shen, said in a note Friday. 
''Imports cannot far outpace exports sustainably, especially when domestic policies remain on a tightening tilt.''
