
The report on the C.I.A.'s interrogations of terrorism suspects, released by the Senate Intelligence Committee on Tuesday, has received extensive coverage in China, which has long accused the United States of hypocrisy on human rights issues.
At a regular news briefing in Beijing on Wednesday, a spokesman for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Hong Lei, said that China "consistently opposes torture."
"We believe that the U.S. side should reflect upon and rectify its relevant behavior, earnestly obey and implement the provisions of international conventions," he said.
On Thursday, state-run news media weighed in with photographs and analysis, including details of extreme interrogation techniques used by the C.I.A., such as waterboarding. 
The English-language China Daily ran a cartoon on its opinion page featuring the rolled-up Senate report funneling water over the face of a bloated man labeled C.I.A.
People's Daily, the mouthpiece of the Communist Party, ran an article with the headline "C.I.A. 
Prisoner Abuse Report Reveals Details of Torture."
The article said the report was published "after a long behind-the-scenes battle."
It details the bipartisan fighting before and after the report's release, and it highlights earlier criticism of C.I.A. practices within the United States.
Su Xiaohui, a researcher at the China Institute of International Studies, was quoted as saying that not only will the United States face "possible retaliation from terrorist organizations" over the report's disclosures, but it "will also have a negative impact on the global security situation."
The United States has historically promoted international law, "but has itself forgotten relevant international conventions including the Geneva Convention," she said, referring to rules governing the wartime treatment of prisoners of war as well as the wounded, civilians and other noncombatants.
"America owes the international community an explanation, and should also propose a practical solution," she continued.
Xinhua, a state-run news agency, listed the report along with racial tensions and income inequality in a broad, critical commentary on the "sheer hypocrisy" of the United States' human rights record.
"It does not even need a discerning eye to see through that camouflage and realize that hegemony, instead of defending human rights, is the U.S. operating code," the commentary said.
On its Chinese-language website, photos from Guantánamo Bay, including one of a hooded prisoner forced into a stress position, accompanied a lengthy analysis of the report, which also described some of the interrogation methods used.
Another state news agency, China News Service, published an editorial calling for the United States to "do some soul-searching on human rights issues."
"On the issue of human rights, the U.S. has always presented the image of a 'champion of human rights,' and rarely mentions its own issues with regards to poverty, unemployment and race," the editorial said. 
"The recently published prisoner abuse report has thoroughly discredited this 'human rights champion' idea."
The nationalist-leaning Global Times, however, lamented that the United States' standing in the world would probably not be greatly damaged by the report.
An editorial with the headline "Despite Torture Report, U.S. 
Escapes Censure" said that the report, which it noted was released just ahead of international Human Rights Day, "captured the lion's share of global attention."
"But it did nothing to jeopardize the U.S. image," the editorial said. 
"Few other countries can do the same."
The editorial went on to say that many people, including in China, "have paid attention to the courage of the U.S." in releasing the report, "rather than the crime of prisoner abuse."
