
Prime Minister Wen Jiabao of China called Thursday for closer political and economic relations with Taiwan, but he offered few specifics and did not expand on a previous suggestion by President Hu Jintao for improving communication with Taiwan on military issues.
In his opening speech to the National People's Congress, Mr. Wen clearly signaled the Chinese leadership's support for a series of economic measures that negotiators from Beijing and Taiwan were already discussing. 
These include the gradual integration of banking and other financial services across the Taiwan Strait, and the drafting of a ''comprehensive agreement on economic cooperation'' that could eventually become the basis for a free-trade agreement.
Mr. Wen also called for ''fair and reasonable arrangements'' on Taiwanese participation in international organizations and a formal cessation of hostilities with Taiwan, without providing any details on how these thorny goals could be achieved. 
And he did not mention any specific measures of military cooperation, like a possible hot line between the People's Liberation Army and Taiwan's military that had been previously mentioned, even though President Hu of China and President Ma Ying-jeou of Taiwan have each expressed some interest in this in recent months.
Taiwanese officials said they were satisfied with focusing on economic issues for now. 
''On the political aspects, when the relationship between Taiwan and the mainland reaches a certain level of mutual trust, only then can discussions be move forward,'' the island's Mainland Affairs Council said in a statement.
Mr. Wen's address represented a modest olive branch to Taiwan and avoided the more hostile language the mainland had used in the past. 
The stock market in Taipei, Taiwan's capital, jumped 2.1 percent as investors responded to Mr. Wen's suggestion for closer cross-strait economic ties.
Mr. Wen's clear endorsement of such ties could help accelerate economic talks, which have been dragging along more slowly than expected.
