
The Chinese authorities prevented one of China's most prominent independent film festivals from opening over the weekend, blocking roads, confiscating documents, computers and films, and temporarily detaining two of the event's officials.
Although independent film festivals in China have run into trouble with the authorities in the past, the shuttering of the 11th Beijing Independent Film Festival on Saturday was the most serious crackdown in recent years on the small but robust Chinese indie film festival circuit, a sign of the government's steadily decreasing tolerance of voices not sanctioned by the state.
"In the past few years, when they forced us to cancel the festival, we just moved it to other places, or delayed the screenings," Wang Hongwei, the festival's artistic director and one of the two event officials detained by the police, told The Associated Press. 
"But this year, we cannot carry on with the festival. 
It is completely forbidden."
On Saturday afternoon, the day the festival was scheduled to open, the authorities blocked off several roads leading to the courtyard offices of the Li Xianting Film Fund, the festival's organizer, according to a memo written by Li Xianting, a prominent art critic and the festival's patron, and posted on the WeChat social messaging platform.
In a series of live updates posted on WeChat, Mr. Li said the police, led by the local Communist Party committee secretary, forcibly entered the fund's offices in the Tongzhou district on the eastern outskirts of Beijing and took away bags of documents, computers and films accumulated over the fund's decade-long history.
Mr. Li and Mr. Wang were also detained by the police on Saturday but later released, according to Wang Shu, a representative of the Li Xianting Film Fund.
"What does it mean to 'stir up trouble'?" wrote Mr. Li in a message posted Saturday. 
"Let me tell you. 
It is when those with power mobilize the police force and stir up the uninformed masses and even the local hooligans to lay siege to those things that have been deemed by them as 'illegal' - which are in fact normal, day-to-day public events for the arts, religion and rights protection."
Mr. Li added that " 'Stirring up trouble' by local governments has already become symbolic of the abuse of power."
On Saturday afternoon, would-be festival attendees found the offices of the Li Xianting Film Fund blocked off and surrounded by the police, some in plainclothes, according to news reports.
Zhou Xin, 25, a Chinese independent curator and writer based in New York who has attended the festival in past years, said that in addition to the uniformed and plainclothes police, there was a car marked with characters for "Wenhua Zhifa," or the Cultural Law Enforcement Agency of Beijing. 
There were also burly-looking men with the authorities, said Mr. Zhou. One of them, he said, snatched his phone and the phones of others around him while they were taking photos.
"They deleted all the photos and then after 10 to 20 minutes, a Tongzhou policeman came over and gave the phone back to me," said Mr. Zhou by telephone on Monday.
Over all, nearly 200 people - including film directors, invited guests and members of the public - tried to attend the opening events at various points throughout the day, said Ms. Wang, the film fund representative. 
She added that electricity at the film fund's office has been shut off since Saturday, in accordance with previous notices from the police.
According to Mr. Li's memos, in the days leading up to the festival's scheduled opening, he was approached several times by the local authorities asking him to cancel the festival, and eventually reached a compromise with them to move the festival to a hotel outside Beijing in nearby Hebei Province. 
But the hotel manager telephoned the film fund's office on Friday to say they had been prohibited by the local authorities from making their premises available for the event.
Reached by telephone Monday, an employee at the Tongzhou District Public Security Bureau declined to comment on the situation.
The forced cancellation of the festival is being seen by many industry observers as evidence of increasing efforts by the Chinese authorities to stifle freedom of expression and speech.
"This most recent crackdown may suggest authorities are no longer willing to tolerate the emergence of independent film voices (and the social networks growing around them) - even if they are already effectively marginalized," wrote David Bandurski, a researcher with the University of Hong Kong's China Media Project, in an analysis on the project's website.
"One of the most important details to note in this case is that over the weekend police raided the offices of the festival's organizer, the Li Xianting Film Fund, reportedly carting away records of the fund's work," Mr. Bandurski wrote, adding that the fund has been instrumental in introducing Chinese independent film to the rest of the world.
