
China said Wednesday that judicial authorities in Tibet had imposed prison terms for 21 additional people convicted of participating in the deadly riots last March, bringing the total number punished for the mayhem to 76.
The new punishments, announced by Xinhua, the official news agency, came three months after the first batch of 55 convicted rioters were sentenced to terms ranging from three years to life for crimes that included robbery, arson and disturbing public order.
Xinhua said the new punishments were first disclosed by Nyima Tsering, a Communist Party official in Lhasa, at a news briefing in the Tibetan capital on Tuesday.
He did not provide details about the length of the sentences or the crimes committed for the newest group of convicts. 
But he suggested that the government had shown leniency toward the 950 people who had been detained since the March 14 riots. 
''We have been restraining ourselves to a large extent,'' he said, according to Xinhua. 
''We haven't been using destructive weapons.''
The disturbances, which began after a peaceful protest by monks turned violent, deeply rattled the Communist Party in the months leading up to the Beijing Olympics and drew heightened international attention to the plight of Tibetans, many of whom resent China's heavy-handed role in their religious and cultural affairs since it seized control of the Himalayan territory in 1951.
Although most of the dead were ethnic Han Chinese killed by Tibetan mobs, exile groups contend that scores of monks, nuns and other Tibetans died in the government's ensuing crackdown.
With just a month until the 50th anniversary of the uprising that led to the exile of the Dalai Lama, Tibet's revered spiritual leader, Beijing is nervous about the potential for unrest in Tibet and adjoining provinces that have heavily Tibetan populations.
In a sign of the Chinese government's tough attitude, it recently renamed that anniversary ''Serf Emancipation Day.''
In recent weeks there has been a growing call for people to show their displeasure with Chinese rule in Tibet by boycotting Tibetan new year festivities, known as Losar. 
In e-mail messages and through word of mouth, people have been told to refrain from setting off fireworks or singing during the holiday period, which begins on Feb. 
25. The government has responded by handing out free fireworks and urging people to resist the calls of people they pejoratively describe as splittists.
Since December, according to the state media, dozens of people in Lhasa have been detained for advocating Tibetan independence, ''spreading rumors'' and fomenting social unrest. 
Most of those taken in during sweeps of Internet cafes and outdoor markets were found to have downloaded or sold banned music that acknowledges the Dalai Lama or advocates Tibetan independence.
