
SHANGHAI -- The Chinese authorities said on Tuesday that they had detained 23 suspects here and had broken up an international gun trafficking ring that conspired with a United States soldier to smuggle firearms into China.
The Ministry of Public Security said that more than 100 guns and gun parts, and about 50,000 bullets, had been seized in the case, which is being jointly investigated with the American authorities.
The announcement came weeks after United States officials arrested Staff Sgt. Joseph Debose, 29, a soldier with a Special Forces National Guard unit in North Carolina, on charges of illegal firearms trafficking.
According to the United States attorney's office for the Eastern District of New York, customs officers in Shanghai stumbled upon the smuggling ring in August after discovering a Beretta 9-millimeter semiautomatic handgun and other firearms hidden inside a stereo speaker in a U.P.S. package.
After contacting U.P.S. in the United States, as well as the Department of Homeland Security, the authorities traced the package to two Chinese nationals in New York, using shipping documents and surveillance video from a U.P.S. facility in Queens. 
The two men eventually led the authorities to Sergeant Debose, who was acting as a gun dealer in North Carolina, prosecutors said.
The Chinese men, Lin Zhifu, 25, and Li Lilan, 23, were indicted last month in New York on charges of illegally exporting firearms. 
Mr. Lin pleaded guilty, and Mr. Li pleaded not guilty. 
The charges carry a prison term of up to 20 years.
The authorities said they believed that the group began smuggling firearms in late 2010. 
Among the weapons brought into China were semiautomatic pistols, revolvers, rifles, shotguns and military-style assault weapons. 
Private gun ownership in China is highly restricted, with nearly all firearms in the hands of the state authorities.
According to the authorities, one of the Chinese men in New York said that Sergeant Debose had taught them how to erase the serial numbers from the weapons. 
The authorities in China used forensic technology and a microscope to recover the numbers.
Officials in New York said that Sergeant Debose spoke to the Chinese men about a shipment. 
Shortly after the call, the authorities said, Sergeant Debose called the local sheriff's office in North Carolina to say that several firearms had been stolen from his garage.
The authorities said that at the time of his arrest on May 20, Sergeant Debose was carrying a loaded .45-caliber pistol. 
A lawyer for Sergeant Debose could not be reached for comment on Tuesday.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
