
As most countries agonize over how to keep their barely reviving economies growing, China is already looking to slam on the brakes.
China's central bank moved late Friday to reduce lending to companies and individuals by requiring large commercial banks to increase the amount of cash they park with the central bank. 
The move, which came earlier than most economists had expected, was meant to slow China's breakneck economy and inflation.
It was the second time in a month that the central bank had directed the country's banks to increase reserves. 
In spite of the earlier edict, which took effect on Jan. 
18, banks actually lent more money in January than in the previous three months combined, illustrating just how hard it is for Beijing to modulate its rapidly expanding economy.
Chinese economists now predict the economy will grow about 10 percent this year, while Western economists put the figure closer to 12 percent. 
The growth reflects a revival of exports, strong consumer spending and heavy government investment in infrastructure projects like high-speed rail lines.
But authorities in Beijing are walking a delicate and difficult line. 
They consider controlling inflation as key to domestic peace because in the past the erosion of the spending power of workers has led to unrest.
At the same time, if China brakes too hard, it risks slowing global growth overall and throwing other countries, including the United States, back into recession. 
For the first time in history, China's economy is acting as a major engine pulling the rest of the world out of recession.
Economic reports Friday showed that most of Europe's major economies either shrank or barely grew in the fourth quarter of last year.
The United States had strong growth in the fourth quarter, leaving many wondering when Washington will start increasing interest rates. 
The Federal Reserve has signaled it will be months.
Fears that China's move Friday would slow global growth sent share prices sliding across Europe and pushed New York markets lower when they opened, though they recovered some of the losses. 
China's commercial banks have become important lenders to the rest of the world as American banks have considerably reduced lending.
''The timing is a surprise,'' said Qing Wang, an economist in the Hong Kong office of Morgan Stanley, referring to the central bank's action.
Policy makers inject additional cash each year into the country's financial system before Lunar New Year to accommodate holiday spending. 
Raising the bank reserve ratio could prevent banks from turning that into loans for activities like real estate speculation.
Jing Ulrich, the managing director and chairwoman of China equities and commodities at J. P. Morgan, said, ''The message coming out of China has been quite clear -- policy makers are becoming more concerned about containing inflationary expectations and managing the risk of asset price bubbles as a result of last year's aggressive expansion of credit.''
Stephen Green, the head of greater China research in the Shanghai office of Standard Chartered Bank, said that he had been expecting one increase a month in the ratio for the foreseeable future as a way to slow the economy and the threat of inflation.
The government began a stimulus plan of more than half-trillion dollars last year, and even before that Beijing had a huge public investment program to strengthen the country's infrastructure.
At the same time, Chinese families are snapping up cars, apartments and other big-ticket items.
China passed the United States last year to become the world's largest car market by number of vehicles sold. 
Car sales in January were more than double the level of a year earlier.
Families, real estate developers and industrial companies have all been borrowing heavily and have started paying more for everything from food to apartments. 
Last month apartment prices surged and the pace of wholesale inflation doubled.
Chinese families have the cash to buy cars now partly because they still have extremely high savings rates by international standards and partly because the state-controlled banking sector went on a lending spree over the last year at the government's request.
China's banks largely avoided investing in the mortgage-backed securities, credit-default swaps and other esoteric financial instruments that have caused tremendous damage to the balance sheets of Western banks in the last two years, leaving them less able or less willing to lend.
The National Bureau of Statistics of China said Thursday that annual inflation in producer prices had more than doubled in January from December, to 4.3 percent. 
Average housing prices in large and midsize cities were up 9.5 percent last month from a year earlier, the fastest rate of increase in 19 months.
Rising producer prices and asset prices have not yet fed into high inflation in consumer prices, which were up only 1.5 percent last month from a year earlier despite an increase in food prices.
The central bank action Friday was aimed at keeping a tight rein on consumer prices.
The central bank pushed up the reserve ratio by half a percentage point, to 16.5 percent, for large banks, and 14.5 percent for small banks, effective Feb. 
25. Small financial institutions that mainly lend to farmers, like rural credit cooperatives, are temporarily exempted from the increase to make sure they can provide loans for spring planting.
As the government tries to keep inflation in check, the conventional remedy in most industrialized countries would be to push up the interest rates that borrowers must pay for loans, typically through actions in money markets. 
But that would draw even more investment into China, at a time when the Chinese authorities are already struggling to control foreign cash that has been flowing in.
Banks have been keeping about 18 percent of their assets at the central bank recently. 
But raising the minimum makes it less likely big banks will start lending that money.
