
SHANGHAI -- A former executive at China Mobile, one of this country's biggest state-owned telecommunications companies, was sentenced to death with a two-year reprieve Tuesday for accepting bribes, according to Xinhua, the state-run news agency.
The sentence means that with good behavior the executive's penalty could be commuted to life in prison. 
Li Hua, the former chairman and general manager of the Sichuan branch of China Mobile, the world's largest mobile phone operator as measured by subscribers, was convicted of accepting more than $2.5 million in bribes by the Intermediate People's Court in the city of Panzhihua, in southwest China's Sichuan Province.
The same type of sentence was handed down last month for one of the company's other former executives, Zhang Chunjiang, who once served as vice chairman of China Mobile. 
He was convicted of accepting more than $1.15 million in bribes while working at a series of state-run telecom companies from 1994 to 2009.
The cases are the latest indications that bribery and corruption are deeply rooted in the operations of China's huge, state-run corporations. 
Many of them operate as oligopolies and have the power to make huge purchases of equipment from local and foreign suppliers.
China has been struggling to root out corruption among high-ranking officials and among executives at state-run companies. 
And over the years, a seemingly endless parade of officials and executives has been convicted of accepting bribes.
In handing down the sentence on Tuesday, the court said that Mr. Li had accepted bribes from local companies, according to Xinhua. 
The report also said he had returned the bribes, but there was no mention of which companies were involved.
At least six other executives from China Mobile are under investigation in corruption cases, according to the nation's state-run news media. 
According to Caixin magazine, one of the nation's most respected publications, Mr. Li was initially detained by investigators in June of last year.
The case unfolded, Caixin said, after a China Mobile audit raised questions about illegal dealings in the Sichuan branch.
