
BEIJING -- Apple has a lot to thank people like Ms. Deng for.
A Beijing-based quality analyst, Ms. Deng gave only her surname because she is embarrassed by the amount of money she spends playing mobile games on WeChat, a hugely popular messaging app developed by the Chinese Internet giant Tencent Holdings.
''The most expensive time was when I spent 68 yuan on a leopard on Tiantiankupao,'' said Ms. Deng, an avid iPhone user, referring to Tencent's hit game Timi Run Everyday, where characters run through obstacle courses. 
Having a leopard as a pet, which costs about $11 when converted from yuan, or renminbi, gives the characters extra power, helping players beat their friends.
Ms. Deng and tens of millions like her have made China Apple's third-largest market for software sales, and a huge chunk of that comes through WeChat. 
Known locally as Weixin, WeChat had 438 million monthly active users globally, mostly in China, at the end of June, and has rapidly evolved from a messaging tool into a digital Swiss Army knife, allowing users to send messages, play games, book taxis and shop online.
The app has proved to be a winning formula in getting people in China to connect their bank accounts with their phones and pay for virtual goods like extra lives and power-ups in mobile games.
''We're seeing some substantial strength there,'' Apple's chief executive, Timothy D. Cook, said of China in July. 
''The thing that's actually growing the most is the iTunes, software and services category, which has the App Store in it. 
That area is almost doubling, year over year.''
Apple's revenue in Greater China, which includes Hong Kong and Taiwan, soared 28 percent in the April-June quarter from a year earlier, to $5.9 billion.
Tencent was the top game publisher for Apple's iOS operating system in China by revenue for both June and July, according to App Annie, a company that measures app use. 
Apple is expected to introduce its new iPhone this week with a larger screen more friendly to game players.
Apple makes all software sales on the iPhone go through its App Store. 
Typically, the company, based in Cupertino, Calif., will receive 30 percent of the sales, while the rest goes to an app's developer or publisher. 
WeChat, which itself hosts apps and games made by other developers, is no different. 
The cash from any products sold on the app are split among Apple, Tencent and the developer.
''By far the biggest factor driving App Store revenue in China is WeChat,'' said Ben Thompson, who writes at stratechery.com. 
''WeChat has driven app download and usage, which drives people to want to buy stuff, which drives them to connect their payment information. 
It's been a very virtuous cycle.''
Growth has also been helped by increased smartphone sales since China Mobile, the country's largest carrier, began offering the iPhone in January.
A big part of WeChat's success has been with casual games -- highly addictive hits like Candy Crush Saga and Temple Run that are often free to download but let users pay for in-game upgrades. 
WeChat has its own stable of games and also publishes Candy Crush in China. 
Games integrated with WeChat and Tencent's other mobile social network, Mobile QQ, generated revenue of 3 billion renminbi, or almost $490 million, for Tencent in the April-June period, up from about 1.8 billion renminbi in the previous quarter.
''If you look at who's playing Temple Run and Candy Crush, a lot of these were nongamers five years ago,'' said Junde Yu, App Annie's vice president for the Asia-Pacific region. 
''It hooks them and encourages them to start making payments.''
China is a special case in another way that helps push up spending on smartphones. 
Both Apple and Tencent have tried to drive the adoption of mobile payments on their platforms, but China's banking payment system is complex at best. 
Apple uses a top-up system for its App Store in China, with a 50 renminbi minimum value, Mr. Yu said.
''This leads to a lot of repeat purchases, as people aren't likely to spend 50 yuan on one purchase,'' Mr. Yu said. 
''After the first time, they won't stop but will keep purchasing and playing games.''
