
BEIJING -- After three days of torrid heat in Beijing, with thermometer readings in the upper 90s Fahrenheit, the air in the city's concrete canyons and on its giant ring roads has cooled a little, to 95. 
Enough for city officials to drop the health warning they had posted on Sunday, as they do whenever temperatures exceed that threshold.
Sure, it is not the heat of the deserts of Rajasthan in India, where temperatures in May crackled to 123.8 degrees. 
But the air in Beijing and other parts of China can reach 106 in the summer, and work rarely stops on the 24-hour construction sites even under these ''bamboo steamer'' conditions, as The Beijing Evening News described them.
China has something rare to address the problem. 
By law, many people who work outdoors are eligible for a heat subsidy when temperatures go above 95, or 35 degrees Celsius -- a pay supplement that in Beijing amounts to 180 renminbi a month, or $27, China News Service reported.
Employers do not always give the money, and workers may not know about it or may fear losing their jobs if they ask, said a business and legal consultancy based in Shanghai.
''Employees have the right to file a complaint if an employer fails to pay, but rarely do in fear of repercussions,'' reported China Briefing, a newsletter of the consultancy, Dezan Shira & Associates. 
''In many cases, employees aren't even aware of the allowance.''
Several people in Beijing who work on contract, or without any contract, laughed when asked whether they had received the subsidy, as temperatures soared this week.
''Who gets that?!'' asked one man, in a typical response.
In the face of global warming and rising temperatures that are affecting human health and productivity worldwide, might the Chinese practice, which aims to protect people's health, catch on?
Could such subsidies become a cost of doing business in a hotter world?
While there is some public discussion in China about the long-term human or economic implications of global warming, in general the implications of rising heat are poorly studied, wrote Rui-Dan Chen, a scientist at Sun Yat-sen University in the southern city of Guangzhou, and Ri-Yu Lu at the Chinese Academy of Sciences in Beijing, in a recent review of published material on extreme heat in the journal Atmospheric and Oceanic Science Letters. 
The authors defined extreme heat as temperatures that exceeded 95 degrees.
China, like everywhere else, is experiencing those rising temperatures and also rising deaths related to heat, the authors said, quoting the World Meteorological Organization. 
During the decade ending in 2010, they said, 136,000 deaths were caused by heat waves, an increase of 2,300 percent over the 6,000 deaths recorded in the previous decade.
''Extreme heat events have become an important public concern,'' the authors wrote. 
But far more attention is paid to ''precipitation extremes,'' they said, ''possibly due to the long history of China as a traditional agricultural country.''
China has a record of flooding along its rivers, especially in the center and south of the country, and leaders regularly appear at major floods to demonstrate support for rescue efforts.
Despite the patchy enforcement of the regulations, the government appears to be trying to raise consciousness of the heat subsidies, not least among foreign employers who may need to pay them to their workers.
In an article in June in its ''Learning Chinese'' section, the state-run newspaper Global Times offered the following dialogue about the subsidies:
''It's way too hot today!
Too bad, I still have to work,'' ''A'' said.
''Don't let it get you down,'' ''B'' urged. 
''Workers that work during sweltering summer days have a right to a 'high heat subsidy'!''
The amounts vary across the country. 
Shanxi Province, in the north, offers 240 renminbi a month, while Guangdong, in the far south, provides a relatively low 150 renminbi, according to China News Service.
Some provinces mandate complex calculations based on daily, or even hourly, rates and temperatures, an exercise that might cause anyone trying to figure it out to break into a sweat.
Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today's Headlines: Asian Morning newsletter. 
Sign up here.
