
''Avatar,'' the Hollywood blockbuster that has proved wildly popular with Chinese moviegoers, will be pulled in the next few days from the majority of Chinese theaters where it is showing, Chinese media outlets reported Tuesday.
The film, which can be viewed in standard format or in 3-D, will be removed from theaters without 3-D technology to make way for a domestically produced biography of Confucius, according to reports in state-controlled media that mainly quoted theater operators.
China limits the number of foreign films permitted to be shown in the country to 20 a year, and it also regulates the amount of time each of those films can be shown. 
Officials ban any foreign films deemed unfriendly to the Communist Party but also want to ensure that any foreign imports deemed acceptable do not dominate the market and smother local film producers.
While many films have a shorter run in Chinese theaters than their foreign producers would like, it is rare for the authorities to cut short the showing of a runaway success like ''Avatar.''
According to 20th Century Fox, the movie's distributor, the film has earned $76 million in ticket sales in China, making it the most successful movie so far in China.
''Avatar'' will continue to play on the scarcer but more popular 3-D screens, the reports said. 
The film has been showing at an estimated 2,500 theaters since Jan. 
4. Two-thirds of them are showing it in standard format, and one-third in 3-D, according to news media reports.
Industry analysts say the China Film Group Corporation, a state-run enterprise with effective regulatory authority over some aspects of the film industry, generally decides how long and where foreign films are shown.
David Wolf, the president and chief executive of Wolf Group Asia, a corporate consulting firm based in Beijing, said Chinese officials were apparently curbing the run of ''Avatar'' because they wanted to protect the box office returns of domestic films. 
He said ''Avatar'' had already run longer than the typical 10 days allowed for foreign films.
''From the indications I have seen, one, it is a purely commercial decision, and two, it seems pretty much routine,'' he said. 
''This is about making sure that Chinese films get their fair percentage of the money. 
This is a politically driven cinema country, not a market-driven cinema country.''
That explanation is probably no consolation to the many Chinese who have been lining up in freezing temperatures for ''Avatar'' tickets.
Liu Chang, a 25-year-old marketing coordinator, said protecting the domestic film industry would not make Chinese films more popular.
''It is obvious that Chinese movies are not as good as those blockbusters,'' she said as she waited for an afternoon showing of ''Avatar'' in Beijing. 
''We have to admit this.''
Cui Weiping, a film critic and a professor at the Beijing Film Academy, said: ''So many people are dying to see it, including me. 
'Avatar' is driving people crazy right now. 
The government makes these decisions whenever it wants to, with no consideration for the market or the desires of the audience.''
The domestic film being released, ''Confucius,'' is loosely based on the philosopher's life, including his supposed romantic attachment to a concubine. 
First released in Beijing on Jan. 
14, it stars Chow Yun-Fat and was produced by Dadi Shidai Ltd.
