
LOS ANGELES - Bruno Wu, a Chinese media entrepreneur, is pushing ahead with his previously declared plan to expand the production of global films in China, despite a chill that ran through movie circles last week amid reports that the Securities and Exchange Commission was investigating whether American studios had made illegal payments to officials in China.
On Sunday evening, Mr. Wu's Seven Stars Global Entertainment company joined the government of the Binhai New Area, a development zone in the city of Tianjin, in announcing the next step of the plan: the development of a new center, the Chinawood Global Services Base, to house companies in the entertainment and media businesses.
Chinawood, they said, will begin with 35,000 square meters, or about 380,000 square feet, of office space, which should be ready for occupants in October of this year. 
The rest of its 800,000 square meters (8.6 million square feet) is expected to include facilities for film production, postproduction services, marketing and the conversion of movies and other forms of filmed entertainment to 3-D formats.
Conversion to 3-D may soon be a big business in China, which recently agreed to expand its 20-film annual import quota by 14 films a year, as long as they are in 3-D or large screen formats.
According to Seven Stars and the Binhai government, 35 percent of the planned $1.27 billion investment in Chinawood will go directly into the financing of films.
Those films are expected in large part to be co-productions between Chinese companies and partners from the United States, Europe or elsewhere. 
Co-productions are exempt from import quotas, and their producers are permitted to keep a larger share of the Chinese box-office receipts than is allotted to purely foreign films.
In an e-mail over the weekend, Mr. Wu said he knew only what he had ''read in the newspapers'' about the S.E.C. investigation. 
Asked about any impact the inquiry might have on his plan to integrate the Chinese film business with that of foreign studios, he added, ''Our own strategic plans are continuing apace.''
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
