
BEIJING -- China's consumer inflation rate cooled slightly more than expected in June, government figures showed Wednesday, pointing to lingering weakness in the economy that could prompt Beijing to begin further stimulus measures to shore up growth.
The consumer price index rose 2.3 percent in June from a year earlier, missing the forecast of 2.4 percent from analysts polled by Reuters and down from 2.5 percent in May, the Chinese National Bureau of Statistics said. 
The producer price index dropped 1.1 percent, in its 28th straight month of decline, versus a market consensus for a fall of 1 percent, signaling that demand in the domestic economy remained lukewarm, despite some recent signs of stabilization.
''The weak inflation data leaves more scope for Beijing to step up use of targeted measures and even opens the opportunity window for blanket easing policy, such as an interest-rate cut, to support economic growth,'' said Wang Jin, an analyst at Guotai Junan Securities in Shanghai.
Most economists predict that Beijing will introduce fresh stimulus measures in the coming months to ensure that economic growth meets the target of 7.5 percent, but they are divided over whether the government will stick to small-scale measures used so far or take more aggressive steps like interest rate cuts or a nationwide reduction in the amount of reserves that banks must hold.
Policy makers are reluctant to announce a huge stimulus program like the one adopted during the 2008-9 global financial crisis, which increased inflationary pressures and left local governments with mountains of debt.
''Subdued inflation means monetary policy will have plenty of room to ease further over the coming months,'' Julia R Wang, an economist at HSBC, said in a note to clients. 
''We think the central bank will likely continue to do so in a targeted manner, provided that economic activity continues to show improvement.''
Ting Lu, an economist at Bank of America Merrill Lynch, also forecast that the government would take further action. 
''We expect Beijing to continue rolling out a slew of small-scale measures to deliver the around 7.5 percent annual growth target,'' he said in a note to clients.
The weaker June inflation reading mostly reflected lower prices for pork and vegetables. 
In the first half of this year, average consumer inflation was 2.3 percent, far below the official ceiling of 3.5 percent set by the government at the start of the year.
Data for May and more recent factory and service sector activity surveys have suggested that China's economy is steadying after a weak start to the year. 
But analysts said easing consumer inflation and persistent factory-gate deflation showed that the recovery remained patchy.
A cooling property market poses an additional risk, and conditions there could determine just how much more may be needed on the stimulus front to stabilize the broader economy.
Beijing has stepped up policy support in recent months to give a lift to economic growth, which dipped to an 18-month low in the first quarter. 
The measures included targeted reserve requirement cuts for some banks, quicker fiscal disbursements, and hastened construction of railways and public housing projects.
Premier Li Keqiang said this week that Chinese economic growth had sped up in the second quarter from the previous three months. 
But he added that the economy still faced downward pressure and that further modest stimulus measures would be needed to bolster activity.
The central bank said on Monday that it would use a mix of monetary tools to keep overall liquidity at an appropriate level to support the economy.
With inflation clearly not a threat for now, the government and central bank have the scope to continue loosening policies to bolster the economy.
''Further monetary policy easing across the board will still be needed to help lift confidence in China's economy,'' economists at the Australia and New Zealand Banking Group said in a research note to clients.
The economists said they believed that Beijing would reduce reserve requirement ratios for all of the country's banks in the third quarter. 
So far, it has relaxed the requirement only for banks that are significant lenders to small companies and the farming sector.
