
BEIJING -- China, clinging to a longstanding policy of noninterference, said on Wednesday that it opposed military action against Syria and insisted that the truth about the chemical weapons attack against civilians last week remained unclear.
As momentum built for Western military strikes against Syria, China was unmoved by the conclusions of Western governments that the Syrian government used banned chemical weapons in the suburbs of Damascus, the capital, killing scores of men, women and children as they slept.
''Some external powers passed the 'verdict' on the Syrian government under conditions where the truth is not yet clear,'' People's Daily, the official voice of the government, said Wednesday. 
''All parties ought to patiently wait for the results of the investigation.''
China supported the dispatch of United Nations inspectors to Syria to investigate earlier reports of chemical attacks, but indicated that it was not prepared to go any further. 
If the Western powers seek a vote by the United Nations Security Council authorizing military strikes against Syria, China is expected to join Russia in a veto, Western diplomats said.
In expressing its opposition to military strikes, China harked back to the NATO-led strikes against Kosovo in 1999, and to the Iraq war, both of which China opposed.
China has a particularly bitter memory of the Kosovo bombing campaign because its embassy in Belgrade was struck by a missile. 
The United States said it was an accident, but many Chinese believe that it was deliberate.
In a similar vein, Chinese analysts said, China was disappointed by the outcome of the United Nations-authorized military action against Libya during its popular uprising in 2011.
In that instance, China, in an unusual move, gave the green light by abstaining from the vote in the Security Council.
But the campaign against the forces of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, the Libyan leader, lasted far longer than China wanted. 
And China expressed unhappiness that the military action resulted in the toppling of the Qaddafi government. 
For domestic reasons -- the fear of encouraging ethnic minorities at home -- China avoids supporting actions on the international front suggesting that rebellion can be justified.
The Obama administration said Tuesday that the goal of a military operation was not to upend governments but to punish the forces of the Syrian president, Bashar al-Assad, for its use of chemical weapons. 
The strikes would be aimed at military units that carried out the chemical attacks, administration officials said.
Foreign Minister Wang Yi said China ''adamantly opposes anyone using chemical weapons'' and continued to stress the need for a political solution.
''External military intervention would be at odds with the tenets of the charter of the United Nations and the basic rules of international relations, and it would also exacerbate turmoil in the Middle East,'' the foreign minister said in a statement Wednesday. 
''China calls on all sides to exercise restraint and calm, and to stick to the correct track of a political solution.''
He carefully avoided assigning blame for the use of the weapons. 
Chinese experts on the Middle East insisted that it would be nearly impossible to come up with definitive proof of who used them.
''As far as I know it is very hard to get the evidence,'' said Yin Gang, a Middle East analyst at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences.
Despite its huge energy interests in the Middle East, China has been reluctant to get deeply involved in the complicated diplomacy of the region, and the government has declined to heed the calls of some nationalists for a more assertive presence.
As the Syrian conflict worsened last year, Chinese leaders invited some members of the opposition to talks here in the capital, but those efforts were interpreted as gestures rather than serious engagement.
Beijing has been less vocal in its support of Mr. Assad than Moscow, but has left the strong impression that it much prefers Mr. Assad to the opposition. 
China joined Russia last year in vetoing a Security Council resolution backing an Arab plan that urged Mr. Assad to give up power.
The Chinese government is not convinced that military strikes will be limited, the Middle East experts said. 
Any Western military action will probably result in a wider conflict in the Middle East, they said.
''If Obama starts a war, he helps Al Qaeda,'' said Mr. Yin. ''Al Qaeda may do something against Israel. 
Obama should think about what Iran would do.''
There were calls for China to take a bolder approach commensurate with its economic power, and its dependence on the Middle East for its largest source of oil.
''China is a different country than it was over a decade ago,'' said Paul Haenle, director of the Carnegie-Tsinghua Center for Global Policy in Beijing. 
''Beijing's new leadership aspires to regional and global leadership positions. 
It needs to look at Syria differently than Kosovo. 
Beijing needs to play a truly constructive role.''
Some Chinese academics and military figures who favor a stronger foreign policy agreed that China's caution was outmoded. 
Within the Communist Party ''there is still a strong force against abandoning the nonaligned strategy,'' said Yan Xuetong, the dean of the Institute of Modern International Relations at Tsinghua University, who favors an alliance with Russia. 
''I think we should totally abandon the nonaligned policy.''
A retired military general, Luo Yuan, said that with so much oil at stake, the Chinese government could no longer act as though the Middle East was divorced from China's strategic interests.
''We cannot think that the issues of Syria and Iran have nothing to do with us,'' he told People's Daily last year.
