
IT was a quiet weekday afternoon last month on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, but the ground floor of the brownstone that houses the China Institute was humming. 
Employees were bustling around with tape measures and installation plans as they readied the institute's gallery for the show ''Confucius: His Life and Legacy in Art.''
Willow Weilan Hai Chang, the gallery director, stood in a corner of the tiny two-room exhibition space, talking about that philosopher and his influence on Chinese society.
''To respect the elders is a tradition of Chinese culture,'' she said earnestly. 
''In China we consider the emperor the father of the entire country, and each family is a cell. 
That's the ideal world of Confucius.''
For her, Ms. Hai Chang added, the show had additional familial resonance: some years ago, after her father managed to reconstruct some of the family history that was eradicated during the Cultural Revolution, she had come to realize that she was descended from Yang Zhen, a renowned Confucius scholar in the Han Dynasty, China's first cultural golden age. 
Last summer she returned home with her two sons to burn money and pour wine over his tomb in Shaanxi.
In another gesture of respect, this time to Confucius, she chose to paint the galleries an ocherous yellow, because it is ''the color of royalty and dynasty,'' she said. 
When a visitor pointed out that the stitching on her quilted mandarin-collared jacket was the same shade, the petite Ms. Hai Chang cast her eyes downward and began giggling in embarrassment.
Beneath the giggling, however, lies a tenacious persona. 
Since 2000, when Ms. Hai Chang, 55, was named the gallery's director, she has put it on the map by mounting small, strategically focused exhibitions that illuminate different aspects of Chinese art and life.
The institute was founded in 1926 by a group of Chinese and American educators, including John Dewey and Hu Shih, to foster a deeper understanding of China in the United States. 
But after the People's Republic of China was established in 1949, it retained little connection to the mainland. 
And its gallery, which didn't open until 1966, usually showed painting and ceramics loaned by American museums and private collectors. 
Ms. Hai Chang has changed that by regularly showing art and artifacts from mainland China, much of it newly discovered, and some never displayed in this country before.
In September 2008 ''The Last Emperor's Collection'' showcased paintings and calligraphy that China's last emperor, Pu Yi, had smuggled out of the Forbidden City before he was exiled in 1924. 
Last spring ''Noble Tombs at Mawangdui'' presented lacquerware, brocaded textiles, figurines and funerary objects from three Han Dynasty tombs, whose discovery nearly 40 years ago is considered one of the major archeological finds of the 20th century.
Ms. Hai Chang has even presented work that is little known in her native land: her fall 2007 show ''Buddhist Sculpture in China'' included steles and bodhisattvas that had languished for decades in storage at the Xi'an Beilin Museum in Shaanxi. 
Since Ms. Hai Chang began mounting these sorts of shows in 2003, the gallery has received serious critical attention and attendance has more than doubled.
As for the Confucius show, which runs through June 13, it is the first exhibition in America to focus on him through the art he inspired. 
It too is filled with rare material, including a Ming Dynasty portrait, as well as jade and bronze Zhou Dynasty ornaments and vessels excavated in the late 1970s from his birthplace, Qufu.
Jay Xu, the director of the Asian Art Museum of San Francisco, said that Ms. Hai Chang has dealt creatively with severe limitations in two areas: one being that the gallery is small, and the other, that she is its only curator. 
''What is admirable to me,'' Mr. Xu said, ''is that she has turned a limitation into an advantage.''
She has done this by organizing sharply focused thematic exhibitions that are usually drawn from a single museum collection (a strategy that also allows her to circumnavigate a lot of red tape) and inviting leading scholars, one from the United States and one from the relevant Chinese institution, to collaborate as guest curators on each exhibition.
She has pulled this off by ''working tirelessly to familiarize herself with the museum collections around China,'' said Maxwell K. Hearn, the Douglas Dillon curator of Asian Art at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, who sits on the institute's gallery committee. 
Added to which, said Diane H. Schafer, the committee chairwoman, ''Willow has guanxi'' -- a Chinese term that roughly translates to ''connections.''
Certainly Ms. Hai Chang's guanxi was hard earned. 
She was raised in a literary family in Nanjing, where her father, the writer Hai Xiao, and her mother, Zhao Renbao, were officials in the local cultural department. 
In 1966, with the advent of the Cultural Revolution, Ms. Hai Chang's family was doubly cursed: not only were her parents intellectuals, but her paternal grandfather had also been a general in the Kuomintang, or Nationalist Party, which lost to the Communists in 1949.
''My father tried to be very Communist, very good, so he cut off the relationship with my grandpa,'' Ms. Hai Chang said, but it wasn't enough. 
Her parents were exiled to a re-education camp, where her father raised pigs and, on her 15th birthday the family was sent to cultivate rice paddies in the salty soil of Dongtai County, near the country's eastern coast. 
Later, when her father was reassigned to the oil mining department, she spent several years doing manual labor on an oil rig.
Initially, Ms. Hai Chang, said, she was thrilled about the idea of moving to the countryside. 
''I was young,'' she said. 
''I believed what Chairman Mao said, that we go to learn from the peasants and we can contribute.''
Once there she taught the local farmers to read and write using Mao's Little Red Book. 
''I became praised, because I worked very hard,'' she said, laughing wryly. 
''They think I clean my brain well.''
But as time went on, she grew disillusioned, and frustrated about having no education herself. 
She taught herself to paint and read the approved books: Karl Marx and Russian and Chinese Revolutionary writers.
In 1977, after the Cultural Revolution ended, the government held its first countrywide university entrance exam in 11 years, and Ms. Hai Chang won a highly coveted spot at Nanjing University, becoming one of the few to study archeology, a relatively new field in China.
She loved the subject from the start.
''I'm very curious,'' she said. 
''I always want to know why, why, why. 
Being an archeologist gives me the firsthand material I can see, I can touch, I can discover.''
Her first expedition was to Qingdun, a Neolithic site in Hai'an County in Jiangsu Province, where she and her classmates unearthed the oldest complete pottery ax in China, the foundations of a house and several grains of cultivated rice (her own discovery).
Within a few years Ms. Hai Chang's future seemed set. 
She had a master's degree, a teaching job in Nanjing, a husband and a new baby. 
But in 1987 her life took yet another turn, when the government sent her husband, Jerry Chang, to the United States to promote Chinese tourism. 
A few months into his trip, he urged Ms. Hai Chang to bring their son, then 2, for a visit. 
When she arrived, he informed her that they were staying.
Ms. Hai Chang suddenly found herself living with their sponsoring family in the Apthorp, a grand Gothic apartment building on the Upper West Side of Manhattan. 
At first,she said, she was stunned by the change. 
''As a Chinese archeologist I would never dream of coming to America,'' she said. 
''What am I going to excavate?''
The worst of it was the language barrier. 
''I have so many things here,'' she said, pointing to her head. 
''But I cannot communicate.''
Soon, however, she met Annette L. Juliano, now a professor of Asian art history at Rutgers University, who found her a volunteer job at the China Institute. 
Once again Ms. Hai Chang's industriousness paid off. 
After a few months, she proved so useful that she was hired as the gallery assistant. 
(She picked up English on the job, she said.)
Although Ms. Hai Chang was devoted to the gallery, she soon realized something was lacking. 
''They did not go deeply enough into the cultural background,'' she said. 
''So I started to put together exhibitions about culture, to show American audiences something new.''
In 1993, the Year of the Rooster, she organized her first show, ''A Year of Good Fortune,'' which combined fine art with folk art and modern-day products, like greeting cards and fabrics, to illustrate the rooster's importance in Chinese life. 
Next came shows about the Chinese zodiac and contemporary calligraphy. 
In 1995 Ms. Hai Chang was promoted to acting director, and her guanxi began to come into play.
As one of the first archeologists trained after the Cultural Revolution, she had enviable contacts: many of her former classmates were working in China's provincial museums and cultural bureaus. 
And her parents were not only back in favor, but her mother was also overseeing all the cultural institutions in Jiangsu Province, of which Nanjing is the capital.
In 1994, on her first trip back to China, she and her father stopped in to see the director of the Nanjing Museum, an old family friend. 
When she asked if she could borrow work for the China Institute, he promptly agreed. 
As Ms. Hai Chang recalled, laughing, ''He joked, 'I don't worry about you, because if anything happens, I can hold your father as the hostage.'
''
Although it took some years to come to fruition, her contacts in Nanjing eventually resulted in the institute's first two international loan shows: ''A Passion for the Mountains,'' which focused on 17th-century landscape paintings, in 2003, and ''Gold and Jade'' an exhibition of recently excavated Ming Dynasty jewelry, in 2004.
After that, Ms. Hai Chang said, several museums where her old classmates were working began to approach her. 
On a later trip, while doing research at the Liaoning Provincial Museum, the director saw her catalogs and chided her.
''Weilan, you did this good show for Nanjing Museum,'' she recalled him saying. 
''Why don't you do a show for us?''
Ms. Hai Chang, momentarily amazed, quickly recovered and said, ''I want your best paintings.''
The result was ''The Last Emperor.''
As for Confucius, the idea came when an official in the cultural bureau of Shandong Province, his birthplace, suggested him as a subject. 
Although Ms. Hai Chang couldn't see it at first, after she had spent several days poring painstakingly through the storage rooms of two museums (many of her shows require ''excavation'' skills, she said) she managed to unearth the right material.
''It is not entirely guanxi, because so many people have connections,'' Ms. Hai Chang said. 
''It didn't happen all in one night. 
It is like a longtime accumulation. 
I know people. 
People also know me and trust me. 
I have insight into our culture and our artwork.''
Also, she said, ''I feel very lucky.''
