
For a visual survey of recent headline-grabbing events in China, look no further than the latest photographic project by the artist Dai Xiang, inspired by the 12th-century scroll painting "Along the River During the Qingming Festival."
Mr. Dai borrows the visual and conceptual framework of that painting - not to mention its title - to produce a patchwork of meticulous vignettes of everyday Chinese society. 
But in a bid to channel the spirit of the times, he swaps out the sentimental depictions of urban life in the Song dynasty for scenes that are far more familiar to modern-day residents of Chinese cities: chengguan, or urban management officials, bullying local vendors; rapacious real estate developers mapping out plans to forcibly evict residents; government officials in dark suits on inspection tours; propaganda banners; crackdowns on prostitution; and snap-happy Chinese tourists wielding cameras.
"I've always wanted to make a scroll that depicts a slice of Chinese contemporary society in a way that combines traditional and contemporary methods," said Mr. Dai, who unveiled the work last week at the Lianzhou International Photo Festival, in the southern province of Guangdong. 
"The vibrancy of real life is the source of inspiration for my creativity."
Mr. Dai said he chose for the piece events that were representative and involved different levels of society. 
The project took about three years to complete, he said, during which he shot about one terabyte of images and processed almost 10,000 composite layers for the final photo. 
Most of the costumes and stage props for the nearly 1,000 characters depicted in the tableau he made himself or rented. 
(He also stepped in to play about 90 of the characters.)
The finished work, which is 82 feet long and about 3.5 feet high, contains more than 30 different scenes. 
Some show common features of Chinese society today: high real estate prices, disgruntled hospital patients and black Audis.
Others refer to specific news events, such as an episode in 2009 in which three university students died while trying to save two drowning children. 
Reports that fishermen on a nearby boat demanded 12,000 renminbi, or almost $2,000, to hand over each student's body prompted outrage among many Chinese.
Another scene depicts the son of a senior police officer in Hebei Province who tried to flee the scene of a fatal car crash in 2010 and evade responsibility by shouting to an angry crowd: "Sue me if you dare. 
My father is Li Gang!"
"Every era will encounter new societal and cultural problems," Mr. Dai said. 
"I hope that by tapping into reality, the work can provoke thought within a new context, and play a role in the progress of society."
"Along the River During the Qingming Festival," attributed to the artist Zhang Zeduan, is arguably China's most famous scroll painting, known for its detailed, multilayered depiction of everyday life in the flourishing 12th-century Chinese capital of Bianjing, now called Kaifeng. 
Mr. Dai, who is based in Tianjin and Beijing, said he felt a certain attachment to the painting after attempting to copy it while studying Chinese traditional painting at university.[Video: Scenes from the original "Along the River During the Qingming Festival."
Watch on YouTube.]Earlier works by Mr. Dai include a satirical series of photographs called "The New Lei Feng Stories," which reimagines the People's Liberation Army hero performing fabled good works in the context of contemporary Chinese society.
Mr. Dai's work will be on display at the Lianzhou International Photo Festival through Dec. 
22. The annual festival, which was founded in partnership with the Lianzhou municipal government in 2005, has become an important platform for Chinese and international photography.
"Contemporary photography often contains a critique," Duan Yuting, the art director of the festival, said.
"Artists want not only to offer a simple representation of society or certain phenomena, but also to encourage people to understand contemporary problems," Ms. Duan added, citing Mr. Dai's work as an example.
