
The Dalai Lama said Saturday that the Chinese government was wrong to attribute political motives to his travels, including a planned trip in early November to a Buddhist mountain enclave in northeastern India that China claims as its territory.
''The Chinese government considers me a troublemaker, so it is my duty to create more trouble,'' he said jokingly, according to The Associated Press. 
''The Chinese government politicizes too much wherever I go. 
Where I go is not political.''
The Chinese government has protested the Dalai Lama's plans to visit the Tawang region of Arunachal Pradesh, an Indian state that borders Chinese-governed Tibet and the nation of Bhutan. 
China claims that Tawang is historically part of Tibet, which China has controlled since 1951.
The Chinese government has said the Dalai Lama's plan to visit affirms his ''splittist'' intentions. 
China has long accused him of advocating for Tibetan independence, even though the Dalai Lama, the spiritual leader of the Tibetans, says he wants only genuine autonomy for Tibet.
India says a self-governing Tibet ceded Tawang to British-ruled India in a 1914 treaty.
''I am surprised the Chinese government is negative about my visit,'' the Dalai Lama said during a visit to Tokyo. 
''If it creates some problems, that is sad.''
He passed through Tawang, a rugged area that is dominated by the Monpa people, who follow Tibetan Buddhism, when he fled into exile in India in 1959. 
The Dalai Lama, who lives in the hill town of Dharamsala, India, appoints the abbot of the monastery in Tawang, one of the most important Tibetan Buddhist monasteries in India. 
He last visited the area in 2003.
His spokesman, Tenzin Taklha, has said the Dalai Lama will visit Tawang for a week starting next Sunday because his Buddhist followers there have asked to see him. 
The Dalai Lama was scheduled to visit last year, but canceled the trip.
Some people in the area suspect the Indian government prevented the Dalai Lama from going because of pressure from China, but his spokesman said the Dalai Lama did not want to interfere with elections taking place around that time.
China has stepped up criticism of the Dalai Lama, and of countries that host him, since widespread protests erupted in Tibet in March 2008. 
China blames the Dalai Lama for fomenting the unrest, a charge he denies.
In Tokyo, the Dalai Lama criticized the Chinese government's authoritarianism and said ''all their information is one-sided propaganda.''
In recent months, the Dalai Lama has made several trips that have infuriated China.
On Aug. 
31, he arrived in Taiwan, the self-governing island that China claims as its territory, after being invited by politicians who support stronger de facto independence. 
The Dalai Lama visited Washington in October, but President Obama declined to meet with him in advance of his own planned trip to Beijing this month.
Mr. Obama's decision not to meet with the Dalai Lama is part of a new attempt to find common ground with China that American officials call ''strategic reassurance,'' but which has drawn criticism from human rights advocates and some prominent Republicans.
