
Will shoppers' love for Burberry's iconic apparel lead to a bid for the British designer?
Investors are certainly betting on it, as the Burberry Group's shares rose 2.3 percent on Wednesday to 11.56 on the London Stock Exchange. 
Speculation is growing that the company, led by its American-born chief executive, Angela Ahrendts, could receive a bid of as much as 15 a share.
This is not the first time takeover fever has gripped Burberry's shares, which have more than doubled in the last 52 weeks. 
And it comes at a time when another luxury powerhouse, LVMH Moet Hennessy Louis Vuitton of France, recently accumulated a stake of a little over 17 percent in the clothier Hermes International.
But arbitragers, who make their money diving in and out of takeover stocks, are taking a more cautious approach to the talk of an imminent Burberry bid. 
They point out that in recent years Burberry has been a perennial target of on-again, off-again takeover chatter.
Back in 2008, the speculation was that the American bag maker Coach was assembling a takeover offer for Burberry. 
More recently, there have been rumors that PPR of France, the multinational company that owns Gucci and other luxury brands, is contemplating a run for the company. 
Now there is a suggestion that private equity firms may have their eyes on Burberry.
But Reuters reports that Citigroup analysts threw cold water on a private equity player rushing in to buy Burberry. 
''We see little strategic or financial rationale for private equity money to enter at such a late stage in Burberry's transformation story,'' the Citi analysts wrote in a research note. 
Takeover interest in Burberry is hardly surprising. 
The company has reinvented itself in the last several years and is widely touted by analysts as one of the luxury makers that should benefit from the growth of the Chinese consumer.
David Yarrow, the London-based hedge fund Pegasus, said that when the British retailer GUS divested itself of its stake in Burberry five years ago, Burberry was viewed as the ''tail'' but ''never considered as a likely wagger of the dog.''
Not anymore. 
The main reason is Burberry's penetration in countries outside of Britain, where it gets 93 percent of its sales. 
Of the remaining 7 percent in Britain, Chinese tourists account for about a third. 
''When the Chinese are not buying Burberry in Shanghai, they may well be doing so in Knightsbridge,'' Mr. Yarrow wrote in a recent investment note.
Perhaps then, investors looking for a buyer for Burberry should look away from the usual suspects and cast their gaze further afield -- to China.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
