
The highest-level Chinese official to visit Taiwan since the two sides split at the end of the Chinese civil war in 1949 described his trip as a success even as he had to cut short his final day of appearances because of aggressive protests.
"If you take the challenge and difficulties we face now compared with the past 65 years, it goes without saying that the past 65 years of challenges and difficulties were much greater," said Zhang Zhijun, the head of China's Taiwan Affairs Office, after his return to Beijing late Saturday, the state-run Xinhua news agency reported.
Mr. Zhang's four-day trip was dogged by pro-independence demonstrations, and protesters both opposed to and welcoming of his visit clashed with one another and the police. 
Late Friday, Mr. Zhang was nearly hit by white paint hurled by an activist near the southern city of Kaohsiung. 
The paint doused bodyguards traveling with Mr. Zhang. The next day, three meetings were scrapped.
Mr. Zhang's visit had originally been planned for April as a follow-up to his historic meeting in February with Wang Yu-chi, the head of Taiwan's Mainland Affairs Council, when the two sides held official talks for the first time since 1949. 
But it was postponed after demonstrators occupied Taiwan's legislature for 23 days in March and April to protest efforts by the governing party, the Kuomintang, to shortcut deliberation of a trade pact with China.
China considers self-governed Taiwan a part of its territory that must eventually be unified. 
Under Taiwan's president, Ma Ying-jeou, trade between the two sides has expanded rapidly. 
But the student-led protests in Taipei, which became known as the Sunflower Movement, underscored widespread concerns about China's intentions toward Taiwan and whether it was using trade and investment to increase its influence over the island.
In early June, a spokeswoman for China's Taiwan Affairs Office, Fan Liqing, said that any issues related to Taiwan's sovereignty "must be decided by all Chinese people, including Taiwanese compatriots."
That statement helped fan the protests against Mr. Zhang's visit, with many demanding more openness in his talks with Mr. Wang and other officials. 
Demonstrators have also complained that a key demand of the Sunflower Movement, that legislation be enacted to allow greater supervision of cross-strait agreements, has not yet been met.
"I don't oppose cross-strait dialogue, consultation or negotiations, but there should first be a clear mechanism for monitoring official talks," Lin Fei-fan, one of the protest leaders, wrote on Facebook. 
"At the same time there should be a basis of equal status. 
If a guest comes from afar and harbors ill intentions, and even tells you that he's not a guest but the master, then there's no basis for treating him as a guest."
Mr. Zhang met with a variety of groups, including students, farmers, retirees and local officials. 
But he was largely blocked from hearing critical voices, said Hsu Szu-chien, a Chinese politics scholar at Academia Sinica, a state-financed research institution in Taipei.
"They selected these grass-roots groups, but we don't think they were representative of Taiwan's overall society," Mr. Hsu said. 
"It was very selective to create the image that Mr. Zhang is able to get access to people in different walks of life. 
It is propaganda."
Taiwan's civil society "has tried very hard to express our diverse opinions as best we can," he said.
