
BEIJING -- Chinese leaders announced Friday that Bo Xilai, a disgraced Communist Party aristocrat, had been expelled from the party and would be prosecuted on criminal charges. 
The leaders also said they had scheduled the 18th Party Congress, the climax of China's once-a-decade leadership transition, to start Nov. 
8.
The announcements ended months of uncertainty over how the party would handle Mr. Bo, the most critical player in one of the biggest political scandals in decades, and when it would be ready to install a new generation of leaders, including Xi Jinping and Li Keqiang, the men expected to become president and prime minister.
Mr. Bo is accused, among other things, of abusing his power in the case of a British businessman who the authorities say was killed by Mr. Bo's wife, and of taking ''massive bribes'' directly and through his family, according to Xinhua, the state news agency. 
The official report's long list of accusations against Mr. Bo, which includes adultery, seems intended to bury Mr. Bo's political career and diminish lingering support for him within the party and among the general public.
Political insiders said the decisions over how to move ahead on Mr. Bo's case and the timing of the party congress were linked, because the Bo issue had to be settled to a certain degree before the leadership transition could take place. 
But party elders, who have an important role in deciding the leadership lineup, could still be in conflict over other significant personnel issues. 
The Nov. 
8 date, a week after the start of a party planning session and two days after the American presidential election, gives the elders time to try to conclude their negotiations.
The most watched part of the transition will be the announcement of new members on the Politburo Standing Committee, the body that governs China by consensus and whose size could be reduced to seven from nine this year.
The son of one of China's revered revolutionary leaders, Mr. Bo, 63, the former party chief of the southwest metropolis of Chongqing, was one of the country's most powerful politicians and considered a contender for the standing committee before investigators this year began looking into the killing of the British businessman, Neil Heywood.
Gu Kailai, Mr. Bo's wife, was convicted last month of murdering Mr. Heywood by poisoning and given a suspended death sentence, which means she will probably serve a long prison term, possibly life.
The news was posted online by Xinhua at 6 p.m. on a Friday ahead of a weeklong national holiday. 
Those revelations and the coming trial could lead the Chinese public to further question the extent of corruption.
The most serious accusations against Mr. Bo appeared to be those relating to bribes and the Heywood killing, though no details were given. 
A family friend and tycoon, Xu Ming, has been detained since the spring and is likely to be implicated in the bribery charges. 
Ms. Gu was also accused of taking bribes. 
One Chongqing resident with government ties said officials had learned of the decision in afternoon meetings in that city; at one session, the attendees were told that Mr. Bo had taken several million renminbi in bribes and that Ms. Gu had taken more than 20 million renminbi, or about $3 million.
The Xinhua report also said Mr. Bo had violated party discipline for years, starting with posts in the city of Dalian and Liaoning Province, continuing during a stint as commerce minister and extending through his four-year governance of Chongqing, where he was known for a so-called anticorruption crackdown and a revival of Mao-era patriotic songs through public singalongs.
The report also said investigators found Mr. Bo ''had or maintained inappropriate sexual relationships with a number of women,'' but did not give names. 
That line did not appear to be referring to potential criminal charges, but instead read like an attempt to soil the reputation of Mr. Bo in the eyes of ordinary Chinese. 
Officials in Chongqing were also told of Mr. Bo's improper relationships, as well as those of Wang Lijun, a former police chief, and Wu Wenkang, another Bo associate in the government, said the resident, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because of a fear of official reprisal.
There was evidence, too, of ''other crimes,'' the report said, meaning the party could unveil more malfeasance.
The public airing of such serious and sordid charges showed that party leaders, including perhaps Mr. Bo's onetime supporter, Jiang Zemin, had reached agreement that Mr. Bo had to be dealt with severely. 
Mr. Bo was a charismatic leader who had used his platform in Chongqing to espouse populist policies and attract an ardent following, especially among believers of a leftist revival where the state would impose economic equality. 
Even recently, Mr. Bo's political allies, including other so-called princelings, or children of party leaders, had privately argued in his defense, going against a push by President Hu Jintao and Prime Minister Wen Jiabao for the party to act quickly and harshly.
The strong-willed Mr. Bo and his flamboyant style of politicking were regarded as threats by many of the current and ascending leaders. 
He was seen as a potential rival to Mr. Xi, a fellow princeling in line to become party chief and president. 
The Chongqing resident with official ties and a political insider in Beijing said that even after Mr. Bo's detention, his sense of superiority remained undiminished.
He Weifang, a law professor at Peking University and critic of Mr. Bo's policies, said the announcement ''indicates that the senior decision makers are furious with Bo's behavior, and they are going to adopt the most severe methods against him. 
What Bo has done has not only been viewed as a crime, but more important has been considered a challenge to authority and to the established party line, which cannot be tolerated.''
It is unclear when a criminal trial for Mr. Bo would begin, but Xinhua said the case had been handed from party investigators to the judiciary. 
Mr. Bo has been detained since March, when he was dismissed from his party chief position. 
He was suspended from the Politburo the following month. 
The state news media said that Mr. Bo was under investigation for ''serious disciplinary violations.''
Li Zhuang, a lawyer who served an 18-month prison sentence after being convicted of suborning perjury during Mr. Bo's crackdown, welcomed the announcement. 
Mr. Li's case inspired an outcry among Chinese liberals, who accused Mr. Bo and Chongqing police officers of taking aim at civilians who had nothing to do with organized crime.
''This is great news, but also quite expected,'' Mr. Li said in a telephone interview. 
''This is how things should be.''
Some leftist intellectuals, though, said after the announcement that they wanted to make it clear that the party had not rejected the ideals that Mr. Bo promoted during his red nostalgia campaign. 
''All the accusations against Bo are over his unethical lifestyle and loose morals,'' said Sima Nan, a Maoist scholar. 
''They didn't criticize the Chongqing model. 
They didn't say what was wrong with the ideology, principles and policies that Bo had adopted.''
