
IN the summer of 2006, having just graduated from Brown University with a degree in history and a yearning for travel, Alison Klayman headed to China. 
She arrived there speaking no Chinese, with only one contact and a vague notion of learning a new language and perhaps finding a job as a journalist.
On Friday the result of Ms. Klayman's adventure, an award-winning documentary film called ''Ai Weiwei: Never Sorry,'' opens in New York. 
In a classic case of being in the right place at the right time, Ms. Klayman happened upon one of the most compelling stories to come out of China in recent years: the transformation of the avant-garde artist Ai Weiwei into one of the country's best-known and most outspoken political dissidents.
''I lucked out,'' Ms. Klayman, now 27 and fluent in Mandarin, said in an interview late last month. 
''I don't know where I thought the movie would go when I was starting out, certainly not to the Sundance festival or a theatrical release. 
I just wanted to try to think something new about China, to do something really good and show who this guy is.''
Capturing the enigmatic Mr. Ai, who calls his studio Fake Design, would be a challenge even in normal circumstances. 
A conceptual and installation artist, photographer, designer and filmmaker whom the magazine ArtReview last year placed atop its Power 100 list, Mr. Ai has a restless imagination and an ability, evident in the film, to confound critics and friends alike.
But around the time Ms. Klayman began filming, Mr. Ai, 55, upped the ante by publicly criticizing the Chinese Communist Party's monopoly on power as well as its handling of the 2008 Olympic Games and a devastating earthquake in Sichuan a few months earlier. 
Last year, as she was editing ''Never Sorry,'' he was arrested at Beijing Airport, held incommunicado for 81 days and then placed under house arrest for a year and charged with ''economic crimes'' -- all developments Ms. Klayman had to scramble to take into account. 
In addition two Beijing art shippers who handle some of Mr. Ai's work were detained this spring on suspicion of having committed economic crimes and are still being held.
''One of the hard parts of making a film like this is that you don't know how the story ends,'' said Evan Osnos, the Beijing correspondent for The New Yorker, who met Ms. Klayman just before she started the project. 
''If you're making a film about Muhammad Ali and George Foreman, you do know, and you structure the story accordingly. 
But if you're making a film in real time about a guy who is going down an uncharted path, all you can do is hang on for dear life and see where it goes. 
To Alison's credit she stayed with it, because she saw a story of real importance.''
Ms. Klayman said that among her objectives was to use Mr. Ai's situation to show that not only are there ''people interested in pushing the boundaries in China,'' but also that ''there are cracks for those people to maneuver in.''
Citing his use of Twitter, blogs and other forms of social media to get his political message and artworks out, she added, ''I do see China as a society with room for a lot of interesting things to be happening, despite the tough nature of authority.''
But she also captures the Chinese state at its most arbitrary and despotic, disregarding the rule of law and international human rights conventions to which it is a signatory. 
Officials in Shanghai, for example, invite Mr. Ai to build a studio there, then bulldoze it when he falls into disfavor: he responds with a party at the demolition site, serving river crab, whose name is a Mandarin homonym for the ''harmony'' the government tries to enforce.
In perhaps the most extraordinary footage in the film, which Mr. Ai himself supplied, police in Sichuan invade his hotel room in the middle of the night and beat him so severely that he has to undergo surgery in Germany for a cranial hemorrhage. 
When he complains, they mock him, saying he must have hit himself; and when he tries to file a complaint at a police station there, an episode Ms. Klayman shot until forced to leave, his quixotic effort is thwarted by a Kafkaesque bureaucracy.
Such up-close glimpses suggest what happens, when no one is looking, to other dissidents, like the jailed political philosopher and literary critic Liu Xiaobo, who won the Nobel Peace Prize in 2010, or the lawyer Chen Guangcheng, held under house arrest until he fled to the American Embassy and became the center of a diplomatic crisis between the United States and China this spring. 
This month the Chinese government's claims that one such dissident, Li Wangyang, committed suicide while under police surveillance in a hospital were met with widespread skepticism and demonstrations in Hong Kong.
''I didn't set out with any intention of how I wanted to portray the state,'' Ms. Klayman said. 
''But I do think they wrote their part into the film themselves.''
Throughout ''Never Sorry'' Mr. Ai seems deliberately to blur the lines among his creative work, political efforts and private life. 
Ms. Klayman shows a project in which the artist, his middle finger extended, is photographed at Tiananmen Square, where in 1989 the People's Liberation Army slaughtered hundreds of students and others seeking political reform.
Even a dinner at an outdoor restaurant in Chengdu, Sichuan, under the watchful eye of police, seems to be staged as an art project. 
As the film notes, Mr. Ai's artistic influences include Joseph Beuys and Marcel Duchamp, who specialized in just that sort of thing.
''If you ask Ai Weiwei, everything he does is a performance piece, so what you see in the movie is also performance art,'' said Zhang Hongtu, a Chinese artist in New York who befriended Mr. Ai during the decade or so he lived in the United States and who appears in the film. 
''He does everything in a calculated way, with a strategy, and 'Never Sorry' captures that.''
But even though Mr. Ai's provocative works and his conflicts with the Communist Party have made him a familiar figure to art world connoisseurs and those who follow events in China, his background and motivation have remained obscure. 
Ms. Klayman's film helps to fill in those blanks.
Thus ''Never Sorry'' contains tender scenes of Mr. Ai and his mother, and also shows his devotion to his father, the poet Ai Qing. 
A major figure in 20th-century Chinese literature, Ai Qing was jailed first by the anti-Communist Kuomintang and then by Mao Zedong in the anti-rightist campaign in 1957, the year Ai Weiwei was born, and was sent off to Xinjiang, in China's remote far west.
''For his first 17 years what did he see?''
Ms. Klayman wondered. 
''He saw his father, an internationally known cultural figure who had hung out with Neruda and studied in Paris, cleaning toilets and being shunned as an enemy of the people. 
It must have been very strange, though it wasn't always clear that this is a defining thing about him. 
Sometimes he didn't want to talk about it, and sometimes he very much embraced it. 
So I don't have a clear-cut answer for that.''
As Ms. Klayman herself is quick to admit, her own road to making ''Never Sorry'' was rather circuitous. 
Initially she took jobs at a members-only wine bar, as a personal assistant to the Chinese actress Liu Yifei and at the Beijing Olympics' English-language Web site. 
But then her roommate, who worked at a Beijing gallery, asked Ms. Klayman, who had just bought a camera, if she was interested in making a video to accompany an exhibition of Mr. Ai's photographs.
''It was sort of like 'Well, you're young and eager and underemployed, would you like to give it a try?'
'' Ms. Klayman explained. 
''I was so game for it, I signed an agreement with the gallery. 
It was 'We won't pay you for this, but you can keep your footage,' and I figured I'd hang out with this artist for a month.''
But after the exhibition opened, in 2009, Ms. Klayman, intrigued by her subject and with few other commitments, kept shooting and shooting. 
As 2009 turned into 2010, she kept at it, with Mr. Ai's encouragement and occasional needling.
Made essentially on spec, ''Never Sorry'' faced one final challenge once Ms. Klayman returned to the United States: finding distribution. 
When the producer Adam Schlesinger, whose credits include the documentary ''God Grew Tired of Us,'' saw the film, he was smitten, and shepherded it to the Sundance Film Festival, where in January it won a special jury prize. 
''Considering that it was her first film, and that the story subject was a moving target, it was really impressive,'' Mr. Schlesinger said, ''and at the same time inspiring and accessible.''
Mr. Osnos added, ''Other films have been made about Ai Weiwei, but the difference is that Alison was on the ground living here and made a commitment to follow him at the sidewalk level.''
He continued, ''I'm guessing that this project took over her life a bit, and that made sense to him, because his project has taken over his life.''
