
One evening in the fall of 1993, when I was 9, my father climbed into a Dumpster. 
This was in a Connecticut college town -- a place totally unlike Chongqing, the sooty, cacophonous Chinese city where I grew up -- that was almost as strange to me as my father was. 
I had known him for only half a year, which was how long my mother and I had been in the United States; he moved here shortly after I was born.
The apartment complex where we lived was made up of 200-square-foot studios, a refuge for indigent, itinerant immigrants like my parents. 
Out front, a hulking gray Dumpster continually filled up with discarded belongings from departing residents. 
To us, this receptacle, stocked with particleboard TV consoles and lethargic box fans, was a self-replenishing superstore.
My father's appearance in our living room, his arms filled with loot, was often the only thing during the course of a monotonous week that pleased my mother, for whom admittance to America came with steep penalties. 
Among her losses: her profession (as a physician), the community in which she was raised and whatever else that made her weep while writing to her mother in the middle of the night.
That evening, while my father was outside rummaging, my mother and I received a visit from Mrs. M., as I had come to know her, a middle-aged woman in a wool skirt and sensible shoes, whom we called the ''foreign church lady.''
(We did not yet have the vocabulary for ''Jehovah's Witness.'') Mrs. M. was a frequent visitor -- indeed, our only one -- who often brought us storybooks in Chinese with illustrations of a white-bearded man rising enigmatically from Popsicle-hued sunsets. 
Mrs. M. urged us to heed his commandments; my mother served her tea on our best Dumpster-retrieved china.
That night, as we walked Mrs. M. out to the front of the building, I registered the image of my father deep in our trove -- though what really caught my eye was the corner of a pastel pink bookshelf. 
My mother and I waved goodbye to Mrs. M., as my father's figure dipped behind the iron box.
In a little while, he sauntered through the door with two chairs, a beat-up night stand and a few mismatched pieces of glassware. 
My mother appraised these spoils and went to fetch cleaning supplies.
''How about the bookshelf?''
I asked.
''Oh, right, there was --'' my father stopped. 
''How do you know about that?''
There was a flicker of agitation on his face -- a sudden stiffening -- as he looked at me. 
''Did you see me?''
I nodded. 
''Then why didn't you say anything?'' he asked. 
My mother had returned, and the conversation quickly and inexplicably mutated into an interrogation. 
Why hadn't I greeted my father?
How could I ignore him in front of our departing guest?
It did not occur to me that I might have been the only one to see him, just as it did not occur to me to hide the fact. 
From their frowns and the urgency of their voices, I knew that I had done something unpardonable. 
But the wrong itself eluded me. 
I repeated what I had seen, like an English word I kept mispronouncing no matter how I contorted my tongue.
Finally it was my mother who supplied the answer to her own question: ''You were ashamed,'' she said softly. 
''That was why.''
While my parents wailed of the misfortune of having a daughter embarrassed enough by her Dumpster-diving father that she couldn't acknowledge him in public, I stood bewildered into silence. 
Ashamed?
Ashamed of what, I wanted to know, long after we moved out of that drab apartment, after my parents separated and a Dumpster became just a place for refuse. 
While my parents seemed to have discarded the memory, I kept it close: a wrongdoing I had to take on trust and a guilt I could never quite expiate.
People are always trying to rid themselves of something. 
For a child, things that come out of the trash are truly free. 
But my parents paid for them in the costlier currency of humiliation and indignity. 
In me, my parents might have found a repository of sorts, a place to dispose of secrets -- the things they could not tell each other -- and a shame they could not admit, not even to themselves.
EMAIL submissions for Lives to lives@nytimes.com Because of the volume of email, the magazine cannot respond to every submission. 
Share comments on this essay at nytimes.com/magazine.
