
The American sweatshop opposition movement was born the day we discovered how our Nikes were stitched together. 
Two decades later, we are discovering how our cherished iPhones are made, giving Apple a ''Nike moment'' of its own.
Worker suicides at Apple's main Chinese supplier, Foxconn, in 2010, followed by reports of forced overtime, child labor, minimum wage violations and unsafe working conditions at its suppliers, have contrasted with Apple's status as creator of hallowed devices and its spectacular $13 billion in profit -- 30 percent of sales -- in the first quarter.
The reports have fueled a budding protest among students and labor unions who call for Apple to compel its suppliers in China to improve the conditions for hundreds of thousands of workers who assemble its products -- workers whose wages contribute a mere $10 to the cost of a contract-free $549 iPhone 4.
But if the troubling conditions at Foxconn's assembly lines raise anew fundamental questions about the responsibility of corporations in this age of global capitalism, the outcry raises a basic question too. 
Does pressure by consumers and governments in the West to improve multinationals' behavior in poor countries do more harm than good?
Sweatshop opposition in the past offers limited hope. 
But Apple is different in some ways than the garment and shoemakers of earlier campaigns. 
Its high profile and deep pockets suggest that consumer pressure might indeed effect change for workers at Apple's suppliers in China.
In the 1990s, when the anti-sweatshop movement was going strong, Paul Krugman, before he became a columnist for The New York Times, wrote that ''as long as you have no realistic alternative to industrialization based on low wages, to oppose it means that you are willing to deny desperately poor people the best chance they have of progress for the sake of what amounts to an aesthetic standard -- that is, the fact that you don't like the idea of workers being paid a pittance to supply rich Westerners with fashion items.''
Today, globalization has a decidedly better track record than its alternative. 
Countries that receive lots of multinational investment have grown faster. 
They report less poverty and less use of child labor.
China is an example of globalization's benefits. 
Foreign investment has surged over the last 20 years, driving spectacular economic growth. 
Wages in the nonfarm sector have risen 10 percent a year in real terms over the last decade, according to Nicholas Lardy of the Peterson Institute for International Economics.
The nation's poverty rate, measured by the share of the population living on less than $1.25 a day, fell to 17 percent by the middle of the last decade, from 64 percent in the early 1990s, according to World Bank statistics. 
In Bangladesh, ignored by foreign capital, half of the population live in abject poverty, roughly the same share as in 1981. 
As Joan Robinson, a British economist, noted half a century ago, ''the misery of being exploited by capitalists is nothing compared to the misery of not being exploited at all.''
This poses a quandary for would-be activists in the West. 
They see their task as convincing multinationals like Apple that whatever the cost of improved working conditions at its suppliers' plants, it is less than the potential cost to its reputation of allowing workers to toil in sweatshop conditions. 
But they must not forget that the No. 1 priority for most of Foxconn's workers is to keep their job. 
While outside pressure might improve their lives, it could also persuade Foxconn to replace them.
The anti-sweatshop movement's origins can be traced to late 1980s Indonesia, a global hub of the apparel and footwear business. 
Reports of violations of workers' rights at Indonesian suppliers to big brands like Nike and Reebok led unions and human rights groups to press the United States to suspend Indonesian trade preferences. 
Articles about women stitching Nikes in dismal conditions for 91 cents a day appeared in the press, mobilizing campaigns against the apparel giant.
For a while it seemed that activism could win the day: the Indonesian minimum wage rose from less than 80 cents to about $1.80 a day from 1990 to 1996. 
Wages at factories for brand-name sneakers rose even faster, as the brands forced suppliers to comply with the wage floor. 
Nike issued a code of conduct requiring suppliers to adhere to labor, health and environmental standards. 
Many othervictories followed, with big brands repeatedly acceding to demands that they enforce better working conditions at their suppliers' plants across the third world.
But in time, many of the victories of consumer activism turned a little sour. 
Though Indonesian factories that stitched sneakers for big brands like Nike did add jobs in the 1990s, despite the sharply higher wages, economists reported significant job losses throughout the economy. 
Activists bemoan the fact that even when they persuade brands to press their suppliers to improve working conditions, victories turn to defeat when suppliers try to pass on the additional cost of higher wages, shorter hours or increased benefits.
''When brands get caught at one facility, and pressure is brought to bear, they can be forced to push for changes at that facility,'' said Scott Nova, executive director of the Workers Rights Consortium, which monitors working conditions at plants that make college-brand clothes. 
''However, if those changes raise costs and slow delivery times, it is easy enough, a year or two down the road, for the brand to reduce orders at that factory in favor of others.''
The most telling commentary on the effectiveness of the anti-sweatshop movement is the prevalence, years later, of dismal working conditions and illegally low wages at many suppliers of the world's large multinational brands
Apple's critics should not despair, however. 
Despite failures and drawbacks, activists have made progress.
For one thing, they have persuaded major brands and retailers to take responsibility for working conditions along their supplier pipeline -- something unheard-of two decades ago. 
And the anti-sweatshop movement has contributed to improvements in workers' lives in concrete ways, forcing better compliance with health and safety norms and reducing the most egregious forms of harassment.
But the most promising consideration for critics is just how different Apple is from the companies singled out by the anti-sweatshop movement of the 1990s.
For starters, Apple's enormous profit margins -- owing to the great popularity of the inimitable products it sells -- vastly outstrip the thin margins prevalent in the garment and footwear industry and make it much easier for the company to absorb the cost of improving worker conditions at its suppliers.
What's more, supplier contracts in the electronic industry tend to be much longer than the three-month terms common in the apparel business. 
This gives Apple a much bigger stake in the long-term success of Foxconn as a supplier, and makes it less attractive to cut and run to a cheaper option.
And Apple's vaunted ability to make suppliers twirl on a dime to satisfy its most exacting specifications in the shortest possible time suggests the company would have little trouble imposing rules on wages or workers' rights.
Consumer pressure and bad publicity have already led Apple to make some big changes. 
In 2005 it created a code of conduct for its suppliers, monitored regularly. 
Last month it became the first electronics company to join the Fair Labor Association, a group set up in 1999 by companies, universities and nonprofit groups to monitor working conditions at garment makers in the third world. 
Over the last two years, Foxconn has announced repeated wage increases at its plant in Shenzhen.
These are early days. 
Who knows, if activists keep up the pressure, they might help lead to significant improvements in the lives of Foxconn's workers and make us feel better about how our iPhones are made.
