
The bankruptcy of General Motors, once the world's largest automaker, gripped Washington and Detroit on Monday. 
But on Wall Street, investors were already turning their attention to other matters.
Stocks ripped higher, sending the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index to its best levels in five months. 
Traders homed in on signs of economic growth in China, stability in Europe and more signs of improvement in construction and manufacturing in the United States.
But as the markets rallied globally, the dollar and the value of United States debt fell. 
Investors worried about the prospect of rising inflation and unprecedented government deficits moved away from Treasury notes. 
They also pushed the value of the dollar lower and bid up the prices of oil -- a commodity that gains value as the dollar weakens.
The Treasury's 10-year note fell 1 23/32, to 95 15/32. 
The yield, which moves in the opposite direction from the price, rose to 3.67 percent, from 3.46 percent late Friday.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 221.11 points, or 2.6 percent, to 8,721.44, as investors piled into shares of two new pending additions to the closely watched market index. 
Early Monday, just after G.M. declared bankruptcy, Dow Jones & Company said it would drop G.M. and Citigroup from its index of 30 blue-chip companies and replace them with Cisco Systems and the Travelers Companies. 
The changes are set for next Monday.
It was a humbling reminder of how far two of America's largest companies had fallen. 
Citigroup was once the largest American bank on Wall Street and commanded a share price of more than $50. 
But its stock now trades for less than $4, and it has taken billions in government aid. 
And G.M. is a shadow of the company that once had a market share in America of 54 percent.
Bankruptcy aside, traders on the New York Stock Exchange focused on G.M. on Monday. 
It was the second most-traded stock of the day, and shares briefly crossed above a dollar before closing at 75 cents. 
The exchange said it would suspend trading of G.M. shares before markets open on Tuesday.
''The company is no longer suitable for listing,'' New York Stock Exchange Regulation said. 
The Standard & Poor's 500-stock index rose 23.73 points, or 2.58 percent, to 942.87, led higher by gains in consumer stocks like Target, Home Depot, Amazon and the Walt Disney Company. 
New reports showed that personal disposable incomes grew 1.1 percent in April while consumer spending declined less than expected. 
The news seemed to buoy investors' hopes for an economic turnaround.
Still, the government reported that consumers in the United States were continuing to save more and more money as the job market got worse. 
The Commerce Department said that the personal saving rate increased to 5.7 percent in April, its highest point in more than a decade, as people socked away the tax cuts they received as part of the government's stimulus package.
Americans have saved an average of 7 percent of their incomes since the 1950s, but that frugality disappeared this decade as consumers went on a binge of easy credit, racking up big credit card bills and tapping home equity loans. 
The saving rate dropped briefly below zero in August 2005, but has rebounded as people worry about losing their jobs.
Economists are split on how personal incomes and spending will shift in the months ahead. 
Some expect the stimulus package to buffer income against the weak economy, but others warn that unemployment will continue to rise and salaries will fall.
''There will be little momentum for consumer spending over the months ahead,'' Richard F. Moody, chief economist at Forward Capital, wrote in a note.
Industrial companies and home builders gained ground after the Commerce Department reported that construction spending rose 0.8 percent in April from a month earlier. 
Spending on residential projects was up modestly, while office buildings and manufacturing operations also rose.
Overseas, investors fixed on reports showing that manufacturing activity rose in China and India in May, while the pace of manufacturing decline in the battered euro zone slowed during the month, according to data released Monday.
The figures appeared to show that the interest rate cuts and stimulus measures rushed through by governments since late last year were beginning to have an effect on the global economy. 
The data also highlighted the gap between the pace of recovery in Asia and in Europe.
The whiff of recovery heightened expectations that oil prices would keep rising, especially if Chinese demand rises. 
Traders pushed the price of oil $2.27 higher, to $68.58 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange. 
The average price of a gallon of gasoline rose to $2.51 a gallon, up nearly 10 cents from a week ago, according to AAA, the automobile club.
Still, many analysts cautioned that actual recovery would take many months to bring about improved company earnings.
''As far as the recent recovery in the markets is concerned, I am convinced that it is largely due to deeply oversold conditions seen in the autumn crash and the fact that central banks have flooded the system with trillions of dollars,'' Puru Saxena, chief executive of PuruSaxena Wealth Management in Hong Kong, said in a note Monday.
Following are the results of Monday's Treasury auction of three- and six-month bills:
