
North Korea's sweeping attempts to revive socialist central economic planning and crack down on private markets appear to have set off runaway inflation and perhaps caused the country's reclusive leaders to reconsider some of their own measures, according to South Korean news reports and intelligence officials.
As one indicator of a possible shift in the leadership's approach, North Korea's leader, Kim Jong-il, is reported to have dismissed the official who oversaw a sweeping monetary conversion late last year that led to severe price increases and social unrest, which is unusual in North Korea, a tightly policed nation.
The official, Pak Nam-gi, chief of the finance and planning department of the ruling Workers' Party of North Korea, was blamed for skyrocketing food prices that had severely curtailed the country's already meager food supplies, according to the Chosun Ilbo, a mass-circulation daily newspaper in Seoul.
The Chosun Ilbo article, which was published Wednesday, cited unidentified diplomatic sources in China. 
The South Korean government could not confirm the report. 
Mr. Kim moves top party officials so secretively that some of those reported to have been banished have often later resurfaced with senior posts.
But analyses by South Korean experts who monitor the situation across the border suggest that a series of steps by Mr. Kim's government to close private markets, radically revalue the currency and restrict the importing of consumers goods from China have created a new crisis for the country's perennially ailing economy.
Prices of basic goods have sharply risen since the government replaced the old bank notes in late November, exchanging them for new bills at a rate of 100 to 1, according to officials here and reports on Seoul-based Web sites that glean information from sources inside the North. 
North Korea placed a cap on how much old money a citizen could exchange for the new currency, effectively confiscating private stores of wealth. 
Reports said it also outlawed foreign currency holdings and punished private traders who smuggled goods from China.
But in an effort to reward people who depend on state salaries, like factory workers and members of the military, the government paid the same nominal wages in new currency, theoretically increasing their purchasing power a hundredfold. 
The underlying idea was to suppress the country's black markets and reassert the economic model of central planning.
''The problem with the currency reform was that it hurt imports through unofficial channels while state-run stores failed to stock their shelves with goods,'' said Dong Yong-sueng, an expert on the North Korean economy at the Samsung Economic Research Institute in Seoul. 
''The factory workers, with their boosted purchasing power, turned to the unofficial markets, driving up the prices.
''Whether this is a temporary problem or the regime will eventually take control of the situation -- we won't find out until one or two months from now.''
The South Korean unification minister, Hyun In-taek, also said it was too early to measure the impact of the currency changes in the North.
Illegal markets had been mushrooming in North Korea since the government's ration system failed to supply enough food, leading to a devastating famine in the mid-1990s. 
A new class of traders emerged, operating outside the official system and establishing corrupt ties with party officials, according to analysts in Seoul.
The emergence of a merchant class and repeated visits by Mr. Kim to different cities in China were taken as signs that the North was cautiously embracing elements of a market economy. 
But the steps taken in the past few years suggest a sharp shift in the other direction.
Mr. Pak, the official said to have been dismissed, took the top financial job in 2005 as North Korea began introducing a series of measures aimed at suppressing the black markets. 
He led the currency reform, which North Korea hoped would arrest inflation by eliminating profiteering in private markets. 
That was viewed as an important task to be carried out before the youngest of Mr. Kim's three sons, Kim Jong-un, was to be officially anointed as the leader's successor, around 2012, the Chosun Ilbo said.
But the currency revaluation instead fueled much higher inflation and uncertainty, bringing market activities nearly to a halt and driving people to panic, South Korean reports and analysts said. 
Mr. Pak disappeared from reports in North Korea's state-run media in early January.
A group of veterans from the 1950-53 Korean War staged a protest last month, sitting in front of a party office in Danchon, a town on North Korea's eastern coast, according to Good Friends, a relief group based in Seoul. 
The unusual show of public discontent in North Korea took place after some people in Danchon died of hunger, the group said. 
The government quickly released emergency food in late January to quell the unrest, it added.
''As the food situation worsened in the North,'' Good Friends said, ''there is talk there that if the government did not come out with drastic measures to improve the situation by the end of February, it could trigger an uprising.''
Good Friends runs one of several Web sites that provide news on North Korea, using sources inside the North. 
Its reports often describe small sectors of North Korean society.
In some parts of North Korea, food prices have more than tripled in the past three weeks, according to Daily NK, another Web site that specializes in North Korean news. 
The value of dollars on the black market, it said, was soaring as well.
The inflationary surge appears to have two related causes. 
One is that private sales of goods have become far riskier, pushing up the price of any goods available outside the state distribution system.
The other is that the currency move at least temporarily rewarded the elite and the loyal class of state workers, who received sharp salary increases they could spend at state stores. 
But the North's centrally planned economy has long lacked the ability to produce enough food and consumer goods at state-set prices, meaning demand outstripped supply even more than it usually does.
