
WASHINGTON -- Financial policy makers from the United States and India concluded a brief round of meetings Tuesday with talk of friendship but no specific agreements, a result that contrasted with the superficially similar talks between the United States and China last month.
The United States and India have much in common. 
They are the world's largest democracies, with relatively open economies and similar views on a range of geopolitical issues.
Yet trade between the two countries is just a fraction of the flow between the United States and China, and leaders from both sides struggled to articulate an agenda for this latest round of talks.
''One of the things that's so encouraging about it is the relative absence of drama,'' Treasury Secretary Timothy F. Geithner said Monday, when asked why these meetings lacked the specific objectives of the meetings with China. 
''There is a natural complementarity of interest.''
The Obama administration inaugurated annual economic talks with India last year as part of its focus on cultivating relationships with emerging markets like India and Brazil.
The administration views increased exports as the most likely driver of an American economic recovery, so it is seeking to open new markets in those countries. 
Moreover, it sees an opportunity to make common cause in pressuring China to adopt economic reforms.
Mr. Geithner traveled to India last year for talks with his counterparts. 
The meetings Tuesday were the return engagement, attended by senior officials from both sides, including the heads of both nations' central banks and a representative handful of financial regulators.
The United States and India traded about $50 billion in goods in 2010, ranking India 12th on the list of American trading partners. 
The volume of trade has increased rapidly in recent years, but remains at about one-tenth the level of trade between the United States and China, although the figures do not include the value of services that India sells to the United States.
American officials said before the meetings that the United States would like India to increase market access for foreign companies, particularly retailers and the financial industry. 
The United States also is encouraging India to pursue internal financial and political reforms it views as important for development -- and by extension, India's value as a trading partner -- like fostering a market in government bonds to raise money for public infrastructure.
''India's growth is good for us, just as our growth is good for India,'' Mr. Geithner said.
The talks, however, produced no specific agreements. 
A statement Tuesday cited ''deeper institutional relationships'' as a major achievement. 
After similar meetings with China last month, the United States published two lists of detailed commitments that ran for several pages.
The Indian finance minister, Pranab Mukherjee, said Monday that he saw no obstacles to the flow of goods, services, people and money between the countries.
''I do not think there is any hurdle,'' Mr. Mukherjee said during a joint appearance with Mr. Geithner at a conference on India sponsored by the Brookings Institution. 
''Through negotiations and conversations we have been able to remove the obstacles that are there.''
Mr. Geithner politely disagreed, saying, ''I cannot improve on that answer,'' before continuing on to note that ''there's a bunch of things that stand in the way'' of increased trade between the countries, ''and we'll keep trying to work through those things.''
