
ELMENDORF AIR FORCE BASE, Alaska -- The United States on Thursday dispatched the first of a flotilla of senior officials to China for high-level economic and security meetings that are likely to be overshadowed by the rising tensions on the Korean Peninsula and the deepening debt crisis in Greece, which some fear will infect other European countries.
Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton and Treasury Secretary Timothy F. Geithner are leading a delegation that will include nearly 200 policy makers and advisers, one of the largest groups of American officials ever to travel to a foreign capital for a single set of meetings.
On the agenda: trying to balance the economic relationship between China and the United States, breaking down trade and investment barriers, and moving China toward a market-driven exchange rate.
But despite rising political pressure at home, administration officials said the United States did not plan to make a public show of pressing Beijing to loosen its policy of pegging its currency to the dollar. 
And it does not expect China to take any action on the currency until at least next month, because Beijing is loath to appear to yield to outside pressure.
The administration sought to put a good face on Europe's troubles, suggesting that they played into one of the main American themes for the meeting: encouraging the Chinese to increase domestic consumption, so that they do not rely so heavily on exports to either Europe or the United States.
''The Greek crisis underlines the U.S. argument about the need for more balanced global growth,'' Mr. Geithner said in an interview. 
''It makes the case very strongly because it is about Europe as well as China. 
It makes our interests in balanced growth even more aligned.''
The Greek crisis has dragged down the euro, however, which complicates a related American priority: prodding China to loosen its peg, which economists say keeps its currency, the renminbi, at an artificially depressed level. 
The United States wants China to allow the renminbi to rise closer to market levels, calculating that it would make American goods more competitive.
The problem is that the renminbi has already risen sharply against the beleaguered euro, making Chinese goods more costly in Europe. 
And this could make Chinese officials more resistant to taking any steps that would allow their currency to rise against the dollar, analysts say.
Moreover, if the Greek crisis spreads to Spain, Portugal or other European countries, it could slow Europe's overall economic growth and further dampen demand for Chinese exports.
The Obama administration delayed filing a report with Congress, scheduled for mid-April, that could have labeled China a country that manipulates its currency. 
The administration's policy, officials said, is to give Beijing the space it needs to make the decision by itself.
Chinese officials have signaled privately to American officials that they may begin to loosen their currency policy in advance of a meeting in June of the industrialized and major emerging economies that make up the Group of 20, officials said.
''While we don't know when China is going to move, we remain confident that they're going to determine that it's in their interest to move to a more market-determined exchange rate,'' said David Loevinger, the senior coordinator for China affairs at the Treasury Department.
On her way to Shanghai on Thursday, Mrs. Clinton was scheduled to stop in Tokyo, where she is expected to begin shaping the international response to South Korea's accusation on Thursday that a torpedo fired from a North Korean submarine sank one of its warships, killing 46 sailors.
Mrs. Clinton did not speak to reporters on the plane, which landed in Alaska for a refueling stop.
