
UNTIL recently, emerging-markets funds have looked a lot like commodity funds. 
When the prices for raw goods tumbled last fall, emerging-markets funds fell on a nearly identical trajectory. 
When commodity prices picked up this spring, these funds rose along with them.
But in the third quarter, emerging-markets funds made a stronger comeback than either natural resources funds, which own stocks, or commodity funds, which use futures contracts to bet on rising commodity prices.
Many developing economies like Brazil are based on commodity exports, and rapidly growing countries like China and India are stoking the global demand for steel, coal and soybeans. 
Investment strategists point out, though, that many emerging markets benefit whenever there is demand for their manufactured products -- while commodity investors make money only when the prices for raw materials rise.
''Emerging-markets funds are closely aligned with commodities, but they do have some additional exposure, certainly to technology and manufacturing,'' said Jeff Tjornehoj, a senior research analyst at Lipper, the fund tracker. 
He said that there was a lot of overlap between these types of funds, though, and that some investors who owned both might have less portfolio diversification than they thought.
To be sure, all three categories have regained ground since the global markets hit bottom in March. 
But only the emerging-markets fund category finished the third quarter higher than it had been a year earlier. 
An investor who put $1,000 into an emerging-markets fund on Sept. 
30, 2008, would have had $1,167, on average, a year later, according to Lipper. 
But a $1,000 investment in a typical commodities fund a year ago would have been worth around $900 at the end of September. 
And a similar investment in a natural resources stock fund would have been worth $828.
Edward E. Yardeni, an independent investment strategist, said that China had kick-started the global economic recovery when it created a huge public works program last fall, and that he thought developing countries would continue to lead the way. 
''That's very positive for commodities,'' he added, ''because these emerging economies spend a great deal on roads and bridges and airports, and their consumers are spending more on homes and cars.''
Mr. Yardeni said that with commodity prices already driven up, he would rather own emerging-markets stocks at this point. 
Most commodity prices, he said, accurately reflect current supply and demand -- except for oil, which he said was more expensive than it should be because of concerns about geopolitical risks. 
He added that current prices would allow both commodity exporters like Brazil and importers like China to prosper.
But Mr. Yardeni did not object to the idea of an individual investor owning both a commodity fund and an emerging-markets fund in the same portfolio, ''as long as you know that you're doubling down on the same fundamental trade.''
Gonzalo Pangaro, the manager of the T. Rowe Price Emerging Markets Stock fund, predicted that the gap between the growth rates of the developed world and the developing world would widen over the next decade. 
''I think it will take the developed world some time to deleverage,'' he said.
Mr. Pangaro, who previously managed the T. Rowe Price Latin America fund, has put a strong emphasis on Latin America, which makes up 28 percent of the emerging-markets fund, and particularly on Brazil, at 18 percent of the portfolio.
Petrobras, the Brazilian state-run oil company, at 6.2 percent of the portfolio, is the fund's largest holding. 
''We've owned Petrobras for a very long time,'' Mr. Pangaro said, ''but in the energy and materials sector, we generally focus on midcaps and small caps.''
The portfolio does not hedge the currencies of countries in which it invests. 
So investors will be exposed to fluctuations in foreign exchange rates, including those for the Brazilian real and the Mexican peso. 
The fund rose 21.7 percent in the third quarter and returned 12.5 percent in the 12 months through September.
The Van Eck Emerging Markets fund also does not hedge for currency risk, and it tilts toward small and midsize companies rather than the large, formerly state-owned companies that dominate the stock markets in many developing countries. 
David Semple, the portfolio manager, said that small companies were more likely to benefit from rising consumption in their local markets, which should bolster demand for commodities, ''whether it's steel for cars or crocodile skin for Gucci shoes.''
In the energy and basic materials sectors, this has led Mr. Semple to focus on some stocks that would not be on the radar screen of many natural resources funds, which tend to own larger energy companies. 
For example, the second-largest holding in the Van Eck fund, recently at 2.2 percent of the portfolio, is KazMunaiGas Exploration Production, which is majority owned by the government of Kazakhstan.
''It has decent assets, and cash in the bank,'' Mr. Semple said. 
But he said the key attraction was its relationship with the government, which gives it preferential rights for oil and gas drilling in Kazakhstan, a central Asian country with vast energy reserves.
Another large holding is the KNM Group, which is based in Malaysia and works on refinery projects for major oil and gas producers worldwide. 
Its shares trade only on the Malaysian stock exchange.
Van Eck Emerging Markets rose 25.1 percent in third quarter and 23.45 percent during the last 12 months.
THE similarities between emerging markets and commodities are also apparent in the world of exchange-traded funds, said Paul Justice, the E.T.F. strategist at Morningstar, the fund tracker.
Among E.T.F.'s owing emerging-markets stocks, Mr. Justice says, he likes the Vanguard Emerging Markets E.T.F. because of its diverse portfolio and low cost. 
It rose 21.2 percent in the third quarter and charges 0.2 percent in annual expenses. 
If investors already own one or two emerging-markets funds, he said, they might consider an E.T.F. focused on small-cap stocks, like WisdomTree Emerging Markets Small-Cap Dividend. 
It was up 22.9 percent in the quarter.
But after six months of robust returns, Mr. Justice cautioned investors not to expect emerging markets to continue to grow by leaps and bounds. 
''I'm not saying that it's going to go negative,'' he said. 
''But I'm not predicting anything like the returns that it's had this year.''
