
Bain Capital, an American private investment firm, said Monday that it had agreed to invest as much as $432 million to acquire a minority stake in Gome Electrical Appliances, one of the biggest retailers in China.
The deal, which had been rumored for weeks, is expected to bolster Gome, which has been struggling amid weakening sales and the investigation of its founder and former chairman, Huang Guangyu, who was detained by the Chinese authorities on corruption charges in November.
Trading in shares of Gome, which are listed in Hong Kong, has been suspended since November. 
The company said shares would resume trading Tuesday.
The deal by Bain Capital, which is based in Boston, will be one of the largest American investments in a mainland Chinese company.
In a statement, Gome's chairman and president, Chen Xiao, called the investment a ''new phase in the company's development.''
Jonathan Zhu, managing director of Bain, said in a statement that Gome's business remained strong and that Bain saw long-term growth potential in the giant electronics retailer, which reported about $6.7 billion in revenue last year.
Neither side mentioned the scandal involving the former chairman, but Gome has said before that the company was not a target of the investigation.
Last year, Mr. Huang was named the richest man in mainland China by at least one publication, with a fortune estimated at $6 billion. 
At the time, he owned about 35 percent of Gome. 
The Chinese government has said Mr. Huang was under investigation for ''economic crimes.''
Under the terms of the deal, Bain will invest about $233 million in a convertible bond and purchase as much as $199 million worth of new shares in the company if those shares are not bought by existing shareholders in what is called an open offer.
Gome shareholders have several weeks to decide whether to increase their holdings; whatever is not acquired by those shareholders is expected to be bought by Bain. 
After the deal, Bain will hold 9 to 23 percent of Gome.
Under the agreement, Bain is also expected to nominate three nonexecutive directors to the board of Gome, which is based in Beijing.
After fees, Gome expects to raise $417 million to strengthen the company's balance sheet. 
Shares of the company plummeted more than 70 percent last year before trading was suspended.
Mr. Chen said at a news briefing in Hong Kong on Monday that the electronics retailer would focus on opening megastores this year to use floor space more efficiently, Bloomberg reported. 
The company, with 859 stores at the end of last year, will relocate or close unprofitable outlets, he added.
Bloomberg also reported that in a Monday filing to the Hong Kong stock exchange, Gome said that Ernst & Young had completed an independent review and had found no deficiencies in internal controls and no misappropriation of funds or assets.
