
BEIJING (AP) -- The International Air Transport Association on Monday nearly doubled its forecast of European airline losses this year to $1.1 billion and said that the worldwide aviation industry would scrape by with thin profit margins because of high fuel prices.
American and Asian airlines should make money this year, but more airlines in Europe might follow Malev of Hungary into bankruptcy if the Europeanfinancial crisis worsens, theassociation, a global trade group, said.
The worldwide aviation industry should make a total profit this year of $3 billion on revenue of $631 billion, a 0.5 percent margin, the association said.
The group represents 240 airlines that carry 84 percent of passengers and cargo worldwide, but its forecast covers the whole industry.
''The industry's profitability is balancing on a knife edge,'' said Tony Tyler, chief executive and director general of the association.
The ''most immediate risk'' is Europe's debt crisis, which could drag down profits if it sets off a recession, Mr. Tyler said. 
He said a 1 percent decline in global airline revenue could turn the small profit the association predicts into a $3 billion loss.
Asian airlines should lead global profits at $2 billion this year, while their American counterparts are expected to earn $1.4 billion, the association said. 
Airlines in Latin America and the Middle East are expected to show profits of $400 million each while African airlines lose a total of $100 million.
The predicted European loss of $1.1 billion is nearly double the association's March outlook. 
Brian Pearce, an economist for the group, said the increased loss was a result of Europe's financial turmoil. 
In addition to Malev's failure in February, smaller airlines in Germany and Spain have closed.
''We've already seen some European airlines going out of business this year, and there is clearly a possibility that will continue,'' Mr. Pearce said.
The latest outlook is based on a forecast that oil prices will average $110 a barrel this year. 
The association said fuel accounted for 33 percent of airlines' costs, up from 13 to 14 percent a decade ago.
The global profit forecast represents a decline of more than 50 percent from $7.9 billion last year. 
That was down from $15.8 billion in 2010.
The association also appealed on Monday to governments to head off a mounting conflict over European carbon charges on airlines by negotiating a global system to regulate the industry's emissions of climate-changing gases.
China, the United States, India, Russia and others oppose the European charges, which took effect Jan. 
1 and require airlines to buy permits to emit carbon.
China and India have prohibited their airlines from cooperating and Beijing has blocked purchases of European aircraft by its airlines, raising fears of further economic retaliation.
