
BRUSSELS -- The head of the European Union's executive arm said that Europe must shun ''reactionary'' opposition to globalization as he criticized French-led efforts to protect the Continent's movie and television industries in advance of trade talks with the United States.
The European Commission president, José Manuel Barroso, speaking in an interview ahead of a meeting Monday with President Obama and other leaders of the Group of 8 industrial nations, offered strikingly robust criticism of efforts in France to limit the scope of a trade pact.
Discussion of the proposed trans-Atlantic trade accord is expected at the Group of 8 meeting, as a result of an agreement that European Union trade ministers worked out in a lengthy bargaining session on Friday in Luxembourg.
Mr. Barroso scorned a view, which France's Socialist government successfully argued at that session, that Europe's movie and television industries must be excluded, at least initially, from the trade negotiations in order to protect the region's cultural diversity.
''It's part of this anti-globalization agenda that I consider completely reactionary,'' Mr. Barroso said, adding that he believed in protecting cultural diversity but not in sealing off Europe. 
''Some say they belong to the left, but in fact they are culturally extremely reactionary.''
But while largely in sync with Washington on the merits of free trade, Mr. Barroso took issue with the United States over its electronic surveillance program. 
He also defended Europe's emphasis on austerity economics, which the Obama administration views as counterproductive. 
And Mr. Barroso called for tougher measures against multinational companies that use aggressive tax avoidance methods.
The battle against illegal tax evasion, as well as the legal but questionable tactics that big companies use to avoid taxes, will be a central topic during a two-day meeting of the Group of 8, which comprises the United States, Russia, Japan, Canada and four European countries.
The meeting is to start Monday in Northern Ireland at a luxury golf resort, which itself became a victim of Europe's financial crisis when it entered insolvency proceedings in 2011 after a crash in property prices.
With this meeting, Mr. Barroso will have attended nine Group of 8 summit meetings, more than any of the other leaders scheduled to be there.
Speaking in his 13th floor office in Brussels, Mr. Barroso voiced alarm at recent reports that a secret United States surveillance program had invaded the privacy of Europeans. 
The program, known as Prism and revealed by a former National Security Agency contractor, Edward J. Snowden, ''certainly raises serious concerns in Europe,'' he said.
''While we understand certainly the concerns of security that we share with our friends and allies regarding the serious threat that terrorism represents,'' he said, ''we believe that it cannot be done in clear violation of fundamental rights, namely of people who have nothing to do with this kind of threat.''
The fight against terrorism, Mr. Barroso added, hinges on ''the moral superiority of democracies'' and must be ''based on the respect for basic human rights and fundamental freedoms.''
He said, ''I think we should not lose that moral ground when we deal with this threat, which is terrorism.''
Mr. Barroso also challenged calls by Washington and from many in Europe for a retreat from policies of austerity. 
The push for fiscal discipline that has dominated the European Union's response to what began as a financial crisis after the collapse of Lehman Brothers in 2008 has grown into a broader economic debacle that has plunged much of the region into recession and left more than 26 million Europeans unemployed.
''We should keep the fiscal consolidation,'' said Mr. Barroso, referring to the budget cuts and tax increases that are the main pillars of austerity.
Debate over Europe's response to the crisis has fed into a wider discussion over the impact of globalization and whether, at a time of deep economic malaise, a proposed trade pact with the United States would relieve or only add to Europe's problems.
Mr. Barroso shrugged off comments by the Greek-born French film director Costa-Gavras, a longstanding critic of global capitalism, that the commission president is a ''dangerous man'' for European culture.
Mr. Barroso insisted that cultural diversity is an important pillar of the European Union and said that the threat from America had been overblown by those who ''have an anti-global agenda.''
Such critics, he said, have ''no understanding of the benefits that globalization brings also from a cultural point of view, also in terms of opening horizons and broadening our perspectives and also the sentiment of belonging to the same mankind, which I think is a very important concept against all forms of narrow nationalism and protectionism.''
At the meeting of European Union trade ministers Friday in Luxembourg, France cleared the way for the European Commission to begin negotiations with Washington on a free-trade pact. 
But the French trade minister, Nicole Bricq, secured a pledge that the talks, at least initially, would not cover movies, television shows and other audiovisual products.
France's ''cultural exception'' policy includes quotas and subsidies for such productions, which promote locally and regionally produced content.
Discussion of protection of state-sponsored film and television industries is not completely off the table but will require a further decision by European Union states at a later stage.
Mr. Barroso's comments were made before the ministers had agreed on the elaborate compromise late Friday.
This agreement, reached after 12 hours of tense talks, does not end the debate but does lift a cloud hanging over Monday's Group of 8 meeting.
Prime Minister David Cameron of Britain, the host of the meeting, hopes to inaugurate negotiations on the trans-Atlantic trade deal and to get commitments from the other Group of 8 countries to agree to cooperate more closely on issues including taxation and the transparency of multinational companies' earnings.
On Saturday, 10 British territories and self-governing regions, including Bermuda, agreed to join an international convention on the exchange of information on taxes, which is already supported by more than 50 countries, and to produce plans on how to shine more light on the ownership of so-called shell companies.
Nonetheless, critics of the Group of 8 question the credibility and relevance of the forum. 
It was conceived at the height of the cold war and later expanded to include Russia, but it is still focused on the West.
Mr. Barroso, one of two top European officials who will attend the meeting -- the other is Herman Van Rompuy, president of the European Council, where national governments meet -- defended the format as worthwhile, despite the emergence of the Group of 20, which includes more economically dynamic countries like China and Indonesia.
''While the G-20 is certainly more representative, the G-8, I think, allows leaders to have a more intimate discussion and more in depth,'' Mr. Barroso said. 
Success in Northern Ireland, he added, ''can in fact relaunch the G-8 process.''
Some experts argue that despite the inclusion of Russia, whose democratic credentials fall far short of those of other members, the Group of 8 could still prove valuable as an influential caucus of developed, free-market economies.
''Two years ago people would say that the G-8 was on its way out,'' said Robin Niblett, director of Chatham House, a research institute in London. 
''The G-8 is rediscovering a little of its mojo, having been put to in the shadows by the postcrisis centrality of the G-20 at a time when we needed everyone to pull together.''
The rise of China had concentrated minds, giving momentum to moves to push for a trans-Atlantic trade pact.
''This agenda has acquired intensity because Europe and America have woken up to the competitive challenge of China,'' Mr. Niblett added.
Mr. Cameron will press Group of 8 leaders to coordinate efforts to deal with tax avoidance by big multinational companies.
Last week, an influential parliamentary committee in Britain criticized the tax affairs of Google, saying that the company had generated $18 billion in revenue from Britain between 2006 and 2011 but paid the equivalent of just $16 million in British corporation taxes in the same period.
Mr. Barroso declined to comment on the Google case but said he supported plans for European rules to force transparency on multinationals' tax affairs.
''We are of course against all practices of aggressive -- what we call aggressive -- tax planning, of tax avoidance,'' he said. 
''We recognize that some of these practices are legal, but that does not mean they are right.''
