
BEIJING -- Have you ever wondered what it is like to roam China's corridors of power, where politics is a skill thousands of years old and state secrets abound?
Wang Xiaofang roamed them for a decade and lived to tell the tale -- an achievement, considering that the man whom he served as private secretary, the executive deputy mayor of Shenyang, Ma Xiangdong, was executed for corruption in 2001, the year Mr. Wang left government to become a writer.
Today, with a dozen novels to his credit and a first, ''The Civil Servant's Notebook,'' just out in English, Mr. Wang's goal is ''to tell the truth'' about China, he said by telephone from the southern Chinese island of Hainan, where he was spending the weeklong National Day vacation.
So what is the truth about China?
''We worship power. 
That is the real China, that is its essence,'' Mr. Wang said, tracing the country's cultural obsession with power and its human embodiment, the government official, back about 2,200 years to the rule of the despotic Qin Shi Huang, the first emperor of China, who curtailed freethinking and meted out harsh punishments.
Mr. Wang's words reverberate today as the country watches the fall of Bo Xilai, the former star politician, amid corruption and morals charges, in the biggest political scandal in China in decades. 
Mr. Bo's wife, the lawyer Gu Kailai, is in jail for murdering a British businessman. 
His former police chief in Chongqing, Wang Lijun, is in jail after being convicted of defection and other charges after fleeing from Mr. Bo to a U.S. consulate in February. 
In the United States, Mr. Bo and Ms. Gu's son, Bo Guagua, hovers, a princeling in exile.
Mr. Wang's words reverberate especially strongly for another reason: Hundreds of top Communist Party officials are competing fiercely for more power as the country gears up for its most important political meeting in a decade, the 18th Party Congress, due to start in Beijing on Nov. 
8. The meeting will pick new leaders for China.
Power worship has exacted a heavy price from China's soul, Mr. Wang said.
''We all adore power, but our spirit has been castrated by power. 
This is the heart of my novel, its core idea,'' he said, referring to ''The Civil Servant's Notebook.''
Secretly, Yang Hengda, the official who opens the novel's action, knows it.
Shortly after getting the promotion he dreamed of to be the head of the No.2 Department of the city of Dongzhou, Mr. Yang thinks of his new office: ''Every day when I open this door I am at my most smug and complacent -- and my soul is at its most empty.''
Mr. Yang also knows he owes his promotion from lowly researcher to his having agreed, against his better judgment, to drink his own urine for five years in order to please his powerful backer, the shadowy Old Leader, who believes that urine prolongs life. 
As the action begins, the Old Leader is in the hospital with uric acid poisoning.
Mr. Wang, who portrays conspiracy, betrayal and lovelessness as part of everyday life for the official, sees Mr. Bo's downfall as merely part of the same game -- just like the secret politicking before the Party Congress, an event that most people cannot observe and that those who can, cannot discuss publicly.
While he did not comment directly on Mr. Bo's fate, Mr. Wang said: ''The basic attitude of the officials with power is: You don't need to know anything. 
Because if you know something, then you threaten my power. 
Hence all the secrecy that we see around us.
''Power must be a monopoly. 
Power is hidden. 
It doesn't like the sun. 
If you know too much, then they lose their power.''
''Some people have said that my novels are how-to manuals, how to rise as a civil servant,'' he said. 
''I disagree deeply. 
My novels are about people who are alive but have no life. 
With this novel, I want to open up this closed can and let the sun shine into it, and maybe it will rot, maybe it will live. 
Maybe it will become free.''
China is urgently in need of change, he said.
''What did gaige kaifang do?'' he asked, referring to the policy of economic openness that began after the death of Mao Zedong in 1976.
''It let those who couldn't breathe, breathe. 
But we mustn't let materialism be the only thing it gave us. 
Even more, we need freedom to spread, the freedom that has been suppressed since the time of the Emperor Qin Shi. 
That has been suppressed by thousands of years of this kind of unfree, power-driven thinking that the officials represent.''
Hardly any author in China dares write about the reality of power and how it operates in the country, he said.
''They don't want to write about the darkness,'' he said. 
''So many are bureaucrats, paid by the system. 
Everyone wants to become an official, and then they are eaten up by the system.''
He added: ''If writers fall silent in the face of power, of the darkness, then everyone will fall silent. 
Even God will fall silent.''
