
TOKYO -- Japan posted a ¥754.1 billion trade deficit for August, data showed Thursday, as shipments to Europe and Asian countries sank, further undermining hopes for an export-driven revival in the country's economy.
The $9.6 billion deficit was not much smaller than the ¥775 billion deficit reported a year earlier, the Finance Ministry reported Thursday. 
Exports in August totaled ¥5.05 trillion, down 5.8 percent from the level of a year earlier; imports fell 5.4 percent to ¥5.8 trillion.
The strong Japanese yen has bitten into exports while demand has evaporated in crisis-stricken Europe. 
Meanwhile, the country's energy imports have risen since most of its nuclear plants were shut down.
Japan's central bank, which announced Wednesday that it would increase the size and duration of a government bond-buying program to encourage growth, forecast little change in the immediate future. 
''Exports and industrial production are expected to remain relatively weak for the time being,'' the Bank of Japan said in its monthly report, released Thursday.
Japan has eked out small trade surpluses in some months this year but reported a record annual trade deficit for the fiscal year that ended in March.
Though the deficit for August was lower than the more than ¥800 billion forecast by some analysts, prolonged weakness in Europe and recent friction with China, Japan's biggest foreign market, suggest the trade gap will probably persist in coming months.
Exports to Europe fell 28 percent in August from a year earlier to ¥484.9 billion, while exports to Asia -- Japan's biggest overseas market -- sank 6.7 percent over all to ¥2.84 trillion.
Even before a recent territorial dispute led to anti-Japanese riots in China, exports were weakening. 
They fell 9.9 percent from a year earlier to ¥966.3 billion, the Finance Ministry reported.
The central bank's bond-buying program is meant to encourage borrowing and spending and make Japan's exports more competitive, while also exerting downward pressure on interest rates and on the yen.
The central bank acknowledged that Japan's economic rebound had stalled but predicted it would return to a ''moderate'' recovery path in the longer term. 
Its report cited resilient domestic demand, because of reconstruction in the northeastern region devastated by the March 2011 tsunami and earthquake, and signs of increasing activity in the housing sector.
The central bank has already pushed short-term rates nearly as low as possible. 
That leaves government bond purchases as one of the few remaining tools to increase growth, though its effect appears limited.
The yen weakened Wednesday to ¥79.17 per dollar by midafternoon, but by Thursday afternoon it had rebounded, trading at ¥78.09 per dollar.
