
Scott James is a columnist for The Bay Citizen.
Emerging from the Australian pavilion at the World Expo in Shanghai, a clearly exasperated American woman standing next to me said, ''That was just obnoxious.''
The woman had been jammed into tubular corridors with a mob tightly packed like a clogged drainpipe, and her dismay was understandable. 
The centerpiece of the Australian display, which required a 40-minute wait in line in blistering heat, was an animated presentation on the environment so shrill and juvenile that it made SpongeBob seem like Shakespeare. 
Half the audience walked out before the video concluded.
Judging from the postcard images that have filled news media coverage, this world's fair is a triumphant spectacle, and the pavilions of the nearly 200 participating nations are genuine architectural wonders. 
Visiting Shanghai this week, Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger announced his intention to bid to bring the 2020 World Expo to California.
''We want everyone to come to Silicon Valley, to the Bay Area,'' Mr. Schwarzenegger said. 
''We know that a World Expo would also bring up to 50, 60 million people, visitors.''
But the Australian exhibit was typical of the Shanghai experience in person, which has gone mostly unreported in the United States. 
Once inside the high security gates of the vast grounds, visitors contend with wait times of up to several hours to get into a single pavilion, and inside the buildings the content tends to be videos and static displays far less inspiring than the structures that house them.
If California's bid succeeds, the state must determine exactly what type of experience visitors would have in 2020. 
Purely as entertainment, the Chinese model is likely to fail with American audiences, according to an expert analysis.
On one recent Friday afternoon in Shanghai, loudspeakers and digital displays informed attendees, in both Chinese and English, ''The wait time for the Saudi Arabia pavilion is seven hours,'' and then later, ''The wait time for the U.K. pavilion is four hours.''
Dennis L. Speigel, president of International Theme Park Services, which has consulted with 450 venues around the world, said, ''Americans don't want to wait 15 minutes, let alone four hours.''
Mr. Speigel explained the science behind managing such venues using the industry term E.C.U. for entertainment capacity unit, a measurement of the number of entertaining experiences a typical attendee has within a one-hour period. 
Successful venues in the United States, according to recent research, have a typical E.C.U. of 1.5, which means an average of three entertaining experiences (like theme-park rides) in two hours.
Applying that standard to the Shanghai wait time of seven hours for access to a single venue, the Expo's E.C.U. is a mere 0.14 -- too low to keep an American audience engaged.
But judging a world's fair solely as a form of entertainment might be missing the point.
Dr. Robert W. Rydell, a professor of history at the University of Montana and a leading expert on expos, said that the event's 19th-century origins promoted imperialism and that those early fairs ''were overwhelmingly used for purposes of education and propaganda.''
While nostalgic retellings of world's fairs have focused on the marvels, like some of the first public displays of electricity, Dr. Rydell said the history was far more complex, and at times disturbing. 
Nations sometimes used the fairs to try to show their superiority over other races. 
For example, in St. Louis in 1904, the United States put 1,200 Filipinos on display in a ''reservation,'' which included a tribal man identified as ''the missing link.''
When one of the Filipinos died, he was dissected, and his brain was removed for medical study.
Fairs evolved into more benign national showcases, most notably the 1915 Panama-Pacific International Exposition in San Francisco, which proved that the city had emerged from the ashes of the 1906 earthquake, and the 1939-40 Golden Gate International Exposition, which created Treasure Island and celebrated the industrial wonders of the time.
In Shanghai today the pavilions are mostly devoted to promoting nations' tourism and business -- propaganda that could be more widely disseminated online. 
So do we really need world expos anymore?
''For a world's fair to work in the 21st century,'' Dr. Rydell said, ''it has to be about problem solving.''
In one respect that means tackling the problems of the host city. 
A reported $45 billion was spent to get Shanghai ready, an infrastructure upgrade that included streets, airports and a modern subway system any MUNI rider would envy.
The real purpose of an expo, it appears, is to prepare a city for its future.
''If it's there to entertain, you probably don't want it,'' Dr. Rydell said about bringing a fair to the Bay Area. 
''If you want to help a couple of generations, then maybe you do.''
