
As Michelle Yeoh, Jackie Chan, Andy Lau and Angelababy provided a star-spangled backdrop, 40 watchmakers, engravers, enamelers and gem-setters from Switzerland showed off their skills in Hong Kong last month, at the Watches&Wonders fair, billed as Asia's version of the famous Geneva Salon.
Over the past 10 years, Asia has become the top market for Swiss watches. 
In 2012 exports to the region were worth 11.6 billion Swiss francs, or $12.84 billion, with exports to Hong Kong alone totaling 4.1 billion francs. 
Though growth has slowed drastically this year, the region remains an important market, industry experts and Swiss watchmakers say.
Certainly the fair's organizers, the Swiss Fondation de la Haute Horlogerie, pulled out all the stops to draw potential buyers. 
An exhibition, titled ''The Mastery of Time,'' displayed about 100 vintage timepieces on loan from Swiss museums and private collections to chronicle 500 years of time measurement; and the exhibitors -- 13 brands mostly of the Richemont luxury group -- offered lavish hospitality outside events on the sidelines of the show.
Among the more eye-catching displays, Roger Dubuis brought its golden eagle statue-cum mascot from Geneva to deck out its booth, while Montblanc hired a mime to ''interact'' with a video presentation on a large, three-sided screen. 
A. Lange & Söhne created a larger-than-life mock-up of its grand complication watch, complete in all its details.
''I think they aimed at the top market, specifically to those who are not able to travel to Geneva'' for the January Salon, said Carson Chan, watch specialist and managing director at Bonhams Asia in Hong Kong. 
''Most of the brands had something new to show, and I must say I was impressed with the events they organized, like the dinners and cocktails.''
Not everybody was equally impressed. 
Journalists, invited by the brands, complained about being herded like sheep, and some collectors complained about wobbly floors and a lack of catering facilities.
''Of course a collector who wears a 2 million Hong Kong dollar watch can buy his own sandwich when he leaves the exhibition,'' said Melvyn Teillol-Foo, a Singapore-based collector. 
Still, he said, ''to promote luxury lifestyle, impressions are everything.''
Still, he added, there were impressive watches to be seen. 
Several brands brought out new, one-of-a kind jewelry models for the show or introduced new limited editions.
''Our Asian clients are very demanding, and they truly enjoy it when they finally come across something unique,'' the watchmaker Richard Mille remarked in an e-mail. 
Mr. Mille's watchmaking company of the same name offered an RM26-01 Panda Tourbillon in white gold with baguette diamonds and a 30-piece limited edition of the RM055 Bubba Watson in white and red.
Red, an auspicious color for the Chinese, was widely present.
Roger Dubuis had a high jewelry piece from its Velvet collection, featuring 304 diamonds and two cushion-cut rubies on its dial. 
Van Cleef&Arpels went for red in its Pavot Mystérieux, with a diamond-encrusted dial at the heart of a large ruby and diamond poppy.
Van Cleef also catered to Chinese taste with an addition to its Cerfs-Volants kite series featuring finely worked marquetry and miniature painting on mother-of-pearl.
At the end of it all, brands were coy about sales: ''We achieved exactly what we were expecting,'' said Angelo Bonati, chief executive of Officine Panerai. 
Visitors, he said were ''attentive, competent and curious -- more than expected.''
