
WASHINGTON (AP) -- New economic data released on Thursday showed that factory output grew last month at the fastest rate since June, construction spending increased for a third consecutive month, and retail and auto sales rose in November.
But the number of people applying for unemployment benefits is still too high to signal strong hiring.
The reports offered a mixed picture for the economy a day before the government reports on November job growth. 
And manufacturers could face strains overseas in important export markets, especially if Europe's debt crisis worsens and leads the Continent into another recession.
For now, manufacturing is growing. 
The Institute for Supply Management, a trade group of purchasing managers, said Thursday that its manufacturing index rose to 52.7 in November, from 50.8 in October. 
Any reading above 50 indicates expansion. 
Factory output has grown for the last 28 months.
Bradley J. Holcomb, chairman of the institute's survey committee, said manufacturers were ''cautiously more optimistic about the next few months based on lower raw materials pricing and favorable levels of new orders.''
Still, companies have tempered their outlook with concerns about future economic growth, government regulation and the debt crisis in Europe, he added.
New orders rose to a seven-month high and production increased, according to separate indexes in the report.
Ian Shepherdson, an economist at High Frequency Economics, said the gains suggested that factory output would expand at an even faster rate next month.
''The economy seems finally to be developing real momentum; growth is accelerating,'' he said in a note to clients.
But a measure of factory employment fell. 
The drop indicates manufacturers are still hiring, but at a slower pace than the month before.
''Manufacturers are trying to meet demand without significantly increasing their work force,'' said Ryan Wang, an economist at HSBC Securities.
Workers in the United States increased their productivity in the July-September quarter by the most in 18 months, while labor costs fell, the government said Wednesday.
A more productive and less costly work force can increase corporate profits. 
But unless companies see more demand, they are unlikely to step up hiring.
And manufacturers could soon see less demand overseas. 
Most economists expect Europe's financial crisis to tip that region into recession next year. 
About 20 percent of exports from the United States are shipped to Europe.
China, the world's second-largest economy, is also slowing. 
Manufacturing in China contracted in November for the first time in nearly three years, according to business surveys released Thursday.
Separately, the Labor Department said the number of people who applied for unemployment benefits last week rose above 400,000 for the first time in four weeks. 
The increase comes after applications had drifted lower over the last two months.
About seven million people are still receiving benefits. 
House Republicans said they were drafting legislation to continue an extended benefits program set to expire at the end of this year. 
That program provides up to 99 weeks of aid in states with the highest unemployment rates.
Another report showed that builders in the United States spent more in October on new homes, offices and shopping centers. 
Construction spending rose for a third month in a row, the Commerce Department said. 
Despite the gains, overall construction spending remained depressed.
