
TWEETY and T. rex are kissing cousins. 
Scientists have known this for years, and with each breathless announcement of a feathered fossil discovery from northeastern China, the news has spread to the larger public. 
But it remains a strange fact to wrap your mind around. 
Winged dinosaurs, with plumage?
''Dinosaurs Among Us,'' opening on Monday at the American Museum of Natural History, lays out the dinosaur-bird case in dramatic fashion. 
A compact, easily navigated exhibition, it presents the visual evidence with freshly exhumed fossils, interactive displays and reconstructed theropods -- bipedal, nonavian relatives of the 13,000 or more bird species alive today -- that prove, if nothing else, that evolution has made wonderful cosmetic improvements over the past 150 million years.
Exhibit A -- the show's star attraction -- is the magnificently hideous Yutyrannus huali, a 23-foot-long tyrannosaurus discovered in China in 2012. 
Bristling with quill-like proto-feathers, it looks like a roadrunner that mated with an anteater. 
The name translates as ''beautiful feathered tyrant.''
Seriously. Velociraptor mongoliensis is no beauty either, but its three forward-facing toes, swivel-jointed wrists and wishbone put it in the same company as a cute tufted titmouse.
The exhibition, organized by Mark Norell, curator of the museum's paleontology department, consists of bite-size subsections that show the evolutionary links between dinosaurs and birds. 
The connection, suspected as long ago as the mid-19th century, is now almost universally accepted as fact, supported by a wealth of shared attributes. 
These include nesting behavior, brain and bone structure, and the feathers that started as rude, spiky projections and developed into the sleek shaft-and-filament feather of the modern bird.
Modern instances help drive the argument home. 
A display showing a crocodile nest with a clutch of eggs underlines the common ancestry of two seemingly unrelated species. 
Like birds, crocodiles lay eggs. 
So did dinosaurs. 
Take the fossil nicknamed Baby Louie, the first dinosaur embryo found with the bones still in place. 
The curled-up posture is positively birdlike, and if Baby Louie had survived, it would have emerged as an oviraptor, a theropod with a parrot-shaped head and a toothless beak. 
Two perfect specimens, Sid and Nancy, are nearby. 
More formally known as Khaan mckennai, they were buried in the Gobi Desert about 75 million years ago, probably when a sand dune collapsed, and now lie together, in eternal repose, at the museum.
Unlike birds, most theropods had two egg tubes, not one. 
One of the most arresting fossils in the exhibition is a pelvic bone preserved with two elongated eggs, shaped a bit like mini-baguettes, that would have been deposited side by side in a nest filled with egg pairs. 
A large reconstructed dinosaur nest, with twin eggs arrayed in a circle, comes with an invitation: Go ahead, sit in the middle of the nest and feel what it must have been like to hatch a theropod.
In the same central case as the ghastly Yutyrannus huali, a lively reconstructed scene unfolds. 
As their parent stands guard nearby, downy Citipati, an oviraptor, emerge from their eggs. 
The fossil record for this small drama is on display in the same case, discovered by scientists from the natural history museum and the Mongolian Academy of Scientists in 1993. 
Nicknamed Big Mama, the remains show an adult Citipati captured in the same brooding posture as a modern bird, sitting on the eggs until they hatch.
A station devoted to brains introduces another strand in the argument. 
Like modern birds, advanced theropods had long, S-shaped brains with a relatively large cerebellum and optic lobe, and a small area devoted to smell. 
Despite their lizardy look, these dinosaurs relied on sight rather than smell for information, like their avian descendants. 
They also had wishbones, or furculae, another chapter of the story. 
It was once thought that only birds had them, and they aided in flight, until theropod fossils, including T. rex, proved otherwise.
Excitement builds as the age of flight draws near. 
Over time, dinosaur bodies became adapted to motion through the air, and feathers assumed their modern form. 
In 1998, Caudipteryx (''tail feather''), the first nonavian dinosaur described with feathers as we know them -- thin filaments branching out from a central shaft -- was discovered in Liaoning Province, China. 
With Microraptor, paleontologists beheld the first dinosaur outfitted with asymmetrical feathers on its hind limbs and forelimbs -- that is, feathers designed specifically to aid flight instead of for warmth or display.
Circling the glass cases, visitors arrive at the immediate ancestors of the modern bird, dinosaurs whose feathered arms meant business. 
There's Microraptor, of course, with two sets of wings, as well as Anchiornis, Xiaotingia and Confuciusornis, which is considered a true bird, with a beak rather than teeth and a feathered rather than a bony tail.
So how did they fly?
Not so well. 
Recall the Wright Brothers at Kitty Hawk, that first lurching foray into the wild blue yonder, then fast-forward to the Concorde, cutting a smooth, aerodynamic path through the sky. 
The biplane and the SST are, nevertheless, both considered airplanes. 
And so, too, with the dinosaurs and birds.
Early bird flight was probably a series of leaps with a little extra lift helped by feathered arms, or a cruising, glider-like descent from tall branches, flying-squirrel style. 
And this is where the real fun begins in ''Dinosaurs Among Us.''
The organizers have set up an interactive station that lets visitors assemble their own dinosaurs and watch them fly -- in a variety of modes.
Using puzzle pieces inserted into a dinosaur illustration, visitors can change the wingspan, body weight and breastbone size from large to small and back again, in all combinations. 
With each selection, an animated creature takes shape on a giant screen depicting a forest scene. 
When all the pieces are in place, the name of the dinosaur pops up, and once a ''launch'' button is pressed, it springs into action. 
Some dinosaurs hop up a tree trunk, with feather-assisted bounds, while others sail effortlessly to the top of the canopy. 
Success at last -- 150 million years in the making.
­''Dinosaurs Among Us'' opens on Monday and runs through Jan. 
2 at the American Museum of Natural History; 212-769-5100, amnh.org.
