
PARIS -- An executive of the French automaker Renault who was fired over accusations that he had sought to pass on secrets of the company's electric-car program said Thursday that he believed the company had been the victim of a dirty trick by a rival.
In his first interview with an English-language newspaper since he was fired, the former executive, Matthieu Tenenbaum, 33, said that while he had no evidence, he was leaning toward the hypothesis that Renault had been duped into acting on the mistaken conviction that it had a traitor in its ranks.
''We are collateral damage,'' he said of himself and two other colleagues Renault fired. 
''Renault would be the target, and we would be the collateral damage.''
Renault filed a criminal complaint with the Paris prosecutor on Jan. 
13, accusing ''unknown persons'' of ''organized industrial espionage, corruption, breach of trust, theft and concealment.''
The company has said that an ''organized international organization'' was behind the spying that it has said was occurring, but that no critical information from the electric-vehicle program was compromised.
French officials in recent weeks have sought to play down suspicions of a Chinese connection to the case that initially made it front-page news. 
Beijing has flatly denied any link.
Renault will ''of course not comment'' on the defense's actions or strategies, Caroline de Gezelle, a company spokeswoman, said. 
''Nonetheless, it should be understood that the facts that led us to act are of an extreme gravity. 
Renault is desirous that justice take its course, is cooperating with the investigative services designated by the prosecutor.''
Mr. Tenenbaum joined the company at 19 and spent his entire career there, even obtaining his degree through Renault's internal engineering course, and polishing his English while working for six months in 2004 at the Smyrna, Tenn., plant of Nissan Motor, a Renault partner. 
Nissan, a Japanese automaker, and Renault are together spending 4 billion euros, $5.4 billion, in a bid for leadership in electric-car technology.
He was well regarded in the company, and his star was rising rapidly. 
When Mr. Tenenbaum was 30, Patrick Pelata, Renault's chief operating officer, personally selected him as the deputy director of the electric-car program -- a plum job coordinating the engineering, marketing and design teams working on the project, and a sign that his career was on a fast track.
''Our job was to make the electric car happen,'' Mr. Tenenbaum said, ''at the right cost, and profitably.''
It all ended on Jan. 
3, when he was whisked out of his office by Renault executives and told he had been suspended.
''They told me, 'We know everything, don't deny it, just quit. 
We're leaving the door open for you to leave,' '' he said. 
''I said, 'What?
Deny what?'
Then I took my PC and my phone and I went home.''
Mr. Tenenbaum said he thought the matter would be cleared up in a few weeks, but added, ''I started reading in the newspaper about how they were accusing me of spying for China.''
He said that it was particularly frustrating that he still did not know exactly what the company had accused him of doing.
''They said I was indirectly mentioned in an anonymous letter,'' Mr. Tenenbaum said. 
''Then they had their investigation, and then they fired me, saying they'd found out that I received a lot of money.''
Because the contents of the company's complaint have not been made public, the only details of the investigation have come in leaks to the news media. 
One such unsourced article last Friday in Le Monde said investigators at Renault had found that Mr. Tenenbaum received 500,000 euros in a Swiss bank account, from money that originated with China Aviation Industry Corporation
Mr. Tenenbaum, like his two former colleagues, denies all accusations in the case.
Along with other two men fired by the company -- Michel Balthazard, formerly a member of the Renault management committee and a top executive of the company's electric-car program, and his subordinate, Bertrand Rochette -- Mr. Tenenbaum is filing a defamation claim with the Paris prosecutor. 
All three are also seeking redress or reinstatement from the French labor court.
The purpose of the defamation complaint ''is to obtain an investigation of Renault's investigation,'' said Thibault de Montbrial, Mr. Tenenbaum's lawyer. 
''All we know is that the whole story is supposed to have started with an anonymous denunciation, with the investigation carried out by an anonymous private investigator.''
Mr. Tenenbaum said he was hoping the investigation, which is partly in the hands of the French domestic intelligence agency, would move quickly.
''I want to be totally clean with French justice,'' Mr. Tenenbaum said. 
''I want them to check my home, my phone, I want them to go fast and see I have nothing to do with this story.''
''I need to find work very soon,'' said Mr. Tenenbaum, who has two children. 
''Today I went to the Web site of the employment office. 
But even though I had a good career at Renault, who would hire a person accused of such a thing?''
