
HONG KONG - China's on-again, off-again market for new domestic share sales returned to action in dramatic fashion Thursday, after shares in three companies that made their trading debut all rose by the maximum 44 percent.
The performance marks a small but positive development in China's struggle to modernize its languishing stock markets, which were the worst-performing in Asia last year. 
Beijing in January lifted a moratorium on initial public offerings that had been in place since late 2012, introducing   new rules meant to strengthen protections for investors and improve corporate disclosure requirements.
Nearly 50 companies rushed to list on the Shanghai and Shenzhen markets in the opening months of this year, reflecting pent-up demand among companies seeking to raise new funds. 
But the resumption of share sales included a number of setbacks, and regulators again halted new I.P.O.s in February.
The trading debuts on Thursday were the first that domestic stock market investors had seen in four months. 
The three companies - Shandong Longda Meat Foodstuff, Wuxi Xuelang Environmental Technology and Feitian Technologies - raised a combined 1.6 billion renminbi, or $260 million. 
All of them are listed in Shenzhen.
Demand for the offerings was torrid - the three companies were part of a batch of six similarly sized I.P.O.s that had locked up a combined 563.9 billion renminbi in investors' funds, the Chinese Securities Regulatory Commission said Tuesday in a post on its official account on Weibo, a social messaging service.
Shares in each of the three companies were suspended from trading Thursday after rising 44 percent, the maximum allowed in Shenzhen under new rules. 
Ordinary Chinese stocks are limited to a single-day gain or loss of 10 percent. 
New listings were previously exempted from any price limits on their first trading day, but under rules announced this month, they are now restricted to a maximum gain of 44 percent or loss of 36 percent.
Reining in sky-high I.P.O. valuations has been a major focus of the Chinese securities regulator's overhauls, and the first-day "pop" in stock prices on Thursday suggests that this effort has been perhaps too successful.
So far this month, 10 companies have been approved and have moved forward with I.P.O.s., including the three that began trading Thursday. 
These 10 companies have priced their I.P.O.s at an average price-to-earnings ratio of 17.8 times, according to the regulator. 
That compares with an average ratio of 29 times earnings for the 48 companies that sold shares at the beginning of the year, before I.P.O.s were suspended.
Still, despite the strong trading debuts, China's stock markets continue to slump. 
The benchmark Shanghai Composite Index is down 3.65 percent this year, the third-worst performer in Asia. 
Only markets in Japan - where the Nikkei is down 6 percent after a 57 percent gain in 2013 - and Mongolia have performed worse this year.
The lackluster state of the Chinese markets persists despite efforts to overhaul the process for new listings, a source of ongoing frustration for companies that have in some cases been waiting years to raise capital. 
The Chinese Securities Regulatory Commission signaled last month that it planned to allow about 100 more companies to sell shares in the remaining months of the year.
As of last week, 619 companies were still waiting for approval to begin the I.P.O. process.
