
The fish rise and fall in their wall of tanks. 
The crabs crouch like linebackers and tap their Morse code. 
''Choose,'' you are told.
At Bite of Hong Kong, a Cantonese restaurant that opened in Chinatown last spring, the trappings are classic: great round banquet tables draped in red tablecloths, lazy susans making idle revolutions and those faintly prehistoric fish that land on giant plates, swimming in ginger, still flaring their fins.
One evening, mine was soon hock, or marble goby, a freshwater fish most likely plucked from the Chao Phraya River in Thailand. 
It was dark and mottled on the outside and delicate within. 
The familiar preparation -- steamed until the flesh seemed to quietly exhale, with little more than soy, scallions and ginger -- was simple and effective, a reminder of how satisfying dining in Chinatown can be when you know where to go.
On another night, flounder arrived deep-fried whole and pancake flat, with armored frills of a thousand tiny bones. 
You can eat them. 
They snap under the teeth like matchstick fries. 
Soon all was gone, soy-drunk flesh and prickly ruff.
Bite of Hong Kong is the latest in a series of Cantonese restaurants to occupy 81 Chrystie Street, across from Sara Delano Roosevelt Park. 
In décor, it tries a little harder than its predecessors. 
A traditional geometric lattice frames the windows, and stylized chrysanthemums bloom on the walls. 
Up front, semi-closed-off booths feel like private rooms, with light filtered through rattan mats hung above.
The chef, Au Yeung Fei, stays mostly true to the restaurant's name. 
The menu is at once too vast and too pithy, but if you study it long enough, you will find dishes that speak to both the elegance and the motley of eating in Hong Kong.
Blades of Chinese leeks, also known as garlic chives, emerge from the wok still crisp, the brevity of the heat just enough to soften their heady flavor (the punch of eating garlic cloves straight, with the edges smoothed out). 
They come littered with dried squid, their touch of briny molder underscoring the freshness of the chives.
The same contrast invigorates fried rice, with dried scallop set against bursts of golden raisins, alongside creamy rags of egg yolks and whites. 
Dried scallop, too, is behind the stealthy funk of XO sauce, a concoction of pricey ingredients credited to Hong Kong chefs in the high-flying 1980s and named after the ''extra old'' designation for Cognac. 
(William Grimes suggested calling it ''Trump sauce'' in a 2000 article in The New York Times.) The restaurant's version marks the right interstices of salty, sour and sweet, without quite mustering a distinct character.
Part of the beauty of a meal here is the procession of textures. 
Fried chicken, barely shielded by crispy skin as thin as vellum, may be followed by egg tofu, made with eggs and soy milk and close to custard inside, or golden e-fu noodles, chewy from a fizz of carbonated water in the dough.
Oxtail, slow cooked with hunks of kabocha squash in a fragrant curry (a nod to Macau), still requires coaxing off the bone. 
Bronzed duck tongues are fried but somehow still lithe, each a forefinger in length, a veil of meat over spongy fat with a nub of cartilage waiting inside. 
Theoretically you can eat that, too, but I found it hard.
A fragile nest of fried noodles, heaped with buttery macadamia nuts, scallops and shrimp, is a dish so mild as to suggest the meal has hit pause. 
But it proves a helpful refresher after pork chops that have seemingly been baked under -- and wholly absorbed -- a mountain of salt.
I did not always order wisely. 
Oversize blocks of tofu had little flavor despite hiding minced shrimp inside. 
Cantonese steak, a relic of British colonialism that fuses HP and Worcestershire sauces, was dishearteningly sweet.
But I didn't give up. 
Bite of Hong Kong is the kind of restaurant that rewards repeat visits, as you learn its ways and it learns yours. 
One night the manager said to me, approvingly, ''I like your order.''
And when the dishes arrived -- one after another, so many that we started laughing, more than the lazy susan could ever hold -- we did, too.
Bite of Hong Kong
81 Chrystie Street (Hester Street), Chinatown; 212-219-8868; biteofhongkongnewyork.com
Recommended Dried squid with Chinese leeks; steamed live fish; pan-fried flounder; egg tofu with assorted mushrooms; crispy chicken with house special sauce; double-egg dried-scallop fried rice; salted fish and diced chicken casserole; e-fu noodles.
Drinks and Wine No liquor license.
Prices $2.25 to $38.95. 
No American Express.
Open Daily for lunch and dinner.
Reservations Accepted.
Wheelchair Access The entrance is level with the sidewalk; restrooms are not equipped with a handrail.
