
The Department of Energy has waived a “buy American” requirement for government projects receiving money from last year’s stimulus bill so that recipients can purchase energy-efficient lighting products for public buildings and roadways.
The department issued the waiver after determining that products like compact fluorescent light bulbs and traffic signals made with light-emitting diodes, or LEDs, are manufactured almost exclusively in China and Mexico.
A memorandum written by Cathy Zoi, assistant secretary for energy efficiency and renewable energy, said the department received a large number of inquiries and petitions from grant recipients, suppliers and trade associations stating their efforts to find domestic manufacturers for compact fluorescent light bulbs, LED traffic and crosswalk signals, and fluorescent electronic lighting ballasts were unsuccessful.
About $6.3 billion from the stimulus bill, also known as the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, is being distributed by the department’s office of energy efficiency for state and local energy programs.
But the lack of domestic-made lighting products “is currently impeding the progress of numerous Recovery Act projects” receiving funds from the agency, Ms. Zoi noted.
Federal agencies may waive the “buy American” requirement if they determine that a needed item is not available from domestic sources in sufficient quantities, that it would inconsistent with the public interest to comply, or that the cost is unreasonable.
The requirement does not cover private projects receiving stimulus money, like the West Texas wind farms whose prospective purchase of Chinese-built turbines has prompted calls to   apply the “buy American” provisions more widely.
“If these products really aren’t being produced in the U.S., then we should consider ways to encourage domestic production of energy-saving technologies,” said Senator Russ Feingold, a Wisconsin Democrat. 
“We need to take steps to create jobs and to ensure the U.S. is competitive in the global new energy economy.”
Craig Updyke, manager of trade and public affairs for the National Electrical Manufacturers Association, said the waiver for the public lighting projects would be a great benefit to its member companies, which include   General Electric,   Philips and Osram Sylvania.
“The waiver is consistent with the goals of the Recovery Act,” Mr. Updyke said. 
“It will boost employment and boost efficiency in public buildings.”
Government agencies have approved more than two dozen waivers to the “buy American” provisions for a variety of public projects, according to notices in the Federal Register, most for single-item purchases from specific manufacturers. 
The exemption approved by the Department of Energy is a rare case of a blanket waiver that covers entire product categories.
Mr. Updyke said the waiver is necessary, even for compact fluorescent light bulbs, or CFLs, which have been supported with government and utility incentives and can be found in home improvement stores for less than $1 apiece.
“Money’s tight,” he explained. 
“States and municipalities don’t have the funds these days to buy a pallet-load or truckload of CFLs.”
Examples of lighting retrofit projects that have received funds from the Department of Energy and may invoke the waiver include $800,600 for Wilmington, Del., to replace incandescent traffic and pedestrian signals with LEDs, and $99,900 to   replace inefficient lighting in a historic courthouse in Plattsmouth, Neb.
With other waiver requests in the pipeline, the Department of Energy says it is already doing more to engage with manufacturers to figure out if goods that are needed for Recovery Act projects, but are not produced domestically, can be manufactured on American soil.
“The Department of Energy is committed to implementing the ‘buy American’ provisions of the Recovery Act in a way that maximizes American job creation,” said Jen Stutsman, a department spokeswoman.
Not everyone is buying that commitment, however.
Technical Consumer Products is a leading manufacturer of energy efficient lighting products. 
Currently, its factories are overseas, but this year it plans to begin construction on a CFL factory, at its headquarters in Aurora, Ohio, that would employ as many as 400 people.
The company, which has been seeking outside funds for its project, says it is frustrated by “the lack of government support of manufacturing.”
“We have been looking for federal support,” said Jim Crowcroft, vice president for marketing, “and we’ve found very little.”
