
[Video: Developers plan a Chinese culture-themed park one hour north of Sydney. 
Watch on YouTube.]
It's been billed by its backers as the "biggest tourism development in New South Wales," and the local mayor predicts it will rank with the Sydney Opera House and Harbor Bridge as an attraction.
Get ready for Chappypie China Time, a $500 million, 39-acre Chinese culture theme park that aims to bring Australia a replica of the Forbidden City; a "Panda Paradise" with, alas, statues, not real pandas; and teahouses, museums and shops whose "porcelain, bamboo, silk, carvings will overwhelm you with their oriental charm," according to a promotional video.
Last month, local officials said the Chinese-born Australian developer had submitted plans for Chappypie (the snappy but perplexing name has not been explained) in Warnervale, about an hour's drive north of Sydney. 
In an interview with The Beijing News, the developer, Bruce Zhong, chairman of the   Australia Chinese Theme Park company, said he hoped that the first phase of construction would begin next year, with the building of a "Thanksgiving Temple."
If all goes to plan, doors will open to visitors in early 2016.
According to a video released by the company, it will be "a park integrating culture and happiness, nature and spirit" that will also feature a treasure ship dedicated to the 15th-century Chinese explorer Zheng He, a youth hostel, performance areas, even a roller coaster and Ferris wheel.
Warnervale's mayor has made it no secret that he's a fan.
"The developers have long been telling us that this theme park will be up there with the Opera House and Sydney Harbor Bridge in terms of tourist attractions, and I've got to hand it to them - it's absolutely in that category," an Aug. 
4 news release quoted Mayor Doug Eaton as saying.
The Wyong Shire Council, which must approve development plans for Warnervale, agreed in 2012 to the $10 million sale of 39 acres of land where the park will be built with a reported $500 million investment.
The project's backers and local officials have said it would create hundreds of local jobs. 
But Mr. Zhong also told The Beijing News that he would like a Chinese construction company to carry out the work, and he said he had been in talks with companies including the state-owned Shanghai Construction Group.
As commercial and other ties between the two countries deepen, the theme park's developers expect that more Australians will be interested in Chinese culture. 
Mr. Zhong said it was likely that Australians would be most of the park's visitors, though ethnic Chinese from Australia and abroad might also come to celebrate traditional holidays such as the Lunar New Year.
Meanwhile, increased tourism from China also means an opportunity to lure that segment as well. 
According to Tourism Australia, Chinese were the second-largest group of foreign visitors to Australia in 2013, after New Zealanders, with just over 700,000 arrivals in 2013. 
They were also the biggest spenders, at $4.8 billion.
According to Chinese news reports, Mr. Zhong, the brains behind the venture, is a naturalized Australian citizen who hails from Shanghai, came to Australia in 1990 and served as an editor in the Australian bureau of the Chinese-language Sing Tao Daily, a newspaper started by a Hong Kong tycoon, Charles Ho Tsu-kwok. 
Perhaps drawing on his own experiences as a new arrival, in 2008 Mr. Zhong published a novel in China about Chinese students in Australia.
Mr. Zhong said funding for the theme park would come from Chinese sources, according to a 2011 news release from the Wyong Shire Council.
"Unlike the United States' well-documented financial problems and downgrading of its AAA Credit Rating, the Chinese economy continues to boom and is more than capable of allowing its Government to help finance the Theme Park," the Council's news release said.
Though developed by a private company, the park has apparently won support from officials in China - unsurprising since the project is in line with the Chinese government's efforts to promote culture abroad as part of its soft culture push.
One of the more controversial government initiatives has been the Confucius Institutes, state-financed centers in foreign universities and schools that teach Chinese language and introduce students to Chinese culture.
The main difference between Chappypie China Time and Confucius Institutes, Mr. Zhong told The Beijing News, is that the park will allow visitors to absorb Chinese culture gradually and through entertainment. 
He noted that Chinese have been influenced by American thought and culture through Disneyland.
In 2011, soon after the project was initially proposed, Chinese Embassy officials visited the project site, followed later by Zheng Xudong, division chief of the Shanghai municipal government's Overseas Chinese Affairs office. 
Bob Graham, who was mayor of Wyong at the time, was quoted in a Council   news release as saying that Mr. Zheng "promised support for the proposal from his government."
The headline on the release, which could easily be repeated across Australia, was "Cashed up Chinese keen to invest."
