
I'VE been flying for business for the last 30 years or so. 
A lot of my trips are international, mostly to Asia.
When I was a young man in the late 1970s, I took a trip with my dad, who was traveling for business to China. 
It was a great opportunity for me, plus it was a lot of fun to travel with my father. 
I'm from Michigan, and going to China seemed really exotic.
I remember when we landed how shocked I was. 
I didn't know what to expect but all I saw was bicycles. 
It seemed like the bikes were three stories high because the people riding them packed so much stuff on them. 
I've never seen anything like that before.
Even in the early '90s, when I flew to China for business, there was a lot of farmland. 
That's changed, too. 
Everything now is high-rise buildings and commerce. 
I'll still see people riding their bikes, but not as many as I saw on that first trip.
It's been kind of interesting to see the changes in China over the years. 
It's an amazing place. 
And I have to admit that sometimes, when we come in for a landing, I wonder if the wing of the plane is going to hit one of those huge skyscrapers.
With all the travel I've done you would think that by now I would be able to sleep on a plane. 
I can't, and I have tried most everything. 
I even had earphones that blocked out noise. 
I put them on and looked a little silly and remained wide awake.
I've taken to watching action movies to keep myself amused. 
I've watched them all. 
You name it, I've seen it, even some really bad ones. 
The worst movie I ever saw was ''Starship Troopers.''
The second worst?
''Starship Troopers 2.''
I get desperate sometimes and wind up watching the same movies over and over. 
I probably know all the dialogue to the ''Die Hard'' movies.
Because I can't get any rest on a flight, I've made a point of trying to get in during the late afternoon. 
That way I can have a big dinner and then go right to sleep. 
I schedule meetings for the next morning, and by then I'm in pretty good shape.
Most of the time, that works out pretty well. 
But a colleague of mine wanted to meet with me as soon as I landed in China. 
It's such a long flight, about 20 hours, but I did what he requested. 
I even wore a really good suit so I would look somewhat professional when I got off the plane.
I got to the meeting and I was absolutely beat. 
There were several people in the room and it was one of those meetings that seemed to go on forever. 
Plus, this guy I was meeting with really liked to talk.
I thought I was doing O.K. 
At least I thought I looked like I was listening intently to everything he had to say.
All of a sudden, I felt someone kicking my leg. 
Apparently, I fell asleep, and the guy next to me saw me starting to slump or maybe he heard me snoring. 
In any event, he thought he'd help me out by giving me a swift kick.
Fortunately, I didn't create a scene. 
It wasn't that deep of a sleep. 
Even better, the guy who was holding the meeting was none the wiser. 
He just kept right on talking.
To this day, I'm not really sure what we were meeting about.
