
HONG KONG -- A former high-level Chinese energy official accused of receiving hundreds of thousands of dollars in bribes said this week that he was tortured into confessing to the crime, a Chinese news outlet reported.
The former official, Xu Yongsheng, who was removed as deputy director of the National Energy Administration in 2014, went on trial this week at the Beijing No. 1 Intermediate People's Court on charges of taking 5.61 million renminbi, or more than $850,000, from companies seeking approval for power plants.
During a hearing on Tuesday, Mr. Xu retracted an earlier confession, which he said was given after he was subjected to physical abuse, and admitted only to receiving a massage chair from a local official, according to a report on Wednesday by Caixin, a Chinese business publication.
Mr. Xu's statements in the closed court could not be immediately confirmed. 
His lawyer did not return a request for comment, and his law office in Beijing said he could not agree to interviews on the case.
Mr. Xu is one of several top officials in China's energy sector who have been investigated on suspicion of corruption since 2013, part of a broader crackdown on graft promoted by President Xi Jinping. 
In 2014, a court sentenced Liu Tienan, a former deputy head of the National Development and Reform Commission and a former head of the National Energy Administration, to life in prison after convicting him of taking bribes and abuse of power.
Mr. Xu's accusations of torture raise deeper questions about the anticorruption drive and the length investigators will go in extracting confessions.
Before Communist Party members face criminal investigations, they can undergo a party-led investigative process called shuanggui, in which the rights of the accused are extremely curtailed. 
Some officials have said they were abused until they admitted guilt. 
A small number have died under mysterious circumstances while under investigation.
Caixin reported that Mr. Xu told the court that during a year of investigation, he had gone long periods without sleep, and that when not being interrogated, he was forced to memorize detention rules. 
He had frequently been forced to sit on a tiny stool that caused him to bleed, Caixin reported.
He also said that investigators threatened to take his wife into custody, leaving their son without a parent to raise him, Caixin reported.
In recent years China has instituted several policy changes to reduce instances of forced confessions, and several people convicted of crimes they did not commit have been released.
But human rights organizations and United Nations experts say torture and other abuses in investigations and detention are still widespread.
While cases of people who have been freed after their cases were overturned have heightened public concerns about investigative abuses, the anticorruption crackdown remains popular among many in China, who see it as reducing official graft and abuse of power.
