
Avery Johnson, the new Nets coach, approached Courtney Lee after one of the most painful seasons in N.B.A. history had finally concluded. 
Johnson gave Lee an option: he could have a significant role with the Nets while the organization rebuilt, or he could seek a fresh start with another team through a trade.
Lee took option No. 2. So off he went to the Houston Rockets last August in a four-team deal as the Nets essentially wiped clean a roster that produced just 12 victories last season, the fourth fewest since the N.B.A. expanded its regular season to 82 games in 1967-68.
As an organization, the Nets now have new ownership, new management and even a new, if temporary, home in Newark as they get ready for their big move to Brooklyn in two years. 
And only four players remain from last season's fiasco.
But although it is relatively easy for the Nets to pretend last season is gone and forgotten, and to unveil a new slogan that proclaims that ''It's all new,'' it is not that simple for the players who have moved on. 
They are trying to jump-start their careers while trying to shake off the indignities of 2009-10.
Some have new jobs playing basketball, and some do not. 
All of them were on the wrong side of history. 
All of them are trying to deal with it.
''There's definitely a stigma that comes along with that,'' said Keyon Dooling, now a member of the Milwaukee Bucks, as he looked to the 12-70 record that is a permanent part of his resume. 
He added, ''A lot of good players are without jobs because of that whole stigma.''
The four players who remain on the Nets from last season are Devin Harris, Brook Lopez, Kris Humphries and Terrence Williams. 
Harris and Lopez are cornerstone players; Williams has already run afoul of Johnson for repeated violations of team rules this season and on Friday was assigned to the team's Development League affiliate in Springfield, Mass.
But of the 13 others who wore a Nets uniform at some point last season, one is in China, at least one is in the minor leagues and others have a foot teetering in retirement.
Seven players -- Tony Battie, Yi Jianlian, Eduardo Najera, Chris-Douglas Roberts, Chris Quinn, Dooling and Lee -- have latched on with other N.B.A. teams. 
Dooling and Roberts are teammates in Milwaukee. 
Quinn got a job with the San Antonio Spurs after another 2009-10 Net -- Bobby Simmons -- was waived.
''It's quite the contrast,'' Quinn said recently of a Nets team that won 12 games last season and a Spurs club that has won 14 of its first 16 in 2010-11.
''It's good to be part of a winner,'' he said. 
''That's everyone's goal in this league, to be part of a winning organization, and it's clear that things are done the right way here.''
Josh Boone, who toiled for the Nets last season, is playing for Zhejiang Chouzhou of the Chinese Basketball Association. 
Sean Williams, a former first-round draft selection of the Nets, suits up for the D-League's Texas Legends. 
He finished last season in China after starting it with the Nets. 
Rafer Alston, Jarvis Hayes and Trenton Hassell did not find any N.B.A. takers over the summer, although Alston could end up in China, too.
No matter where they are, they remain linked by last season's ordeal.
''When you win 12, there's always a lot of talk about players, no matter how good they are,'' said Rod Thorn, who was the Nets' president last season and now holds the same position with the Philadelphia 76ers. 
''There are questions from the league, from other coaches, G.M.'s and so forth,'' he added.
The catalyst for last season's futility came in the cost-saving trade the Nets made before the first regular-season game. 
Vince Carter went to the Orlando Magic in exchange for Battie, Lee and Alston. 
The move opened up cap room for the Nets, who were looking ahead to the summer pursuit of LeBron James, Chris Bosh and others, futile as it turned out to be.
But meanwhile, they would have to do without Carter. 
They began the season by losing 18 straight games, an N.B.A. record. 
In the midst of the streak, the Nets fired Coach Lawrence Frank, now an assistant with the Boston Celtics. 
Kiki Vandeweghe, who was the organization's general manager, reluctantly took on the job of interim coach. 
He and Thorn decided to give preference to the team's younger players.
On an already bad team, some veterans took another hit.
''That was a business decision that they made, and I understand that,'' Battie said. 
''You have to do that, especially at that point when we had no chance of making the playoffs and no chance of even having a somewhat O.K. record.''
The losses continued to pile up. 
Still, the Nets played a little better toward the end of the season, and the record for the fewest victories in a regular season -- nine, by the Philadelphia 76ers, in 1972-73 -- remained safe.
''Just losing those games and trying to run away from that record and when you go to the games and you see people with trash bags on their heads and people holding signs like, 'Worst team in the N.B.A.'
-- that's definitely one of the toughest things I've ever been through,'' Lee said. 
''But that made me who I am today. 
It made me tougher.''
Dooling recalled: ''It was a tough situation, but it wasn't all bad. 
I met a lot of nice people when I was in New Jersey, I enjoyed my time there. 
It wasn't all bad there. 
I got all my money, you know what I mean?''
Still, modest veterans like Dooling and Battie needed to stay in the league.
''Players make a good salary,'' Thorn said, ''but it's not like if you're a lawyer or a doctor or some other professional, that your career can span decades.''
Vandeweghe, who moved back to California after the season and is not working for any N.B.A. team, said he did not agree that a stigma was attached to last season's players. 
If an organization needed a player with certain needs and that player fit, he said, the player would be signed no matter how bad his team was.
''All the G.M.'s and coaches understand and they've been through rebuilding themselves,'' Vandeweghe said in a recent telephone interview. 
''They're going into it thinking Keyon Dooling was hurt all year. 
He got hired right away. 
We all knew he could play.''
This season's Nets team is off to a 6-11 start, not very good, but nothing like 0-18. 
Derrick Favors, the third overall draft pick last June, is full of potential. 
Off in the distance, Brooklyn awaits. 
But in the rearview mirror remains the wreckage from last season. 
Even Thorn, who has been in the N.B.A. for nearly five decades, feels its lingering sting.
''It's something that I don't know that you ever forget,'' he said. 
''If you dwell on something, whether it's really good or really bad, you get yourself in a bad spot. 
For me, it happened. 
It wasn't fun, but it happened.''
Rebounds
Devin Harris had 25 points, including a clutch 3-pointer with 1 minute 11 left, and 8 assists to lead the Nets to a 98-96 win over the visiting Portland Trail Blazers. 
The teams traded the lead five times during the fourth quarter, before Harris made the long jumper from beyond the top of the key. 
Portland turned the ball over on its next possession.
