
TAIPEI, Taiwan -- In a closely fought election rife with verbal attacks and partisan rancor, the comments of a foreign academic with no official government position might normally be subsumed by the storm and stress of the campaign.
But the remarks, uttered by a former American diplomat and splashed across the front pages of several Taiwanese newspapers on Friday, have kicked up a tempest, underscoring the enormous influence that the United States has on Taiwan's adolescent democracy.
The former diplomat, Douglas H. Paal, who was the American government's de facto ambassador to Taiwan from 2002 to 2006, told a Taiwanese television station that a victory by TsaiIng-wen, who is opposing President Ma Ying-jeou in the election on Saturday, could threaten the stabilityI of the region.
Mr. Paal suggested that Washington was unhappy with Ms. Tsai and her tougher approach to dealing with China, Taiwan's longtime nemesis across the Taiwan Strait. 
If she won, he said, the United States would have to ''massively and quickly engage to try to help her come to a formula that would preserve peace and stabilityI,'' he told CTi News, a cable television channel. 
''She should find the means to persuade China that she is not threatening,'' he said, adding that both Washington and Beijing would breathe ''a huge sigh of relief'' if Mr. Ma were re-elected.
Mr. Paal, vice president for studies at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace in Washington, is visiting Taiwan with a group of academics and former American officials.
Hours after the remarks appeared in print, Frank H. Murkowski, the former Republican senator from Alaska who is leading a delegation of election observers, convened a news conference to lambaste Mr. Paal's comments. 
He called them ''careless,'' ''irresponsible'' and ''inexcusable,'' and accused Mr. Paal of deliberately trying to aid the campaign of Mr. Ma, who is in a statistical dead heat with Ms. Tsai.
''I challenge the credibility of Mr. Paal to speak for me or my government, or for the vast majority of Americans,'' he said, suggesting that the remarks were intended to frighten voters into thinking a vote for Ms. Tsai would anger the United States, Taiwan's most dependable ally against Chinese aggression.
The American Institute in Taiwan, the entity that has functioned as the American Embassy since Washington shifted diplomatic recognition to China in 1979, quickly reiterated its neutrality in the race, but the damage was done.
Bi-khim Hsiao, a spokeswoman for Ms. Tsai's Democratic Progressive Party, said it was not the first time that Mr. Paal had returned to Taiwan to make comments perceived as favorable to Mr. Ma during an election. 
In 2008, when Mr. Ma was fending off accusations that he was a permanent resident of the United States, Mr. Paal seemingly put an end to the controversy a day before the vote by stating that Mr. Ma did not hold a valid green card.
''He's a private citizen and there's nothing we can do to stop him from speaking, but it's illegal for nonvoters to participate in a Taiwanese campaign,'' Ms. Hsiao said. 
''We hope people from democratic countries can respect our democratic process.''
In an interview on Friday, Mr. Paal dismissed the criticisms, pointing out that he did not claim to speak for the American government, and that as an academic specializing in Taiwanese politics his views were frequently solicited by the media. 
''I don't need to shout it from the rooftops but when I'm asked to give my opinion, that's what I'll do,'' he said. 
''I'm just trying to explain to the Taiwanese that there are external consequences to giving up on the '92 Consensus.''
The ''1992 Consensus'' is the name given to the verbal agreement between Beijing and the Taiwanese government led by the Nationalist Party, or Kuomintang, that has been the foundation of warming relations. 
While it avoids thorny political issues like unification, the agreement states there is only one undivided China, but it also allows Taipei and Beijing to interpret the notion of ''one China'' as they see fit.
The pro-independence Democratic Progressive Party rejects that arrangement. 
Ms. Tsai has proposed forging a new agreement with China, one that would be determined by voters. 
Beijing has greeted Ms. Tsai's so-called Taiwan Consensus with scorn, and Mr. Paal appeared to second that sentiment in his interview, calling it ''impractical'' because of Taiwan's deep divisions on the issue. 
In his comments, he suggested that the Obama administration, too, was unimpressed with Ms. Tsai's proposal during her recent visit to the United States. 
''The assurance given about the management of cross-strait ties in Tsai's administration were too vague to make Washington comfortable,'' he said.
The controversy has once again underscored the sensitivities surrounding Taiwan's ties with the United States as both countries try to manage their relationship with a rising China. 
Although Washington has repeatedly stated its neutrality in the race, the Democratic Progressive Party has accused the Obama administration of seeking to influence the outcome in subtle ways.
Last month, the American Institute in Taiwan appeared to hand Mr. Ma an election-season triumph by announcing that the island's long-awaited application for visa-free access to the United States was nearing approval.
But Tuan Y. Cheng, a research fellow at the Institute of International Relations at National Chengchi University, said he thought the uproar over Mr. Paal's comments would ultimately have little impact on voters. 
''Our democracy is not that fragile, and we are smart enough to make our judgments,'' he said. 
''After four presidential elections, I don't think the people of Taiwan will be affected by opinions of a foreign scholar.''
