
Su Yutong, a Chinese political exile in Germany who last month was from her job at Deutsche Welle, the German public broadcaster, has issued an open letter to the station's director general calling on him to speak up for press freedom during a visit to China.
Ms. Su was dismissed on Aug. 
19 after a debate over the 1989 military crackdown on the Tiananmen Square protests in Beijing, in which hundreds, possibly thousands, of civilians were killed. 
Deutsche Welle said she had   disclosed information about a co-worker in violation of internal regulations .
Ms. Su called on Peter Limbourg to "raise the issue of press freedom and speak about how the CCP" - Chinese Communist Party - "government has monopolized all media to spread propaganda and lies, to persecute journalists and hide the truth," in the letter on her Facebook page.
Mr. Limbourg was in the western Chinese region of Xinjiang, Deutsche Welle said by telephone on Monday from its headquarters in Bonn. 
He was to take part in a China-German Media Forum starting on Tuesday in Beijing co-sponsored by Global Times, a nationalist newspaper that is part of the Communist Party's flagship People's Daily group, the broadcaster confirmed.
Ms. Su also appealed to Mr. Limbourg to visit Gao Yu, an outspoken journalist who contributed to Deutsche Welle and was detained by the Chinese authorities in April. 
Ms. Gao, about 70, is in prison in Beijing, charged with leaking state secrets to a foreign news site.
Ms. Su's letter highlights a growing debate over the political direction of Deutsche Welle's China coverage, which began on June 4 when it ran a column by a Beijing-based media consultant, Frank Sieren, in which Mr. Sieren called the 1989 Beijing massacre a "one-off."
Mr. Sieren wrote that some Western media were unfairly critical of the crushing of the Tiananmen demonstrations and that the Chinese government's point of view should be given equal weight in discussions of the event. 
That prompted criticism, including on the Deutsche Welle website, from Chinese journalists and human rights activists, who accused Mr. Sieren of whitewashing the killings.
Here is the text of Ms. Su's letter:
Dear Mr. Limbourg:
I learned from Global Times, a state-owned newspaper, controlled by the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) and China Radio International that you will be attending the China-German Media Forum sponsored by Global Times in Beijing in early September, only weeks after Deutsche Welle's dismissal of me. 
As a veteran journalist currently living in Germany, I wish to make the following public appeals:
First, I would like you to visit independent journalist Gao Yu, who is currently held in the Beijing Number One Detention Center. 
It has been more than three months since her "disappearance" on April 24, but neither her relatives nor her lawyers have been able to meet her properly, which is in severe violation of her basic human rights and current Chinese law. 
She met with her lawyer only twice but was forbidden to talk about her case, so the lawyer can't provide her any real legal aid. 
As a contributor to Deutsche Welle, her reports and commentaries about current affairs in China have won tremendous praises for DW's Chinese service. 
While we appreciate the fact that you issued a statement on May 8 regarding Gao Yu's case, and that you said you had also written to the Chinese Embassy in Berlin to demand for an explanation of Gao Yu's sudden disappearance, but to our disappointment, we don't know whether or how the Chinese embassy has responded, nor have we seen further appeals or actions from you regarding Gao Yu's release.
Confirming the news of Gao Yu's criminal detention, Martin Liao, former president of the Independent Chinese Pen Center and renowned writer Liao Yiwu jointly wrote to Foreign Minister Frank Walter Steinmeier, and I myself have written 20 letters in total to President [Joachim] Gauck; Chancellor [Angela] Merkel; Foreign Minister Steinmeier; Christoph Strässer, Federal Government Commissioner for Human Rights Policy and Humanitarian Aid; and members of the Cross-Party Human Rights Group. 
The replies I have received show the German leaders have made diplomatic efforts. 
I have kept contact with Gao Yu's family and her friends, and assisted with the hiring of lawyers and other matters. 
Seventy-year-old Gao Yu has lived her distinguished life in search of truth, and the Chinese Communist government now has detained her on trumped-up charges. 
As a long-term partner of Ms. Gao that she contributed to, DW has the moral responsibility to be concerned about her well-being. 
Therefore, Mr. Limbourg as director general of DW, it's your job to represent DW, and you have both the responsibility and capacity to speak up for her. 
Your visit to her at the detention center and your protest to the Chinese government will improve Gao Yu's situation in jail. 
I would be willing to provide a channel for you to contact her family and attorneys.
I do not know the detailed agenda of the China-Germany Media Forum, but I believe the most important topic should be press freedom. 
Sir, you have attended the forum numerous times, this trip will be a fruitful one if you raise the issue of press freedom and speak about how the CCP government has monopolized all media to spread propaganda and lies, to persecute journalists and hide the truth.
I am particularly hoping Mr. Limbourg would promote DW's value of "media pluralism" to the CCP government and Chinese media sector, and request that Chinese media not to be the "voice of the CCP."
Only after this has become reality, can DW's policy of "not being the voice of dissidents" have an appropriate foundation. 
Under the condition of the CCP controlling all the media in China, no "voice of dissent" would have any outlet in China. 
Meanwhile, the "voice of CCP" has launched an international campaign of "Global Foreign Propaganda" \xBC\x88term quoted from official documents\xBC\x89with economical rewards and coercion, to drown out the "voices of dissent."
This leads to a fact that DW should act exactly as a "voice of dissident" in order to achieve "balanced coverage" and "media pluralism" in the Chinese-language media. 
I would like to believe that you, Mr. Limbourg, would not be so enchanted by Chinese wine offered by the hospitable Global Times, a CCP mouthpiece, so as to become a puppet in the CCP's "Global Foreign Propaganda."
I learned from official Chinese information that, Mr. Frank Sieren, who is at the center of the recent controversy concerning DW because of his comments on the Tiananmen massacre, will also be attending the forum. 
Would you please convey to him the waves of readers' protest against his article whitewashing the massacre?
Given that debates over the massacre have sparked quite an upheaval within DW, and given the Global Times' incredible excitement and approval of DW's dismissal of me, I think this debate should have a place in the forum, and you may hope to introduce your Chinese counterparts to the debate. 
We look to seeing the details of your diversified discussion at this media forum to be released, especially in China.
Thank you and wish you a pleasant journey to China!
Su Yutong
A Chinese citizen
