
My Thursday column is about North Korea, a topic I’ve covered on and off since I first moved to Asia in 1986. 
It’s a country that has fascinated me both because it is so bizarre to visit and because it is such an impossible headache to manage.
The basic problem is that North Korea really, really wants to keep its nukes. 
It began its nuclear projects under Kim Il Sung in the 1950’s, and it thinks — probably correctly — that its nuclear deterrent helps protect it and give it international visibility. 
Kim Jong Il is probably thinking: If Saddam had had nuclear weapons, he might still be in power. 
And what’s the big difference between North Korea and Cameroon?
That’s right: the former has nuclear weapons. 
So it’s difficult to see North Korea giving up its nukes, but the international community just can’t accept it as a nuclear power. 
If we do, that will just encourage other countries to get nukes as well (maybe even Cameroon). 
The last thing we want is to reward rogue countries that get nuclear weapons.
What’s different from North Korea today, compared to it in the past or to other unpleasant countries, is that it seems to be a proliferator. 
It supplied the nuclear reactor to Syria (it was a dead ringer of the 5 mw reactor in Yongbyon), and it may have supplied one to Burma. 
And if North Korea is willing to supply nuclear weapons to the highest bidder, heaven help us. 
Al Qaeda might be next. 
Remember also that North Korea has tons of sarin nerve gas and anthrax bioweapons. 
If it is willing to supply nuclear technology, then why not nerve gas or anthrax?
Indeed, there are also some suspicions that North Korea may have held on to the smallpox virus. 
For whatever reason, North Korea still vaccinates its troops against smallpox, which isn’t a good sign, since no other army does and smallpox has been wiped out except in a few labs.
The problem is that we have next to no leverage. 
North Korea doesn’t particularly care what we think, and it’s prepared to see its citizens starve. 
In the 1990’s, some 2 million North Koreans starved. 
With North Korea backing away from its economic reforms, we may see more starvation over the next year.
At some point, North Korea will collapse (or evolve very quickly, as China did beginning in 1978). 
But no one knows when that will happen. 
I do have a reed of hope that after Kim Jong Il dies (and he is said to be terminally ill with pancreatic cancer), that maybe the generals will steer the country toward a more pragmatic course, on the China model. 
In the meantime, we need to contain North Korea and try to ensure that its WMD doesn’t leak out. 
I think the Obama administration is basically doing the right things — working with Japan and China, signalling a willingness to talk without an inclination to capitulate, reconstituting the financial sanctions that David Asher had put together in the Bush administration (then dismantled under Chris Hill), and getting UN sanctions that focus on WMD transfers. 
But I think some people in the administration still think that there’s a deal to be done with the North, and for the time being I just don’t see that. 
I’m closing comments here, because you can comment beside the column.
