
There are only three official engine suppliers in Formula One this season. 
But a fourth constructor, Honda, has become a tacitly accepted part of the 2014 series, a year before it is to make its return to elite racing after a hiatus of six seasons.
The Japanese car manufacturer is set to equip the McLaren team with an engine next year, renewing its Formula One presence after having left the series at the end of the 2008 season amid the global financial crisis. 
Honda was a full team owner and engine manufacturer at the time, and after its departure, the team's name was changed to Brawn the following season. 
Then, with the structure Honda had built and using Mercedes engines, Brawn won the drivers' and constructors' titles in 2009.
So it is that Honda, the fifth-most successful engine manufacturer in the history of the series -- behind the current suppliers Ferrari, Renault and Mercedes (and Ford, the second-most successful, which is no longer in the series) -- has something to prove in Formula One.
But for Honda, it's a different game this time around. 
The company's return was prompted primarily by new regulations that have changed the face of the series: Cars are now equipped with environmentally friendly and compact six-cylinder, 1.6-liter, turbo-charged engines with kinetic and heat energy-recovery systems and with a strict fuel consumption limit of 100 kilograms, or 220 pounds, per race.
The new rules were in fact established partly to attract some of those engine manufacturers -- which also include BMW and Toyota -- who had left amid the financial crisis and who had been dissatisfied with the series's lack of relevance for their road car programs in an era of downsizing engines, fuel efficiency and hybrid systems.
Engine manufacturers, Honda among them, have a tradition of coming and going from Formula One, using it to develop their latest technology and sell cars.
The new regulations offer Honda an important opportunity to do just that once again.
Yasuhisa Arai, the director of Honda's Formula One engine program, said as much at the Chinese Grand Prix in Shanghai last month, when he was invited to participate in the official Friday afternoon press conference organized by the series' governing body, the International Automobile Federation.
''One of the major reasons for our decision was the new regulations introduced this year, because the various green technologies in the new Formula One power unit, as well as the total energy management, are both very challenging and significant,'' Arai said.
''The new regulation encourages each power-unit supplier to pursue the ultimate combustion efficiency and high-pressure direct-injection,'' he added, reading from a statement. 
''Thus, the challenge is to convert each unit of gasoline into energy and this is expected to be reflected on the huge production mode.''
Honda has been involved in the series during three previous periods. 
First, it was a full team owner from 1964 to 1968, and won only two races. 
It returned to the series from 1983 to 1992 as an engine provider. 
In those years, the Honda-powered cars -- which included Williams and McLaren -- won 69 races.
Honda took part in the series again from 2000 to 2008, first as an engine provider to the BAR team, which it then bought in 2006. 
The renamed team won one race that year, with Jenson Button driving.
Returning in 2015 as an engine manufacturer to the McLaren team, Honda is recalling its glory years. 
McLaren is the team with which it was most successful and, as it turns out, it may have as one of its drivers the man who secured Honda's only victory in the 2000s: Button, who has raced for McLaren since 2010.
''I think it's very good for the sport and hopefully it will bring others back into the sport,'' Button said, referring to Honda's return to the elite racing series.
But the Japanese company will be starting with the new technology for hybrid engines a year later than the other three engine providers now in Formula One. 
So Honda may have a year of catching up to do. 
Or it may play that to its advantage, observing what problems the other manufacturers faced this season and integrating those lessons into its own technology.
Jonathan Neale, the chief operating officer of the McLaren team, said he didn't think it would help Honda to see how the other manufacturers have done the job.
''The time in order to be able to develop one of these power units -- you really have got to do your fundamental work very early,'' he said. 
''You can't afford just to sit back and do a copy.''
''A 'me too' thing isn't the way to go for this,'' he added. 
''Arguably, then, what Honda have to do in a very short period of time is come up with a competitive power-train at a time when the other guys have already got something up and running and then are given a second bite of the cherry.''
Also, Mercedes, Renault and Ferrari all provide several teams with engines. 
But Honda will only provide one team with engines, at least for the first two seasons.
''For year 2015, McLaren is our only customer,'' Honda's Arai said. 
''I don't think about the future, because we want to concentrate on next season. 
If teams want to use our engine or power unit, we can deliver after year 2016, but right now there are no plans.''
Still, the challenge will be significant. 
Honda may have celebrated its best results with McLaren, but the current team has had problems with its chassis since last year, when it recorded its worst racing results since 1980.
Alain Prost, who drove for McLaren during its collaboration with Honda in the 1980s and who is now an ambassador for Renault, said that Honda was strong enough to rise to the challenge. 
He pointed out the advantage that Honda will have in working with McLaren in particular.
''They know how to work with Honda people, they know the company, they know the mentality,'' Prost said of McLaren. 
''Maybe I myself did not know 100 percent how to work with the Japanese.''
Neale suggested that the ties indeed run deep.
''And I'm pleased to say that in some cases, some of the people who were involved in those early relationships are still around on both sides of the water, which is really good to see,'' he said.
