
HONG KONG -- At Hong Kong's graft-busting commission, Rebecca Li was a star, helping to bring corrupt tycoons and bent officials to justice. 
She received commendations for her work, won a coveted spot to train with the F.B.I. and last year became the agency's most senior career official, a first for a woman.
But this month, she resigned after being unexpectedly demoted from her post leading the commission's operations department.
Ms. Li, a 32-year employee of the agency, has not spoken publicly since her resignation, and the head of the commission, Simon Peh, told reporters that he took the action because her performance ''didn't meet the job requirements.''
But given her stellar track record, the news has raised questions about the organization's independence and impartiality, clouding the reputation of one of Hong Kong's most respected institutions and stirring fears about whether this may be the latest example of Chinese control eroding the city's autonomy.
Attention has focused on one of the anticorruption commission's most sensitive cases: a complaint against the city's top official, the chief executive, Leung Chun-ying, who wields considerable authority over the commission through his power to appoint its top officials.
Ms. Li's department oversaw the case, which centered on whether Mr. Leung properly disclosed some $6.4 million in payments he received from an Australian company, UGL, that does business with the city-owned subway company.
''In fact, we don't know the de facto reason, but the arrangement is very dubious, the timing is very sensitive, and Rebecca Li is the highest-ranking investigating officer investigating the UGL case,'' said Lam Cheuk-ting, who served as an investigator under Ms. Li from 2007 to 2011 and is now a candidate for Hong Kong's legislature for the Democratic Party, which opposes Mr. Leung. ''It is reasonable to believe that the case and the personnel arrangement are related.''
Ms. Li's sudden departure threw the organization, the Independent Commission Against Corruption, into turmoil and produced a swift backlash.
Her resignation was followed by that of one her top investigators, and the commission was forced to cancel its annual dinner after most employees decided to boycott.
The commission, set up in 1974 to combat rampant corruption in what was then a British colony, became a model of independent law enforcement and helped earn Hong Kong a reputation for clean, efficient government. 
After Hong Kong's return to Chinese sovereignty in 1997, it continued to operate under an arrangement known as one country, two systems, in which China promised the city a high degree of self-rule until 2047.
But people here are increasingly concerned that Chinese influence, especially under the uncompromising rule of President Xi Jinping, is already chipping away at the city's institutions, including the universities, the press and the police.
Those concerns set off protests this year after several book publishers based in Hong Kong vanished, only to reappear weeks later in Chinese custody. 
In 2014, when China's legislature set election rules all but ensuring that only pro-Beijing candidates could run for Hong Kong's chief executive, tens of thousands of protesters paralyzed the city center for months.
Although the anticorruption commission has proved independent enough to take down tycoons and top civil servants, Ms. Li's departure highlights how potentially vulnerable it may be to outside political influence, including from the mainland.
The link to both, critics say, is Mr. Leung, a Beijing loyalist who has extraordinary power over the commission, enough to bend it to the mainland's will or shield himself from scrutiny should he be so inclined.
Mr. Leung nominates the leader of the commission, as he did with Mr. Peh, who is then appointed by China's central government.
Ms. Li had been serving as acting chief of the commission's operations department. 
Making her appointment permanent would have required Mr. Leung's consent. 
The commission said that Ms. Li would be replaced by Ricky Yau, another career official.
More important, an oversight committee that has the power to review the commission's investigations is also overseen by a Leung appointee, Maria Tam, a Beijing loyalist and a member of China's Communist-controlled legislature since 1997.
Mr. Leung appointed Ms. Tam, who declined to comment for this article, as chairwoman of the Operations Review Committee in December 2014, two months after the reports on his payments from UGL surfaced.
''This is a committee that looks at all the evidence that's been gathered -- it's not just providing advice,'' said Simon Young, a law professor at the University of Hong Kong who has written about the commission.
While Ms. Tam, a lawyer, would be expected to uphold Hong Kong's separate system, she is also a member of China's Parliament, where the Chinese government has made it clear that it tolerates no disloyalty toward Mr. Leung.
A Hong Kong member of the National People's Congress advisory body was expelled in 2014 after he voiced disapproval of Mr. Leung's handling of the street protests.
Anson Chan, who supervised Hong Kong's Civil Service in the last years of British rule and in the first few years under Chinese sovereignty, questioned why Mr. Leung would appoint an openly pro-Beijing politician to oversee Ms. Li's department. 
''Why does the chief executive feel it necessary to appoint someone like her?''
Ms. Chan asked. 
''People are so afraid. 
They are so mistrustful of him.''
It is not known whether Ms. Tam had any role in reviewing the anticorruption commission's investigation into Mr. Leung. The commission does not comment on its work.
In a statement, Mr. Leung's office said that the chief executive and his staff ''would not comment on any investigation undertaken by the law enforcement agencies but would cooperate if necessary.''
A spokeswoman for the commission said that all of its personnel changes ''are made in accordance with established procedures without interference.''
Mr. Peh, through the spokeswoman, declined to be interviewed.
But those procedures work only if the chief executive acts in the best interests of Hong Kong and not Beijing, where the judiciary serves the Communist Party, said Emily Lau, a lawmaker for the Democratic Party. 
Oversight committees led by pro-Beijing officials ''aren't going to do their work'' overseeing an ostensibly independent body, she said by telephone.
Hong Kong's criminal justice system, including the anticorruption commission, is one of the pillars that make the city distinct, attracting multinational corporations and banks that want to do business with China but in a place where they can count on the rule of law.
''If you want to keep Hong Kong as an international city where business and commerce flourishes, you need very strong rule-of-law institutions, things that people have lots of confidence in,'' Mr. Young said.
Or, as Ms. Lau put it, referring to the commission, ''If the I.C.A.C. is finished, Hong Kong is also finished.''
''It will be just like any other Chinese city, so corrupt and no rule of law,'' she said.
