
HONG KONG -- When Candace Campos moved from the United States to Hong Kong six years ago, she encountered few hurdles to opening her own interior design company.
She started small, transforming her 750-square-foot home from a gutted commercial rental into a bright living space styled like New York loft. 
Word of mouth led to a 2008 cover story featuring her apartment in the Hong Kong magazine Home Journal and to interest from expatriates who wanted to bring Western aesthetics into their Hong Kong homes.
''The idea of leaving pipes exposed, beams and columns raw, and floors as concrete was not a design aesthetic found in Hong Kong,'' said Ms. Campos, 34. 
''So it was easy to stand apart from other designers.''
Her company, ID Interiors & Identity Design, has produced designs for restaurants like the Michelin-starred Tate Dining Room & Bar and a boutique hotel in the city's Kowloon district. 
Beyond her aesthetic, Ms. Campos said, the absence of homegrown talent has given her an advantage. 
Her biggest competition, she noted, comes from other expat designers.
But Hong Kong, known more for its cargo ports and financial sector than for a vibrant cultural or creative scene, is working to move past an economy based on manufacturing and reproduction of goods to one based on innovation, branding and design, said Stanley Chu, 64, the founder and chairman of the Adsale Group, which organizes international trade shows in Asia. 
The creative industries could be ''the next economic locomotive of Hong Kong,'' he said.
A 2007 report commissioned by the Hong Kong Design Center said the city's traditional role as a commercial intermediary was a barrier to fostering creativity and innovation. 
In 2009, the government established CreateHK, an office dedicated to developing creative industries, which broadly include advertising, architecture, design, cultural heritage, the performing arts and film. 
The office has also worked with the local educational system, from primary schools to colleges, to develop curriculums for teaching film, animation and architecture.
The initiatives are starting to pay off. 
The contribution of the creative industries to the territory's gross domestic product increased to 4.9 percent in 2012 from 3.9 percent in 2007, according to the Hong Kong Census and Statistics Department -- about 97.8 billion Hong Kong dollars, or $12.6 billion. 
The number of people employed in those fields also increased by 20,000 from 2007 to 2012, to 200,370.
Private investors are working with the government to nurture local talent. 
The former Police Married Quarters, barracks from the colonial era, were transformed under a conservation plan. 
The site, now known as PMQ, opened in April and now houses studios for more than 100 entrepreneurs in the creative industries, many of whom are product and fashion designers. 
It holds workshops on marketing, branding and identifying counterfeit goods and has received more than 1.5 million visitors since it opened.
Mr. Chu, who is also the chairman of PMQ, said its mission was to ''raise the creative appreciation of the public.''
His foundation, the Musketeers Education and Culture Charitable Foundation, donated 100 million Hong Kong dollars to the project.
He said it was time for a broader change in Hong Kong. 
''In the future, why couldn't it be 'Designed in Hong Kong and manufactured in China'?''
Mr. Chu said.
But executives in creative fields say that although the local talent pool may be deepening, customers' views on creative work can remain stuck in the past.
Lindsey Hermes, 30, the founder and managing director of the design and marketing company Unison Creative, said that when she arrived in Hong Kong, ''I realized my dream job didn't exist here. 
I saw an opportunity to fill a gap in the market because the bar for creative work for local businesses in Hong Kong in 2009 was low.''
Early on, she noticed that clients did not want to bother with identifying their brand's core values, instead preferring to jump on flashy marketing trends.
''With the thriving business economy in Hong Kong, finding prospective clients has never been a problem,'' she said. 
The challenge can be convincing those prospects that ''it's better to invest in the brand rather than a short-term campaign.''
''Local businesses will pay for a quick fix but not a long-term strategy with the right tactics, because they presume the strategic-planning work is out of their budget,'' she added.
The Savannah College of Art and Design is joining other efforts to bring credibility to the creative fields in the territory, said Robert Dickensheets, the college's vice president in Hong Kong.
The American university based in Savannah, Ga., opened its Hong Kong campus, housed in the former North Kowloon Magistracy building, in 2010. 
Mr. Dickensheets said it had seen increasing interest from local students since the beginning. 
Enrollment increased to 600 in the this year's incoming class from 141 in 2010.
''For Hong Kong parents, they want their children to have an American education without leaving,'' he said.
When Lucia Ho, 21, applied to the college, ''my parents didn't like it at first,'' she said, but not for the obvious reasons. 
It was not because she wanted to study art but because it was an international school.
Student work as varied as furniture pieces and framed prints lines the corridors of the college. 
In one classroom, design concepts that have been presented to local companies like Cathay Pacific Airways and HSBC are on display.
The 2007 report says a creative, collaborative philosophy is sometimes lacking in Hong Kong's educational system, and the university is trying to embrace those attributes. 
In-class critiques, for instance, enable students ''to better adapt the work in the real world,'' Ms. Ho said. 
If people reject her ideas, she said, ''I won't feel bad, because every idea is helpful.''
Today, she works full time for Peninsula Merchandising Limited, which produces merchandise for the Peninsula hotel chain. 
She helped design the packaging for the hotel's mooncakes. 
She noted that of the 13 graphic design majors in the school's first class, 11 had job offers before graduation in June.
As more people like her find work in the nascent creative industries, they will begin to change the general perception of such work in Hong Kong, Mr. Dickensheets said.
The long-term goal for Hong Kong, he said, is to create a culture in which ''the designer can be valued as much as a banker.''
