
On a recent morning in Arizona, my two young sons padded out into their grandparents' garden to marvel at the flowers of a hedgehog cactus. 
The spectacular pink and yellow blossoms of this particular plant burst open once a year and last for only a day.
The boys seemed a bit like those flowers. 
We were on a lung-clearing holiday from the pollution belt of eastern China, where we live, and after a winter spent blanketed in gray smog, they flourished in the bright sunshine and crystalline desert air. 
At one point that morning, my 5-year-old son looked up at the half-moon still hanging above a distant mountain range. 
''Grandpa,'' he said, ''is the sky here always so blue?''
My wife and I are writers based in China, and our sons have spent most of their lives there. 
One of the first words they learned in Chinese was ''wuran,'' or ''pollution.''
Growing up in Beijing, they developed a disconcerting knack for guessing the air-quality index, a measurement of tiny particulates in the air. 
China now produces more pollutants than any other nation on earth, and 66 of the country's 74 largest cities still fall far short of the government's air-pollution standards. 
Beijing, our home until last autumn, rates among the worst.
After three decades of rapid industrialization, China is starting to grapple with the toxic pollution that, like an evil twin, has shadowed its rise in prosperity. 
It's a process fraught with contradictions, as shown by the chain reaction set off in March by ''Under the Dome,'' a documentary by the former state television reporter Chai Jing that probes how pollution regulations have been steamrollered by industrial growth. 
The film exploded online, drawing hundreds of millions of viewers -- and praise from China's top environmental minister -- before government censors tried to erase it from the Internet less than a week after its release.
On the same day, President Xi Jinping vowed to punish heavy polluters ''with an iron hand.''
There is no guarantee that the government will be able (or willing) to meaningfully rein in the biggest culprits -- motor vehicles and coal, which accounts for nearly 70 percent of the nation's energy production. 
But in late March, Beijing announced that it would shut down the last of the capital's four coal-burning power plants.
Foreigners living in Beijing have obsessed over its pollution for years; the air got so poisonous a year ago that I started compulsively charting air-quality index statistics in Beijing and Shanghai. 
Chinese concern, however, is a relatively new phenomenon. 
When my family moved to Beijing in 2010, many of our local friends still seemed to be in denial about pollution. 
One Chinese acquaintance, worldly and well-educated, insisted that the gray pall hanging over the city was merely fog -- ''just like in San Francisco.''
Many others used the passive term favored by Chinese state media, ''wumai,'' meaning ''haze,'' rather than ''wuran,'' literally ''dirty contamination,'' with its suggestion of human responsibility.
Among friends in Beijing, we joke, darkly, that we all suffer from a sort of battered-spouse syndrome. 
When the oppression lifts -- usually when a north wind blasts away the smog -- the city sparkles in surreal high-definition. 
People rush outdoors to gulp in the air, to soak in the sun, to enjoy a freedom so long withheld. 
On those miraculous days, it's easy to forgive the city for all the suffering it has inflicted, to half-believe that the worst is over. 
Then, inevitably, the heavy smog descends again, along with our spirits.
But this grudging acceptance has lately turned into concern, especially among parents in China's growing middle class. 
They have enjoyed the benefits of rising prosperity; now they are facing its darker consequences -- not just air pollution, but also pervasive soil and water contamination and recurring food-safetyscandals.
At my son's primary school in Beijing, it was the Chinese parents -- not the expatriates -- who surreptitiously took air-quality-index readings in classrooms and used the results to demand more air purifiers. 
When the school responded tepidly, the Chinese parents spirited their kids away to another international school that boasts an ''antipollution dome'' -- a huge sports bubble with airlock entrances to ensure air purity. 
For the rest of us, high pollution levels simply mean no outdoor activities at all. 
When our sons do venture outside on those days, moving to and from school, they wear heavy-duty masks emblazoned with teddy bears, designs which do little to soften the Darth Vader effect.
The shift in local awareness was prompted, in part, by the United States Embassy's decision in 2008 to publicize its air-quality measurements live on Twitter. 
After years of griping about this ''illegal'' interference in domestic affairs, the government began publishing its own more soothing air-quality statistics. 
During the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit meeting last fall, when world leaders gathered in Beijing, the government forced a popular air-quality tracking app to stop running Embassy statistics alongside the official ones, a move that did little to inspire confidence in the government's vow of transparency.
Nothing has signaled the public awakening -- and government ambivalence -- more starkly than ''Under the Dome.''
The government's environmental protection minister initially praised Chai Jing's film as a worthy Chinese successor to Rachel Carson's ''Silent Spring,'' and the largely middle-class audience seemed primed to hear the unvarnished truth about the country's pollution crisis. 
But the film's viral success apparently spooked the powers that be. 
As Beijing forced websites to delete the film and commanded the news media to stop reporting on it, many Chinese were left wondering, in the silence that followed, what to make of Xi's ''iron hand.''
Along with many others in China, we often find ourselves plotting our next escape. 
Nobody knows the long-term impact of heavy pollution on children's lungs, but the circumstantial evidence is dire. 
China's former health minister said in late 2013 that 350,000 to 500,000 people die prematurely every year as a result of air pollution. 
Even the Beijing mayor declared in January that his city is ''unlivable.''
Lung-friendly vacations -- ''breathers'' -- are so popular that China's most pristine places, like Tibet and Yunnan, are clogged with tourists on national holidays. 
It can be even more crowded abroad. 
Over the Spring Festival holiday in February, nearly 11,000 Chinese tourists descended on the tiny Pacific island nation of Palau -- the country's population is only about 21,000 -- to enjoy the hitherto unspoiled coral reefs. 
My wife and I fled with our sons to the remote rain forests of Borneo -- only to find ourselves surrounded by other pollution refugees from China.
At one point last year, we considered joining the exodus of expatriates and locals moving out of China altogether. 
In the end, we decided to move to Shanghai, where we found that five other families in our son's kindergarten class had made the same decision. 
It is only a half-solution; the city of 24 million has its own serious pollution. 
Still, it has far fewer very bad days than Beijing. 
According to the air-quality charts that I keep, in 2014 Beijing had more than 60 days that averaged higher than 200, the threshold at which our sons' schools cancel outdoor play. 
Shanghai had only four.
On our boys' bedroom ceiling in Beijing, we had stuck glowing plastic stars arranged into constellations, which might be considered a kind of compensation for the absence of the real thing in the polluted night sky. 
Even in Shanghai, the constellation-spotting app on our smartphones serves mostly as a map to invisible stars. 
Our imaginations needed no help in Arizona. 
The cactus flowers closed that evening, gone for another year. 
But as the sun set on the distant mountains, we were able to gaze at the moon, the planets and the stars that fill the sky. 
I was tempted to pull out the astronomy app, but I left the phone in my pocket. 
The stars were beautiful enough on their own.
