
Jon M. Huntsman Jr.'s campaign manager has resigned less than a month after Mr. Huntsman began his bid for the Republican presidential nomination, officials for the campaign confirmed on Thursday.
The manager, Susie Wiles, who had helped Rick Scott, a Republican, get elected governor in Florida last November, will be replaced by Matt David, the campaign's communications director, officials said.
The changes were first reported by The Washington Post.
''Susie has served the campaign well and was vital in getting it off the ground in such a short time-frame,'' John Weaver, a top political strategist for Mr. Huntsman, said in a statement.
The departure of Ms. Wiles is the first serious sign of trouble for Mr. Huntsman since he returned from a two-year tour as President Obama's ambassador to China to challenge his former boss.
Since making his campaign official on June 21 in Jersey City, in the shadow of the Statue of Liberty, Mr. Huntsman has vowed to run a civil campaign and has largely stayed away from the heated rhetoric of some of his rivals.
But he has also been less visible on the campaign trail, holding no public events for days at a time or making just one appearance each day. 
Campaign aides have said that he has been busy raising money and have promised a more vigorous schedule in the weeks ahead.
Mr. Huntsman has also trailed some of his rivals in fund-raising, though because of his late start, he had less time to collect before the end of the last reporting period, on June 30. 
He reported raising about $2 million and lending his campaign another $2 million from his personal fortune.
Mitt Romney, the former governor of Massachusetts, raised $18 million.
Mr. Weaver, who was a top adviser to Senator John McCain of Arizona during the early part of the 2008 presidential campaign, has been the driving force behind Mr. Huntsman's presidential ambitions. 
He left Mr. McCain's campaign in the summer of 2007 after clashing with other top McCain aides.
Ms. Wiles joined Mr. Weaver early this year as the executive director of the political action committee formed to support Mr. Huntsman's presidential bid.
But Ms. Wiles reportedly clashed with Mr. Weaver over the last month as the campaign got under way, according to people familiar with the private interaction between the two.
''In just under three months, Governor Huntsman has returned from China, launched a campaign and created a strong infrastructure in the three early primary states,'' Mr. Weaver said in his statement. 
''He's built important relationships with donors, as well as political, policy and grass-roots leaders that other candidates have been courting for half a decade.''
In a statement to The Miami Herald, Ms. Wiles said she was leaving the campaign because she wanted to ''resume my life and get home.''
She said her resignation should not come as a surprise.
''It was just time,'' she said. 
''It was in my plans to resign at some point. 
I have a great life and a great situation. 
We launched this thing and it's up and running. 
Our team is so good that we hired from within. 
I continue to have a role here. 
I intend to be friend and confidante of Huntsman.''Jeff Zeleny contributed to this report.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
