
COLUMBIA, S.C. 
-- The flags on the podium were fluttering as if powered by fans for a photo shoot, and the waters of New York Harbor were glimmering at the foot of the Statue of Liberty, a perfect stage set awaiting former Gov. Jon M. Huntsman's presidential announcement.
As the crowd -- equal parts news media and supporters -- gathered Tuesday, a slightly intrigued maintenance man asked a guest in the Liberty State Park bathroom: ''Who is this guy?
Utah, right?''
Up in Exeter, N.H., later that day, Leona Nelson, a semiretired police and fire dispatcher who went to hear Mr. Huntsman speak acknowledged, ''I didn't know anything about him when he came in today.''
She added that she liked what she had heard.
Mr. Huntsman, who continued his introductory tour in South Carolina on Wednesday, has wowed the insatiable political press, scoring glossy magazine coverage and ample television and Internet buzz as a fresh new face on the campaign trail.
But he remains little known to most Americans. 
And now comes the hard part.
In the critical weeks ahead, Mr. Huntsman, until May President Obama's ambassador to China, will have to prove he is a real contender who is not heading for the same fate that befell fresh new faces of primaries past, including Gen. Wesley K. Clark, who ran as a Democrat in 2004, and Fred Thompson, the former senator and actor who ran as a Republican in 2008.
For the wandering eye of the political press and some party strategists, Mr. Huntsman is the candidate du jour, just as Sarah Palin was yesterday, Donald Trump was the day before that and Gov. Rick Perry of Texas may be tomorrow, if he steps closer toward a run.
This fickleness is evidence that the party has yet to coalesce around former Gov. Mitt Romney of Massachusetts, the presumed front-runner.
But with attention focused elsewhere, Mr. Romney is steadily raising a lot of money and building his organization. 
As Mr. Huntsman rolled out his candidacy, Mr. Romney's campaign was sending out a steady stream of announcements about the construction of its nationwide vote-getting machine: a steering committee in Idaho and new slates of supportive elected officials in Colorado and Michigan.
It was hardly the stuff of national news. 
But winning party nominations requires that kind of state-by-state effort, aimed at drawing in voters who might not read Esquire magazine, The New York Times or Politico.
As an acknowledged ''margin-of-error'' candidate who barely registers in polls, Mr. Huntsman is playing catch-up. 
Aboard the small campaign plane bound for this critical battleground state, Mr. Huntsman's chief strategist, John Weaver, acknowledged as much.
But he said his team, and his candidate, were ready to downshift into the less glamorous work of campaign building. 
''It's not very sexy and it's not very exciting, necessarily,'' Mr. Weaver said. 
''You just have to methodically build your campaign -- particularly in New Hampshire -- building block by building block.''
Mr. Huntsman has already complained about being tired. 
But during a brief interview at the State Republican Party headquarters here on Wednesday, when he signed up for the primary ballot, he said he was prepared to knuckle down. 
''I've got to say for the past six to seven weeks we've been running a very rapid clip so, do we have the endurance?'' he said. 
''Absolutely we do.''
Asked how long he could afford to stay at his ''margin-of-error'' place in the polls, he said, ''Give us a month or two and I think we'll be punching through.''
As the news media seek out the next potential new candidate, Mr. Huntsman's aides said the campaign was moving on to the activities that do not take place in public view anyway, like fund-raising -- he reported raising $1.2 million in New York on Tuesday night -- organization building and policy planning. 
(Aides said he had consulted with Republican foreign policy realists including former Gen. Colin L. Powell, the elder George Bush's national security adviser Brent Scowcroft and former Secretary of State James A. Baker III.)
All the while, Mr. Huntsman is sprinting to meet activists and party leaders. 
In New Hampshire alone, he has attended more than 40 events since he returned from China a few weeks ago. 
While he is emphasizing New Hampshire, he also said South Carolina was ''going to be incredibly important to our campaign.''
Of course, there are plenty of people who will not make it easy on him.
They include the former state Republican chairman here, Katon Dawson, who recently left the campaign of Newt Gingrich and is currently unaffiliated. 
Mr. Dawson warned that Mr. Huntsman's work as Mr. Obama's ambassador was one of many challenges he would have to overcome with Republicans.
''It's like when you got in trouble with your mother,'' Mr. Dawson said. 
''You had some explaining to do.''
