
LOS ANGELES -- Imax has reached a deal valued at about $100 million to open 75 new theaters in China, a move that underscores the degree to which the movie exhibition business is surging there.
Imax, the large-format film company, said late Wednesday that it would team with China's largest theater operator, Wanda Cinema Line Corporation, to build the theaters by 2014. 
Imax currently has 45 theaters open in China, with an additional 57 in the works. 
The company expects to have 300 theaters operating in China by 2016.
''As disposable income has increased in China, the demand for entertainment -- particularly a movie experience -- has dramatically increased,'' said Richard L. Gelfond, Imax's chief executive. 
''To meet that demand, the creation of a more robust exhibition infrastructure is crucial.''
Terms were not disclosed. 
Imax investors with knowledge of how the company conducts business overseas estimated that building the theaters would jointly cost Imax and Wanda about $100 million. 
The new theaters in aggregate could add about $25 million in annual revenue to Imax. 
The company's total revenue last year was $250 million.
The 75-theater deal is unusual for Imax because the company stands to profit primarily by splitting a share of box-office grosses with Wanda. 
Until now, the bulk of Imax's deals in China have involved licensing technology and collecting royalties.
Mr. Gelfond also announced the creation of a subsidiary, Imax China, to oversee the expansion. 
Imax will hire a Chinese chief executive to run it.
The deal offers a window into China's evolving attitude toward the film business, which government leaders have identified in recent years as a growth priority. 
China is racing to build more modern theaters to entertain an expanding, cinema-loving middle class. 
The country is also ramping up local film production, partly as a way to spread its culture across the globe.
China currently has about 6,000 movie screens, up from roughly 1,500 three years ago, according to studio distribution executives. 
The Chinese government has said it expects 20,000 screens to be operating by 2015 and 40,000 by 2040, bringing it on par with movie exhibition in North America.
Imax's latest deal is good news for Hollywood studios, which fervently want to expand in China but face a quota; only 20 non-Chinese films are allowed to be shown in local theaters each year. 
China has a strong record of approving Hollywood films that Imax wants to show.
Imax, which has become one of the entertainment industry's fastest-growing companies, has a strong brand in China because its large-format theaters, which often play films in 3-D, offer an affordable luxury. 
When Imax showed ''Avatar'' last year, Chinese customers waited up to six hours for tickets that cost about $16 each.
Mr. Gelfond has spent years stalking the Chinese market, converting Chinese-made films for Imax screens (on favorable terms) and developing a portable theater to deploy in rural areas. 
And he is still courting. 
''One of the important things about this latest deal is that, over time, it increases our base so dramatically that we will be able to increase the number of Chinese-produced films that we show,'' he said.
