
DIGITAL GOODS
A few months ago, a friend sent me an otter. 
It was a birthday gift, and it arrived via Facebook: a tiny digital representation labeled ''Lonely Otter.''
The person who sent it to me is someone I've never met or spoken to, a friend only in the Facebook sense of the term. 
The otter cost her a dollar. 
The dollar was filtered through the popular social network's ''gift points'' setup, but ultimately it wasn't a representation, the way the Lonely Otter is. 
It was an actual dollar.
Spending real money on things that don't exist still sounds ''fringe-y and aberrant'' to many United States consumers, observes Jeremy Liew, managing director of Lightspeed Venture Partners, a venture-capital firm. 
(Lightspeed has invested in some digital-goods sellers, although none of the ones mentioned in this column.) Yet it has been going on for years in elaborate games like World of Warcraft or Everquest, as players buy tools, weapons and the like for digital characters. 
Moreover, Liew adds, ''this is a set of behaviors that has been commonplace in Asia and, increasingly, in Europe.''
Indeed, in April, a company called Changyou.com Limited, based in China, went public on the Nasdaq stock exchange. 
With annual revenue of around $200 million a year, it is (unlike many well-known Web 2.0 companies in the United States) profitable, and it makes most of its money by selling pixelated goods to game players and virtual-world users in China; as of late April, the market's judgment put the company's valuation at more than $1.3 billion.
As more of us live more of our lives in digital contexts, it seems plausible that immaterialism will become more common. 
Consuming things made of bits might sound weird, but actually it offers a lot of the same attractions that make people consume things made of atoms. 
Facebook's digital gifting is one relatively mainstream example. 
Consider the Fort Worth, Tex., company Alamofire. 
Its best-known creation is a Facebook application called Pack Rat. 
While nominally a game, it's really premised on a virtual version of the urge to collect things: in this case, the things are ''cards'' that are basically little pixel-pictures. 
The company calls its wares ''digital collectibles.''
Josh Williams, a founder of Alamofire, figured out the appeal of collecting pixelated stuff by accident. 
Originally he was in the business of designing digital icons, and he and his partners decided to make some of their creations available for others to use, free. 
There were thousands of takers, and he got curious about what they were doing with the icons. 
The most prominent answer turned out to be: Nothing much, just collecting them, trading them, using them as means of fun social connection with other collectors. 
''A light bulb went off,'' Williams says. 
''We were in the wrong business.''
Alamofire's new project is called Gowalla. 
This time, the product is more tied to mobile devices like the iPhone and involves ''collecting'' digital icons by (nondigitally) visiting certain spots in various cities. 
Really, he figures, it's not so different from what inspired earlier generations to collect postcards or other gewgaws. 
But, Williams adds, without ''all the physical crap.''
There are plenty of other examples, like the teen-focused virtual worlds of IMVU and Gaia, where participants pay to deck out their avatars much as real-world consumers have long paid to deck out their physical bodies. 
Perhaps immaterialism comes more naturally to younger people who take the digital extension of quotidian life for granted, but the digital-stuff consumer base is clearly expanding. 
Facebook, which opened its virtual-gifts shop in 2007, doesn't comment on its finances, but Liew has estimated the social network's digital-stuff revenue at around $35 million a year. 
Expand the definition of immaterial goods to include things like iPhone apps, and it's tempting to think that despite, or maybe even because of, the recession, we're rechanneling basic shopping urges in a fundamental way. 
Consumption does seem different if it's only conspicuous in the digital world.
Liew talked me down from this point of view. 
''People are behaving in exactly the same way they've always behaved,'' he said. 
They're simply doing so online ''because that's where most people are spending their time.''
And when I told him about my birthday otter, he immediately asked, ''Do you remember who gave it to you?''
Of course I did -- proving that it was a pretty effective gift, just like a traditional, physical birthday card, which expresses a sentiment but really has no other utility. 
In other words, the gap between materialism and immaterialism may not be as wide as it seems.
