
The first SportAccord World Mind Games, which ended on Friday in Beijing, brought together competitors in five disciplines: bridge, checkers, chess, Chinese chess and go.
In bridge, 24 players from four countries competed in team, pair and individual events in both open and women's categories.
The concluding three-session individuals were won by Americans. 
The women's was captured by Janice Seamon-Molson and the open by Chris Willenken.
Seamon-Molson won $6,000 by finishing 0.6 of a board ahead of Nicola Smith from Britain ($4,000), with Tobi Sokolow from the United States third ($3,000).
Willenken, who received $8,000, finished 0.8 of a board in front of Jie Li from China ($6,000), with Brad Moss from the United States ($5,000) only 1 match point behind in third.
Given that the results were that close, several boards could have changed the rankings. 
The diagramed deal occurred during the final session.
At Jie Li's table, North opened two diamonds; Jie (East) passed; South bid three hearts; West jumped to four spades; South competed with five diamonds; and West's five spades ended the auction.
North led a heart, South winning with his jack and shifting to a diamond. 
Xu Hou from China (West) won with his ace and ruffed both of his heart losers in the dummy to take 12 tricks.
Note that neither a spade lead nor a Trick 2 trump shift would have defeated six spades. 
Even if declarer were not willing to risk the club finesse, he could have played a club to the ace and ruffed a club, bringing down the king. 
Then he would have crossed to dummy's spade nine to run the clubs.
In the given auction, Willenken (South) ended in six hearts doubled. 
It looked as if this might be expensive, the defense going (in some sequence) diamond ace, club to East's queen, club ace, diamond ruff, spade ace for down four, minus 1,100. 
(Yes, it could have been 1,400 with two diamond ruffs, but no West was going to underlead his spade honors, playing partner for the nine.)
At the table, though, West led the spade king. 
He then cashed the diamond ace. 
Now a club switch was needed, but West led a second high spade. 
Declarer ruffed, drew trumps and ran the diamonds to escape for down one, 8 match points out of 10 and first place.
The Edgar Kaplan Winter Regional will take place in the Hilton Hotel, 1335 Avenue of the Americas, near 53rd Street, in Manhattan, from Dec. 
26 to 30. 
Details are at gnyba.org.
