
BEIJING -- The first waves of shock had passed, and it was not time yet for mourning.
The relatives and friends of the 227 passengers of the missing Malaysia Airlines Flight 370 were settling in on Wednesday for what they realized could be a long wait. 
They had been hungry for news of their loved ones since Saturday, although little had come.
At a morning meeting at the Lido Hotel in Beijing on Wednesday, they again pressed Malaysian officials and airline executives about the search operations. 
They also insisted that the airline pay for all expenses incurred during their ordeal, which began when the Beijing-bound flight disappeared shortly after takeoff.
In response, the airline agreed to give them 31,000 renminbi per passenger, or $5,000, to cover their expenses on top of payments for food and hotel rooms. 
Ignatius Ong Ming Choy, an airline executive, told the 200 or so people gathered in a ballroom at the hotel that the cash would be handed out later that day at the Lido or at one of three other hotels in Beijing where families were staying. 
The meeting had begun with Mr. Ong and other airline executives, along with the the Malaysian ambassador to China, listening to the audience members from a table at the front of the ballroom.
''We know that some of you have traveled far,'' Mr. Ong said at a later meeting.
The discussion had not turned yet to compensation for lost lives. 
People expect those talks to come later.
The family members appeared more subdued on Wednesday, possibly resigned to the reality that the hope of finding survivors was slipping away. 
Just two days ago, angry relatives lobbed water bottles at Mr. Ong and other airline executives as they tried to make arrangements for the families to travel to Malaysia, from where the Boeing 777 had taken off on Saturday.
The airline executives had little information to share during that meeting, and there was just as little information on Wednesday, and perhaps even more obfuscation. 
In Malaysia, the transport minister told reporters, ''It is only confusion if you want it to be seen as confusion.''
The sealed ballroom was starting to resemble a train station: people sitting around with shoes off, eating meals, trying to ignore the growing stench.
The Chinese news media began expressing some of the frustration felt by the relatives. 
Global Times, a popular state-run newspaper with a nationalistic voice, published a scathing editorial on Wednesday that said, ''Among all the information that has been released by Malaysia, we're not sure what is true and what is not, or whether Malaysia has released all the information it possesses.''
''We doubt that Kuala Lumpur has the ability to effectively make sense of the information; maybe they should consider letting China in on interpreting the raw data,'' it said. 
''The world is watching.''
The relatives and friends in the Lido Hotel asked some of those same questions on Wednesday, but they appeared equally obsessed with negotiating with Mr. Ong over logistics: how many seats, and in which class, could each family book on a planned charter flight to Kuala Lumpur, the Malaysian capital?
Could Malaysia Airlines pay for better hotel rooms and food here in Beijing?
''We'll look into it,'' Mr. Ong said several times at the morning meeting, which was officially closed to journalists, though some were in the room.
Several people in the audience stood up and demanded that Malaysia Airlines apologize. 
There were also the inevitable questions about the search-and-rescue efforts, which have now spread across two seas, and accusations of incompetence on the part of the Malaysian government and military. 
Some people had heard about news reports in Malaysia that the military might have tracked a plane, perhaps the missing Boeing, that had gone west across the Malaysian Peninsula and over the Strait of Malacca.
''Who did they inform after the plane disappeared?'' one man asked, referring to Malaysian officials. 
''Did they inform everyone?''
The Malaysian ambassador to China, Datuk Iskandar Sarudin, was present at the meeting, as were a man and a woman representing the Malaysian Department of Civil Aviation. 
The woman said, ''If your daughter goes missing, you ask all your neighbors.''
One of the relatives, Qiao Yan, who has been designated to act as the moderator at these meetings, stood at the front of the ballroom with a microphone, pointing to those with questions.
A middle-aged man stood up.
''The countries are conducting maritime searches,'' he said. 
''Just searching the sea, we're not getting any results. 
We could also search the forests and mountains of the surrounding countries.''
He said the pilots might have glided the jet to a landing on a remote patch of land. 
If so, it would be stranded and cut off from communications, he said.
One woman muttered, ''If it was in the mountains, they would have found it by now.''
There were some testy exchanges with the ambassador, who tried to build a rapport with the families by getting up from the table where the airline executives sat. 
One Chinese man asked why he had yet to receive his visa, after having handed in his passport on Monday. 
The ambassador said the embassy had processed 315 visas already and was working as fast as possible.
Since Sunday, the Chinese government has been issuing passports to the relatives while the Malaysian government has been approving visa applications. 
Some had already left on commercial flights earlier this week.
The ambassador also said the Malaysian Embassy in Beijing would try to arrange for the relatives to get visas to other Southeast Asian nations if the plane were found in another country. 
He discussed that with other ambassadors on Tuesday, he said.
''If the visa is required to go to another country, the embassy of Malaysia in Beijing will cooperate -- fullest cooperation -- with that particular country, be it Thailand or Indonesia or whatever country,'' he said.
The morning meeting ended around 10:30 a.m. People went to get lunch downstairs. 
Then they lined up at a table in the ballroom to register to pick up the compensation cash later. 
The airline had posted a list of the passengers whose families were entitled to the cash. 
Strangely, that included the Italian and Austrian whose stolen passports were used by two young Iranian men to board the plane.
Around 6 p.m., two police officers showed up in the ballroom. 
One watched television, the other sat by the passport application booth. 
A Malaysia Airlines employee called out names using a microphone, and people stepped into a small room one by one to take their packets of bills.
