
LONDON -- The traveling basketball coach, now on gig No. 12 and in country No. 3, looked across the scorer's table as ''The Star-Spangled Banner'' played Sunday. 
He recognized the faces of the opposition, all American, all familiar.
The coach, Bo Overton, sat opposite them, an American surrounded by Chinese. 
How he ended up there, an assistant with the Chinese women's national team, even Overton is not exactly sure. 
There was the forced resignation in Chicago. 
The stint in the Bahamas. 
The rock from Italy.
The years and milestones, they blend now, a mishmash of small towns and big cities and foreign lands.
Overton played basketball in college for Oklahoma. 
He coached men and women, in college and the pros. 
He never wanted to be a lifer, the stereotypical old ball coach, someone who settled in one place for decades and became an institution.
Overton always liked life better in transit, his passport filled with stamps. 
Even if that meant his old friends pounded China on Sunday, 114-66, as both teams advanced to the quarterfinals in women's basketball. 
The United States tied its highest ever Olympic score and earned Group A's top seed.
''I don't know if I ever came to, like, that moment,'' Overton said last week, outside a coffee shop, as the local traffic zipped past. 
His kind of people, on the move. 
He continued: ''That moment where you say, 'Now this is what I'm going to do.'
''
His father, Claudell Overton, played minor league baseball, minor league basketball and 15 games in the N.B.A. 
For one season, he toured with and played against the Harlem Globetrotters.
The lessons his father imparted gave Overton his first glimpse of the world outside Oklahoma. 
Pictures showed his father playing basketball on a battleship, or with Globetrotters like Marques Haynes in France. 
After one trip, Claudell brought home a rock from Italy, dated it and displayed it in the living room.
Funny how it all worked out, Overton said. 
Here the father played against the Globetrotters and later settled into coaching. 
The son never wanted to coach but did so anyway. 
And now, ''I'm an actual globetrotter,'' Overton said.
The latest adventure in the Overton Chronicles took him to China, where he took over the Liaoning Hengye of the Women's Chinese Basketball Association. 
Overton sent e-mails of some of the funnier lost-in-translation moments to friends, who forwarded the messages, until Overton's e-mail list grew to more than 200.
He wrote about trying to decipher the ''language of honking one's horn in Shenyang'' and watching table tennis in prime time. 
He wrote about his adventures in finding a cable box, eating with the consulate general of the United States, hot milk, no ovens and facial scans.
A sample: ''This one I love, it's the guy riding the bike with cart in front. 
I'm saying, he's in trouble no horn. 
No problem, he carries a can with rocks in it. 
As he strolls thru the intersection he shakes his rocks. 
I want to tell him, 'For God's sake, go buy a bullhorn!'
''
Overton learned small, pertinent portions of Chinese, how to say ''rebound'' and ''get back quick.''
He named plays after common words, like pizza or Adidas. 
An interpreter assisted with practices and games. 
Tone and inflection took care of the rest.
Early on, Overton learned what would not change. 
His players, regardless of instruction, still practiced three hours in the morning and three hours in the afternoon, six days a week, 12 months a year. 
They did not take vacations.
Liaoning doubled the salary he had in the W.N.B.A. 
But such riches ratcheted up the pressure, too. 
''The owners are crazy,'' he said. 
''They want to win.''
Three weeks into the season, the team's 4-3 record apparently unacceptable, Overton said he was instructed to win the next game or pack his bags and head home.
Overton eventually adjusted to the showers that doubled as bathrooms in hotel rooms, the patrons at the next table who ate the heads of fish. 
He purchased the N.F.L. 
Sunday Ticket to watch his beloved Dallas Cowboys. 
He ate Subway every day for lunch.
As many as 5,000 fans turned out for games. 
As few as 200 did, too. 
The style of cheering took a while to get used to. 
A short ''Whoa!'' usually followed a great play, then silence. 
Overton could not read newspapers or watch TV, so he saw zero reviews of his performance.
Ruth Riley played for Overton in China, and she said in an e-mail that the moment she met him at the airport, Overton struck her as a traveler's spirit, a storyteller, like a ''good ol' country boy back home.''
She said they made friends at the pizza parlor near where they lived and relied on hand signals to communicate with the rest of the team.
''I'm pretty sure Bo and I would win a charades tournament,'' she wrote.
Overton never expected he would end up here. 
He played point guard at Oklahoma for Dave Bliss and Billy Tubbs. 
Phoenix drafted him in 1983 but cut him quickly. 
He became a coach.
First, he worked with men, an assistant at times and head coach at others, at Oklahoma as a graduate assistant, then with a C.B.A. team in Pensacola, Fla., then at Oral Roberts, Murray State Junior College, Southwest Texas State and Louisiana Tech.
In his final year at Louisiana Tech, his boss left and his father died. 
Overton returned home to be near his mother. 
Sherri Coale, the Oklahoma women's coach, asked Overton if he ever thought about coaching women.
He started in 1998, and in his six seasons as an assistant at his alma mater, the Sooners won 143 games and 3 Big 12 regular-season titles and made the N.C.A.A. title game in 2002. 
Attendance, Overton said, soared to 5,000 from 200. 
Salaries increased. 
He saw a future in the women's game.
Overton left for the University of Missouri-Kansas City, then jumped to the W.N.B.A. with the Chicago Sky. 
In 2008, an anonymous poster on a message board accused Overton of sexual harassment toward his players. 
The Sky's management forced him to resign; it also said its internal investigation did not uncover any examples of harassment. 
Overton said he signed a nondisclosure agreement and cannot discuss the resignation.
Next, Overton went to the Bahamas, where he assisted with the national team. 
That period gave him international experience, which led to the job in China, which led him to the national team, which led him to the basketball arena and the game against the Americans on Sunday.
Through his travels, Overton never married. 
He said he always thought: ''I'm going to settle down in a year or two. 
I'll stay in one place. 
I've got plenty of time.''
So said the traveling basketball coach.
2012 LONDON
