
Astella Kung, 64, is known as the unofficial mayor of Grant Avenue, the heart of San Francisco's Chinatown. 
A short woman who speaks in a nasally Cantonese dialect, she is the owner of Ming Kee Game Birds, a dingy shop crammed with chickens, ducks and pigeons in wire-mesh cages.
Ms. Kung moved to Grant in 1971, a 24-year-old newlywed with $50 in her pocket.
''We came with nothing and just wanted to make money; we never thought of politics,'' said Ms. Kung, smiling. 
''But 10 years ago, when China began growing strong, I thought maybe we would have a Chinese mayor soon.''
On Tuesday, that day will most likely arrive, the realization of a major power shift in San Francisco politics.
The mayor's race includes five Chinese candidates in the field of 16, including interim Mayor Ed Lee. 
If Mr. Lee wins, as polls predict, he will be the first elected Chinese mayor of Old Gold Mountain -- the name given to San Francisco by Chinese immigrants who first came here more than 150 years ago.
Nearly one-quarter of San Francisco's population is Chinese, according to the latest census. 
As more affluent immigrants have settled in the city, joining an older generation whose economic fortunes continue to rise, the community's political power has soared.
Three of 11 seats on San Francisco's Board of Supervisors are occupied by Chinese-Americans, including its president, David Chiu, a mayoral candidate. 
For the first time, Chinese voters are returning absentee ballots at a higher rate than the city average, heralding what may be a record turnout, election officials said.
Chinese-Americans ''never had a horse in the race before; now they have five,'' said David Lee, director of the Chinese American Voter Education Committee, a nonpartisan organization dedicated to voter registration. 
(He is not related to the mayor.)
But with that progress, there have been growing pains. 
In many ways, the mayor's race has pulled back the curtain on how Chinese politics is played in San Francisco, revealing the infighting, bitter rivalries -- some dating back to China -- and a tradition of patronage and guanxi, or strategic relationships.
The daily tit-for-tat dramas between leading Chinese politicians and their supporters -- allegations of fraud and fecklessness that were once fodder for hushed gossip over morning porridge -- have suddenly become topics in English-language newspapers and on the evening news.
Some Chinese residents said they were embarrassed by the messy campaign. 
At the Geen Mun Activity Center on Stockton Street on a recent Saturday, May Woo, 67, finished folding a red paper lantern with a half-dozen women in her crafts group.
''The candidates are not talking about schools or the economy; all you hear is attack, attack, attack,'' Ms. Woo, a retired domestic worker, said in Cantonese. 
''A candidate breaks wind in public and suddenly it's a scandal. 
What an embarrassment for the Chinese!''
Ms. Woo's friends burst into laughter and cheers.
Chinatown remains the center of political life for San Francisco's Chinese community. 
The neighborhood, still one of the city's most popular tourist attractions, has been called a gilded ghetto. 
Two-thirds of its 14,500 residents do not speak English. 
One-third live in poverty, often in single-room-occupancy hotels with communal baths and kitchens.
Since the 1860s, the Six Companies -- the umbrella organization of family associations whose members share the same surname -- enforced order over Chinatown politics. 
In a city where Chinese were once required to pay a $2.50 monthly tax and William Randolph Hearst's Examiner stoked fears of ''yellow peril,'' the associations provided jobs, legal assistance and protection from white ''anti-coolie'' gangs.
Over the past three decades, the family associations have ceded influence to hundreds of community organizations run by politically savvy, American-educated activists and social workers.
Ed Lee came out of that world. 
Born in Seattle, the son of an immigrant restaurant owner, he began his career as a tenant lawyer at the Asian Law Caucus, a Chinatown-based legal and civil rights organization. 
He agreed to become interim mayor in January after Gavin Newsom was elected lieutenant governor.
In an interview, Mr. Lee said he was proud to take the job in part because of the Chinese community's difficult past.
''This city had laws on the books that prevented Chinese immigrants from voting, from owning property,'' he said. 
''There were physical and social restrictions -- and hurt -- placed on coolies. 
All of that has resonated in my mind.''
But, in Mr. Lee's rise from obscure city bureaucrat to mayor, some Chinese residents say they detect a disturbing trend. 
Chinatown power brokers have aligned themselves with traditional politicians and business interests, these critics say, creating a relentless political machine for Mr. Lee.
Over the past several weeks, Chinatown has served as the stage for a political war between supporters of Mr. Lee and supporters of Leland Yee, a state senator. 
For years, Mr. Yee has feuded with Rose Pak, the powerful head of the Chinatown Chamber of Commerce and Mr. Lee's chief political patron.
There have been allegations in news reports for months that Mr. Lee's nascent administration was tainted by pay-to-play politics involving Ms. Pak and former Mayor Willie Brown, another prominent backer of Mr. Lee.
Resentment over Mr. Lee's ascendance -- and the tactics employed by Ms. Pak on his behalf -- is particularly fierce at the Yee family association, in an ancient building on Waverly Place in Chinatown, behind bright red double doors.
''Is this a dictatorship or an open government?'' said Larry Yee, the association president, raising his voice over the clacking of mah-jongg tiles. 
In a windowless back room, a faded campaign banner for Mr. Yee was taped to the wall.
''You come all the way to America and you get this?''
Mr. Yee said.
But outside Chinatown, the campaign is playing out differently.
In neighborhoods like Visitacion Valley and the Richmond, younger Chinese immigrants are transforming entire city blocks as they watch the political theater play out.
Nelson Liang, a Visitacion Valley barber, said campaign workers frequently asked if they could put up their signs in his shop. 
But Mr. Liang said that more important things needed his attention, like making money.
''To the Chinese, you succeed if you have skills, if you work hard,'' Mr. Liang said, shaking his head. 
''But politics is different. 
You need to have tricks. 
You need to be dirty.''
Mr. Liang, whose barbershop is situated between Salvadoran and Hong Kong-style bakeries on San Bruno Avenue, is part of a wave of younger Chinese-Americans who have left Chinatown's insular culture to seek opportunities in other parts of San Francisco and the Bay Area.
This transformation is even changing the ways people communicate.
The patois of the Taishan region of the Guangdong Province -- the ancestral home of the majority of Chinese immigrants in San Francisco and the family associations -- is fading from use. 
And while Cantonese remains the most frequently heard Chinese dialect, Mandarin is now common in the Richmond and Sunset districts. 
Increasingly the rolling tones of Shanghainese and even the flat dialect of Sichuan natives can be heard as well.
Two Harvard-educated candidates -- Mr. Chiu, the board president, and Phil Ting, the assessor-recorder -- are widely viewed as the political faces of this generation.
Mr. Chiu, 42, can appear more comfortable touring South of Market tech companies than sitting through the lush banquets that underpin Chinatown political life. 
''It's often easy for some elected officials to gravitate to one community or another,'' Mr. Chiu said in an interview. 
''I'm running to represent all of San Francisco.''
L. Ling-chi Wang, a professor emeritus of Ethnic Studies at the University of California, Berkeley, and a longtime Chinatown activist, said candidates like Mr. Chiu and Mr. Ting were untainted by Chinatown's internecine politics and will benefit as the Chinese community continues to evolve. 
Mr. Wang is supporting Mr. Chiu.
''They're young; they're idealistic; they're not corrupted,'' said Mr. Wang, who has criticized both Mr. Yee and Ms. Pak.
