
Taiwanese herbal remedy shops peddle elixirs for indigestion and impotence on storefront signs awash in Chinese characters. 
Nearby, Shiseido cosmetics boutiques advertise their wares in Japanese. 
And the imposing Ganesh Temple, one of the largest Hindu temples in the United States, greets visitors in Hindi script.
Flushing, Queens, is one of New York's most polyglot immigrant neighborhoods. 
But a member of the City Council, who is known by some as the unofficial mayor of Flushing, is railing against the dominance of Chinese, Korean and other foreign languages on storefronts.
The council member, Peter Koo, is no would-be Archie Bunker. 
He is a Chinese-American who grew up in Hong Kong and is proud of his Asian roots.
Mr. Koo said that diminishing the proper role of English on signs threatened to alienate non-Asian customers and residents. 
He is proposing a measure that would require all storefront signs to be at least 60 percent English. 
Businesses would face fines if they did not comply.
''This is America, no?
If I go to a Polish neighborhood and only see Polish signs, I would not be comfortable,'' said Mr. Koo, a Republican. 
''New York is a city of immigrants, and English is a way for different ethnic groups to communicate.''
He added that the legislation was needed so that police officers and firefighters could quickly identify stores in case of an emergency.
Mr. Koo, 58, who owns a chain of drugstores in Flushing, arrived in the United States nearly 40 years ago. 
He taught himself English working as a cook at Kentucky Fried Chicken while he was at the University of New Mexico College of Pharmacy.
He wants inspectors with the city's Department of Consumer Affairs to enforce an obscure state law, passed in 1933, that requires businesses to display their names in English. 
The law was intended to protect consumers from fraud by underground shops during the Depression, but it has seldom been applied.
His proposals have divided multiethnic Queens, where nearly 120 languages are spoken; Flushing itself has one of the largest Asian communities in the country, outside of California.
Opponents say the measures are not needed because there is English on most signs.
Timothy Chuang, owner of Tung Ren Tang, an herbal remedy shop, is chairman of the Downtown Flushing Business Improvement District, which represents local businesses. 
He said imposing a ''predominantly English'' requirement on signs would undermine ethnic diversity in Flushing, which was once predominantly Jewish and Italian, but shifted when Asian immigrants arrived, first from Japan, then from Taiwan and, in the 1980s, from mainland China.
Mr. Chuang, whose storefront awning features giant Chinese characters that dwarf the Roman characters above it, agreed that all signs should have some English. 
But he said a requirement of 60 percent would force him to spend up to $5,000 for a new sign that 95 percent of his customers might not understand.
The move, he added, threatened to frighten off Chinese customers, many of them immigrants too embarrassed to speak English. 
''Why should the English be bigger when this is an Asian town?'' he asked. 
''If that happens, Queens will stop being Queens.''
Other opponents said requiring that signs be mostly in English would clash with the values of their adopted homeland. 
''This is America,'' said Hyung Chong, a Korean restaurant manager from Seoul. 
''We should have the right to put up whatever sign we want.''
But some native English speakers said they sometimes felt like outsiders in their own country.
''It is nice to be exposed to a foreign culture,'' said David Kulick, a longtime Flushing resident who is president of a local civic group, ''but I wish there were signs in English so I could understand what's on offer there.''
Dian Song Yu, executive director of the Business Improvement District, said the proposal did not take into consideration the nuances of language. 
He noted that Chinese words did not always have English equivalents, and that a Chinese character could mean several things.
He pointed to a restaurant on 40th Road, between Main and Prince Streets. 
The English letters on its sign read Box 5 Buffet, while the Chinese characters meant ''Quantity.''
The neighboring business is labeled the Wilkin Driving School and, in Chinese, the Red Apple.
If a restaurant transliterated its name to Mei Shi Lin, Mr. Yu said, ''it may comply with the law, but it won't help non-Chinese speakers to understand what that means.''
(It means ''delicious food,'' he said.)
John C. Liu, the city comptroller, a Flushing resident who is of Chinese descent, said Mr. Koo's proposal recalled the early part of the 20th century, when some native New Yorkers railed against the Yiddish on signs used by Eastern European Jewish immigrants on the Lower East Side.
''Trying to justify this as a public safety issue is hogwash,'' Mr. Liu, a Democrat, said. 
''The real premise behind the sign law is that some people are longing for the good old days.''
Still, Assemblywoman Grace Meng, a Democrat who represents Flushing and supports the legislation, said she hoped that it would help break down cultural barriers. 
But, she added, it will take more than English lettering to foster integration in one of the city's more insular communities.
On a recent day at a busy Verizon shop in Flushing, the sign outside was in English, but inside, the dozens of Chinese customers who approached salespeople spoke Chinese.
Tony Sun, 25, a salesman who moved to Queens from China, said in fluent English that he was sorry that Chinese-only signs were alienating to some people.
But Mr. Sun, who is called Yan in Chinese but adopted the name Tony after coming to the United States, said having predominantly Chinese signs in Flushing was deeply meaningful. 
''We all need a place to call home,'' he said.
