
TAMPA, Fla.
COLUMBUS DRIVE, across town from the site of the Republican National Convention this week, is a somewhat gritty corridor where Spanish techno music blares through strip malls selling spandex club wear and knockoff sneakers.
Meat markets, tire shops and restaurants dot the drive, nicknamed ''Boliche Boulevard'' after the popular Cuban dish made from eye round roast, chorizo and tomato sauce. 
Anyone believing Tampa is devoid of original food culture need only take a short trip down the boulevard to know better.
The restaurant Arco Iris is a case in point. 
During the lunch rush here on Friday, girls with mascara smeared from a long night out ordered plates of masas de puerco frita, fist-size hunks of fried pork served on a massive platter with thick wedges of lime and slivers of onion. 
Nearby, a table of businessmen laughed over vaca frita, a mangled pile of savory fried beef with green peppers and onions. 
A small, older Cuban woman sat alone, reading Tampa's trilingual paper, La Gaceta (English, Spanish and Italian). 
The smells of espresso, toasted bread and fried fat filled the air.
Arco Iris means ''rainbow'' in Spanish, though the rainbow on the sign outside is faded after 26 years in the Florida sun. 
Another sign reads ''Spanish and Chinese food.''
Arco Iris was one of the first places in Tampa to serve Chinese food, its own fusion cuisine.
Gary Mormino, a Florida historian and retired professor from the University of South Florida St. Petersburg, said the immigration of the two populations came together in Tampa in the mid-19th century.
Havana's Chinatown had the largest concentration of Chinese people in the Caribbean, he said, and many came to the United States as indentured laborers to work on plantations. 
And only a few miles away from Arco Iris, Ybor City brought an influx of Spanish, Italian and Cuban immigrants to the cigar factories.
The menu at Arco Iris is mostly simple and classic Cuban fare. 
Mounds of yellow rice are topped with peas and roasted red peppers. 
Bistec de palomilla, thinly sliced sirloin with onions, green peppers, garlic and parsley, is served with a squeeze of lime. 
Minuta empanizada is fried breaded fish.
But fried pork and plantains are still served alongside shrimp fried rice. 
Professor Mormino called the restaurant ''simply the perfect Cuban eatery.''
''It's all about the smallest, and biggest, details,'' he said. 
''The perfectly cooked grains of rice, glistening fragrant black beans and the slow-cooked, gelatinous pork shank.''
And the Chinese-Cuban fried rice?
''Takes the dish to new levels,'' he said.
