
JAKARTA, Indonesia -- Indonesia's economy grew last year at an annual rate of less than 6 percent, the country's Central Statistics Agency reported on Wednesday, the first time that has happened since 2009.
A poor fourth quarter exposed an economy hampered by an ailing currency, higher interest rates, a current-account deficit and other problems that analysts said could linger well into this year.
Indonesia posted gross domestic product growth of 5.78 percent in 2013, the statistics agency said, compared with annual growth of more than 6 percent in 2010, 2011 and 2012. 
The country's G.D.P. grew 4.6 percent in 2009.
For the fourth quarter of 2013, the economy shrank 1.42 percent from the previous quarter, although the agency noted it grew 5.72 percent compared with the same period in 2012.
Didik Rachbini, director of the Institute for Development of Economics and Finance and a member of the National Economics Committee, which advises the Indonesian president, said multiple factors were influencing G.D.P. growth.
''First, the tensions on the rupiah because the central bank forced the interest rate up too much, which has influenced the private sector to postpone investment,'' he said. 
''And also, there is the decline in the importation of raw materials and machinery. 
This decline will not happen only this quarter, but maybe the next two or three quarters will be slower.''
The Indonesian central bank raised its benchmark rate five times -- a total of 1.75 percentage points -- in 2013 to try to contain a current account deficit that hit $10 billion in the second quarter of 2013.
Most recently, in November, Bank Indonesia unexpectedly increased that rate by a quarter of a percentage point, to 7.5 percent.
The rupiah has fallen 21 percent in the last 12 months, according to data from Bloomberg.
Stephen Schwartz, chief economist for Asia at BBVA Research in Hong Kong, said the drop in Indonesia's year-on-year and quarterly growth rates had not been as severe as expected and could be viewed positively, given signs in 2013 that the economy was overheating because of rapid credit growth and record foreign investment.
''The good news is the Indonesian rupiah has stabilized in the last couple of months, and it's encouraging with the latest volatility we've seen in emerging markets -- Indonesia seems to be on the sideline,'' he said.
''It suggests that at least for now, the markets are giving Indonesia credit for policies, for addressing issues such as the current-account deficit, which is narrowing, and FX reserves are increasing,'' he said, referring to foreign exchange reserves.
Indonesia, which has long aspired to become a member of the BRICS group of major emerging economies, is now part of the so-called Fragile Five -- the others being Brazil, India, South Africa and Turkey -- which are experiencing turmoil and have become too dependent on foreign investment to finance their growth ambitions, according to analysts.
On Tuesday, Finance Minister Chatib Basri of Indonesia called for improved corporate governance to attract more foreign investors.
''During the era of easy money, foreign investors usually place their portfolio without a full assessment of the country,'' Mr. Chatib was quoted as saying in an event hosted by the Financial Services Authority in Jakarta. 
''As that era ends, investors will take more time with their decisions and start looking to corporate governance as one of the indicators.''
India, another member of the Fragile Five, has gone from having annual G.D.P. growth rates like China's, more than 9 percent from 2005 to 2007, to projected growth of less than 5 percent in 2013. 
This has raised questions about whether its economic slowdown is a result of structural problems.
''We find that over half of the slowdown is due to cyclical factors and the remainder is structural, and it's a good thing, because many people think the slowdown is due to structural factors,'' said Mr. Schwartz of BBVA Research. 
Among these, he said, are corruption, inflation, inadequate infrastructure and the government's sluggish pace in opening sectors to greater foreign investment.
''The government is initiating reforms, it's fair to say,'' he said. 
''It looks promising, but it's uncertain, because there's an election coming up this year.''
Japan, which is Asia's second-largest economy after China and the third-biggest globally after the United States and China, also faces a critical year with its Abenomics policy under Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, Mr. Schwartz said.
''Monetary policy has helped exports, the fiscal packages have helped stimulate growth, but the hard part is their structural reform agenda,'' he said. 
''It's critical for them to do these supply-side reforms. 
A lot of people think this is a very critical year, and that Abenomics could fail if reforms aren't made.''
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
