
Reaction to President Obama’s speech on climate change this morning in New York is pouring in from across the political spectrum.
On the right, Senator James Inhofe, the Oklahoma Republican, plans to deliver his own speech in Congress this afternoon arguing that the President’s speech “fell short of expectations, offering only talk of rising sea levels and climate refugees, with no constructive solutions for the challenges ahead.”
Mr. Inhofe — who has called the threat of global warming the “greatest hoax ever perpetrated on the American people” — will argue that the talks to develop a climate treaty in Copenhagen have been “marred by failure.” A draft of his speech says:
I was surprised that President Obama failed to define what success will mean in Copenhagen. 
So I suppose I will have to do it for him. 
From the standpoint of the United States Senate, success will not mean a vague, open-ended commitment on emissions from India or China, the world’s leading emitter. 
Success can only mean that China and other developing countries agree to mandatory emissions cuts comparable to those required of America — and that any treaty or agreement avoid causing harm to our economy. 
Unless those conditions are met, no such treaty or agreement can be approved by the Senate.
On the left, Congressman Edward Markey, a Massachusetts Democrat and a co-sponsor of the climate bill passed by the House in June, praised Mr. Obama’s speech:
“Today, President Obama delivered a forceful argument for swift and bold international action to fight the catastrophic effects of global climate change,” Mr. Markey said. 
“To combat this grave threat, we must negotiate globally and act locally. 
Congress must pass comprehensive clean energy legislation as soon as possible to show the world we are committed to a clean energy future and help make the Copenhagen climate negotiations a success this December.”
Keya Chatterjee, the acting director of the World Wildlife Fund’s climate program, criticized the speech for its lack of specifics, and urged action on a greenhouse-gas reduction commitment in the Senate.
She said in a statement:
The speech as a whole represents a missed opportunity for the U.S. to take a leadership role and signal to the rest of the world that it is serious about tackling the threat of climate change. 
While other countries announced specific targets and timetables, including China, Japan and the Maldives, President Obama did not address these critical elements. 
It was also disappointing that he did not reaffirm his previous call for action on climate financing at the upcoming G-20 Summit.
Myron Ebell of the Competitive Enterprise Institute, meanwhile, blasted the speech’s reference to rising temperatures, rising sea levels and other weather-related implications of climate change as “based on fantasy.”
