
A stubborn, smoky fire skipped from one century-old building in Chinatown to another on Sunday night, and then to a third. 
A Fire Department spokesman said that 33 people were injured, 29 of them firefighters.
Flames shot 20 to 30 feet over the buildings on Grand Street near Eldridge Street as the blaze reached seven-alarm status and more than 60 Fire Department vehicles answered a boroughwide call. 
Firefighters were still hosing down the rubble more than 10 hours later, trying to put out the last of what a Fire Department spokesman called ''hot spots.''
The spokesman, Firefighter James Long, said that the fire broke out in the back of a store on the first floor of 283 Grand Street, a six-story building. 
The blaze spread to 285 Grand Street, he said, and then to 289 Grand, on the corner of Eldridge Street.
Of the injured, one was an emergency medical technician and three were civilians. 
Firefighter Long said two were elderly men who lived in the burned-out buildings. 
He said they were in ''serious to critical condition.''
The fire, first reported around 10 p.m. on Sunday, took hours to bring under control. 
On Monday morning, a fire hose still snaked into a fourth building, 281 Grand Street, and wisps of smoke continued to rise from the other three.
Officials said that more than 200 people lived in the string of densely populated buildings. 
Chen Hui, who lived on the third floor of 283 Grand Street, was talking with his wife in China on a Web cam when he realized that he and his parents, who also lived there, had to get out.
''I heard my mother yelling, 'It's fire!
It's fire!'
'' he said on Monday. 
As he stood across the street, staring at the heavily damaged building, he said, ''Everything I own is gone.''
Zengjian Wang, who lived in the basement at 285 Grand Street, said there was ''smoke, black smoke'' around 10 p.m. He said he grabbed some clothing and his Chinese passport and ran outside just as the first fire engines arrived. 
He said he saw no flames and figured that the blaze would not prove that serious.
But it only grew worse with time. 
An hour later, he said, ''the whole building was filled by flames.''
The cause under investigation. 
By midmorning Monday, fire marshals had not been able to go into the rubble to search for clues. 
''We have no reason to believe there was anything suspicious,'' Firefighter Long said, ''but the marshals need a look-see and to gather evidence.''
Last May, seven firefighters were injured while fighting a blaze at another six-story building in Chinatown, on East Broadway.
