
CANNES, France -- Acceding to pressure from European leaders, Italy ''invited'' the International Monetary Fund on Friday to look over its shoulder to ensure that Rome is carrying out changes devised to keep the country from succumbing to Europe's sovereign debt crisis, signifying a new moment in global economic management.
Even as political instability in Greece threatened to tip the crisis into a new and more dangerous phase, the unprecedented move by the I.M.F. to act as an overseer of Italy's efforts to contain its ballooning debt underscored just how rapidly Italy was pivoting back to the center of the storm on the Continent.
The Group of 20 summit meeting was also a new departure for the I.M.F. 
In addition to agreeing to scrutinize Italy, the fund is leading a push to raise billions in new rescue money from China, Russia and other cash-rich rising powers.
It is also preparing credit lines for countries like Hungary that are ''innocent bystanders'' of the crisis, a provision that goes well beyond the group's traditional mandate of helping countries that are direct recipients of its financial aid.
As financial markets cast a wary eye on Greece, on the eve of a critical no-confidence vote in Parliament, officials in the euro zone struggled to keep the debt contagion from spreading west to neighboring Italy. 
Should Italy get swept up in that, it could rapidly overwhelm even the latest bailout vehicle being assembled, the $1.4 trillion European Financial Stability Facility, taking Europe's debt crisis to a new level and potentially dragging down the global economy.
Italy said it would allow the fund to scrutinize its books every three months to make sure a $75 billion austerity package was carried out according to plan. 
A team from the European Commission will also travel to Rome next week to start monitoring Rome's efforts, said the president of the commission, Jose Manuel Barroso.
Even that backstop seemed in doubt on Friday after the Group of 20 meeting broke up apparently with little progress on Europe's debt problems, aside from the decision to have the I.M.F. monitor Italy. 
Germany's chancellor, Angela Merkel, acknowledged that Europe's leaders had so far failed to interest any of the nations in the Group of 20 in investing in the new facility -- a major goal of European leaders.
The decision also did little to edge Italy away from the center of the storm: The interest rates it pays to borrow in financial markets continued to tick up Friday, amid concerns that a broader rescue effort by European leaders had not gained much traction. 
Rising borrowing costs are what helped send Greece, Portugal and Ireland to the fund looking for bailouts last year.
Mrs. Merkel said cash-rich countries like China and Russia wanted more assurances that they would not sustain losses, perhaps by having the I.M.F. oversee the financing facility. 
Japan, whose leadership has grown increasingly alarmed at the Continent's spreading debt crisis, does not want to commit funds to the rescue effort until it is clear that they would not be subject to losses, especially if Europe insists on using the money to help support insolvent banks, a government spokesman said Friday.
President Obama called on world leaders to continue to work to manage the global economic crisis, saluting them for making ''important progress.''
Mr. Obama, who has spent the last two days shuttling between meetings trying to salvage last week's European debt deal, said the agreement on increased scrutiny of Italy was a step in the right direction.
''There's no excuse for inaction,'' Mr. Obama said. 
''That's true globally, and it's certainly true back home right now.''
Mr. Obama's remarks came at a news conference at the Debussy Theater -- usually the sight of Cannes Film Festival movie premieres.
Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi's shaky coalition government is having trouble carrying out a number of painful austerity measures passed recently to reduce the nation's deficit and its $2.5 trillion mountain of debt.
Further complicating matters, his government is hanging by a thread, and faces challenges from his main coalition party, the Northern League, which has already said it does not agree with all the structural changes adopted by Rome to bring the nation's finances under control.
The I.M.F.'s decision is a further sign that the Italian government has little credibility, Pier Luigi Bersani, leader of the Democratic Party, the largest opposition group, said Friday. 
''Being under a guardianship takes away our liberty, and a bit of our dignity,'' he said in an interview on Italian state television.
The Berlusconi government faces a critical vote next week that could spell its end, Italian commentators said this week.
President Nicolas Sarkozy of France and Chancellor Merkel have been pressuring Mr. Berlusconi to fulfill Italy's financial commitments, but to date the Italian prime minister has been able to muster only a letter outlining his government's intentions.
Publicly, European officials are presenting Italy's decision to bring in the I.M.F. as purely voluntary. 
''We didn't put Italy in a corner,'' said Herman van Rompuy, the European Commission president. 
''They themselves decided to invite the I.M.F.''
But few countries easily surrender their sovereignty to the fund, and Italy appears to be no exception. 
Behind closed doors, said one European Union official, leaders pressured Mr. Berlusconi to bring in the group's auditors to demonstrate to world markets that Italy is making a credible effort to cut its deficits and make changes to restore growth, which is currently close to nonexistent.
Mr. Berlusconi sought to play the development to his advantage, telling reporters he had rejected an offer by the I.M.F. to provide a financial lifeline. 
That differed from accounts offered by European Union leaders and Christine Lagarde, the managing director of the I.M.F., who started pushing the idea several weeks ago as a way to help the Europeans act as a fiscal parole officer for Italy.
In an interview on the sidelines of the summit, Ms. Lagarde said that ''friendly pressure'' had been placed on Italy to accept the I.M.F. as a monitor. 
Because Italy is not under an I.M.F. bailout, the only way the fund could act as a monitor was if Italy invited it to do so, she added
The oversight of Italy is an extraordinary step for the fund, which typically monitors only countries that are recipients of bailouts. 
But the I.M.F. appears to be increasing its clout and presence in Europe as the crisis grows. 
It is already overseeing the bailouts of three Western European countries -- Ireland, Portugal and Greece -- something that would have been all but unthinkable just a few years ago.
