
MILAN -- In an industry based on looks, the facts are not pretty: For the last four quarters, the Italian economy has contra cted like a stagnant pond sizzling up in the scorching heat.
In the last quar ter, ending in June, the country's gross domestic product took a 2.6 percent nos e dive, while consumer confidence, measured by the National Institute of Statist ics in Rome, continued to dry up.
With the economy groaning rat her than growing, the country's once throbbing fashion retail scene is in a chok ehold, with sales slowing at mono-brand shops and many top multibrand boutiques now behaving like cash-strapped, third-rate stores.
The big labels -- Prada , Dolce & Gabbana and Giorgio Armani among them -- packed up their logo luggage and sprinted for Asia a while ago now, relying on a more robust market to suppor t a frenzy of new store openings and to buoy their balance sheets (although even the hot Chinese economy is cooling).
That leaves the little guys -- small, young, independent Italian fashion brands with no mono-brand stores of their ow n -- to struggle along. 
For these Milan-based designers, the hardest part is not designing, producing or selling their product. 
It is getting paid by Italian st ores.
Paola Bay
Ms. Bay is a shoe designer and founder of the five-year-old Zoraide brand, sold in two multibrand stores in Italy.
'' The reality of the situation is that if I want to sell in Italy, I now have to a ct like a bank rather than a fashion designer. 
I have to advance money to my fac tories when I place the orders, and then hope one day I'll get paid by the Itali an store who wants it. 
No one is paying.
''You end up losing money. 
It's cr azy. 
I've never had this problem with a foreign buyer. 
The Italian boutiques are n't too worried about this because they know you won't take them to court -- it' s too time-consuming and expensive. 
I've learned I keep a few stores in Italy fo r image purposes only, but the rest are abroad.''
Ms. Bay's strategy
''The big labels are not doing high fashion anymore, and the real luxury custome r is getting fed up with that. 
I am going to focus my business on the extreme hi gh end, doing customization and special orders for private clients. 
I'm also thi nking of moving to Paris to show during Couture.''
Fabio Sasso
Mr. Sasso and Juan Caro are the designers and owners of the five-year-old Leit motiv brand, sold in 60 multibrand stores in Italy.
''It is a very diffic ult moment in Italy. 
Two years ago, we'd get paid 30 days after the shipment. 
Th en the terms moved to 60 and then 90. 
Now, it's four or five months later that w e see the money. 
Even the best, top stores in Italy.
''Actually, with them it's worse because they feel pressure to pay big brands like Givenchy or Y.S.L. before us. 
There's no more money left for the little ones.
''Foreign stores pay us 30 percent in advance when they place their order. 
If we did not have ha lf of our stores abroad, we would have gone bankrupt.''
Mr. Sasso's strateg y
''Price is working in Italy. 
If you have great product at the right pric e, you're in play. 
We're aligning ourselves price-wise more with a brand like Mi u Miu rather than Lanvin.''
Andrea Pompilio
Mr. Pompilio is th e designer and owner of the men's fashion label Andrea Pompilio , which is one and a half years old and sold in 16 multibrand stores in Italy.
''I starte d my business in the middle of this economic crisis, so I guess I'm used to the drama. 
Globally, I have three times as many stores this season over last, but in Italy they have put on the brakes. 
They are all trying to stop the bleeding. 
I' ve seen stores close their men's department altogether and others reduce their b uys only to 'must-haves.'
They're only taking what's actually new.''
Mr. Po mpilio's strategy
''Italian buyers are encouraging me to lower prices. 
If I made my products in Romania or China, my prices would drop 30 percent. 
But the n, it's a different hand and a different brand.
''I am superconscious of p rice. 
I began as a merchandiser, so I'm not a designer who sits around dreaming. 
But I want to do a 'very well made in Italy' product. 
I believe in the Italian industry and want to keep jobs here.''
Paula Cademartori
Ms. C ademartori is a handbag designer and owner of the two-year-old brand Paula Cadem artori , sold in 12 multibrand shops in Italy.
''I've increased my sales an d number of stores this season, but it's very difficult right now, because a lot of shops aren't paying. 
Some shops make me do consignment. 
I have to pay my pro ducer when the order goes through, so if the shop doesn't sell my bags, I try to sell it later myself at a private sale. 
This system only happens in Italy. 
No o ther market does it. 
But I need the visibility in the shops, so I have to play a long.
''For spring/summer 2013, I'm using the Riccardo Grassi showroom for the first time to handle sales -- up until now every sales agent in Milan told me no. 
They wouldn't even look at the bags. 
None of them want to take any risks, and they don't believe in young brands.''
Ms. Cademartori's strategy
''A lot of the big fashion companies are increasingly using cheap hardware and are not paying attention to the quality of their leathers. 
I have found a specia l niche focusing on high-quality, handcrafted designs. 
I won't leave Italy, beca use it's the only place who knows how to do a careful, perfect product. 
It's bee n an opportunity for me.''
Fausto Puglisi
Mr. Puglisi is a wo men's fashion designer and owner of the two-year-old brand Fausto Puglisi , sol d in 51 multibrand stores in Italy.
''It's true that getting paid is becom ing a problem. 
But I'm Sicilian about it. 
You can't push me around. 
I am very cl ear in advance about it. 
If you can't pay, I don't sell. 
People ask for consignm ent and I say, 'Absolutely not.'
''I dream to be in certain shops, but this is a business. 
I much prefer to give a gift to Madonna rather than to a buyer.'
'
Mr. Puglisi's strategy
''I'm developing personal relationships with buyers to understand what they need.
''For a small designer, you need to create a product that people are dying to have. 
You can't give them basics. 
Peop le are going crazy for my leather skirts because it's a kind of accessory.
''It's like when you buy a pair of Louboutins -- a 17-year-old or a 70-year-old can wear it. 
It's right for cocktails or for walking your dog. 
For fall, I doub led my number of Italian stores.''
