
TOKYO — By the time most Japanese were sipping their morning coffee on Thursday, the gymnast known as "the king" already had another crown.
On Wednesday night in Rio de Janeiro, Kohei Uchimura, 27, won the men's all-around gymnastics title for the second straight Olympic Games, the first time anyone has accomplished that feat since 1972.
Japanese newspapers printed special editions, and television news programs replayed highlights nonstop.
Mr. Uchimura has lifted Japanese men's gymnastics to a level of glory not experienced in generations. 
Described as "magic," "perfect" and "a machine," he has not lost an individual competition since taking silver at the Beijing Games eight years ago.
And with the next Summer Olympics scheduled to take place in Tokyo in 2020, the pressure on him to keep going will be huge. 
"I'm exhausted," he said after his latest victory.
"I put everything out there, until there was nothing left," he added. 
"More than happiness, I'd say I feel contentment."
If American television networks have dedicated a lot of airtime to Simone Biles, the dominant female gymnast at the Games, Japanese television has been focused on its own   national hero.
Ms. Biles has been barely a blip in the coverage here. 
Mr. Uchimura gets the gauzy profiles: of his childhood in the countryside, training under his gymnast parents; of the birth of his daughters, in 2013 and 2015; of his struggles to give up junk food and smoking.
A gymnastics-themed comic he devoured as a child — "Gamba!
Fly High," written by a Japanese gold medalist from the 1984 Games in Los Angeles — has gone into reprints.
He has appeared in advertisements for Toyota, frozen noodles and gyms. 
When the news media reported on his favorite snack a few years ago — a chocolate cookie called Black Thunder — its sales surged. 
(He has since learned to love vegetables, word has it.)
Tabloids reported that he racked up nearly $5,000 in cellphone roaming fees after downloading Pokémon Go in Rio. 
His provider has reportedly waived the charges.
Mr. Uchimura did not have the Olympics news cycle here to himself on Thursday. 
Two gold medals won the day before by Japanese athletes in judo — a sport in which the Japanese team had been disappointing during these Games — drew extensive attention, too. 
Like gymnastics, judo is beloved in Japan, albeit in the sort of way that brings its stars wide popular attention only every four years.
In Isahaya, Mr. Uchimura's hometown on the island of Kyushu, a crowd of about 250 gathered before dawn on Thursday at a sports center nicknamed Uchimura Arena.
More fans assembled at the headquarters of Konami Sports Club, the chain of gyms that sponsors him, along with a number of other Japanese Olympians. 
In one of Konami's commercials, Mr. Uchimura spins on a pommel horse in the middle of an office full of presumably exercise-deprived workers.
In interviews before the Games, Mr. Uchimura said he wanted to exorcise the "demons" of past Olympics. 
Though he won individual gold in London in 2012, the Japanese team finished second to China, the dominant power in men's gymnastics in recent years and a regional rival of Japan.
In Rio, it initially looked as if the demons might get the better of him. 
He fell off the horizontal bar in the qualifying round, and the Japanese team started behind China, the United States and Russia. 
But in the end, Mr. Uchimura led Japan to a team gold, a prelude to his individual victory.
On Thursday, early risers watched as he took the gold on the last of the event's six apparatuses, nailing a difficult routine on the horizontal bar. 
Before the bar, he trailed Oleg Verniaiev, 22, of Ukraine by more than nine-tenths of a point, a gap large enough that headlines called his comeback a miracle. 
He won by less than a tenth of a point.
Japan has not enjoyed this kind of success in gymnastics since the 1960s and '70s, when it was known as the kingdom of gymnastics. 
Bolstered by an intense government-sponsored training effort that started in the lead-up to the 1964 Tokyo Games, its men won five consecutive team golds in the Olympics and five consecutive world championships from 1960 to 1978.
It was a Japanese, Sawao Kato, who won the last consecutive all-around golds, 48 and 44 years ago.
On social media, speculation about whether Mr. Uchimura would compete in 2020 has ranged from resigned to hopeful. 
By then, he will be 31. 
Japan has other skilled gymnasts, but none with his talent.
"Uchimura, please stay until 2020. 
I know 31 will be tough," read one typical Twitter post. 
"He's saving his best performance for Tokyo 2020 — I believe it," read another.
After his victory, Mr. Uchimura seemed both tempted and daunted by the prospect. 
He said he wanted to take time off to think. 
He said that if he did compete, his fans should not expect more miracles.
"I won't be able to match Oleg in the all-around event," he said of the man he beat on Wednesday.
"I'd be happy if I could somehow make the team," he added. 
"My kids would be at an age when they would remember it."
Follow Jonathan Soble on Twitter @jonathan_soble.
