
Times Higher Education has published its first university ranking focusing on Asia. 
While it includes the Middle East, South Asia and Turkey, its standout performers were all East Asian economic powerhouses.
On the top-100 ranking released last week, Japan had the most institutions (22), followed by Taiwan (17), mainland China (15) and South Korea (14).
The top 10 individual schools were: the University of Tokyo, National University of Singapore, University of Hong Kong, Peking University, Pohang University of Science and Technology in South Korea, Tsinghua University in Beijing, Kyoto University, Seoul National University, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology and the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology.
The T.H.E. statement called Hong Kong, a city of seven million with six universities in the top 100, a ''star performer, particularly given its size.''
It cited ''challenges facing India,'' a nation of 1.2 billion with only three schools, all of them technology institutes, in the Asian top 100 and none in the top 10.
''Rapid growth in the face of staff shortages and declining per-student spending has affected standards,'' Pawan Agarwal, an Indian government education adviser, wrote in the T.H.E. supplement.
Foreign students to return to London Metropolitan
London Metropolitan University, which lost its right to admit students from outside the European Union last autumn over allegations of visa problems, announced last week that it would be able to resume accepting foreign students.
The move by the Home Office to strip it of its ''trusted sponsor'' status meant that thousands of students had faced deportation. 
It also cost the university, which serves some of London's poorest neighborhoods, nearly £20 million, or about $30 million, in lost income.
''That translates directly into educational opportunities and resources for staffing,'' the university's vice chancellor, Malcolm Gillies, told The Financial Times.
Although university officials welcomed the decision, the university said it would continue to pursue legal action against both the Home Office and the U.K. 
Border Agency. 
A High Court judge ruled in September that current students should be allowed to stay in Britain to complete their studies. 
He also granted the university the right to seek a judicial review of the government's action. 
-- D.D. 
GUTTENPLAN
German universities to get &#x20ac;4.4 billion more funding
Germany is injecting an additional &#x20ac;4.4 billion worth of funding into the country's universities, the German media reported Friday.
The extra funds, worth more than $5.7 billion, are to come in equal parts from the federal and the länder, or state, governments. 
They will be used to help institutions deal with a boom in student enrollment. 
The government estimates that between 2011 and 2015, 630,000 students will enroll in German universities, 360,000 more than predicted. 
Chancellor Angela Merkel and heads of the länder are expected to approve the funding boost in June.
The jump is due partly to higher birthrates and the discontinuation of mandatory military service, according to Der Spiegel. 
-- CHRISTOPHER F. SCHUETZE
Most Asians save regularly for education, survey shows
Two-thirds of households in the Asia-Pacific region save money on a regular basis for their children's education, which takes up 14 percent of their total income, according to a new study by MasterCard on consumer education spending.
The Asian component of the survey released last week, for which MasterCard polled 7,678 consumers in 16 countries and territories, found that the portion of household income saved for education tended to correlate with a country's developmental status. 
In Myanmar, families on average save 18 percent of their household income for education. 
Meanwhile, families in Japan save 10 percent of their relatively much higher salaries for education.
Most Asian parents plan for their children to attend universities locally; the three exceptions were China, South Korea and Bangladesh.
Two thirds of Asia-Pacific households also spend money on extracurricular classes for their children, though geography tended to determine what those activities are. 
Foreign languages are popular in China and South Korea. 
Meanwhile, 43 percent of children in New Zealand who did outside activities chose to engage in sports. 
-- KRISTIANO ANG
