
HIROSHIMA, Japan -- Secretary of State John Kerry attended a memorial ceremony in Hiroshima on Monday for victims of the American atomic bombing 71 years ago, becoming the highest-ranking United States administration official to visit the site of one of the most destructive acts of World War II.
The visit is likely to intensify speculation about whether President Obama will go to Hiroshima during a planned trip to Japan next month. 
Mr. Obama would be the first sitting American president to visit the city, a decision that would resonate deeply in Japan but would be controversial at home.
''Everyone should visit Hiroshima, and everyone means everyone,'' Mr. Kerry said at a news conference on Monday in response to a question about whether Mr. Obama would go. 
He said that the president had been invited by Japanese officials and that he would like to visit someday, but Mr. Kerry added: ''Whether or not he can come as president, I don't know.''
Mr. Kerry spoke after he and other leading diplomats from the Group of 7 industrialized countries toured Hiroshima's atomic bomb museum, laid flowers at a cenotaph in its Peace Memorial Park and examined the former exhibition hall that stood directly under the atomic blast and has been preserved as a skeletal monument. 
He called the experience ''stunning'' and ''gut-wrenching.''
Mr. Kerry and the other officials were in the city for talks ahead of the annual Group of 7 summit meeting next month, to be hosted by Japan.
The question of how to acknowledge the nuclear attack on Hiroshima, and another on the city of Nagasaki three days later, has long troubled American diplomats. 
The bombings ultimately killed more than 200,000 people, most of them civilians, in a country that after the war was transformed from an enemy of the United States into one of its closest allies.
But a majority of Americans have long believed that the bombings were necessary to force Japan's surrender and to spare American lives. 
Any hint that the United States was apologizing could prove highly damaging politically. 
For decades, American ambassadors to Japan avoided the somber annual ceremonies commemorating the bombings each August.
Japan has never demanded that the United States apologize for the bombings, and Mr. Kerry did not do so on Monday. 
Still, the Japanese foreign minister, Fumio Kishida, who is from Hiroshima, called the visit by Mr. Kerry and other Group of 7 officials ''a historic day.''
''I want to deliver a strong and clear message of peace from Hiroshima to the world,'' Mr. Kishida said.
Mr. Kerry's participation in the ceremony threatened to overshadow the two-day Group of 7 meeting, attended by foreign ministers from Britain, Canada, France, Germany and Italy as well as the United States and Japan. 
They discussed terrorism, the refugee crisis in Europe, North Korea's nuclear program and maritime security threats in Asia, among other issues.
Without naming China, the ministers criticized Beijing's assertive claims in the East and South China Seas, condemning what they called ''intimidating, coercive or provocative unilateral actions that could alter the status quo and increase tensions.''
Similar language has appeared in the communiqués issued by Western officials before, but it has done little to stop China from moves like building artificial islands in disputed waters and dispatching its coast guard into areas claimed by its neighbors.
Plans for Mr. Kerry's visit to Hiroshima had already caused speculation that Mr. Obama could make history next month by going to the city during the summit meeting in Ise-Shima, about 250 miles to the east.
Former President Jimmy Carter toured the atom bomb memorial in May 1984, about three years after he left office, and Nancy Pelosi visited in 2008 when she was speaker of the House of Representatives. 
But no serving administration official of cabinet rank or higher has visited.
In 2009, Mr. Obama opened his presidency with an idealistic speech in Prague declaring his commitment to creating ''a world without nuclear weapons.''
Putting that sentiment into practice has proved difficult, however, and some see a visit to Hiroshima, in his last year in office, as a way of breathing fresh life into the effort.
Mr. Obama has already changed the United States' approach to recognizing its World War II nuclear attacks on Japan. 
In 2010, John V. Roos, the ambassador at the time, attended the August commemoration in Hiroshima, becoming the first American ambassador to do so. 
His successor, Caroline Kennedy, has also attended.
Most Japanese would respond warmly to a presidential visit to Hiroshima, even if it did not include an apology, said Tsuneo Watanabe, a senior fellow at the Tokyo Foundation, a research group.
Although some Japanese would like the United States to say sorry, few expect it to do so, he said. 
Conservatives tend to favor close political and military ties between Tokyo and Washington and would not want to jeopardize the relationship by pressing for an apology, he said. 
Liberals would be satisfied if Mr. Obama used a visit to Hiroshima to strengthen his broader antinuclear message, even if he stopped short of apologizing.
''Unlike the apology politics between Japan and other Asian countries, most Japanese understand that it's a very high hurdle for an American leader to apologize,'' Mr. Watanabe said, referring to disputes over wartime history between Japan and the victims of its early 20th-century imperial expansionism, notably China and South Korea.
On Sunday, the mayor of Nagasaki, Tomihisa Taue, who was attending the meeting of the Group of 7 foreign ministers, told the Japanese news media that he had delivered a letter to Ms. Kennedy urging Mr. Obama to visit one of the bombing sites while in Japan for the summit meeting.
''This isn't about questioning America's responsibility for using nuclear weapons,'' Mr. Taue was quoted as saying. 
''It's important to think about how to rid nuclear weapons from the world.''
Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today's Headlines: Asian Morning newsletter. 
Sign up here.
