
BEIJING -- Randy Huntington's laugh boomed through the hallways of the Bird's Nest stadium after the long jump competition, making him something of a rarity at the world track and field championships on Tuesday: an American with something to celebrate.
Huntington, who hails from Walled Lake, Mich., coached Mike Powell when Powell jumped 8.95 meters (29 feet 4 ¼ inches) in Tokyo in 1991 -- setting a world record that has now endured a year longer than the ethereal Bob Beamon mark it broke.
Huntington has worked with many fellow Americans through the years, but he is now coaching Chinese athletes. 
Though his arrival in 2013 is not the only explanation for the buzz in the stands on Tuesday night, it is certainly a big part of why China now has its first medal in the long jump at the world championships.
''We brought him here because he is good, simply because he's good,'' said Feng Shuyong, the Chinese team leader.
China's first long jump medal at a global championships turned out to be bronze, which Wang Jianan, just 18 years old, secured with an 8.18-meter leap -- all of which seemed auspicious given China's talismanic attachment to the number 8. 
Chinese jumpers also finished fourth and fifth, a signal that an event long dominated by the West may soon see a boost in its global profile similar to the one that Liu Xiang brought to the 110-meter hurdles a decade ago.
The gold went to Greg Rutherford of Britain -- already the Olympic, European and Commonwealth Games champion -- with a leap of 8.41 meters and the silver to Rutherford's training partner, the Australian Fabrice Lapierre (8.24). 
They, too, train under an American coach, Dan Pfaff, at a high-performance center in Phoenix.
Those looking for the Americans, whose legacy remains the richest in this event, needed to keep moving briskly down the results list.
The two who did make the final -- Jeff Henderson and Mike Hartfield -- failed to advance past the first phase of three jumps. 
Hartfield, who had jumped 8.27 meters this season, fouled on all three of his attempts. 
Henderson, who had jumped 8.52 meters, fouled on his first and third attempts and could go only 7.95 meters on his second.
''There are no words I can say about how disappointed I am,'' Henderson said.
It was that sort of evening in general for the United States team, the sport's powerhouse, as it failed to win a medal in any event. 
Those included its traditional stomping ground of the men's 400 hurdles, which was won by Nicholas Bett of Kenya in 47.79 seconds.
It was Kenya's first victory in the event at the world championships, and given its dominance of the 3,000-meter steeplechase (which also has hurdles), perhaps it was only a matter of time. 
The other medalists on Tuesday were Denis Kudryavtsev of Russia in 48.05 and Jeffery Gibson of the Bahamas in 48.17. 
Gibson finished a hundredth of a second ahead of the former world champion Kerron Clement of the United States.
Another former world champion from the United States, Jenny Simpson, lost her left shoe in the 1,500 meters and finished 11th in a 12-woman race that was won -- to the surprise of no one -- by Genzebe Dibaba, the latest Dibaba sister to win gold for Ethiopia.
Her older sibling Tirunesh swept the 5,000 and the 10,000 at the 2008 Olympics and has won three Olympic gold medals and five world titles over all. 
Now 30, she is taking a break from the sport after giving birth to a son, Nathan, in March. 
Another Dibaba sister, Ejegayehu, now 33, was a silver medalist in the 10,000 meters at the 2004 Olympics and won bronze in the 5,000 and 10,000 at the 2005 world championships.
But Genzebe Dibaba, 24, is the sister making headlines now. 
She set the world record in the 1,500 last month in Monaco in 3 minutes 50.07 seconds, prompting her to add the event to her world championship program. 
She is now in strong position to complete her own double in Beijing when she runs the 5,000 later this week.
''A new queen Dibaba is arriving,'' she said through a translator.
After four days, Kenya leads the medal count with four gold medals and nine medals over all. 
The United States has just one gold and six medals, below its customary and anticipated strike rate.
''US team need to turn it around quick!''
Michael Johnson, the former American sprint star, wrote on Twitter. 
''Competition management has been atrocious with multiple event favorites failing to advance to final!''
But it was a better night for American long-jump coaches, even if Huntington was not entirely satisfied.
''I think they really had more in them,'' he said of his three Chinese jumpers. 
''But when you put the pressure on kids like this, it is quite something for them to handle.''
The Chinese entries' runway sprints generated the biggest roars of the night in the stadium. 
And as it turned out, Wang, the youngest, handled the pressure best. 
Nicknamed Eddie, Wang is a former world junior long-jump champion as well as a former decathlete.
''Eddie is just steady Eddie,'' Huntington said. 
''He's only 18, but he has the mental capacity of a 30-year-old in the way he approaches things.''
He is also the least flashy of the three and the only one without a tattoo. 
The others are more challenging to coach, Huntington said.
Gao Xinglong, 21, who finished fourth, thrusts his chin far back when he jumps. 
''A real exuberant personality, but he gets really wired real fast, so bad that there would be times he'd be at a competition and would start at the wrong check mark because he'd get just so whacked out,'' Huntington said.
Li Jinzhe, the 25-year-old Asian Games champion who finished fifth on Tuesday, is an even bigger challenge. 
''He and I are at tremendous odds all the time,'' Huntington said. 
''He's a gamer, but he doesn't want to train. 
He's like an old basketball player. 
They want to play, but they don't want to train.''
This is not Huntington's first expatriate assignment in Asia. 
He worked with the South Korean national team before returning to the United States and rejoining the private sector.
In dire need of a vacation in early 2013, he said, he decided to go to the airport in Portland, Ore., that March and fly to the first city that appeared on the departure board. 
It was Beijing, and as he already had a valid multiple-entry visa for China, he stayed true to his word. 
There, he dined with Feng, who invited him to attend a meet outside of Beijing.
Four months later, Huntington, back in the United States, received a job offer from the Chinese track and field federation. 
Two years later, the Bird's Nest was atwitter over -- of all things -- the men's long jump.
