
BEIJING -- Chinese banks extended 703.9 billion renminbi in new loans in August, the central bank said Tuesday, beating market expectations of 600 billion renminbi and giving hope that the economy could be bolstered by new credit.
Also Tuesday, Prime Minister Wen Jiabao of China said that the country was on track to meet its target for economic growth for this year and that if needed, the government could use a fiscal stabilityI fund that holds 100 billion renminbi, or $16 billion.
''China's economic development trend is good, economic growth still remains within the target range set at the beginning of the year, and the economy is stabilizing,'' said Mr. Wen, speaking at a meeting of the World Economic Forum in the eastern port city of Tianjin.
China set a target of 7.5 percent for economic growth in 2012, but some analysts fear that could be missed as a global slowdown drags down activity in the country.
The August lending figure for renminbi-denominated loans, which was disclosed after recent interest rate cuts by the central bank and after speeded-up government approvals for some infrastructure projects, also was a sharp increase from 540.1 billion renminbi in July.
''The lending number is better than the market expected. 
That was mainly due to accelerating investment in the real estate sector and the government-backed spending on infrastructure projects,'' said Shen Lan, an economist at Standard Chartered in Shanghai. 
''However, demand for loans from the corporate sector remains weak, as confidence is still lacking. 
It will take some time for the quickened government infrastructure investment to boost demand in the downstream industries.''
Chinese banks grant loans at the central government's behest, and money and credit numbers show both policy aims and the state of credit demand.
The central bank said the so-called M2 measure of money supply -- the broadest measure -- grew 13.5 percent in August from a year earlier, missing forecasts for a 14 percent rise. 
Outstanding local-currency loans rose 16.1 percent by the end of August from a year earlier, slightly better than expected.
Economists had projected a rise of 14 percent in M2 and 15.9 percent in outstanding loans in August from the same period last year. 
In July, the figures rose 13.9 percent and 16 percent, respectively.
China's total social financing aggregate, a broad measure of liquidity in the economy, stood at 1.24 trillion renminbi in August, the central bank said.
The central bank has lowered the proportion of cash that banks must hold as reserves by 1.5 percentage points in three steps since last November, freeing an estimated 1.2 trillion renminbi for new lending. 
But that, along with tax tweaks and two interest rate cuts, has so far failed to halt the slide in economic growth.
The speeded-up approval of infrastructure investment projects in recent weeks by the National Development and Reform Commission, the country's top economic planning agency, might require the central bank to approve the extension of more credit, analysts said. 
But it will not be an easy decision, they said, with the risk of fanning a flare-up in property prices and a rise in consumer inflation.
A number of investment banks have reduced their outlook for China's economic growth for 2012 and 2013. 
Barclays Capital, for example, has cut its forecast on China's 2012 annual economic growth to 7.5 percent from 7.9 percent and cut its 2013 growth forecast to 7.6 percent from 8.4 percent.
