
Marjorie Scardino, the chief executive of the global educational and media conglomerate Pearson and one of Britain's highest-ranking female executives, will step down after nearly 16 years, the company said Wednesday.
John Fallon, currently chief executive of Pearson's international education division, was expected to take over the company, which owns The Financial Times, the book publisher Penguin Group and half of The Economist magazine.
The transition, expected to take place in January, raises questions about the future of Pearson's flagship newspaper, known as The FT. 
Analysts have speculated that Pearson would sell the FT Group, which includes the rose-colored business daily and its various digital assets. 
Potential buyers include Thomson Reuters and Bloomberg, both of which employ hundreds of financial journalists but do not own a daily newspaper.
''I think it increases the chance that in the medium term they dispose of The FT,'' said Ian Whittaker, a media analyst at Liberum Capital in London. 
He said the company could look for other ways to slim down as its core education business faces challenges, particularly in the tough North American market.
A longtime player in printed educational products, Pearson has had to adapt to the digital era and a range of deep-pocketed competitors like Discovery Communications, the Walt Disney Company and Apple. 
At the same time, public schools in the United States face budget cutbacks.
''Penguin is in question, too, but there are more synergies between that and the education division than The FT,'' Mr. Whittaker said.
In an interview, Mr. Fallon said The FT was a ''valued and valuable'' asset that fit into Pearson's education business. 
He noted a popular English-language program in China aimed at executives that used The FT's business and markets coverage into lesson plans. 
The company says The FT has more than two million readers worldwide, including the print paper and its online, mobile and tablet services.
''If you look at the portfolio of Pearson, it's constantly changing and evolving and we never ever said what we're going to do or not going to do,'' Mr. Fallon said. 
''We never rule out anything.''
Mr. Fallon, 50, does not have a traditional publishing background but does understand the company's fast-growing education business. 
He spent the last several years leading Pearson in its expansion into international markets, which represent a significant area of growth. 
Before taking over the international education division in 2008, Mr. Fallon headed operations in Europe, the Middle East and Africa.
His appointment signals the company's global ambitions, particularly in emerging markets like China, Brazil, India and sub-Saharan Africa. 
''What you see is a rapidly growing middle class that is very conscious of the importance and value of education,'' Mr. Fallon said.
Ms. Scardino, 65, was born in Arizona and previously served as chief executive of The Economist Group. 
She took over Pearson in 1997 and led a period of aggressive acquisitions, including the $2.4 billion purchase of National Computer Systems, a company that provides school administrators and teachers with data management for educational exams, and the $4.6 billion purchase of Simon & Schuster's educational, professional and reference book publishing business from Viacom.
Even as newspapers faced a downturn in advertising revenue, Ms. Scardino stood by The FT. 
When questioned about its future, Ms. Scardino once said Pearson would sell the newspaper ''over my dead body.''
Thomson Reuters and Bloomberg have denied that they are interested in acquiring the FT Group. 
But strategically, analysts said such an acquisition would make sense for either company because each relies on computer terminals that dispense financial news to a small but lucrative subscription audience mostly in the financial sector. 
That business has softened in recent years as Wall Street and hedge funds cut back.
The company said Ms. Scardino had for months planned to retire after leading the company for nearly 16 years.
Analysts said the timing corresponded to the challenges facing Pearson's core education business and that Ms. Scardino, who oversaw the 168-year-old company through a period of great growth wanted to go out on a high note, while board members wanted a leader who could emphasize digital and emerging market expansion.
''For more than 160 years, Pearson has stood for integrity, quality and business strength. 
It has been a privilege to be part of such a great company for a small part of its history,'' Ms. Scardino said in a statement.
Glen R. Moreno, the chairman of Pearson, said Ms. Scardino had ''navigated two recessions, one financial crisis, a dot-com boom and bust and several waves of structural industry change.''
