
Jean-Paul Tennant is in the adventure business, but that does not mean he enjoys taking risks. 
He is chief executive of a travel company, Geographic Expeditions, that specializes in arranging ambitious trips to exotic lands, places where unstable local currencies can make financial transactions a challenge.
Based in San Francisco, the 31-year-old company books trips to Bhutan, Tibet, Central Asia, Patagonia and the Galápagos Islands months or even more than a year in advance. 
In late 2006, Mr. Tennant had booked travel for eight clients who wanted to explore northern India. 
Then the rupee began a double-digit climb against the dollar, which prompted one Indian supplier who had already agreed to fees for hotel rooms, guides and drivers to say he needed to raise his prices. 
Suddenly a trip costing Geographic Expeditions $7,500 per person was going to jump to $9,000.
''As soon as we commit to a price, we are heavily exposed if we don't know what our costs will be,'' Mr. Tennant said. 
''It can totally kill a company like ours.''
He quickly canceled the contract and found another supplier that agreed to a firm quote.
As more small companies conduct business overseas, owners are learning that volatile exchange rates can cut into profits. 
More of these businesses are using banks and international payment companies and creating risk management strategies that mimic those of large concerns.
Mr. Tennant said he now worked with experienced global currency traders who help Geographic Expeditions conduct transactions and lock in costs. 
The strategy has helped his company of 45 employees grow to expected sales of $27 million this year.
These are some tips for conducting business in foreign currencies, based on the experiences of small-business owners like Mr. Tennant.
EXTEND THE QUOTE PERIOD Many American businesses pay their overseas vendors in the local currency. 
But not all business owners have the time or expertise to figure out how to avoid being hit by a sudden change in the exchange rate.
Craig T. Batten is chief financial officer of S4 Inc. in Toano, Va., which imports and sells $8 million in holiday lights a year. 
Four years ago, the company was so small that he could not find a bank to help him, so Mr. Batten worked alone, getting quotes from Chinese manufacturers that were paid in dollars. 
He would make a deposit of up to 50 percent of the order when he placed it, with the balance due when the product was shipped. 
Quotes would be valid for up to 90 days. 
After that, the vendor would deliver a new quote, which was time-consuming and could force S4 to update its prices.
Now working with Citizens Bank, Mr. Batten said he got quotes six months in advance and could pay in the local currency, the renminbi.
''The U.S. dollar has been losing value compared with the renminbi,'' Mr. Batten said. 
''The two places I deal with will hold prices for a longer time and quote better prices because they're not hedging on the loss of the U.S. dollar.''
The bank saves him money, he said, because he has been able to develop relationships with their representatives, who look out for him. 
''They often reduce the wire transfer fees when dealing with funds outside of U.S. dollars,'' he said.
WORK WITH A TRADER Adriana Kahane, founder and chief executive of Dream Foods International in Santa Monica, Calif., depends on a currency trading company to help her business import organic citrus juices from Sicily. 
Dream Foods tallies about $6 million a year in sales.
When she started in 1998, Ms. Kahane relied on a big bank to buy currency to carry out transactions. 
She would place an order 90 days or more in advance, committing to buy, say, 75,000 euros on a certain date to pay a supplier. 
When the date came, even if she did not need the product at that moment, she was obligated to buy the currency. 
That became a problem during the recession, she said, when ''we were a little bit squeezed on our margins because of the high cost of the euro.''
Five years ago Ms. Kahane started using Associated Foreign Exchange, or AFEX, an international payment and foreign exchange company in Los Angeles. 
She said the company had been willing to give her extra days before she was committed to buying euros. 
The AFEX representative calls her regularly when he sees the euro's value dropping and knows she may want to make a purchase. 
She said that had helped Dream Foods save as much as $100,000 in a year.
''The smaller foreign exchange shops are more competitive and I find their service level is much higher,'' she said. 
''If they see a swing in the rates, they are going to give me a call.''
LOCK IN THE PRICE Mr. Tennant of Geographic Expeditions urges business owners to use forward contracts that lock in an agreed-upon price for a foreign currency. 
This strategy works especially well for companies like wine importers that publish prices months in advance.
Mr. Tennant works with Wells Fargo and AFEX to carry out the transactions. 
Traders buy the currency -- for instance, New Zealand dollars -- to pay for hotel rooms or tours that will be used months later. 
The exchange rate is set and the price cannot budge, even if the currency rates change.
''You've locked in the price of the foreign currency that you're going to need to buy on payment date,'' Mr. Tennant said. 
''If you can lock in a price because you're using the appropriate financial instrument, it's good for the consumer. 
Hedging is a wonderful thing. 
It takes uncertainty off the table.''
Some volatile currencies, however, cannot be hedged, he said, including the Moroccan dirham, the Mongolian tugrik and the Tajik somoni. 
It also is more challenging to deal with countries like China that have capital controls in place to regulate the flow of foreign currency in and out of the economy.
Geographic Expeditions tries to have at least two suppliers in any one destination so that when one supplier raises prices, as the Indian vendor did, the company can find an alternative. 
When American dollars must be used, Mr. Tennant makes sure those contracts stipulate that the prices cannot change.
Generally, he said, ''If we can't hedge, we eat the risk.''
STICK WITH DOLLARS Some small businesses find that using foreign currency is too great a challenge. 
When Ice Air, a Mount Vernon, N.Y., company, buys air-conditioning units made in China for resale, Hugh Koh, the company's chief financial officer, insists on paying in dollars.
For three years, he said, the company worked with a major bank to buy forward contracts and conduct business in euros. 
With the exchange rate fluctuations and bank fees, Ice Air broke even on the currency transactions.
''It was a lot of work,'' Mr. Koh said. 
''With foreign exchange, there's an element of gambling in there. 
There is always the risk.''
By dealing only in dollars, he said, the company avoids market fluctuations. 
But there are drawbacks. 
Some overseas vendors refuse to accept dollars. 
Those that do may try to protect themselves by charging a fee, adding as much as 10 percent to the cost of their products or services.
But Mr. Koh is happy to pay a fee that brings peace of mind. 
''For planning purposes it's a finite number,'' he said. 
''When we look at costs for this year, we know what the costs will be.''
