
India House, a private club in Lower Manhattan founded 100 years ago, has removed much of the art it has displayed over the years, but related documents survive to entice researchers. 
The art historian Margaret Stocker, a trustee of the India House Foundation and a former curator at the club, is writing a book about Asian and maritime art that has been on view there, while the pieces themselves have been going on the market.
Their provenances are tied to presidents, emperors and peace activists. 
Two of the club's founders, Willard Straight and his wife, Dorothy Payne Whitney Straight, ''wanted to bring East and West together through cultural diplomacy,'' Ms. Stocker said in an interview.
At her Manhattan apartment, India House relics include a light fixture painted with galleon silhouettes, portraits of shipping magnates and vintage catalogs of India House exhibitions. 
She plans to call her book ''Saving China's Art: The Heiress, the Diplomat and the 'American Emperor.'
'' The subtitle refers to the Straights and their friend Theodore Roosevelt, who collaborated to raise awareness of Asian art and protect what was left in China.
India House has dispersed about 90 percent of the artworks and artifacts shown there. 
(The foundation, established in 1999, tried futilely to save the collection.)
In 2011 a bronze Chinese deity from India House sold at Christie's in New York for $2.21 million. 
In September Christie's auctioned a dozen Chinese vessels and deity statues in copper and bronze; the highest price paid was $147,750.
Last August Northeast Auctions of Portsmouth, N.H., sold three dozen paintings of ships and shipwrecks from the club. 
The top lot ($60,000) was William Bradford's 1850s view of a Boston clipper ship.
India House was originally formed to foster international trade. 
The Straights and assorted shipping tycoons and industrialists commissioned its dining and gathering spaces in a mid-1800s former cotton exchange on Hanover Square.
Mr. Straight, although often suspected of having married to avail himself of his wife's railroad fortune, was self-made. 
The son of teachers in Oswego, N.Y., he was orphaned by the age of 10. 
He graduated from Cornell and quickly rose to prominence in banking and diplomatic circles across Asia. 
He worked with American financiers, including J. P. Morgan and Edward H. Harriman, on loans to prop up the Chinese government, and Roosevelt appointed him consul general in Manchuria.
Mr. Straight collected art along the way, and he urged museums and dealers to stop buying plundered Chinese pieces. 
''Monuments are even being broken up by vandals,'' the Asiatic Institute, which the Straights helped found, warned in 1914.
Mrs. Straight was a suffragist, philanthropist and art collector. 
By marrying Willard, she ''spurned foreign noblemen and the pick of all the aristocratic clubs of New York,'' a newspaper reported in 1911.
The newlyweds took a honeymoon train ride to Peking from Geneva. 
Soon after they settled into quarters within the Forbidden City, Ms. Stocker said that ''looters ransacked their home and carried away their wedding gifts.''
The couple returned to New York. 
During World War I, Mr. Straight signed up for military service in France. 
He caught the Spanish flu and died in Paris in December 1918, at 38, leaving his wife to raise their three small children.
Mrs. Straight outlived her husband by 50 years.
Ms. Stocker has been interviewing descendants. 
She has found objects that belonged to the Straights' circle, including a gilded Buddha from the 13th Dalai Lama at Roosevelt's family home, Sagamore Hill, on Long Island.
At India House, traces remain of the founders' tastes. 
Some walls are trimmed with sea horses and scallops, designed by the society architect William A. Delano. A back room called the Willard Straight Lounge has a portrait of him in World War I uniform. 
Shelves here and there display Buddhas, demons, opium pipes and maritime books like ''Greyhounds of the Sea'' and ''Fair Winds and Foul.''
In a corridor, a framed copy of another club founder's speech describes artworks there as ''reminders of that glorious period when our merchants and ships opened the markets of the world.''
Stacey Gershon, the club's current curator, said in a brief interview that the collection is now ''pretty stable.''
Herbert A. Lewis, the chairman of the club's art committee, declined to comment on Ms. Stocker's research.
Maritime collections elsewhere are shrinking. 
Auctions at companies such as Bonhams in New York have dispersed private holdings and works from the Independence Seaport Museum in Philadelphia and the Seamen's Church Institute in New York.
BODICES, NOT FOR RIPPING
Summer visitors to Governors Island are encouraged to handle disintegrating gowns. 
''Tattered and Torn (on the Road to Deaccession),'' an exhibition organized by Empire Historic Arts in Hudson, N.Y., fills a former Army officer's house with mannequins wearing clothing that museums sold or gave away.
Satiny bodices, bustles, hats and parasols are shredded and stained, but still elaborately beaded and trimmed in lace and fur. 
The outfits, dating to the 1780s, were custom-made for schoolgirls, brides and dowagers. 
Some mannequins are tucked into closets and bathrooms, for fun-house effects.
Michael Levinson, who runs Empire Historic Arts with Rodney DeJong, gives tours while wearing a 17th-century black and gold frock coat that the Beatles would have envied. 
It cost about $25 at a Paris flea market, he said, and other clothing on view was similarly cheap.
He declined to disclose which museums owned the pieces. 
''They don't like their name attached to the de-accessed material,'' he said.
More clothing collections will be dispersed in the next few months. 
Charles A. Whitaker Auction Company in Philadelphia will offer material from the Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco and the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, and Augusta Auctions will have a New York sale with lots from the Museum of the City of New York and the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, among other institutions.
