
Activists in the Chinese territory of Macau say they plan to hold an informal referendum on direct elections after a similar effort in Hong Kong attracted a large turnout and helped publicize residents' aspirations for democratic change.
Like Hong Kong, Macau's top official is chosen by a largely pro-establishment body of electors who are unlikely to challenge China's central government. 
The chief executive of Macau, Fernando Chui, is expected to be granted a second five-year term by the 400-member election commission when he faces re-election on Aug. 
31.
A former Portuguese colony of about 600,000 residents that returned to Chinese sovereignty in 1999, Macau is the only part of China where gambling is legal. 
Its gambling turnover has grown rapidly over the past decade and now dwarfs Las Vegas thanks to a steady influx of players from mainland China.While the success of the casino industry has made Macau's per capita gross domestic product one of the highest in the world, residents have expressed growing concerns about housing prices, income inequality and corruption. 
In May, thousands of people in Macau   demonstrated against a bill that would provide top officials with substantial retirement benefits.
"Macau residents are generally considered apathetic, but since the demonstrations, they have shown they will not remain silent in the future on political issues," said Jason Chao, an activist and one of the organizers of the planned referendum. 
"The upcoming chief executive election is an opportunity to get citizens involved. 
In the past, while we as activists could organize demonstrations, this time we can encourage citizens to get involved and to take part in the civil referendum."
The unofficial referendum, which is scheduled to run from Aug. 
24 to 30, will allow Macau residents to say whether they support having the chief executive chosen by universal suffrage in 2019. 
Participants will also be asked to cast a mock ballot for the 2014 race. 
If no opponent emerges to face Mr. Chui, voters will be asked whether they have confidence in the incumbent. 
The informal poll is being organized by three civil society groups: Macau Conscience, Macao Youth Dynamics and the Open Macau Society. 
It will be conducted both by online voting and in person.
The Macau government said the proposed referendum "does not have a constitutional basis, does not have any legal foundation, is illegal and invalid."
Government officials and the Chinese state news media similarly criticized the Hong Kong referendum, which   attracted nearly 800,000 votes in a territory with 3.51 million voters.
Like Hong Kong, Macau is governed under the principle of "one country, two systems," a formula that means that while it is part of China, it has retained broad autonomy in running its local affairs. 
But unlike Hong Kong, which is less than an hour away by ferry, Macau's Basic Law has no provision that says its leaders should ultimately be chosen by universal suffrage.
