
A Chinese man traveled to the United States looking to buy thousands of pounds of the kind of high-grade carbon fiber that makes fighter jets fly faster and maneuver better, the authorities said. 
His two accomplices, working from Taiwan, had helped set up the deal, scouring the Internet to find a company willing to sell.
But when the Chinese man, Ming Suan Zhang, came to meet his sellers, he instead met a surprise: the Americans he expected to sell him the goods were in fact undercover federal agents, according to court documents.
Mr. Zhang had been caught in an elaborate sting operation.
He was charged Wednesday with attempting to illegally export aerospace-grade carbon fiber from the United States to China. 
He could face as many as 20 years in prison if convicted.
''I am innocent,'' Mr. Zhang, 40, said Wednesday through an interpreter during a court appearance in Federal District Court in Brooklyn at which he pleaded not guilty. 
He was ordered held without bail.
A lawyer for Mr. Zhang, Daniel Nobel, said his client was a manufacturer of sports equipment. 
''He's an honest businessman who was caught in something he didn't fully understand but he believed to be legal,'' he said.
But the complaint that prosecutors filed quoted e-mails from him to undercover agents saying that the carbon fiber would be used for fighter planes. 
The material costs about $2 million per ton, according to the complaint.
Carbon-fiber composites of the type that prosecutors say Mr. Zhang sought are used to make planes stronger and lighter. 
America's newest fighter planes use the technology, as does the Boeing 787 Dreamliner. 
China trails the United States in use of composites.
The Commerce Department regulates the export of the material because of its potential military use.
The investigation began in April after a man and a woman in Taiwan requested information from a Web site purporting to belong to a company that sells aerospace technology; the site was actually run by United States Immigration and Customs Enforcement.
According to the complaint, the buyers were working on behalf of Mr. Zhang. When undercover agents told them that a license was required to export the requested type of carbon fiber from the United States, they expressed the desire to sidestep that process, the complaint said.
Investigators followed phone records from the buyers to Mr. Zhang.
