
Michael Chernow, a founder of the many-tentacled Meatball Shop, now has a place to call his own, and the focus is on fish. 
''There's a lot of good seafood swimming locally, and I wanted to take advantage of it in a basic way,'' he said. 
The subtext?
No salmon or red snapper. 
A blackboard in the airy white storefront lists local fish like hake, porgy, flounder and sea robin. 
A wooden spoon hanging alongside the name indicates that it's on the menu that day, ready to be seared and served in a bowl over greens and quinoa with a sauce. 
Fish tacos, a few sandwiches (including one beef burger) and dishes like curried mussels are also produced in the open kitchen. 
The wine list is sourced from coastal areas: 390 Broome Street (Mulberry Street), 212-730-6005, seamores.com. 
Opening
Angel Anahi Angelone and the chef Banks White of Corner Social in Harlem are opening this Latin-Caribbean restaurant nearby. 
(Opens Thursday): 2272 Frederick Douglass Boulevard (122nd Street), 212-316-0350, angelofharlemnyc.com.
Babbalucci Italian food, including pizza, from a wood-fired grill defines this addition to Harlem. 
(Wednesday): 331 Lenox Avenue (127th Street), 646-918-6572, babbalucci.com.
Croque Monsieur This uptown satellite of the East 13th Street sandwich shop offers some new creations, including more vegetarian options: 459 Lexington Avenue (45th Street), 212-675-2227, croquemr.com.
Dovetail After a brief hiatus for renovations, John Fraser is reopening his Upper West Side restaurant Tuesday, serving only tasting menus from $82 to $135: 103 West 77th Street, 212-362-3800, dovetailnyc.com.
Kings County Imperial This may be the Riverpark of Chinese restaurants, with its own vegetable garden supplying the kitchen with red mustard, Sichuan peppercorns and more. 
The owners and chefs, Josh Grinker and Tracy Jane Young, who also have Stone Park Cafe in Park Slope, Brooklyn, interpret regional cooking, especially from Central China. 
The menu features whole wheat Beijing noodles with radishes, and fragrant river fish steamed in a soy-chile broth. 
Soy sauce made by Kings County Soy Works, a partner, is dispensed on tap: 20 Skillman Avenue (Meeker Avenue), Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-610-2000.
Loosie's Kitchen You enter speakeasy-style, through a flower market, Casa Helecho, to find the restaurant. 
It's the companion to Loosie Rouge, a bar that opened this year. 
The cuisine is from New Orleans and includes a Sazerac mignonette alongside oysters, fried green tomatoes and blackened catfish with corn maque choux. 
(Wednesday): 91 South Sixth Street (Berry Street), Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-384-2904, loosieskitchen.com.
Mother of Pearl Ravi DeRossi has turned what was his lavish Gin Palace, which closed for repairs last year, into a restaurant that serves tastes of Hawaii, Korea, Japan and other Asian locations, with tiki drinks: 95 Avenue A (Sixth Street), 212-614-6818, motherofpearlnyc.com.
Superiority Burger Brooks Headley's famous veggie burger has a home, sharing the menu with a brown rice tofu wrap and a vegan ''sloppy Joe'' made with tofu, for which Mr. Headley said he was inspired by a can of Manwich. 
The hours, 6 to 10 p.m. Thursday to Monday, are likely to expand: 430 East Ninth Street (Avenue A), 212-256-1192, superiorityburger.com.
Swanky Dog What to do with the secret space behind Prova, the pizzeria owned by Donatella Arpaia and Pasquale Cozzolino?
For the summer, they've turned it into this hot dog pop-up, open from 5 p.m. Tuesday to Saturday. 
The lineup consists of three franks, one lavished with chiles, cheese and peppers; another with Cheddar and sauerkraut; and a chicken dog with mushrooms and cheese. 
Cocktails are available: 184 Eighth Avenue (19th Street) and 263 West 19th Street.
Looking Ahead
Ninebark Matthew Lightner, who earned two Michelin stars when he was at Atera in New York and who left that restaurant this year, has become the executive chef for all of AvroKO's West Coast projects. 
First up will be this three-story restaurant, featuring market cuisine, to open Aug. 
1: 813 Main Street, Napa, Calif., 707-226-7821.
VaucluseThe next project from Michael White's Altamarea Group, opening in early fall, will detour from the usual Italian territory and will be French, touching on Provence, brasserie style. 
But count on pasta, too. 
The chef will be Jared Gadbaw, who is at Marea: 100 East 63rd Street.
Chefs on the Move
Eli and Max Sussman, who are cooking at Samesa at Berg'n in Brooklyn, are also running the kitchen at Ruschmeyer's, a rustic lodge in Montauk, N.Y., that welcomes guest chefs each summer.
David Venturini is the new chef at A Voce Madison in the Flatiron district.
Closing
Char No. 4 Sean Josephs has announced that dinner on Sunday will be the last meal served at his barbecue restaurant in Cobble Hill, Brooklyn. 
Until then, he will offer some favorite dishes and open bottles of old and rare whiskeys.
Closed
CommerceTony Zazula and Harold Moore have pulled the plug on their vibrant bistro in a historic West Village location amid a long-running dispute with the landlord that has not been resolved.
Whiskey Soda Lounge Andy Ricker has closed his restaurant next to Po Pok Ny in the Columbia Street Waterfront District.
