
SHANGHAI -- China's high-profile prosecution of executives of the British-Australian mining giant Rio Tinto took a bizarre turn on Monday, as the executives, once accused of spying, confessed instead to accepting bribes from Chinese steel makers.
The guilty pleas, which came on the first day of a three-day trial in Shanghai, confounded most accounts -- including extensive coverage in China's state-owned media -- of why the four executives were arrested last July and what the case reveals about corruption in China's steel industry, the world's largest.
Initial accounts of the case, perhaps the most closely watched prosecution of executives of a foreign company, suggested that the executives had sought to obtain confidential information about China's steel industry by bribing industry officials. 
They did so, the accounts suggested, so that Rio Tinto, a major seller of iron ore, could raise prices the steel makers pay Rio Tinto for the crucial raw material.
Chinese officials said in July that the Rio Tinto executives had caused ''enormous economic losses'' through their espionage. 
All four executives have been in Chinese custody since July.
Monday's admissions of guilt for accepting bribes revealed a very different transgression: China's steel makers, most of them controlled by the state, had paid bribes to the Rio Tinto executives. 
They may have sought to obtain information about delicate iron ore negotiations or to try to get bigger allocations of iron ore, analysts who have followed the case said.
Chinese officials have yet to explain why they initially said the foreign executives were engaged in espionage. 
They have also not explained why they would prosecute executives of a foreign company for taking bribes even though they have yet to announce any arrests or even an investigation into bribery by the steel companies.
Chinese police and prosecutors have broad leeway to arrest and even indict suspects on suspicion of committing one offense, then change course and bring them to trial on a different charge unearthed in the course of interrogating and investigating the suspects.
The switch in this case could reflect the fact that the Rio Tinto dispute has major economic, political and diplomatic implications, involving relations with Australia, a major trading partner, and affecting tens of billions of dollars of iron ore imports to China each year.
The case also provides a glimpse into the workings of China's party-controlled security and judicial systems. 
Both the police and prosecutors ultimately report to China's political leaders, who in the most important cases decide whether to proceed with a prosecution and what charges to pursue.
The prosecution of the mining executives has prompted fears among international investors and businessmen working in China that they could be subject to legal penalties if they get into disputes with their local partners.
When the four Rio Tinto executives were arrested last year by state security agents, Chinese state media said they had sought to obtain secrets about Chinese steel production and procurement that could aid Rio Tinto in its attempts to keep the price of iron ore high.
When the charges were filed a few weeks later, they were downgraded to bribery and theft of ''commercial secrets,'' rather than espionage. 
Prosecutors did not explain the change at the time. 
They have also not made clear how the bribery charge subsequently morphed into a guilty plea for accepting bribes, or how accepting bribes relates to stealing commercial secrets.
In court testimony on Monday, three employees of Rio Tinto, including Stern Hu, an Australian national, and two Chinese nationals who work for the company, admitted to receiving several millions of dollars in bribes, according to lawyers involved in the case. 
The lawyers also said the three and a fourth Rio Tinto employee, who is expected to enter a plea on Tuesday, were being accused of taking more than $12 million in bribes as well as stealing commercial secrets.
Jerome A. Cohen, a professor at New York University School of Law and a expert in Chinese law, said the closed proceedings, the lack of transparency and the switching of charges raised troubling questions about the country's judicial system.
''The first thing they did to quell foreign protests was to reduce it to trade secrets,'' Mr. Cohen said in a telephone interview. 
''The second was to discredit the defendants in the eyes of their employers,'' he said, by having them plead to accepting bribes.
The detentions in July rocked the global steel industry and strained diplomatic relations between China and Australia. 
Shortly before the detentions, China's steel industry association had complained about the skyrocketing price of iron ore and criticized Rio Tinto and other foreign suppliers for a breakdown in iron ore contract talks.
The detentions also came just after Rio Tinto scrapped plans to accept a $19.5 billion investment from Chinalco, one of China's biggest state-owned mining groups.
But analysts who follow the Chinese steel industry said that the case also involved internal problems in the steel industry that Chinese officials did not discuss. 
In recent years some desperate, smaller steel mills that received only a small allocation of iron ore in China's collective procurement of the commodity may have offered to pay hefty bribes to secure the supplies needed to keep their factories running.
In telephone interviews after Monday's trial, Tao Wuping and Zhang Peihong, two defense lawyers involved in the case, declined to give details about the charges or the specifics of the bribes. 
They only said that their clients would plead guilty to receiving a smaller amount than prosecutors alleged.
Beginning Tuesday afternoon, the four executives are also expected to be charged with stealing commercial secrets. 
That part of the trial is closed even to Australian consular officials.
Australia had for months demanded a fair and transparent legal process, hinting that the Rio Tinto employees may have been framed. 
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd even warned in recent days that ''the world will be watching'' the trial.
Since the spying allegations were dropped, though, tensions have cooled. 
In recent months, Australian officials and Rio Tinto executives have been more cautious in their remarks about the case.
Last week, Rio Tinto said that it had formed a joint venture with Chinalco, the Chinese state-owned company, to develop a huge iron ore project in Africa. 
And on Monday, Rio Tinto's chief executive, Tom Albanese, spoke at the China Development Forum in Beijing, and pledged to work with China to find mineral resources in China and overseas.
