
CANCUN, Mexico (Reuters) -- Nearly 200 nations were to meet in Mexico on Monday to try to agree on modest steps to slow climate change, a United Nations gathering overshadowed by global economic problems and strains between the top two emitters, the United States and China.
The 12-day meeting, in a heavily guarded resort, will seek to revive negotiations stalled after last year's Copenhagen summit meeting fell short of a binding United Nations treaty to slow global warming.
Delegates began arriving Sunday for the talks that will seek agreement on lesser measures, like a ''green fund'' to channel aid to poor nations and new ways to share clean technologies and to protect tropical forests that absorb carbon as they grow.
The ultimate goal is to extend the present Kyoto Protocol, which controls the greenhouse gas emissions of all industrialized countries except the United States, which did not ratify the pact. 
The United States and major emerging economies now have to make emissions pledges if the protocol is to survive, the European Union said Sunday.
''Continuing the Kyoto Protocol only makes sense if major economies which are not part of it like the U.S., China and India also make further commitments,'' said Artur Runge-Metzger, a senior European Union negotiator.
Mr. Runge-Metzger said the European Union had withdrawn some demands in order to focus on priorities in Cancun, like clear rules on measuring emissions and finance, and he said others had to do the same.
This year is likely to be recorded as one of the warmest since record keeping began in the 19th century. 
The United Nations panel of climate scientists says rising temperatures will mean more floods, droughts and sandstorms, as well as rising sea levels.
For Cancun participants, the major challenge is to end a deadlock on sharing the burden of emissions cuts between China and the United States. 
Their relationship already is strained over China's trade surplus, North Korea and other issues.
The Cancun meeting also comes as the weak world economy, with euro zone bailouts of Greece and Ireland, has sapped attention from climate change.
Japan said last week that it would be ''meaningless and inappropriate'' for Kyoto Protocol supporters to extend the pact without more action by the top emitters. 
But supporters are fast running out of time to agree what to do after the Kyoto Protocol expires on Dec. 
31, 2012.
