
SEOUL, South Korea -- President Park Geun-hye of South Korea warned on Monday that there would be more provocations from North Korea after the North's fifth nuclear test last week, adding that they could raise the danger of war on the Korean Peninsula.
Ms. Park issued the warning when she met the leaders of opposition political parties to appeal for a united front against what she called the North's ''maniacal obsession'' with building a nuclear arsenal.
Ms. Park has become increasingly critical of the North since the test on Friday, when she said that its leader, Kim Jong-un, was guilty of ''fanatical recklessness'' and that ''his mental condition should be considered out of control.''
On Monday, she ruled out dialogue with the country, saying that its nuclear program was ''not a bargaining chip'' but a ''present and urgent threat'' to her country's security. 
She said such discussions would only buy the North more time to perfect its nuclear weapons. 
China, Russia and opposition parties in South Korea called for talks with North Korea, insisting that sanctions alone could not end its nuclear ambitions.
''We are now facing a very serious security situation that is different from the past,'' Ms. Park told the opposition leaders, according to a statement released by her office. 
''North Korea is claiming that it will carry out more provocations, and that could lead to danger of war on the Korean Peninsula or take various forms such as terrorist attacks and local provocations.''
The nuclear test last Friday was the most powerful by the North to date, and the government later claimed to have tested a ''standardized'' warhead to be fitted on its ballistic missiles. 
Although that claim cannot be independently verified, the test fueled regional fears over a growing nuclear threat.
Earlier Monday, the South Korean Defense Ministry said the North had the ability to conduct another nuclear test anytime at its Punggye-ri test site, where all five underground nuclear tests have occurred. 
South Korean officials said the site still had a couple of spare tunnels where the North could detonate a nuclear device if it wanted.
On Tuesday morning, the United States flew two B-1 bombers over an air base less than 50 miles from the North Korean border.
The opposition leaders joined Ms. Park in condemning the North Korean nuclear test, but they accused her of using the North Korean threat to suppress dissent at home. 
They told Ms. Park that they opposed her decision to deploy an American-backed missile defense system called Terminal High-Altitude Area Defense system, or Thaad, in the South by late next year.
They said the move would only further antagonize North Korea and alienate China. 
Beijing has opposed the system, saying its powerful radar would be used to track China's missiles. 
The United States says the system is intended to shield South Korea and American military bases there from North Korean missiles.
A United Nations relief agency reported that floods caused by heavy rains in northern North Korea last month killed 133 people and left 395 missing.
Citing figures from the North Korean government, the agency, the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, also said that more than 35,500 houses and 8,700 schools and other buildings were damaged, as well as almost 40,000 acres of arable land.
At least 140,000 people were in urgent need of assistance, the agency said in a statement posted on its website.
Last week, North Korea's official news media reported 60 deaths and 25 people missing in the floods that hit towns near the Tumen River, which borders China. 
On Sunday, it said the country was sending officials and workers there for urgent relief work.
With its mountains stripped bare for firewood and turned into terraced farm patches, North Korea has frequently experienced floods and droughts. 
In 2012, it reported that at least 169 people had died in floods.
