
Over the past week, links to a series of articles titled "The Past and Present Life of Murong Xuecun" have been retweeted more than a thousand times by more than a hundred Twitter accounts. 
The 10-article series portrays Mr. Murong, a prominent author and critic of the Communist Party, as a sexually promiscuous, wife-beating, money-hungry hypocrite.
"It's amusing to read as bad fiction," Mr. Murong said in a telephone interview. 
"Some scenes were written as if the writer were right there, but there is no point-of-view character."
However, some biographical details, he said, such as his birth date and the names of his elementary and middle schools, are accurate. 
"Very few people have such information," Mr. Murong said. 
"Whoever wrote the articles must have access to my secret file."
The Chinese government keeps confidential personal files on citizens, recording their performance at school or work, political history and any criminal convictions. 
Mr. Murong recently published an Op-Ed essay in The New York Times on such files.
A closer look at the Twitter accounts that were spreading the articles shows that the links were posted and reposted more than five times by the same group of accounts. 
"Clearly, it was an organized smear campaign against Murong," the writer Xiang Xiaokai commented.
The same group of Twitter accounts has also posted videos accusing advocates of democratic change in China of staging protests to solicit donations for their personal gain.
Mr. Murong said the smear campaign might have been a response to his participation in a small gathering of Chinese intellectuals in Beijing in May commemorating the 25th anniversary of the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests. 
After some attendees of the gathering were detained, Mr. Murong publicly demanded that he be detained as well. 
In July, he was detained and released after eight and a half hours.
"It looks like Murong has been categorized as a Tiananmen activist and is being dealt with by a cluster of online anti-Tiananmen team members," said Sharon Galant of Zeitgeist Media Group, Mr. Murong's literary agent.
Mr. Murong said the links were being spread on Twitter, which is blocked in China, rather than on Sina Weibo, the Chinese microblogging service with hundreds of millions of users, probably because he had already lost any meaningful presence on Weibo.
"My Weibo account has been deleted more than 10 times. 
I no longer have a voice within the Great Firewall," he said, referring to the system used to control the Internet in China.
