
TOKYO -- The Japanese Coast Guard used water cannons on Tuesday to disperse fishing boats from Taiwan in waters claimed by Japan in the East China Sea, widening a territorial dispute that has already pitted Japan against China and threatened vital trade relations in the region.
Japan's top government spokesman, Osamu Fujimura, said Tokyo had lodged a protest with Taiwan's government over the fishing boats' intrusion into waters around a chain of small, rocky islands controlled by Japan, but also claimed by China and Taiwan. 
Japanese ships have also confronted fishing boats from mainland China in the area in recent days.
The islands, called the Senkaku Islands in Japan and the Diaoyu Islands in China, are uninhabited, but the waters around them are coveted fishing grounds and may have large gas reserves. 
The status of the islands touches on historical grievances in East Asia dating from World War II and before.
Taiwan's government generally maintains friendly relations with Japan, and has not been very vocal about its claim to the islands. 
Even so, activists in Taiwan have raised their voices about the issue as mainland Chinese activists have done.
Scenes of a Japanese Coast Guard vessel blasting water at a Taiwanese fishing boat were televised by NHK, the Japanese public broadcaster. 
Another Taiwanese boat was seen trying to spray water back. 
The Coast Guard said that more than 40 Taiwanese fishing boats and 8 Taiwanese patrol craft briefly approached the disputed islands, but had since departed.
The dispute erupted earlier this year when the governor of Tokyo, a well-known nationalist, announced that he wanted to buy three of the islands from their owner, a Japanese citizen. 
He said he believed that Japan's central government was not doing enough to defend them.
The uproar that followed prompted the Japanese central government to step in and buy the islands itself. 
Officials said that was done to keep them from falling into more provocative hands, but the move was seen in China as an effort to solidify Japanese control. 
Angry demonstrations broke out, and some Chinese protesters attacked Japanese businesses.
The foreign ministers of Japan and China met in Beijing on Tuesday to talk about ways to settle the dispute, but the Chinese Foreign Ministry said no substantive progress was made.
The meeting came as the Japanese military was winding down joint military exercises with the United States that the Japanese government said were aimed at improving its ability to defend far-flung islands, Reuters reported.
On Tuesday, Pentagon officials said the joint exercises should not be interpreted as a signal to China that the United States was abetting Japan in its dispute over the islands; the two militaries frequently practice together. 
''It's natural for us to help the Japanese and to exercise with them,'' George Little, the Pentagon press secretary, said during a news conference on Tuesday. 
''I wouldn't construe this particular event as in any way tied to the island dispute.''
Pentagon officials said the exercises had been planned before the flare of public concern over the sovereignty issue.
China has been sensitive to any moves to support Japan, however, and last week some officials complained that an agreement to deploy a second advanced missile-defense radar on Japanese territory helped embolden the country in the territorial dispute.
Also on Tuesday, China put its first aircraft carrier into service, a move intended to signal its growing military capabilities as tensions run high over various island disputes with other nations.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
