
BEIJING -- Outside Honesty Dog House, a cold and dry December wind whipped coils of beige earth skyward. 
We ran for the brick buildings.
Dozens of dogs surged and barked in a central courtyard of the kennel in Tongzhou, east of Beijing: golden retrievers, Labradors and Tibetan mastiffs, elegant breeds aimed at China's fast-growing upper and middle classes.
Fulfilling a longtime promise to our children, we, too, had come to buy a dog. 
I had tried to explain to Mr. Yang, the owner, over the phone what we were looking for, so he took us straight to a dim room heated by a coal brazier that echoed with the barking of a dozen pit bull puppies and bulldogs. 
I grabbed my 4-year-old daughter and drew her to me. 
My son and husband stared.
''That's what you said, isn't it?'' asked Mr. Yang, sensing our consternation.
''Uh, no,'' I said, as my husband showed him photographs of a boxer on his mobile phone.
''Oh. Quanshi gou,'' said Mr. Yang, a sunburned, wiry man in his 40s. 
''Actually we're not that precise in Chinese about what to call them. 
There's also yingshi niugou,'' or English bulldog, he said, pointing. 
''Or French ones. 
Do you want one of those?''
Then one of those magical moments happened and our gaze was drawn, as if by command, to a cage on the floor, where a single, brown boxer puppy stood on his hind legs, paddling at the sides, staring at us hopefully.
It was Hercules -- or Xiao Tongzhi, ''Little Comrade,'' as I now call him, to the equal shock and delight of Chinese friends who sense a breached taboo in giving an animal a revolutionary name. 
(Today, ''comrade'' also means homosexual, so the reaction is complex.)
We wanted him. 
But it was close.
''Fifteen thousand renminbi,'' said Mr. Yang -- $2,400. 
The boxer is not an indigenous breed, but that was too much for an ordinary family. 
(In the United States, they might cost around $300.) Dreading the children's disappointment, I set to bargaining.
My main card was an honest one: Just because we're foreigners doesn't mean we're rich.
Once, non-Chinese in China were wealthy compared with Chinese, and widely perceived as such. 
We were charged more for the same things and even had to use a special currency, the F.E.C., or Foreign Exchange Certificate. 
(It was abolished in 1995.) But over the past three decades, China has seen the creation of enormous wealth.
This year, the Shanghai-based Hurun Rich List counted 251 U.S.-dollar billionaires, compared with two in 2000. 
There were at least 2.7 million dollar millionaires, according to the list, whose founder, Rupert Hoogewerf, says he believes the true numbers are higher.
And yet there are many poor, too. 
This week, a survey found that China's Gini coefficient -- a measure of income inequality -- was 0.61 in 2010, with zero equaling perfect equality and 1 equaling a situation where one person owns all the wealth. 
That was significantly higher than the global average of 0.44 and 50 percent above the ''risk level'' for social unrest, The South China Morning Post, a Hong Kong newspaper, wrote, citing Chinese news media.
The survey, conducted on 8,438 households and 29,500 individuals, was set up by the Finance Research Institute of the People's Bank of China and Southwestern University of Finance and Economics, The Post reported.
For many Chinese today, spending 15,000 renminbi on a puppy is unremarkable, even though it remains impossible for others.
I had to instill some normalcy into the negotiation and disabuse Mr. Yang of the idea that because we were non-Chinese we must be wealthy.
''You know who are the richest people in China today?''
I began, casually. 
''Chinese people.''
Mr. Yang nodded in polite agreement.
''Foreigners are merely middle-class,'' I continued. 
''The rich are all your own people. 
They're the ones with money.''
I saw some kind of understanding dawn on him. 
We set to naming prices.
''This morning, a Chinese man bought one for 11,500 renminbi,'' said Mr. Yang. ''It's the lowest I'll go.''
''Who knows where people get their money from these days,'' I countered.
''I'm not rich either, you know,'' grumbled Mr. Yang. ''I have a child to educate.''
''So do I,'' I parried. 
''Two.''
As he inched down, I inched up.
In the end, perhaps sensing a deal was better than no deal, he thrust Little Comrade into my arms, naming a price far below his asking but still above mine.
''Take him,'' he nodded, not unhappily, as if to say: You and I, we're the same. 
Just trying to get by.
And yet the incident reminded me not just how foreigners in China today are no longer comparatively rich -- something I welcome as it shows that many Chinese people are doing much better -- but that China is no longer cheap, by any standard.
Prices are rising relentlessly as the economy swells, and in a repressed economy with few outlets for investment other than a bubbly property market, rich people are willing to pay exorbitant amounts for things that may prove a good investment.
Even ink-grinding stones, used in traditional painting, have become a speculative object. 
Pu'er tea long ago became something one can buy and sell for profit rather than drink. 
As for buying a home, the Nobel Literature laureate Mo Yan said recently that his $1.2 million award would not buy him a decent apartment in central Beijing.
I suppose we were lucky with Little Comrade. 
Last year, Chinese media reported, a Tibetan mastiff sold to a rich businessman for around $1.5 million.
