
North Korea, angered by a United Nations rebuke of its recent missile launching, declared on Tuesday that it would permanently pull out of nuclear disarmament talks and restart its nuclear program. 
It also expelled United Nations inspectors from the country.
The moves, which came hours after the United Nations Security Council chastised North Korea for violating a United Nations resolution, pose a nettlesome foreign policy test for the Obama administration.
Political analysts said they did not expect North Korea's latest actions to immediately heighten the nuclear danger the country posed because it had dismantled parts of its nuclear plant at Yongbyon. 
North Korea has taken a hard line before, only to soften its stance once it got concessions or made a political point.
Still, the White House spokesman, Robert Gibbs, said North Korea's threat to abandon multiparty talks and reactivate its Yongbyon nuclear reactor represented a ''serious step in the wrong direction.''
He urged the North Korean government to return to the bargaining table.
Privately, administration officials said they expected little change in tone or tactics from North Korea until there was some resolution of an internal struggle to replace the country's leader, Kim Jong-il, who only recently began appearing in public again after recuperating from what South Korean and Western intelligence officials have said was a stroke.
''If you tried to do a grand bargain with these guys right now, it's not clear that they would want to,'' said Marcus Noland, an expert on North Korea at the Peterson Institute for International Economics. 
''This is a situation in which no one can afford to look conciliatory to an adversary.''
For now, at least, the administration's strategy is to try to persuade China to exert its influence on the North to resume negotiations over its nuclear program, while trying to devise more targeted economic sanctions against the North.
The Security Council decided unanimously on Monday to tighten sanctions against North Korea, and the White House has asked the United Nations sanctions committee to develop a list of North Korean companies to be singled out by April 24. 
The focus is expected to be on companies involved in missile and nuclear technology.
Given the poor record of sanctions against North Korea, some analysts said they doubted that these measures would prove effective. 
They noted that China, which is by far North Korea's largest trading partner, opposed a stronger United Nations response to the missile launching.
Even by its strident standards, the North Korean government used particularly uncompromising language, saying the Security Council's vote to condemn the launching and tighten sanctions was an ''unbearable insult'' to the North Korean people.
''There is no need for the six-party talks anymore,'' said a statement issued by the Foreign Ministry, referring to the off-again-on-again talks between North Korea and five countries, including the United States. 
''We will never again take part in such talks and will not be bound by any agreement reached at the talks.''
The International Atomic Energy Agencysaid its inspectors had been ordered to remove surveillance devices and other equipment at the Yongbyon nuclear plant, and to leave North Korea as soon as possible.
Siegfried S. Hecker, a professor at Stanford University who has extensively toured the plant, said it would take six months to rebuild the cooling tower that North Korea blew up in June 2008 as part of an earlier agreement.
But Dr. Hecker said the North Koreans could begin reprocessing plutonium from an existing cache in a couple of weeks. 
That would allow them to make one additional bomb a year, he said, which might embolden them to conduct another test and refine their bomb-making expertise.
''With Yongbyon disabled, it meant no more bombs and no better bombs,'' Dr. Hecker said.
The North had earlier agreed in principle to give up its nuclear material and any weapons, but talks on how to reach that goal stalled. 
During the Bush administration, North Korea is believed to have produced enough bomb-grade plutonium for six or more nuclear weapons.
Dr. Hecker said that throwing out inspectors also raised the risk that North Korea could sell nuclear material to other countries.
The United States has worked to get North Korea back to the negotiating table, even as it has tried unsuccessfully to win a tougher statement from the Security Council in response to the April 5 missile launching.
The launching, experts said, was supported by the North Korean military and was part of a larger drama in which Mr. Kim was reasserting his grip on the levers of power. 
North Korea had said the launching was meant to send a satellite into orbit, but Western analysts said it was a failure, with parts of the rocket plunging into the sea off Japan. 
Nevertheless, it was worrisome because the North was using the same technology as an intercontinental ballistic missile.
On Tuesday, China, which along with Russia had blocked a sharper rebuke from the United Nations, said it hoped that North Korea would reconsider. 
The Russian foreign minister, Sergey V. Lavrov, said he was confident that the talks would resume, even if ''emotions usually run high in such situations.''
At the White House and the State Department, officials seemed to be digging in for a long struggle.
''You have to be able to withstand short-term setbacks,'' said one official, who spoke on condition of anonymity because of the delicacy of the matter. 
''You can't judge these things by short-term reactions.''
