
Two American journalists on a reporting trip to the border between China and North Korea have been detained by the North Korean military, a human rights activist and another source said Thursday.
Laura Ling, a Chinese-American, and Euna Lee, a Korean-American, were believed to have been detained by North Korean border guards on Tuesday morning. 
Their Chinese guide, an ethnic Korean, was also detained. 
A third journalist, Mitch Koss, was believed to have remained in China.
Aaron Tarver, a spokesman at the United States Embassy in Seoul, could not immediately confirm the report.
The journalists went to China last week to report on North Korean refugees in northeastern China, according to Chun Ki-won, a Christian clergyman in Seoul who helped arrange their trip, and Lee Hark-joon, a reporter with the Chosun Ilbo, South Korea's leading daily newspaper, who met them last week in Seoul.
North Korea condemns the presence of foreign journalists in the border area reporting on the plight of North Koreans who have recently fled hunger and political repression at home and accuses them of acting as American spies.
The journalists' reported detention comes at a tense moment in American relations with North Korea. 
The North has announced that it will launch a communications satellite early next month and has ordered American aid groups to leave the country.
On Thursday, Japan threatened to tighten sanctions on the North if it proceeded with the rocket launch, which Washington and Tokyo see as a cover for testing ballistic missile technology.
''We will make a comprehensive decision, including the possibility of imposing tougher sanctions,'' Prime Minister Taro Aso of Japan told a parliamentary committee.
Mr. Chun, who heads Durihana, a South Korean missionary group that assists North Korean refugees in China, said he learned of the journalists' detention from American officials.
Mr. Lee said journalists from the cable channel Current TV consulted with him about reporting on North Korean refugees before heading to China. 
Current TV is an independent media company that was founded by former Vice President Al Gore and a businessman, Joel Hyatt.
Mr. Chun said he last talked with the journalists at 6 a.m. Tuesday, when their Chinese guide told him that they were moving from Yanji, a Chinese town near the northeastern end of the China-North Korean border, to Dandong, near the opposite end of the border.
The journalists entered China on March 13 via Seoul, and during their reporting had interviewed North Korean refugees living in hiding, including orphans and women who worked for pornographic Internet chat sites in the hopes of earning enough money to travel to South Korea or the United States, Mr. Chun said.
It was not clear where along the 300-mile border and under what circumstances they were detained.
''They told me that they completed what they went to China for, and that they completed their assignment,'' Mr. Chun said. 
''I warned them against getting too close to the border. 
I suspect that they got too ambitious.''
Since the mid-1990s, famine has driven thousands of North Koreans to sneak across the Tumen and Yalu Rivers, which form the border.
Arrests of Americans in the area are rare. 
In 1999, the State Department said an American citizen visiting a North Korean economic zone near the Chinese border had been arrested. 
The citizen, Karen Han, 58, a Korean-American businesswoman based in Beijing, was deported after being held for a month on unspecified charges.
In a more widely reported case, in 1996 Bill Richardson, then a United States congressman from New Mexico, negotiated the release of the American citizen Evan C. Hunziker, who swam across the Yalu River, while drunk, on what he called a mission to spread the Gospel in the North. 
Mr. Hunziker was detained for three months on espionage charges.
Holding Japanese and South Korean citizens has long soured Pyongyang's relations with its neighbors.
On Thursday, Foreign Minister Hirofumi Nakasone of Japan said that his country faced ''the most serious threat'' from North Korea's planned rocket launch and that it would rally the international community to impose additional sanctions against the North.
North Korea has informed international agencies that it will launch its rocket between April 4 and 8 along a trajectory that crosses Japan.
If the rocket launching is successful, it will give the newly elected parliament a chance to celebrate Kim Jong-il's re-election to another five-year term as the country's leader. 
North Korea said Friday it will convene its parliament, known as the Supreme People's Assembly, on April 9.
After North Korea detonated its first nuclear device in 2006, the United Nations Security Council adopted a resolution banning it from nuclear tests and all ballistic missile activities. 
Japan joined global sanctions banning arms and luxury goods trade with North Korea.
But international sanctions have little impact on the North Korean regime, which has survived decades of isolation as famine has killed thousands of its people.
The North showed its imperviousness to outside influence this week when it informed the United States it no longer wanted to receive food aid and told five American aid groups to leave by the end of the month.
No international sanctions work effectively without cooperation from China, the North's main ally and biggest trade partner, but Beijing remains wary of American moves to increase economic pressure on North Korea and favors a policy of engagement.
On Thursday, China's official People's Daily newspaper said that Prime Minister Wen Jiabao told his North Korean counterpart, Kim Yong-il, during a meeting on Wednesday in Beijing that China wanted to ''actively push forward'' deadlocked nuclear disarmament talks involving the two Koreas, China, the United States, Russia and Japan.
