
For New Yorkers who basked in regular productions of Chinese opera at the tiny Taipei Theater of the Taiwanese Chinese Information and Culture Center in the 1990s, it has since been feast or famine. 
Mostly famine.
True, there was Chen Shi-Zheng's epic 18-hour production of Tang Xianzu's ''The Peony Pavilion'' at the Lincoln Center Festival in 1999. 
But nothing remotely approached that level of ambition until this week, when the Chinese star Zhang Huoding made her American debut in two full-evening works of Peking opera with the National Academy of Chinese Theater Arts at the David H. Koch Theater: ''Legend of the White Snake,'' on Wednesday, and ''The Jewelry Purse,'' on Thursday.
The reach of Ms. Zhang's fame was evident from what appeared to be full houses and from the unbridled enthusiasm of the audiences, clearly consisting largely of Chinese speakers. 
They seemed to anticipate Ms. Zhang's every move and acknowledged a beautifully sung aria or a particularly elegant turn with immediate applause and shouts, as Chinese opera audiences are wont to do (and as the uninitiated were urged to do, in little preperformance talks from the stage).
Chinese opera, which differs greatly from the Western mode, is the basic theatrical form in China, a catchall typically including not only vocal and instrumental performance and acting but also mime, speech (often melodiously heightened), thoroughgoing choreography and acrobatics. 
The colorful variety of expression is often enough to attract Westerners to the form even before their ears have become accustomed to it.
Peking opera, one of several styles of Chinese opera, can grow raucous, as New Yorkers have had occasion to see. 
But Ms. Zhang adheres to the Cheng school, a somewhat restrained tradition, which she has extended through her own productions, including ''White Snake.''
Based on a thousand-year-old folk tale, ''White Snake'' tells of two immortal snake spirits, Bai Suzhen and her maidservant, Xiao Qing, who reside atop a mountain. 
As they explore lower ground, Bai falls instantly in love with Xu Xian, and they marry. 
But through the evil deeds of a bullying monk, Xu sees Bai in her reptile form origins and dies on the spot. 
Restored to life through Bai's efforts, Xu again proves an all-too-human companion, but they come to terms.
Ms. Zhang was superb as Bai, a regal presence in her singing and acting, but also remarkably skilled at swordplay and martial-arts moves as, with her character pregnant, she goes to battle to free the hapless Xu from another fix: captivity in a monastery. 
The fight rages all around her in that scene, in the form of acrobatics by the large cast.
Xu Chang was also delightful in the role of Xiao, the maidservant being a pert and spunky stock character in Chinese opera. 
The role of Xu, something of a nullity to begin with, was played by an understudy.
''The Jewelry Purse'' was nowhere near so entertaining to a newcomer. 
Action was minimal.
Its heroine, Xue Xiangling, begins as an insufferably spoiled daughter of a wealthy family but is moved to an act of kindness on her wedding day and turns over her well-filled jewelry purse to an impoverished bride-to-be, Zhao Shouzhen. 
After Xue is separated from her husband and son by a flood and left impoverished herself, her kindness is returned by -- as fate would have it -- Zhao.
The Zhang fans in the audience went wild repeatedly, and it was easy to see why, but this is a work for connoisseurs attuned to its niceties. 
And it struck this viewer as little but niceties: two and a half hours' worth of them.
Even the comic relief quickly becomes tiresome: two squabbling clowns who rise little above Abbott-and-Costello level. 
Where is a good sword fight or acrobatic brawl when you need one?
Still, as with ''White Snake,'' the production was lavish and beautiful to the eye. 
And it was kinder to the ear than Wednesday's performance, the crude amplification seemingly toned down a bit.
There can be little question that amplification is needed in so large a space for a vocal technique that emanates more from the head than from the chest. 
But it didn't flatter anyone on Wednesday, least of all Ms. Zhang, whose lovely tone was often rendered coarse and shrill. 
All that apart, it was wonderful to make her acquaintance.
