
HONG KONG -- A bevy of manufacturing indexes from around the world on Wednesday underlined the uneven and shaky nature of the global recovery, with activity picking up a notch in the economic powerhouse of China, but cooling in the eurozone and several other Asian countries.
The mixed picture reflected the uncertainties haunting the global economy. 
U.S. unemployment and household debt remain high and the country's property market is still fragile. 
At the same time, much of the Asia-Pacific region continues to stand out with buoyant, although moderating growth.
Growth in China, which this year leapfrogged Japan to become the second-largest economy in the world, behind the United States, has been supported by a giant government stimulus package and ample lending by state-controlled banks.
The pace of expansion in China has somewhat moderated in recent months, as the government has instructed banks to lend less and as various tools designed to curb speculative investments in the soaring property market have stalled excessive price increases in the sector.
But the manufacturing data on Wednesday, which gave the first insight into how the economy performed in August, showed that the modest slowdown of the past few months had not become a worrying decline.
Two monthly surveys of purchasing managers released on Wednesday showed manufacturing activity picked up slightly in August after several months of slight declines.
The government-backed purchasing managers' index, published by the Federation of Logistics and Purchasing, ticked up to 51.7, from 51.3 in July.
A similar survey compiled by HSBC also rose, to 51.9 from 49.4 the previous month.
''This reconfirmed our long-held view that China is moderating rather than melting down,'' commented Hongbin Qu, chief China economist at HSBC, in a note accompanying the bank's data.
Analysts at ANZ echoed this in another note. 
''Today's P.M.I.'s also show that there is little chance that China will experience a double-dip recession in the second half of 2010.''
Longer-term, economists caution, China faces the considerable challenge of rebalancing its economy, stimulating more domestic demand for the goods it produces.
For now, however, China's robust recovery mirrors the performance across much of the Asia-Pacific region. 
Free from the sort of debt levels still plaguing governments and households in much of the developed world, most of the region quickly resumed healthy growth after the global financial crisis.
Data this week have underlined the point. 
On Wednesday, Australia reported that its economy had expanded more than analysts had expected during the second quarter, growing 1.2 percent from the previous quarter and 3.3 percent compared with the same period last year.
On Tuesday, India reported better-than-expected growth figures for the quarter. 
Although the HSBC-compiled P.M.I. for India, published Wednesday, slipped a touch in August, economists are generally bullish on the country's growth prospects.
South Korea, meanwhile, released trade data for August on Wednesday that showed exports and imports both rose nearly 30 percent from a year earlier -- somewhat less than analysts had forecast.
The main exception to Asia's rebound is Japan.
''Japan's export-led recovery is running out of steam, dragged down by an uncertain global economic outlook, slack domestic demand, and a government policy stalemate,'' Standard & Poor's said in a report on Wednesday.
The ratings agency said that the recovery's momentum in the United States had weakened recently and that certain growth areas like Japanese auto and technology-related exports are expected to slow.
''In Europe, we see demand remaining weak in the near term, so it will likely take time for Japanese exports to Europe to reach pre-global financial crisis levels,'' the report said.
A purchasing managers' index for the euro zone, also released Wednesday, underlined this point. 
The gauge declined to 55.1 in August, from 56.7 in the previous month, said Markit Economics, which is based in London, adding that activity remained especially subdued in Greece, Spain and Italy.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
