
TOKYO -- Ichiro Ozawa, the shadowy power broker of Japan's governing Democratic Party, suffered another political blow on Monday when an independent panel said he should face charges for a political financing scandal, weeks after he was defeated in his attempt to become prime minister.
The panel, Japan's equivalent of a grand jury, overruled a decision by Tokyo prosecutors not to charge Mr. Ozawa in connection with $4.4 million in misreported political funds. 
Three of Mr. Ozawa's former aides were indicted in the scandal, which has sapped public support for the Democrats and helped force the resignation in June of Prime Minster Yukio Hatoyama.
While prosecutors ruled that there was not enough evidence to link Mr. Ozawa to any misdeeds, the panel's decision on Monday will probably force prosecutors to appoint lawyers to indict him anyway. 
If indicted, Mr. Ozawa, 68, could face the embarrassing possibility of standing trial for the charges, which he vowed to contest.
''This is very disappointing,'' he told reporters. 
''I am confident that a trial will show that I am innocent.''
Mr. Ozawa is widely credited with engineering the Democrats' historic election victory last year, when they ended the virtual postwar monopoly on power of the Liberal Democrats. 
But Mr. Ozawa is also intensely unpopular among voters because of the scandal and his image as an old-school back-room deal maker. 
His star fell further as he lost his campaign to replace the current prime minister, Naoto Kan, in an internal party vote last month.
An indictment, much less a trial, would make a political comeback all the more unlikely for Mr. Ozawa, who has largely dropped from public view. 
There had been speculation that he might be biding his time before making another challenge to Mr. Kan, who has faced criticism for appearing to give in to Chinese demands during a recent standoff over an arrested Chinese trawler captain.
Mr. Kan also faces the daunting task of passing bills through a divided Parliament, in which opposition parties control the upper house. 
During last month's internal party vote, Mr. Ozawa contended that only he had the leadership skills to win passage of the party's agenda.
The indictment will also force the Democrats to decide what to do with Mr. Ozawa, who controls the party's largest faction, but who is also disliked by many party elders, including Mr. Kan. One possibility is that the Democrats could decide to expel Mr. Ozawa, though such a move would risk splitting the party.
On Monday, there were already calls by Democrats for Mr. Ozawa's exit from the party. 
But the Democrats' secretary general, Katsuya Okada, said the party would not decide how to handle Mr. Ozawa until it had heard his side of the story.
The Japanese news media have reported that prosecutors also investigated a $3.9 million land purchase in Tokyo for possible irregularities. 
The reports said that much of this money, as well as the other $4.4 million, appeared to come from the same construction company.
