
A roundup of festivals, concerts, opera and dance on world stages this winter.
FESTIVALS
VARIOUS CITIES
St Jerome's Laneway Festival
This traveling music festival kicks off in Singapore before visiting to a slate of cities in New Zealand and Australia over the course of about two weeks in January and February. 
Big name pop and rock bands -- like Battles, Beach House, Chvrches, QT, Shamir and Grimes -- will make multiple stops with the festival, and local acts will join in at each locale. 
Stops on the festival tour include Singapore, Auckland, Adelaide, Brisbane, Fremantle, Melbourne and Sydney.
VAGATOR, INDIA
Sunburn Festival
The European and American pop and rock music festival circuit mostly goes quiet in the winter, but the southern hemisphere's stays strong. 
From Dec. 
27-30, this major music festival brings DJs, EDM (electronic dance music) and house sounds to a coastal city in Goa, a province on India's west coast. 
Some of the world's best-known artists are performing, most notably the DJ David Guetta, known for his collaborations with artists like Nicki Minaj and Sia. 
Over 100 acts are showing in all, including up-and-comers like the American performer Kshmr, and the Indian DJs Sartek and Swami Harami.
VIENNA, AUSTRIA
Mozartwoche
Over two dozen Mozart-centric concerts and events will appear in this festival, which takes place from Jan. 
22-31 and is timed to coincide with Mozart's birthday, on Jan. 
27. Events include concerts of some of Mozart's less performed works, by groups like the Monteverdi Choir, the Salzburger Bachchor and the Vienna Philharmonic. 
The lineup also includes some offbeat offerings, like a screening of the movie ''Mozart Superstar,'' and a performance by the Mozart Kinderorchester, a children's orchestra.
OPERA AND DANCE
AMSTERDAM
Dutch National Opera and Ballet
The experimental Finnish composer Kaija Saariaho and the even more experimental theater director Peter Sellars will join forces for ''Heavenly Opera,'' an evening featuring two short operas inspired by the Japanese Noh theater tradition. 
The production capstones a busy season for the company, which will also stage a new production of the ballet ''Mata Hari,'' about the courtesan and dancer who was convicted of spying on the French and put to death by firing squad. 
Handel's ''Ariodante,'' and Mussorgsky's epic ''Khovanshchina'' round out the company's winter opera program.
BEIJING
National Center for the Performing Arts
The ever-busy Center hosts a range of opera, theater and dance, both from China and abroad. 
Prominent touring companies that will visit the venue in the winter months include the ORF Vienna Radio Symphony Orchestra, which will perform belated New Year's concerts on Jan. 
7 and 8; and the Chicago Symphony Orchestra, which will play two concerts under the direction of its star conductor, Riccardo Muti. 
Chinese companies in the Center's winter lineup include the N.C.P.A. 
Orchestra, which will perform a New Year's concert on Jan. 
1; and the Chinese People's Armed Police Force Male Chorus and Orchestra, which features dozens of uniformed singers and musicians. 
The chorus and orchestra will perform on Jan. 
22.
BERLIN
Komische Oper
In January, the opera's artistic director, Barrie Kosky, will tackle a new production of Tchaikovsky and Shilovsky's operatic epic ''Eugene Onegin,'' about a man caught in a love triangle with two sisters. 
The baritone Günter Papendell sings the title role; Henrik Nanasi conducts. 
Under Mr. Kosky, the Komische Oper has become by far Berlin's most forward-looking opera house. 
This winter, American musicals like ''Kiss Me, Kate'' and ''West Side Story'' run alongside some of the edgier works in the opera canon, like Prokofiev's exorcism opera ''The Fiery Angel'' and the operatic thriller ''The Canterville Ghost'' by Marius Felix Lange.
LONDON
Royal Opera House
Two of the opera canon's greatest vehicles for soprano voices -- Puccini's ''Tosca'' and Verdi's ''La Traviata'' -- are running alongside one another here in the depths of the winter months. 
Angela Gheorghiu and Amanda Echalaz will split duties in the title role of ''Tosca'' under Jonathan Kent's direction. 
Venera Gimadieva, Maria Agresta and Nicole Cabell will share the role of Violetta Valéry, the doomed courtesan in ''La Traviata.''
In February, the opera will open its first-ever production of Emmanuel Chabrier's goofball opera ''L'étoile,'' about King Ouf the First, who spends his birthday looking for a subject to execute as a present to himself. 
The Royal Ballet's lineup, meanwhile, includes classic works like ''Giselle'' and a triple bill of works by the choreographer Christopher Wheeldon, including a new, as-yet-unnamed piece (Feb. 
12-March 11).
TOKYO
New National Theater
Leos Janacek's bleak opera ''Jenufa'' follows a woman who lives in the Moravian mountains, and who is subjected to near-endless persecution and strife after she becomes pregnant. 
The Czech conductor Tomas Hanus will make his New National Theater debut with the production, which is directed by Christof Loy. 
Stagings of the ''The Magic Flute'' and ''Salomé'' round out the theater's winter opera programming.
MADRID
Teatro Real
The Komische Oper of Berlin's psychedelic take on ''The Magic Flute,'' which uses eerie, cartoonlike projections and illustrations to bring Mozart's opera to life, comes to Madrid in January. 
The Oper's artistic director, Barrie Kosky, staged the production with 1927, a British theater troupe that uses projections and mimelike performance styles to create surreal, cartoonish worlds in its work. 
Later that month, the theater will stage ''The Knight of the Sad Countenance,'' an adaptation of the writings of Cervantes; the year 2016 marks 400 years since the author's death.
MOSCOW
Bolshoi
The Bolshoi in Moscow will stage another adaptation of Cervantes's work -- this one in ballet form. 
The choreographer Alexei Fadeyechev based his new version of ''Don Quixote,'' which will premiere here on Feb. 
2, on Marius Petipa and Alexander Gorsky's original ballet. 
That work caps a busy dance season at the Bolshoi, which will also stage revivals of ''Peer Gynt'' and ''La Sylphide.''
The Bolshoi's opera company will also keep busy through the depths of winter: In February, a new production of ''Katerina Izmailova'' will open here. 
New stagings of ''Iolanta,'' ''The Stone Guest'' and the children's opera ''The Fables of the Vixen, the Duckling and Balda,'' are also scheduled.
MILAN
Teatro alla Scala
The director Gilbert Deflo's grand, traditional production of Verdi's ''Rigoletto,'' which features towering sets by the designer Ezio Frigerio and costumes by Franca Squarciapino, opens here in January. 
Leo Nucci plays Rigoletto, the court jester who seeks vengeance when the duke he entertains seduces his daughter. 
From Jan. 
28, the Teatro will present a newly reworked staging of Handel's ''The Triumph of Time and Truth.''
Written as an oratorio, the work was given a fully staged production by Jürgen Flimm and Erich Wonder at the Zurich Opera in 2003. 
A polished and expanded version of that show will appear here.
PARIS
Paris Opera Ballet
In his brief tenure as the Opéra's director of dance, the young choreographer Benjamin Millepied has revived the institution's programming, inflecting it with a hipper, more contemporary feel. 
In February, ''Bel/Millepied/Robbins'' will open here. 
The evening of short works includes new pieces by Jérôme Bel and Mr. Millepied, who set his new work to music by Beethoven. 
The Feb. 
20 performance of the work marks the dancer Benjamin Pech's ''official farewell'' to the company. 
That night, the company will add works to the program to bid the dancer adieu. 
The company also has a busy opera season featuring major works from the opera canon, like ''Die Meistersinger von Nürnberg'' and ''Il Trovatore.''
TEL AVIV
Israeli Opera
Verdi's sprawling opera ''Il Trovatore'' traces the intertwined lives of citizens and nobles during a civil war in 15th-century Spain. 
The Polish director Michal Znaniecki's epic adaptation of the opera, which features video art by Michal Rovner and imposing sets by Luigi Scoglio, will open here Dec. 
26. Gustavo Porta and Alfred Kim will trade turns in the role of the troubadour, Manrico (the story is part love story, part political thriller as Manrico leads a group of political rebels). 
The company will follow the war epic with some bubblier offerings: Johann Strauss II's ''Die Fledermaus,'' Handel's ''Rinaldo'' and Rossini's ''La Cenerentola.''
ORCHESTRA
BERLIN
Berlin Philharmonic
In February, the conductor Simon Rattle, who usually draws crowds to the grande salle of the Philharmonie, will play an intimate concert in the Philharmonie's chamber music hall. 
Mr. Rattle will play piano, while his wife, the mezzo-soprano Magdalena Kozena, sings songs by Strauss and Dvorak. 
Mr. Rattle returns to the main stage on Feb. 
18 with a major concert of works by Francis Poulenc, Charles Koechlin, Gyorgy Kurtag and Maurice Ravel. 
It's a starry season for conductors at the Philharmonic this winter: Christian Thielemann, Daniel Harding and Ivan Fischer will play multiple concerts there in January.
HONG KONG
Hong Kong Philharmonic
The Hong Kong Philharmonic has a reputation for blending classical programming with pop flair, and this year is no exception: In March, the Beach Boys will come to Hong Kong to play two stadium concerts with members of the orchestra. 
The orchestra has a number of more traditional concerts before then, though, like ''Bach -- the 6 Brandenburg Concertos,'' an evening featuring the concertos, led by the harpsichordist and music director Benjamin Bayl (Feb. 
5 and 6).
MUNICH
Symphonieorchester des Bayersichen Rundfunks
Yo-Yo Ma, the world's only superstar cellist, will hold a mini-residency with the orchestra in January. 
The series lineup includes a solo recital of cello suites, two performances with the orchestra (of Strauss and Dvorak, led by the conductor Mariss Jansons) and a master class, where viewers can watch Mr. Ma work with young cellists on their technique.
TOKYO
Tokyo Philharmonic Orchestra
The conductor Tadaaki Otaka will kick off the orchestra's 2016 slate in January with two New Year's concerts, featuring music by Johann Strauss II, Tchaikovsky and Ravel. 
From Jan. 
29-31, the powerhouse conductor Ken-Ichiro Kobayashi will lead the orchestra in three consecutive evenings of Tchaikovsky concerts. 
The concerts feature music from Tchaikovsky's fourth, fifth and sixth symphonies; his ''Nutcracker''; and his adaptation of the poet Pushkin's ''Eugene Onegin,'' and other works.
SEOUL, SOUTH KOREA
Seoul Philharmonic Orchestra
The company's star conductor, Myung-Whun Chung, will lead several concerts in January, including a performance featuring Bruckner's Symphony No.9 and two centered on Mahler's Symphony No.6. 
In February, the conductor Domingo Hindoyan will visit the orchestra to conduct Brahms's Violin Concerto. 
Op. 77 and Richard Strauss's tone poem, ''Ein Heldenleben.''
Suyoen Kim will be the solo on the violin.
