
Just ahead of the opening ceremony of the Winter Olympics on Friday, a plurality of Americans say it was a bad decision to hold the Games in Russia, with security concerns the top reason, a new Pew Research Center poll found.
Forty-four percent of respondents called the decision to conduct the Games in Sochi a bad one, compared with 32 percent who said it was a good decision. 
Twenty-four percent said they did not know.
Among those who said holding the Olympics in Russia was a bad decision, 62 percent cited concerns about safety or terrorism as a reason. 
Only 5 percent mentioned President Vladimir V. Putin, while 4 percent cited Russia's treatment of gays and lesbians.
Moreover, in a Quinnipiac University poll conducted in mid-January, half of registered voters said they thought it was at least somewhat likely that a terrorist attack would occur at the Sochi Olympics.
The Pew poll found that negative views of the decision to have the Winter Olympics in Russia increased with age. 
Only 25 percent of adults under age 30 called it a bad decision, while 55 percent of adults 50 and older said so.
Nevertheless, a majority of Americans said they planned to watch the Winter Games, including 37 percent who said they would watch some of the Olympics and 18 percent who said they would watch a lot of them.
In 2008, when the Summer Olympics were in Beijing, Pew found Americans more positive about the decision to hold the Games in China once the competition began. 
In April 2008, four months before the start of the Games, Americans were closely divided over the decision to hold them in China. 
But in a Pew poll conducted during the opening weekend of those Olympics, more called the decision a good one.
The Pew Research Center poll was conducted Jan. 
30 to Feb. 
2 among 1,003 adults and has a margin of sampling error of plus or minus four percentage points. 
The Quinnipiac University poll was conducted Jan. 
15 to 19 among 1,933 registered voters and has a margin of sampling error of plus or minus two percentage points.
