
SAN FRANCISCO -- Perhaps no one took more pleasure in the city's first election of a Chinese-American mayor than Rose Pak.
Ms. Pak, 63, might at first glance be mistaken for one of the grandmothers who play cards on Chinatown benches. 
She has never held office and is listed only as a consultant to the Chinese Chamber of Commerce.
From her office at the chamber she also operates, political experts say, as one of San Francisco's power brokers, a crucial bridge between an increasingly assertive Chinese community, now one-fourth of the city's population, and the wider political and business establishment.
Since she became a community organizer in 1980, Ms. Pak has been a savvy networker, mobilizing Chinese votes and donations for a succession of mayors in return for city financing of social programs and building projects in Chinatown. 
Now she has, by all accounts, played a prime role in achieving her generation's dream, electing one of their own to the city's highest office.
''I'm ecstatic,'' she said after Edwin M. Lee's victory was declared this week. 
''After decades of struggling, we finally elected a Chinese-American.''
Critics call her an unregistered lobbyist who trades her influence for donations to groups she controls and is too friendly with wealthy developers. 
Others say she is an unusually effective broker of interests of the sort that makes any large city run.
''Rose Pak fits into the historical narrative of Chinatown,'' said David C. Latterman, associate director of the graduate program in public affairs at the University of San Francisco. 
''She came in as a community activist and did what it takes to get her folks a bigger seat at the political table. 
Like her or not, you can't criticize her success.''
Whether out of respect or fear, Ms. Pak is regarded by many here with awe. 
She is a powerful woman in an ethnic subculture dominated almost totally by men.
She is often loud and profane in a subculture that values quiet modesty, and is even known to shout obscenities at enemies from the reviewing stand at the Chinese New Year parade (which, like the Miss Chinatown U.S.A. pageant, is run by the chamber she dominates).
She is ''tenacious as a pit bull,'' said an ethnic Chinese lawyer who, like most Chinese interviewed, spoke about Ms. Pak only on the condition of anonymity. 
She combines a fiery temper with a wicked sense of humor about her political exploits.
''I'm not shy about what the community needs, and I'll shout at the top of my lungs if necessary,'' is how she described herself, in an interview laced with profanities.
Ms. Pak was born in China, where her father was a businessman. 
He died in the civil war, and her mother fled with the children to Hong Kong in 1952. 
At 17, she won a scholarship to a women's college in San Francisco and went on to earn a master's degree in 1972 from the Columbia School of Journalism in New York.
She returned to the Bay Area to work as a reporter for The San Francisco Chronicle. 
But she resigned after eight years to lead a campaign to save the treasured Chinese Hospital, which faced being closed without costly renovations. 
As a board member today, she is in charge of fund-raising for a new $160 million facility.
Fluent in English and Cantonese, with a shrewd understanding of the political ways on both sides of the divide, she became something of a gatekeeper for Chinatown, literally translating for city leaders who came to seek donations or discuss projects.
Battling the reluctance of immigrant Chinese to get involved in politics, she and other educated baby boomers organized Chinatown and demanded more city money. 
Nonprofit groups like the Chinatown Community Development Center, which provides low-income housing, became important institutions in Chinatown alongside the traditional family associations. 
The nonprofit groups also, it happens, provide legions of volunteers for favored political causes -- most recently, the election of Mr. Lee.
Ms. Pak, who has never married, offered support to a succession of mayors and became especially close to Willie Brown, who stepped down in 2004 and who calls her Miss Rose.
''I realized that to empower our community we needed to get involved in the political process,'' she said. 
''Why would anyone pay attention to you otherwise?''
Rather than seeking office herself, she felt she could accomplish more (and, critics note, expand her influence) by helping up-and-coming Chinese-Americans get appointments in city agencies and, increasingly, win elections.
Ms. Pak was instrumental in securing the appointment of Mr. Lee, then the city administrator and a longtime friend, as interim mayor in January, gaining votes from wavering supervisors after he firmly promised not to run in November. 
But months later, Ms. Pak and her allies raised money for an independent ''Run, Ed, Run'' campaign and gathered 60,000 signatures. 
Mr. Lee reversed himself and won handily.
Aaron Peskin, chairman of the city's Democratic Party, said he worked cooperatively with Ms. Pak for part of his tenure as president of the Board of Supervisors from 2005 to 2009. 
But he is now a vocal critic.
''It was very seductive,'' Mr. Peskin said of being courted by Ms. Pak, recalling how she gave presents, remembered the names of family members and invited him and his wife, along with other officials and business leaders, on one of her many delegations to meet senior leaders in China. 
''What I didn't realize at the time was that I was being lobbied.''
In Hong Kong, on the last night of the China trip, he and Ms. Pak were joined by one of San Francisco's largest contractors, he said, who had flown that day to have dinner with him (then the top city legislator) and Ms. Pak.
Jim Stearns, a Democratic political consultant who managed the mayoral campaign of a Lee rival this fall, said, ''She is definitely a power player in this city, and it goes well beyond social services for poor Chinese.''
''It's well known that if you have a controversial development project, you get Rose Pak on your side,'' Mr. Stearns said, and make payments to the Chamber of Commerce or certain nonprofit groups, if not directly to Ms. Pak.
Such talk has been personally hurtful, Ms. Pak said, asserting that she only promotes public projects that will benefit the Chinese community.
Except for some modest payments in a period of personal hardship about a decade ago, she has not accepted corporate consulting fees, Ms. Pak said. 
She mainly lives on ''a few thousand a month'' from the chamber, she said. 
Even her critics say that she seems to be motivated more by power than wealth.
Jason McDaniel, a political scientist at San Francisco State University, said in Ms. Pak's defense: ''People look to interest-group leaders like her to get things done. 
I get a whiff of resentment, this idea that Rose Pak is an inscrutable power broker behind the scenes.''
Ms. Pak's raucous style, and her wry pleasure in the blood sport of politics, was evident in her description of a conflict with Mr. Peskin. As a supervisor he tried to block a parking garage she wanted in Chinatown, she said, but then ''he had the nerve to come to the grand opening.''
''I grabbed the microphone and said, 'Here comes the Taliban,' '' she recalled with a chuckle.
''Aaron later claimed that I purposely had arranged for firecrackers to be set off underneath him, making a hole in his pants,'' she said, laughing and offering no comment on his charge.
