
UNITED NATIONS -- Ukraine's interim prime minister, seeking to rally support for a Security Council resolution criticizing the Russian takeover of Crimea, took pains on Thursday to say that his country wanted a peaceful resolution to the crisis.
''The Ukrainian government is absolutely open. 
We want to have talks. 
We don't want any type of military aggression,'' the prime minister, Arseniy P. Yatsenyuk, told the Security Council. 
He spoke in flawless English, and then, for dramatic effect, looked up and addressed Moscow's envoy in Russian.
''We are looking for an answer to the question, whether the Russians want war,'' he asked. 
''And I'm sure as a prime minister of Ukraine, which for decades had warm and friendly relations with Russia, I'm convinced that Russians do not want war.''
The Russian ambassador, Vitaly I. Churkin, sat straight-backed, hands on the table, and listened. 
When it was his turn, he replied crisply: ''Russia does not want war nor do Russians. 
I suspect Ukrainians don't want it either.''
He went on to excoriate Mr. Yatsenyuk's administration in Kiev as ''a government of victors,'' stuffed with extremists, who came to power on the shoulders of violent protesters and Westerners who had interfered. 
He called Sunday's scheduled referendum in Crimea an exercise in ''self-determination.''
Speaking to reporters after the meeting, the American ambassador, Samantha Power, said, ''I missed the day in law school where self-determination was defined as Russia-determination.''
It was an afternoon of intense diplomatic theater, as the Security Council met for the sixth time in two weeks over the developments in Ukraine and diplomats announced plans to propose a resolution that was more for show than function.
The resolution is almost certain to be vetoed by Russia, which like the other five permanent members of the Council has the right to torpedo any measure it does not like. 
It is not likely to explicitly condemn Russia's military advance in the Crimean peninsula. 
Ms. Power said it is expected to express support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine and dismiss the referendum on Sunday as illegitimate. 
The measure is likely to be carefully worded to isolate Russia, potentially corralling even its traditional ally, China, to abstain from a vote.
China has not yet shown its hand. 
Yet even its brief public comments have made it amply clear that it is in a tough bind. 
On Thursday, the Chinese ambassador, Liu Jieyi, tried to defend some of Moscow's apprehensions, singling out its concern about ''extremism'' and violence on the streets of Kiev.
But Mr. Liu also signaled Beijing's worries: China has its own separatists in Tibet, for instance, and would not wish to invite foreign meddling in its affairs. 
He said it was Chinese policy ''not to interfere'' and ''respect other countries' sovereignty and territorial integrity.''
Several Council members said they intended to put up a resolution for a vote before Sunday's referendum in Crimea. 
It is certain to call on countries not to recognize the validity of its results. 
Several Western diplomats pointed out that the referendum would be held at a time when Russian troops have bolstered their presence on the peninsula and massed along Ukraine's eastern border.
''It is clear that any referendum vote in Crimea this weekend would be farcical,'' said Mark Lyall Grant, the British ambassador.
The text could also contain expressions of support for minorities in Ukraine and call for access to all parts of Ukraine by international monitors. 
Several observers have not been able to get into the Crimean peninsula, including most recently the United Nations assistant secretary general for human rights, Ivan Simonovic.
Among the rotating members of the Security Council is Lithuania, a former Soviet republic. 
Its ambassador, Raimonda Murmokaite, one of the last to speak on Thursday, looked up from her prepared remarks at one point and said that across Europe ''the memories of Soviet occupation are very much alive.''
Speaking to reporters after the Council meeting, Mr. Yatsenyuk said: ''We are wondering what is the final destination of Russian troops?
Is it Crimea?
Is it Kiev?
Is it another city?''
