
Tim Hardaway Jr. experienced the less glamorous side of the N.B.A. this month when the Knicks went on a barnstorming tour of New England and beyond.
The team played three games in four nights, starting in Providence, R.I., where the visitors' locker room seemed to be the size of a cubicle. 
It continued to Toronto, where a video of a Hardaway dunk went viral. 
It wrapped up in Manchester, N.H., where the road took its toll and the team looked sluggish.
''It was a learning experience,'' said Hardaway, a first-year shooting guard.
With renovations continuing at Madison Square Garden, the Knicks have become vagabonds once again this preseason. 
On Monday, the team will make its second trip to Toronto for an exhibition against the Raptors before heading to Green Bay, Wis., for a game on Wednesday against the Milwaukee Bucks. 
The Knicks' lone preseason appearance at the Garden will not come until Friday, when they host the Charlotte Bobcats.
It might not be an ideal situation -- ''It's O.K.,'' Coach Mike Woodson said -- but at least the Knicks have company. 
In fact, N.B.A. teams are collectively logging more than 200,000 miles of preseason travel to destinations as diverse as Biloxi, Miss., and Istanbul.
All that traveling can create challenges for coaching staffs that would prefer to focus on evaluating personnel and devising offenses. 
But the league increasingly sees the preseason as vital for spreading the N.B.A. gospel at home and abroad.
Consider that 28 percent of the N.B.A.'s games this preseason are being played at nonleague locations. 
For example, the Knicks' appearances in New Hampshire and in Rhode Island were home games for the Boston Celtics. 
Just two of the Celtics' eight preseason games are being staged at TD Garden.
At the same time, the Knicks' peripatetic schedule, covering about 3,070 miles, has been a breeze compared with the globe-trotting of other teams. 
The Oklahoma City Thunder played two games in Europe this month. 
The Houston Rockets and the Indiana Pacers faced each other in the Philippines and in Taiwan. 
Most recently, the Golden State Warriors and the Los Angeles Lakers had a two-game swing through China.
Those exhibitions were all part of what the league has branded the N.B.A. 
Global Games: eight preseason and two regular-season games featuring 12 teams in seven countries. 
Commissioner David Stern said the league's overseas adventures required an extraordinary amount of planning.
''But they're our attempt to grow the game,'' said Stern, who added that the league was ''serious about bringing this sport to the greatest number of people.''
League officials seem well aware that the travel can be a drain. 
Upon arriving in China last week, Adam Silver, the league's deputy commissioner and chief operating officer, reflected on his 24-hour trip from Rio de Janeiro, where the Washington Wizards played the Chicago Bulls on Oct. 
12. ''I look forward to the next generation of airplanes,'' he said.
Wizards Coach Randy Wittman said his team enjoyed its trip to Brazil. 
Many of the players took their families along.
''We were basically together 24/7,'' Wittman said. 
''It was a good time to sit down and get to know families, which we don't have an opportunity to do that often.''
No team will wind up traveling more during the preseason than the Pacers: roughly 19,770 miles, based on an analysis of their schedule. 
The Celtics (2,060) and the Nets (2,310) have the lightest schedules. 
It is all relative, of course.
As for the Knicks, they dealt with the same issue last year, playing all six of their preseason games on the road, though it did not seem to have an adverse effect on their preparation for the regular season. 
They won 54 games and advanced past the opening round of the playoffs for the first time since 2000.
Their preseason excursions have also been a boon for arenas -- and secondary markets -- that seldom have the opportunity to host N.B.A. games. 
The Knicks' game on Thursday against the Wizards had an announced attendance of 12,376, a sellout, at Baltimore Arena, a 51-year-old building that has seen brighter days.
The game required substantial preparations by the arena's staff. 
Frank Remesch, the arena's general manager, said his crew had refurbished the court, installed new backboards and replaced both 45-second clocks. 
On game day, Remesch approached Woodson after the Knicks' morning shootaround and asked if the accommodations were suitable.
''He said it was perfect, so that meant a lot,'' Remesch said.
Many of the improvements were necessary because the arena had not staged an N.B.A. game since the Washington Bullets played several home games there in the 1990s. 
Remesch also recalled an exhibition appearance by the Chicago Bulls when Michael Jordan was in his prime. 
At the time, Remesch was concerned because the court sat on a sheet of hockey ice. 
Sure enough, there was condensation on the court the morning of the game.
''I was thinking, Oh, my God. 
I don't want to be part of the facility that rips Michael Jordan's A.C.L. out,'' Remesch said.
By afternoon, the weather had cooled and the game was uneventful. 
Jordan's knees remained intact.
The Knicks' visit was similarly drama-free. 
Carmelo Anthony, who grew up in Baltimore, was treated like royalty, and the Knicks won. 
And it was another win for the N.B.A. in its October push to markets big and small.
''Everybody and his brother came out for the game,'' Remesch said. 
''It was more than just basketball. 
It was an event.''
