
The week after a vote in Hong Kong's legislature ended nine months of intense debate about how Hong Kong will select its next leader, another ending loomed outside the Legislative Council complex, this time for the tent city of pro-democracy demonstrators.
For nine months, the tents were the base of dozens of people campaigning against the rules China set for the election of Hong Kong's chief executive in 2017. 
Beijing decied last August that it would, for the first time, allow all eligible voters to cast ballots, but they would be able to choose only from two or three candidates selected by a committee that critics say would be stacked with Beijing loyalists.
On Thursday, 28 Hong Kong legislators voted down the bill, saying it came short of offering genuine universal suffrage. 
People in the protest camp said the outcome was far from being a victory for democracy, but they added that it brought them a sense of closure nonetheless.
On Monday, the Hong Kong authorities posted notices at the tent site instructing the protesters to leave by Wednesday, and to take all their belongings with them. 
But even before this, some protesters were already planning to go.
"I'm relieved," said Matthew Fung, 32, after the vote on Thursday, as he walked shirtless in the searing midafternoon heat between the rows of tents. 
"Now I can finally go home."
He was one of many protesters who started packing up within hours of the defeat of the election bill. 
Although Beijing and Hong Kong officials trumpeted the election proposal as a major advance compared with the current system, in which a 1,200-member committee both nominates and elects the chief executive, Mr. Fung and other protesters said the new plan was merely fake democracy.
Mr. Fung said he had lived in a tent outside the legislature on most days since September, when protests of the Chinese legislature's decision on election rules erupted across Hong Kong. 
The use of tear gas by the police outside the government headquarters sent tens of thousands of protesters into the streets for weeks. 
They set up hundreds of tents and held nightly rallies until Dec. 
11, when officers moved in to reopen the streets to traffic. 
But a small number of protesters later returned with their tents, which they set up along the sidewalks of an avenue that connects the government headquarters and the Legislative Council. 
Some have remained there since.
"We can't stay here forever," said Samson Chan, a protester-in-residence who also helps run the Tim Mei Avenue Christian Church, named after the avenue next to the government buildings. 
His position on the vote was clear from the back of his yellow T-shirt, which was printed with the words, in English, "Fake universal suffrage?
No!"
Mr. Chan, a member of the pro-democracy Civic Party, said the summer heat had driven away many protesters. 
Fewer people were happy to spend the night without air-conditioning in the village - as they called the tent city.
But that village was by no means a backwater.
Over time, the protesters obtained televisions, refrigerators and enough books to fill several bookshelves - ranging from the memoir of Zhao Ziyang, a former Communist Party chief in mainland China, to titles in the Harry Potter series - all protected from the heat and rain by canopies and blue-and-white striped tarpaulins.
Simon Wong, a 71-year-old regular in the tent city known as Uncle Wong, said the books were some of the most valuable items available to them, and that they had been donated by supporters, authors and publishers. 
On Tuesday morning, he was packing up his pillow and sleeping mat and preparing to return the tent he had borrowed from another protester.
"It wasn't a victory for us," Mr. Wong said of the Legislative Council vote, "but at the very least we managed to convince 27 legislators to stick to their promise to vote against the proposal, and even a 28th legislator to vote against it."
That 28th legislator, Leung Ka-lau, is an independent lawmaker representing the medical sector who was not part of the bloc that had promised to oppose the proposal. 
"We haven't won, because we still do not have a genuine universal suffrage," Mr. Wong said, "but we have protected our dignity."
Hong Kong residents who were tired of the obstruction of the area by protesters had complained that the tents were fire hazards and could hide weapons, which the demonstrators might use on the day of the vote.
On June 13, days before the Legislative Council cast ballots, the police confiscated wooden planks, metal bars and glass bottles from the tents for "safekeeping" and to "reduce the risk to public safety," said Lai Tung-kwok, Hong Kong's secretary for security.
On Tuesday morning, many protesters said that they would leave the tent city by the Wednesday deadline, but that they would return to the streets again on July 1, for the annual march for democracy held on the anniversary of the former British colony's return to Chinese rule.
The Civil Human Rights Front, the main organizer of that march, has a list of demands for the Hong Kong authorities: the resignation of the chief executive, Leung Chun-ying; the abolition of the nominating committee; and the prosecution of police officers who were filmed beating a protester last year.
"We're just taking a break," Mr. Wong said about clearing the tent city. 
"We'll take some time to ponder our next move and then we will be back."
Follow Alan Wong on Twitter at @alanwongw.
