
TOKYO -- Japan's exports rose in July for the first time in three months, government data showed on Wednesday, in a tentative sign that overseas demand is starting to recover, which could raise hopes that exports could offset a slump in consumer spending.
The 3.9 percent rise compared with the same month last year was roughly in line with a 3.8 percent increase expected by economists in a Reuters poll. 
It followed a revised 1.9 percent decline in June.
Growth in exports was driven by increased shipments of cars to Europe, metal-processing machinery and items like liquid crystal displays, according to the Ministry of Finance data.
''The data shows exports are recovering moderately as a trend, so external demand may offset some of the weakness in domestic demand ahead,'' said Takeshi Minami, chief economist at the Norinchukin Research Institute. 
''But export growth is unlikely to accelerate much from here. 
Europe's economy lacks momentum, and this will weigh on growth of Japan's big Asian export markets like China.''
Exports to Asia, which account for more than half of Japan's total exports, rose 3.4 percent in July from a year earlier as automobile shipments grew in the first increase in three months. 
Exports to China were up 2.6 percent in July because of gains in shipments of metal-processing equipment and car parts.
Japanese exports have struggled with weak demand in Asia for much of this year, as well as a growing shift in production overseas that has disappointed officials in the government and at the central bank, the Bank of Japan.
Exports to the United States rose 2.1 percent as Japan shipped more car parts. 
However, exports of cars to the United States market tumbled 10.3 percent from a year earlier, the fourth straight month of decline, as Japanese companies shifted production to the United States and other countries.
The central bank has warned that the relocation of factories offshore, particularly for making cars, means that Japan may not be able to accelerate exports at will. 
But the evidence that exports are finally starting to recover suggests that the economy may rebound after a sales- tax increase this past April, which would ease pressure on policy makers to do more to support growth.
''The B.O.J. can say with more confidence that it will keep its monetary policy on hold,'' said Hiroshi Miyazaki, senior economist at Mitsubishi UFJ Morgan Stanley Securities. 
''The government has already announced some steps to support corporate activity. 
Now it is simply a matter of reflecting these policies in next fiscal year's budget.''
Japan's imports rose 2.3 percent in July, compared with a median forecast for a 1.7 percent annual decline, as energy imports grew. 
That brought the trade balance to a deficit of 964 billion yen, or $9.3 billion.
The export data will be a relief for the central bank, which has based its economic growth and inflation forecasts on a rapid rise in exports as part of the government's plan to energize the economy.
Prime Minister Shinzo Abe updated his economic growth strategy, known as Abenomics, in June with a plan to lower the corporate tax rate and to offer incentives in special economic zones to encourage companies to expand operations in Japan.
The economy shrank an annualized 6.8 percent in the quarter that ended in June, its biggest slump since the March 2011 earthquake and tsunami, raising fears that consumer spending had weakened more than expected after the April sales-tax increase.
Exports also fell in that quarter, showing that both domestic and external demand had weakened.
Economists expect that Japan's gross domestic product will grow around 4 percent on an annualized basis in the current quarter, and many policy makers say exports must grow to ensure the economy remains on track.
