
NEW YORK is unquestionably an international capital of the arts, but it can also be a frustrating backwater when it comes to contemporary opera. 
Yes, in February the Metropolitan Opera mounted John Adams's ''Nixon in China'': a groundbreaking work at its premiere 24 years ago, since embraced as canon most everywhere but here. 
In November the Met revived a brilliant staging of Philip Glass's ''Satyagraha,'' a 1979 opera that proved its worth elsewhere first.
New York City Opera, meanwhile, showed real gumption in March with ''Monodramas,'' a boldly conceived, brilliantly executed triptych of works by Schoenberg, Morton Feldman and John Zorn. 
(I missed City Opera's other contemporary offering, Steven Schwartz's ''Seance on a Wet Afternoon,'' but the critical response was not encouraging.)
True, small, determined companies produced a steady stream of newly composed pieces on shoestring budgets. 
But a current Carnegie Hall residency by the distinguished Finnish composer Kaija Saariaho reminds us that none of her widely admired operas have been produced here. 
Of major recent works by Harrison Birtwistle, Hans Werner Henze, Aribert Reimann and Unsuk Chin, there is no trace. 
''St. Francois d'Assise,'' Messiaen's towering expression of mysticism and faith?
As if!
So while the Met served up bread and circuses, and City Opera fumbled with smoke and mirrors, the year's most important premiere was at the Juilliard School. 
There, in November, a student production of ''Kommilitonen!''
(''Young Blood!''), written by the veteran English composer Peter Maxwell Davies on a commission from Juilliard and the Royal Academy of Music in London, showed how vital and exhilarating contemporary opera could be.
Mr. Davies, invigorated by writing for young performers, produced a score that was brimming with potency, its abrasive vocabulary and polystylistic clamor leavened with passages of deeply affecting lyricism. 
A deft libretto by David Pountney, the director, wove together three historic student protests -- in Munich during World War II, in China during the Cultural Revolution and in the segregated Mississippi of 1962 -- in a manner that warned and inspired, largely without hectoring.
As one-note spectacles and directorial incomprehension drew critical barbs at the Met, Mr. Pountney's economical, imaginative staging was pitch perfect. 
The singers and players, conducted by Anne Manson, performed at a level that would do any professional company proud.
With protests erupting from Tahrir Square to Times Square, and even outside Juilliard's theater, ''Kommilitonen!'' could hardly have been timelier. 
Even without that unplanned resonance, the work fomented a revolutionary notion: that there is in New York an audience hungry for uncompromising contemporary opera.
