
PARIS -- The automaker Renault filed a criminal complaint on Thursday in an industrial espionage case in which it asserts that a foreign company sought to obtain secrets related to its electric car program.
The complaint, filed with the office of the Paris prosecutor, Jean-Claude Marin, asserts that Renault was the victim of ''organized industrial espionage, corruption, breach of trust, theft and concealment.''
Though Renault has suspended three executives, the complaint was made ''against persons unknown,'' a common tactic in French legal affairs.
''We confirmed several days ago that there was an international organization behind it,'' Caroline de Gezelle, a Renault spokeswoman, said. 
''Making the complaint against 'unknown persons' gives the investigators the possibility of going after the others.''
She declined to identify the organization or the country the company suspects.
Mr. Marin said at a news conference that the complaint accused a private company in a foreign country, Reuters reported. 
''It's Renault's position,'' Reuters quoted him as saying. 
''They don't cite a foreign power. 
They only cite private persons.''
On Tuesday, Renault held disciplinary hearings as a prelude to firing the executives, whom it suspended on Jan. 
3. The company suspects the three executives of having sought to pass on data related to its electric vehicle program. 
Although Renault has not released specific details, it has said none of its secrets were compromised.
The French authorities are looking into possible Chinese involvement, a link that Beijing denies.
Renault said the complaint followed ''the discovery of serious misconduct detrimental to the company and in particular to its strategic, technological and intellectual assets.''
''The matter,'' it added, ''is now in the hands of the judiciary.''
The prosecutor's office did not immediately respond to a request for a comment. 
The Central Directorate of Interior Intelligence, the French domestic intelligence agency, is also participating in the investigation.
The three suspended employees all maintain that they are innocent. 
They are Matthieu Tenenbaum, a former deputy director of Renault's electric vehicle program; Michel Balthazard, formerly a member of the Renault management board; and Bertrand Rochette, who was responsible for pilot projects in the traditional auto business and is a subordinate of Mr. Balthazard.
Xavier Thouvenin, a lawyer for Mr. Balthazard, said that Renault's formal complaint -- which they have only read about in the media -- had changed nothing, and that his client ''remains ignorant of what he's being charged with.''
''We're waiting for the letter of dismissal that we're expecting following the hearing'' Tuesday, Mr. Thouvenin said. 
''That letter,'' he said, ''should finally allow us to see the legal basis on which they're accusing him. 
It will be only then that Mr. Balthazard will explain himself in detail.''
Mr. Thouvenin said the company's announcement ''shows that the case goes over our heads.''
''The statement shows clearly that they're looking for a lot of people, a big conspiracy,'' he added. 
''My client denies having anything to do with that.''
Neither the other two employees nor their lawyers could be reached for comment.
Renault, along with Nissan Motor, its Japanese affiliate, is pushing toward mass production of a range of electric vehicles, investing 4 billion euros, or $5.3 billion, in the project, and the company hopes to become the pioneer in the technology.
Suggestions that the French authorities are following a Chinese connection have drawn a sharp response from Beijing. 
Hong Lei, a spokesman for the Chinese Foreign Ministry, on Tuesday categorically denied spying by China, saying the accusation was ''baseless and irresponsible.''
France's relations with Beijing have gone through some rough patches -- President Nicolas Sarkozy threatened in 2008 to boycott the Beijing Olympics over China's human rights record in Tibet -- but all indications were that things had been improving. 
And France, along with its European neighbors, is seeking China's financial support for the struggling euro.
Renault is treading carefully, as it is still seeking to make significant inroads in China, the world's largest auto market.
