IN late summer 2007, as my third 12-month teaching visa was about to expire, and my partner, Andy (ne Hou Bingnan), had been refused a visa to visit me in the United States for the third time, I had to make a decision: New York or Andy. 
My choice ultimately led me to the task of creating an American-style home in China, little knowing what such a project would entail.
That fall, I went back to New York and sold my apartment. 
When I returned to China, Andy and I set out to find an apartment in Dalian -- a northeastern city where we had been living for three years -- that would serve as a home and a place to tutor students: I teach conversational English to Chinese students, and Andy teaches Chinese to foreigners.
After a month of intense shopping, we found a 2,000-square-foot apartment on the second floor of a 10-story condo. 
The main attraction was a cavernous room (17 by 57 feet) that we could turn into an open living and kitchen space. 
There were also four bedrooms, two windowless bathrooms and a dark interior room nestled between the bedrooms.
Outside, there were three-foot-deep terraces with no access from the apartment. 
Inside was raw space: a concrete bunker with exposed heating and water pipes and dangling electrical wires.
For the neighborhood and the quality of the building, $300,000 seemed reasonable. 
And having undertaken a number of renovation projects, I was confident that I could do the plans and elevations myself, particularly since building codes and condo board restrictions are minimal here.
Prices of goods and labor, though, can vary wildly. 
Everything is negotiable, but to bargain effectively, one must have guanxi, or connections, a force useful in the West but exponentially more powerful here. 
So we accepted an offer from Andy's father, a man with considerable guanxi, to bring workers and materials from his hometown, Huludao, about a five-hour drive away.
A week later, a flatbed truck arrived bearing wallboard, plywood, bags of cement, nails and screws, followed by eight laborers with tools and bed rolls. 
For the next three weeks, the crew worked 10 hours a day, seven days a week, sleeping on pallets on the floor. 
They also brought cards and mah-jongg sets and built tables from scrap plywood, exchanging their wages every evening in gambling games. 
Hou Wenkui, Andy's father, served as watchdog and cooked meals on portable gas rings.
As the only member of the team who spoke English and Chinese, Andy was the go-between for me and the crew, a migraine-inducing task.
Before building out, we did some demolition, and created doorways to the terraces. 
That was the easy part. 
Then the construction began.
As we boxed the heat and water risers and horizontal ceiling ducts, and dropped the ceiling to 9 1/2 feet, I drew in recessed lights. 
That started the first battle with the crew.
They were accustomed to the Chinese taste for rococo, and Zhang, the wallboard specialist, wanted to show off his expertise at fashioning tiers of lightning-bolt zigzags and undulating dragons across the ceilings. 
I wanted clean, straight lines.
Wang, the chief carpenter, was disappointed when I rejected his offer to build a fake mantel and fireplace in the living room to serve as a pedestal for the flat-screen TV and a cabinet for the cable box and DVD player. 
And they were all astonished when I told them my plan to put the TV in the master bedroom, recessed into a closet wall. 
(In middle-class China, the TV is the centerpiece of the home -- as in American houses of the 1950s.)
On some projects, they applied their skills without asking, and we were happy with the results. 
When Li installed the floor tiles in the bathrooms, for example, he carefully laid them so that there was an imperceptible slope down to the drains, ensuring that water wouldn't accumulate.
Other efforts were less successful, but all had more or less happy endings. 
When Hsia, the electrical specialist, hooked up the transformer I had brought from the United States for connecting the American-made 110-volt range and dishwasher, he got some wires crossed and blew out the electronic control panel on the range. 
The replacement panel was intercepted by the local police, who refused to give it to us at first. 
When I saw it, I was grateful for their protectiveness: it looked just like the bomb-detonation timers you see in American movies about terrorism.
The total cost of the project, once everything was added up -- materials, labor, furniture, fixtures and appliances -- was about $60,000. 
But the final chapter of the construction story didn't occur until several weeks after we had moved in.
One morning, I found a letter to Andy in the mailbox, handwritten in Chinese. 
It said, in effect, ''We are a large gang of dangerous men. 
We know you are rich'' -- we are not -- ''and unless you give us 10,000 yuan'' -- about $1,500 -- ''we will kidnap you and torture you and then ask for an even larger sum. 
If you pay, we will leave you alone.''
From the details the writer had provided about us and our belongings, it wasn't hard to figure out that the ''gang'' members were among the local laborers who had been in the apartment during the post-construction decorating process.
In the family powwow that followed, I argued that if we conceded, they would be back for more. 
Andy's parents thought it wasn't worth the risk and insisted that Chinese criminals are usually men of their word. 
So we paid.
A week later I found a nicely worded thank-you note in the mailbox. 
So far, we have heard nothing more from our extortionists.
