
Federal investigators reported on Monday that a ''strong association'' exists between chemicals in Chinese drywall installed in thousands of homes during the housing boom and electrical problems in those homes.
In addition, investigators said that the drywall was a possible cause of respiratory problems reported by homeowners, brought on by hydrogen sulfide gas emitted from the imported drywall in combination with formaldehyde, which is common in new homes.
The finding, released by the Consumer Product Safety Commission, is the second in a series of progress reports on a widespread investigation into complaints by homeowners that their newly built homes were giving off a rotten egg odor and causing respiratory problems, and that appliances and electrical systems were failing quickly.
More than 2,100 homeowners, mainly in Florida, Louisiana and Virginia, have complained to the government of problems with their homes. 
Those three states experienced a home construction boom after devastating hurricanes. 
With domestic sources of drywall running low a few years ago, many home builders turned to imported drywall from China, which investigators now say is linked to many of the homeowners' problems.
The report found that Southern homeowners were particularly vulnerable. 
The problems were brought on by a higher-than-normal level of hydrogen sulfide, worsened by high humidity, high temperatures and poor air circulation in highly air-conditioned homes.
''The real suspect can now be confirmed,'' said Jack McCarthy, president of Environmental Health and Engineering, hired by the government to study 51 homes. 
''There's a strong association with the drywall and hydrogen sulfide and the corrosion that we see in these homes. 
Temperature, humidity and air exchange rates are contributing factors.''
An estimated 60,000 homes may have been built with Chinese drywall, but the commission said that not all Chinese-made drywall was tainted.
Federal investigators shied away from any definitive statements about the relationship between the drywall and reported health problems, saying that further studies were under way. 
But they clearly pointed in that direction.
''When we look at these levels, we see how this could possibly contribute to some of the health problems reported to the C.P.S.C.,'' said Mr. McCarthy.
Of the 51 homes examined, 41 had problems and 10 did not. 
Air samples were taken, and X-ray and infrared tools were used to determine drywall composition. 
Wiring and copper plumbing were inspected and homes were tested for temperature and air exchange. 
The investigation, which is costing $3.5 million, is the largest in the safety commission's history.
Scott Wolfson, a spokesman for the commission, said that the agency's next step would be to look into possible ways to fix the problems facing homeowners and possible ways to provide financial aid to homeowners.
The commission has sent a letter to the Internal Revenue Service asking that the service allow homeowners to deduct drywall-related costs as a casualty loss on their federal income tax returns.
Senator Bill Nelson, a Florida Democrat who has been critical of the government's response, said on Monday that he was ''disappointed the government is taking too long to establish whether there is a link between drywall, corrosion and health problems.''
He added that ''we still lack definitive answers.''
Further studies will be conducted at the federal Sandia and Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratories to better understand and isolate the chemical emissions and to determine the long-term corrosive process.
The commission also said that no new Chinese drywall had entered the United States since 2009, although stockpiles of uninstalled Chinese drywall had been located. 
The owners of those stockpiles have been notified by the commission that they must report to the government if they sell or dispose of the material.
The Formaldehyde Council, a trade organization, disagreed with some of the findings.
