
One of the ''knowns'' in the evolutionary biology of mammals, including humans, is that the three little bones in their middle ear originated in the lower jaw of their reptilian predecessors. 
The link has been demonstrated in studies of developing mammalian embryos, and two of the three bones are found in the jaw of living reptiles. 
So reptiles eat with the bones we hear with.
But finding fossils of the transitional middle ear, considered a classic example of gradual evolution in vertebrates, had until now eluded paleontologists.
Scientists report in the current issue of the journal Nature the discovery in China of a 122 million-year-old fossil of a mammal the size of a small squirrel that lived in the shadow of the mighty Cretaceous dinosaurs. 
The specimen, excavated in the rich fossil beds in Liaoning Province, has been named Liaoconodon hui.
Its well-preserved skeleton, the scientists said, bore ''the first unambiguous paleontological evidence'' showing the close relationship between the lower jaw and the middle ear, the ring-shaped area just inside the ear drum. 
Two of the three bones associated with mammalian hearing, the malleus and the ectotympanic, had already detached from the lower jaw of the specimen, but they were held in place by an ossified cartilage. 
The other bone, the incus, had moved to its eventual place in the middle ear as seen in present mammals.
The research team, led by Jin Meng, a curator of paleontology at the American Museum of Natural History in New York, said the discovery highlighted the role of the cartilage in the transitional stage. 
It apparently acted as the stabilizer for the migrating bones and also, perhaps, the eardrum.
''The bones had already lost their function in chewing, and were halfway through the transition,'' Dr. Meng said in an interview. 
His collaborators in the research are Yuanqing Wang and Chuankui Li, paleontologists at the Chinese Academy of Sciences in Beijing.
In contrast, the scientists pointed out in the report, similar bones in a 200 million-year-old fossil mammal, Morganucodon, were more akin to those in reptile jaws. 
They were still attached to the lower jaw and served a dual function for hearing and feeding.
''In my mind I always had this dream, to complete the story of the middle-ear evolution,'' Dr. Meng said. 
''When I first saw these specimens, I knew I had had this once-in-a-lifetime discovery.''
