
HONG KONG -- The American consul general here had some pointed words on Thursday for Hong Kong and the Chinese authorities, saying that their decision to let the former United States intelligence contractor Edward J. Snowden flee to Moscow last month had ''damaged the very high level of trust'' between Hong Kong and the United States, and that repairing the relationship would take time.
The consul general, Stephen M. Young, who will leave his post as the top American representative here by the end of the month, said in departing remarks to reporters that the Snowden case raised serious questions about the legal autonomy Hong Kong is supposed to hold under the agreement by which Britain handed its former colony over to mainland China in 1997.
''There was a China factor here,'' he said in suggesting that the Chinese government steered Hong Kong into letting Mr. Snowden flee to Russia on June 23. 
''China let us down.''
During an hourlong news conference, Mr. Young occasionally directed pointed words at Beijing's influence here, and at one point upbraided a reporter from a mainland Chinese newspaper, saying, ''I wish you would be more objective,'' adding, ''but you have your masters in Beijing.''
Until the Snowden episode, Hong Kong had warm relations with the United States and cooperated closely on local law enforcement matters. 
But Mr. Young said that trust had been eroded by Mr. Snowden's departure, noting that American presidents and secretaries of state are not normally focused on ties with Hong Kong, and that this sequence of events had probably left a negative imprint in their minds.
''It will take some time to repair the damage there,'' he said. 
''We were frankly disappointed by the way our colleagues here in Hong Kong'' handled the situation.
Mr. Snowden fled Hong Kong after the United States asked the local authorities to detain and send him to the United States on charges that he illegally disclosed classified documents about global American surveillance programs. 
He has been staying in the transit zone of Sheremetyevo Airport in Moscow, awaiting a decision from the Russian authorities on his request for temporary asylum.
While citing recent cases of what he called mainland Chinese intimidation of Hong Kong media outlets, Mr. Young nevertheless expressed confidence in the ''one country, two systems'' governance of Hong Kong, in which Beijing exercises control over the territory's defense and foreign policy while ceding autonomy on other matters.
''The U.S. has long had an interest in the success of the one country, two systems model,'' he said.
Mr. Young, who will retire from the Foreign Service, is being replaced as consul general by Ford Hart, who is the United States special envoy to the six-party talks on North Korea, which have stalled amid tensions over Pyongyang's nuclear program.
