
TOKYO -- Japan reported its first annual trade deficit in 31 years last year, government data showed Wednesday, as fuel imports surged in the wake of its nuclear disaster at Fukushima.
The nation's exports also fell slightly as a result of last year's devastating tsunami, tepid global demand and a punishingly strong yen -- though a surprisingly strong post-disaster rebound by its exporters has kept the fall to a minimum.
Instead, much of Japan's 2.49 trillion yen ($32 billion) deficit in 2011 came as a result of a 33 percent increase in petroleum and other imports from the Middle East after the Fukushima nuclear crisis led to the idling of reactors across the country.
Japan now runs a trade deficit of more than 10 trillion yen ($129 billion) with the Middle East, in particular the United Arab Emirates, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and Iran. 
Japan's dependence on the region for oil has come into sharp relief in recent weeks as pressure mounts from the United States to curb oil imports from Iran after a standoff over its nuclear program.
Japan's trade deficit with its largest trading partner, China, widened after Tokyo's exports to that country fell by 3 percent while imports rose 10 percent on a surge in purchases of machinery and other industrial goods for the post-tsunami reconstruction.
The widening deficit also underscores the standing of China as Asia's manufacturing powerhouse, a role once played by Japan.
Japan's trade surplus with the United States remained high, however, with the island nation selling almost twice as much to the United States -- mostly cars and machinery -- as it buys from it. 
Japan's exports to the United States fell more than 3 percent in 2011, while imports stayed flat.
Overall, Japan's exports fell 2.7 percent for the year to 65.5 trillion yen ($842 billion) after the strong post-tsunami rebound among its exporters, who raced to fix ravaged factories and severed supply chains -- while its imports rose 12 percent to 68 trillion yen ($874 billion). 
The fall in Japan's exports in 2011 was far smaller than in 2009, when exports, battered by the global financial crisis, fell a startling 33 percent. 
But the nation's imports plunged at a similar rate that year, allowing Japan to eke out a slight trade surplus.
Still, Japan's negative trade balance comes at a time when the nation's aging population and recent sluggish economic growth is also driving down its savings rate. 
Some analysts fear that the country could eventually struggle to finance its public debt, which has ballooned to more than twice the size of its economy.
And that trade deficit could continue to widen. 
Heightened public fears over nuclear safety after the multiple fuel meltdowns at the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant in March have made it difficult for operators across the country to keep their reactors running.
Only four of Japan's 54 nuclear reactors are still running, and these are scheduled to be stopped for maintenance in months, forcing Japan to fire up old thermal power stations to meet the shortfall. 
Imports rose 8.1 percent in December from a year earlier, again thanks to rising fuel needs.
The government has pushed for the quick restart of nuclear reactors that pass safety checks. 
But many experts say that Japan could do more to increase its output of solar, wind and other forms of renewable energy.
Meanwhile, Japan's exports continue to suffer from weakening global demand and a strong yen, which helps makes its cars and electronics more expensive, and therefore less competitive, overseas. 
The strong yen also erodes the value of Japanese exporters' overseas earnings when repatriated back home.
