
SHANGHAI -- After Fei Lin saw the damage done to a heritage-listed home in the French Concession district where she was raised, she decided that she had to do something.
Ms. Lin, born in Shanghai, moved to London at the age of 18 to attend school and, after graduation, stayed on to establish herself as an interior designer.
After almost 20 years in England, she visited her hometown in 2007 and went to the lilong, or lane, where she had been raised. 
Each of the old lane houses had been awarded heritage status by the city, a program that Shanghai hopes will help preserve the traditional homes.
Ms. Lin was horrified to see that one new homeowner had built a wall around one of the old houses and, after shielding it from view, had demolished it so he could build a modern structure.
''I was the one that actually called the police and reported it,'' she said. 
''I was so shocked someone could do that, but what I could do about it was so limited.''
Though there is not much a single person can do to slow the replacement of Shanghai's lane-style living with modern, high-rise apartments, Ms. Lin, 40, decided to acquire a small piece of the city for herself, a place she could renovate to retain its charm while still incorporating modern features.
''I decided that it would be at least something to save one old house,'' she said, ''and I wanted to prove that you could renovate an old house like this and make it comfortable for modern life, without destroying it and totally replacing it.''
So during her visit, Ms. Lin bought the 904-square-foot, or 87-square-meter, top floor of a three-story lane house for 1.76 million renminbi, or about $287,000. 
At the time, the apartment was composed of a main room, kitchen and small bedroom, so she immediately started on a loft conversion, raising the back roof and adding a roof terrace.
The renovations led to another call to the authorities, but this time it was Ms. Lin's neighbor on the second floor, reporting her for an illegal loft conversion.
Ms. Lin said that she had tried to get permits for the work but that officials told her that no such permits existed and that, if anyone complained, she should just say she was doing the work for health and safety reasons. 
Like many things in China, there are lots of gray areas in building and construction regulation.
As it turns out, the neighbor simply wanted to use the threat of legal action to force Ms. Lin to buy his apartment, too. 
The tactics were unnecessary, she said, as she was happy to take his share of the building off his hands.
Although the house's ground level is still owned by a reluctant seller in his 90s, his four children have allowed Ms. Line to include the space in her renovations and agreed to transfer the deed to her when their father dies.
With all three levels under her control, Ms. Lin, who now lives in Shanghai full time, split the property into two self-contained, 1,500-square-foot, two-bedroom apartments.
With the help of local contractors, she added a spiral staircase to the property's central courtyard and renovated the lower two floors, saving materials that could be reused where possible and retaining original features, including windows and doors. 
The work was a particular challenge, she said, as it had to be done without damaging the already-renovated third level.
As with many old properties -- the building was constructed in 1907 -- the electrical wiring needed updating, but, Ms. Lin said, it was the structure of the house, which sits in the middle of a row of other homes, that caused the most problems.
''This lane is really old and the foundation is very shallow, and there was so much construction going on everything was sinking,'' she said. 
''Each building shared a single brick wall with its two neighboring houses, so I added another layer to that, which eats into the interior space, but also helped make the place more structurally sound.''
The completed apartments have ceilings of 13 feet, or 4 meters; plenty of light; open kitchens (the ground-floor apartment includes a kitchen island designed by Ms. Lin for the space); and bathrooms with an industrial feel, thanks to the selection of glass, polished concrete and sleek fixtures.
Charlie Gale, 29, who was born in the United States, has been in Shanghai for over six years and Ms. Lin's tenant for five months. 
He says he appreciates the comforts of the renovated space as well as lane living, which he believes is a more authentically Chinese experience than in a high-rise apartment.
''When I first came to Shanghai I lived in an apartment block and I loved the convenience, but after a while, I wanted to get into, not so much a Chinese lifestyle, but to get more within China,'' Mr. Gale said.
''It's very easy for me to live here,'' he said. 
''It's very comfortable. 
There is floor heating in winter; the hot water always works, and I have lots of friends in this lane. 
There are old guys always hanging out on the corner and we all get along, which is nice.''
Though Ms. Lin estimates that the entire property could be sold now for as much as 21 million renminbi, she has no plans to let it go. 
''I think I will keep it forever,'' she said. 
''I can't imagine selling it. 
To me, it's irreplaceable. 
To me, it's more than just a house, really.''
