
For legions of New York's glossiest women, for whom a trip to the nail salon is a weekly must, ''square shape or round?'' is often the most they will ever hear from their manicurist.
But six long-suffering nail lacquerers were rewarded when they raised their voices against the owners of a chain of Long Island nail salons, saying they were paid below minimum wage and forced to toil in an abusive environment. 
Ignored by their bosses, who they said sometimes went so far as to kick the stools on which they sat as they sloughed off calluses and buffed toes, they took their complaints to federal court. 
And last month, the workers -- all Chinese immigrants -- were awarded nearly $250,000 after a weeklong jury trial.
The victory coincides with a push to organize by salon workers across the city, a group largely made up of thousands of immigrants from China, Korea, Nepal and countries in South America, who work long hours painting nails Ballet Slipper pink or Jelly Apple red. 
Advocates said the movement suggested that this historically docile labor force was growing more assertive.
''Organizing within the nail salon industry has been very difficult,'' said Sarah Ahn, an organizer with a coalition of service workers advocacy groups -- they call their campaign ''Justice Will Be Served!''
-- that fought for the salon employees. 
''Victories show there is a way that if you come forward, you can fight and win.''
De Ping Song, one of the workers, said he expected more of his peers to join in. 
''We all are facing the same conditions,'' he said through a translator at a news conference on Tuesday. 
''Because all the workers have had enough of these sweatshop conditions, I believe workers will stand up with us to fight for everybody.''
At the three Babi Nails salons in the suit, which are in Greenvale, Glen Head and Carle Place, workers answering the phone on Tuesday said the owners could not be located.
The lawsuit, filed in United States District Court in Central Islip in December 2009, claimed that the workers were paid far less than the federal minimum wage of $7.25 an hour. 
Work weeks of more than 40 hours were standard, the workers said, but they were never paid overtime as required by the Fair Labor Standards Act and New York labor law.
For the past year, the workers -- four of whom were fired shortly after filing the suit -- picketed the salons weekly, joined by other workers who rallied to their cause. 
Aaron Halegua, a lawyer at the Legal Aid Society who represented the workers in court, said three of the four fired workers were reinstated through a settlement with the National Labor Relations Board after the workers claimed the dismissals were in retaliation.
The verdict was delivered on March 22 after a trial before Judge Leonard D. Wexler. The jury found the workers were owed a total of about $160,000 in unpaid wages and about $80,000 in overtime. 
The jury did not find the workers' claims of abuse and discrimination by the owners, who are Korean, to be substantiated.
Advocates for the workers in the lawsuit said that though the fear of losing jobs had silenced some workers, they were hoping the verdict in the Long Island case, as well as past successes, like in 2009 when workers rallied against Simply Nails, an Upper West Side salon, would embolden others seeking higher pay or better working conditions.
''I think more and more we see groups of employees'' fighting back, said Wing Lam, the executive director of the Chinese Staff and Workers' Association, where the salon employees first sought help several years ago.
''In the past, they probably quit the jobs,'' he said, ''not because people don't want to fight, but they see the law as weak.''
