
HANOI, Vietnam -- Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates met here with his Chinese counterpart on Monday to directly make a case for restoring military-to-military relations broken off by Beijing in retaliation for American weapons sales to Taiwan.
At the sidelines of a conference for Asian defense ministers, Mr. Gates spent about half an hour behind closed doors with Gen. Liang Guanglie of China, and emerged to say he had explained how arms sales to Taiwan were a decision by Washington's civilian leadership, not one made by the Pentagon or the armed forces.
''It is fundamentally a political decision,'' Mr. Gates said. 
''Why the military relationship should be held hostage to what is essentially a political decision seems to me curious. 
And I believe it should not be.''
Restoring communications between the Chinese and American militaries is an urgent need, Mr. Gates said, because ''having greater clarity and understanding of each other is essential to preventing mistrust, miscalculations and mistakes.''
Military relations between the two nations lag far behind their diplomatic and economic ties. 
Exchanges between the armed forces were completely frozen by China earlier this year in retribution for a decision by the United States to sell $6.4 billion in arms to Taiwan, which Beijing considers a renegade province.
''Indeed, when there are disagreements, it's all the more important to talk to one another -- more and not less,'' Mr. Gates said. 
''I have felt for a long time that the dialogue between the two militaries ought to be sustainable regardless of the ups and downs in the relationship.''
General Liang, as expected, extended an official invitation for Mr. Gates to travel to Beijing, and Mr. Gates plans to make the visit next year.
Even so, a Chinese Defense Ministry spokesman said after the meeting that Taiwan remained the ''biggest obstacle'' to improving military relations between the two countries.
Recent Chinese bullying of its smaller neighbors has figured heavily in discussions in advance of the session of defense ministers from the Association of Southeast Asian Nations. 
China has gone so far as to threaten economic punishment as it has sought to extend its sovereignty over regional waters.
In his public comments on Monday, Mr. Gates again showed that he was trying to balance a desire to restore military relations with China while restate Washington's unwavering support for its partners, allies and the internationally recognized rights of safe passage through international waters.
Thus there was no direct criticism of China, but instead a description of discussions about the broader topic of maritime security. 
''We have a shared interest in freedom of navigation and access to maritime domain,'' Mr. Gates said.
The theme was repeated as Mr. Gates's day was spent in a sequence of high-level but low-key sessions with counterparts not only from China but also from Japan, Vietnam and the Philippines.
The most colorful part of the day came when Mr. Gates was introduced to an audience of military personnel and civilian students at Vietnam National University with molar-rattling techno-pop music, an unexpected accompaniment for the rather traditional defense secretary.
''The U.S. and Vietnam, as well as other nations in the region, also share a common interest in maritime security and freedom of access to the global commons,'' Mr. Gates said in his address, in a polite reference to the disputes by many of the region's smaller nations with China over claims to territorial waters.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
