
HONG KONG -- Net-a-Porter, the highly successful Internet fashion retailer, plans to introduce three new versions of its e-commerce site this month: in French, German and Chinese.
The Chinese site will make Net-a-Porter among the first major Western fashion e-tailers operating in the language, joining Emporio Armani and Yoox.cn. 
And, as Asian customers already make up one-third of Net-a-Porter's customers -- and it wants more -- the company also is opening a Hong Kong distribution center that it says will sharply reduce delivery times.
The 130,000-square-foot, or 12,000-square-meter, warehouse space in Tsing Yi, part of the city's New Territories region, will serve customers in 17 countries in the Asia-Pacific area, including China, Japan, Singapore, South Korea and Taiwan.
''The primary reason for choosing to open a distribution center in Hong Kong is because it's a free port with strong courier networks, which will allow us to improve on our existing shipping service time period by around one day,'' said Adrienne Ma, a senior vice president of Net-a-Porter Asia Pacific Group. 
''We plan to offer a same-day delivery service in Hong Kong and next-day shipping service to major cities in Australia soon.''
The Hong Kong center will be Net-a-Porter's third, after New York and London, but it will rely on 100 employees to pack and ship merchandise as the building's ceilings are not high enough for the automated system used in the other locations.
The 13-year-old company, founded by Natalie Massenet and now owned by the luxury conglomerate Richemont, also has set up a marketing team in Hong Kong and Shanghai. 
But its personal shopping service, which is conducted in 22 languages including Cantonese and Mandarin, will continue to be based in London.
Net-a-Porter incurred a loss of £27 million, or $40.8 million, in the year to March 31, 2012, compared with a £5.2 million profit the previous year. 
However, the company noted at the time that its sales had grown 55 percent during the period, attributing the losses to investments like the new distribution center.
Ms. Ma, the youngest daughter of the former fashion doyenne Joyce Ma of Hong Kong, joined Net-a-Porter in 2010 after it acquired her company, Shouke, a designer flash-sale Web site that she started in China in 2007. 
Her mother, who opened Joyce Boutique in Hong Kong in 1970, was responsible for introducing the city to international designers like Yohji Yamamoto, Giorgio Armani and Prada. 
The company was acquired by Lane Crawford in 2003, ending the Mas' association.
Ms. Ma, who grew up in Hong Kong and England and was exposed to fashion at an early age through her mother, is betting that the increasingly sophisticated taste of Chinese consumers will prompt them to use Net-a-Porter to buy fashion brands that have very few, if any, stores in mainland China.
''They love classics by the likes of Miu Miu, Alexander McQueen and Chloé, and are increasingly turning to us for evening wear as well as purchasing bags and shoes,'' Ms. Ma said. 
''This season we added more emerging designers to our mix who we predict big things from, including Simone Rocha, Vika Gazinskaya, Sophia Webster and Gianvito Rossi.''
The Net-a-Porter site in Asia will go up against Lane Crawford, who got a head-start on China's e-commerce battle by introducing its online shopping site 18 months ago. 
Lane Crawford's business model is integrated, with stores in Beijing and one planned for Shanghai, where merchandise ordered online may be picked up or returned. 
It also operates distribution centers in Hong Kong and Beijing, and plans to open one in Shanghai.
According to Andrew Keith, president of Lane Crawford, online and retail business form a crucial symbiotic relationship. 
''From a business perspective, having a physical retail network has allowed us to move quicker online, maximizing our brand partnerships and using our distribution points enabling same-day delivery in Hong Kong and Beijing,'' Mr. Keith said.
''We have more than one million monthly visitors to the online store, and 85 percent are from greater China,'' he said. 
''More than 50 percent of the brands we carry are exclusive to Lane Crawford in the region, and we edit the collections with a very distinct point of view our customers appreciate.''
Lane Crawford also has another advantage: It accepts payment in renminbi. 
Net-a-Porter does not.
''Customers in Hong Kong can shop in Hong Kong dollars and Australians in Australian dollars. 
The rest of our Asia-Pacific customers, including those in China, can make purchases in U.S. dollars,'' Ms. Ma said. 
So, unless mainland customers have overseas accounts or accounts in U.S. dollars at mainland banks, they will not be able to shop online with Net-a-Porter.
It is still early to tell whether online shopping will become a regular habit of Chinese consumers.
According to Austin Huang, founder of the luxury information Web site Neeu.com, which has 80 million registered members, many Chinese customers are still wary of shopping online.
''On the whole, online shopping in China is still in its early stages, and has suffered some setbacks as several sites offering discount prices on designer goods had mixed in fake goods,'' said Mr. Huang, who is based in Beijing. 
''The customers are wary of buying online, and international level e-tailers like Yoox.com and Net-a-Porter may have some advantage.''
Mr. Huang also acknowledged that growth in China has become very important to Western designers. 
''For many designers, operating stores in China is very expensive, especially if they have to enter major shopping centers,'' he said. 
''New designers who cannot afford to open stores in China will benefit from online business.''
