
Updated, 4:16 a.m. ET| Among the panoply of officials to be targeted in China's continuing crackdown on corruption, the case against a former deputy director of the Beijing Zoo has raised the most unlikely questions.
How can a zoo official be corrupt?
Should Xiao Shaoxiang, the official in question, be considered, in the phraseology popularized by President Xi Jinping, a low-level corrupt "fly" or a mighty "tiger," or does his profession offer the potential of a new taxonomy?
And given that Chinese, like many languages, has a range of zoological phrases for bad behavior, how many animal terms can be employed to hint at Mr. Xiao's beastliness?
Beyond its famous panda exhibit, the Beijing Zoo is notoriously grim. 
Lonely Planet says it's "a pleasant spot for a stroll among the trees, grass and willow-fringed lakes as long as you ignore the animal's pitiful cages and enclosures."
Such conditions have prompted some people to wonder if Mr. Xiao's suspected ill-gotten gains - he's accused of taking more than 14 million renminbi, or $2.3 million - could have come from skimping on food and lodging for the zoo's residents.
Even as the Chinese news media focused on the formal announcement of a corruption investigation into the former domestic security chief Zhou Yongkang, an out-and-out tiger, it took time to analyze Mr. Xiao's odd case. 
The Beijing News, in a   commentary on Thursday headlined "Animals Are Caged, the Deputy Zoo Director's Power Was Not," sought to put concerns about animal welfare to rest.
Despite the unusual setting, the alleged corruption at the zoo was rather mundane, Liu Xuesong wrote in the commentary. 
Mr. Xiao is accused of embezzling large sums from the zoo's capital construction account and demanding bribes in exchange for awarding renovation work. 
That, Mr. Liu wrote, is even harder to detect and exposes the wide-ranging potential for graft in the public sphere:
After all, it's easy to see if the zoo is short an animal, but who can tell if some meat is trimmed from public money?
Zoo construction funds are an easy target for corruption, and no matter how small the official, they all have a chance to leap into the pit of corruption.
Another target of Mr. Xiao's was a 2012 kite festival in Taoranting Park in Beijing, which he managed. 
He allegedly skimmed about 13,000 renminbi, or $2,000, from funds for the festival for himself, the Beijing Youth Daily reported.
Mr. Xiao is definitely small fry, wrote Mr. Liu, who used a mashup of anticorruption vernacular and boxing terms to describe him as a "flyweight official."
