
SHANGHAI -- The Shanghai government has shortened its list of sectors in which foreign investment will be banned or restricted in the new Shanghai free-trade zone, but the changes make it only slightly easier to enter the Chinese markets.
The municipal government cut the length of the 2014 ''negative list'' to 139 items from the 190 items listed in 2013.
However, the reduction was mostly a result of eliminating rules repeated throughout the document, rather than a tearing down barriers to foreign investment in the zone, which was introduced to much fanfare last year.
The ''negative list'' approach was originally promoted as a major overhaul in itself, as previous lists had been full of gray areas that gave the government wide latitude to encourage or block investments on a case-by-case basis, an ability seen as highly risky for foreign investors.
The first version of the list was so long and comprehensive that the actual liberalizations it offered were seen as minimal, and most major multinational investors have held back from substantive investments in the zone, even as commercial property prices there have been affected by heavy inflows of speculative investments.
Even the state news media has publicly criticized the Shanghai government as too conservative in its approach after promoting the zone as the most significant financial overhaul since the success of a zone in Shenzhen in the 1980s.
The latest rules offer some modest improvements for foreign investment in the real estate, financing and service sectors.
For instance, a provision that restricts foreign investment in the secondary property market and in real estate brokerages was revised to allow investment in these areas by foreign companies that also have other lines of business.
A provision restricting foreign investment in investment banks, financing firms, trust firms and money brokers in the zone was removed, but it was replaced by a statement saying ''all investment in banking-style financial institutions must abide by existing regulations.''
In the service sector, all provisions related to bans on gambling and pornography have been abolished, but the abolition does not mean that such businesses are now allowed in the zone, as such activities are already illegal in the mainland.
Some excessively detailed provisions, like those related to how Hong Kong and Macau companies should invest in publishing, print material distribution and book chain stores have also been deleted, among other changes.
China set up the Shanghai zone in September to test plans for overhauls in the country's currency, interest rates, trade and industry policies.
The central government has permitted the limited opening of capital accounts and eased restrictions on offshore lending in the zone, and Beijing has said overhauls in the zone are experiments that aim to expand to larger Chinese regions and eventually throughout the country.
