
''MODERN'' is a term so routinely invoked in fashion-speak that it lost its meaning long ago. 
But without quite intending it, JNBY, a new loftlike boutique in SoHo, has revitalized that concept, lending ''modern'' a near-prophetic ring.
The wares at this first United States outpost of the Chinese retail chain hint at a future in which fashion is the product of a youthful design collective. 
The brand, founded in 1994, was conceived by an unsung cadre of 12 students largely inspired by the club-wear of the late '80s and '90s. 
Today a design team still toils anonymously to turn out a line destined to be worn in churning urban centers like Shanghai, Tokyo and Paris, where JNBY has, or soon will have, retail outlets.
Based in Hangzhou, the company operates some 600 stores worldwide. 
But it entered Manhattan gingerly, opening a pop-up shop in SoHo less than a year ago. 
Its name, it turns out, is short for ''Just Naturally Be Yourself.''
As if New Yorkers needed coaxing.
On the rack that phrase translates to a utilitarian mode of dress aimed at a steadily homogenizing global market. 
But it's unlikely that the shrunken leather jackets, duffle coats, leggings, pickled jeans and Grecian-draped frocks showcased here will be novel to the New York University students who appear to form a sizeable portion of the shop's clientele.
Some may have a hard time ferreting out the standout pieces in what at first glance is a dim sum of shapeless, and soulless, gray, black, taupe and navy body casings suspended from fixtures that look like outsize swing sets. 
But on closer inspection, the loose-fitting clothes, in sizes 1 to 5 (3 is a medium), are audacious indeed, shifting shape, mood and proportion like an army of soft-skinned Transformers. 
Their mutability suggests a no-commitment approach to dressing that has parallels in contemporary home design; the clothes are the fashion equivalent of a cleverly constructed sectional that can be pushed, piled, tugged or folded into myriad shapes and configurations.
''Just play with it,'' Alice, a cheerily accommodating manager, urged, handing me a black linen wrap, a grainy-textured variation on a dancer's warm-up sweater ($215). 
Her lilting invitation, uttered like a mantra, ought to be stamped on the company's hang tags.
With little else to occupy a storm-soaked Sunday afternoon, I obliged, flipping an attenuated cardigan upside down to turn it into a shrug, the strategically placed Y-shaped dart at its rear causing it to billow flatteringly. 
''See, you can push up the sleeves,'' Alice said. 
I did and was impressed to see it mutate into a Gothic-looking wrap.
With Alice as my prod, I slipped on a button-front dress, hiked it up a few inches to turn it into a curve-enhancing tunic, then tried it on backward, watching, transfixed as it became a bubble top with an off-the-shoulder ''Flashdance'' -era neckline. 
Shroudlike on hangers, these clothes are far sexier than might be supposed.
I tugged at the drawstring waist of a taffeta anorak ($315) -- and, presto, a dress; I worked a black cotton shirt ($195), tying its front sash behind me to give it an hourglass shape that evoked Ava Gardner baiting a toreador in ''The Sun Also Rises.''
Alice was unstoppable, jerking me out of my cheesy reverie just long enough to coax me into a bubble skirt. 
So not me, I grumbled inwardly, but didn't fight. 
After whisking it into a mirrorless fitting room where creature comforts were in short supply, I ventured back to the sales floor to assess it, toying with its buttons and watching it morph under Alice's vigilant eye. 
''If you don't like it short, then wear it long,'' she chirped. 
''There is no confinement.''
The concept of convertible clothing isn't uniquely Chinese, of course, nor is it groundbreaking. 
The idea was floated at least as far back as the early '90s by Dolce & Gabbana, which unveiled a series of jersey dresses that transformed via buttons to the wearer's whim. 
And a cursory tour of the Web will turn up any number of looks from designers as varied as Norma Kamali and Rachel Roy that can be hitched, sashed, buttoned or draped to take on new forms and uses.
But in a value-driven economy, clothes that do double duty are certainly compelling. 
Among ''frugalistas'' and light-traveling frequent fliers, they carry a cachet that has not been lost on luxury marketers. 
Only last week, Alber Elbaz, the creative force behind Lanvin, unveiled a resort collection highlighted by daytime chemises that reverse to ruffled chiffon or draped tulle for night.
Not that the offerings here are especially wallet-friendly. 
Persuading yourself that a dress can double as a coat or blouse -- or, for that matter, a parachute -- is just another way to rationalize parting with sums that do not compare favorably with those of Topshop or H & M.
My friend Cam, who accompanied me on a visit to the store shortly after it opened this month, was tempted to buy some streamlined high-heeled pumps for his girlfriend, until he saw the price. 
''Four hundred dollars?''
He balked. 
''That could buy 12 pair of sneakers.''
Prices that range from about $195 to close to $500 did not deter a young woman from splurging on a linen tunic marked at just over $200. 
''You can't leave here without buying something,'' she trilled on her way out the door. 
It happens she was right.
JNBY
75 Greene Street (near Spring Street); (212) 219-2529.
THE MOOD Transient. 
The spartan decor still has the pop-up feel of its original incarnation. 
Foldaway tables and fixtures add to the feeling of impermanence.
SERVICE Zealous. 
Rachel Zoe has nothing on these shop assistants, who double as stylists when they're not tallying sales.
HIGHLIGHTS Clothes that morph to suit a spectrum of moods, body types and even climates, making them handy travel mates.
