
SEOUL, South Korea -- A political split in South Korea over the deployment of a United States missile defense system sharpened on Monday, as six opposition lawmakers began a three-day visit to China and President Park Geun-hye accused them of siding with Beijing in a dispute of major national import.
The lawmakers, all critics of the deployment, were traveling to Beijing at a time when relations between South Korea and China are rapidly deteriorating.
Beijing has angrily opposed South Korea's decision last month to deploy the American military's Terminal High-Altitude Area Defense system, or Thaad, on its soil. 
Although the United States and South Korea have said the deployment is aimed solely at countering the North's growing missile threat, China says the Americans' antimissile radar will undermine its security.
The South Korean lawmakers said they did not intend to align with Beijing during their trip. 
Rather, they said, they would seek to meet with Chinese scholars to discuss ways of preventing bilateral relations from deteriorating further. 
But on Monday, Ms. Park's governing Saenuri Party called them ''flunkies for China.''
''When it comes to a national security issue where the lives of the people are at stake, there should be no difference between the ruling and opposition parties,'' Ms. Park said on Monday.
She criticized the lawmakers for ''sympathizing with China'' and accused the opponents of her decision to deploy Thaad of making ''absurd arguments that jibe with North Korea's.''
Over the weekend, the state-controlled Chinese newspaper Global Times highlighted the South Korean lawmakers' impending visit with a front-page banner headline, and Ms. Park's office appealed to them to cancel their trip, saying that China would use it to bolster its campaign against the American deployment.
''Whatever is their true intention, their visit to China will end up strengthening China's position and deepening our country's own internal divide,'' Ms. Park's press secretary, Kim Sung-woo, said on Sunday.
The six lawmakers are affiliated with the main opposition Minjoo Party and are in their first terms in the National Assembly.
Speaking to reporters at the airport on Monday before boarding a flight to Beijing, one of them, Kim Young-ho, said that if anything, the government's attempt to block their trip would provide the state-run Chinese news media with further opportunities to criticize Ms. Park's decision.
''We go there to do what we can for diplomatic relations between South Korea and China, which are now plunging into a chill,'' Mr. Kim said.
