
WASHINGTON -- President Obama and South Korea's president agreed Tuesday night to hold joint military exercises as a first response to North Korea's deadly shelling of a South Korean military installation, as both countries struggled for the second time this year to keep a North Korean provocation from escalating into war.
The exercise will include sending the aircraft carrier George Washington and a number of accompanying ships into the region, both to deter further attacks by the North and to signal to China that unless it reins in its unruly ally it will see an even larger American presence in the vicinity.
The decision came after Mr. Obama attended the end of an emergency session in the White House Situation Room and then emerged to call President Lee Myung-bak of South Korea to express American solidarity and talk about a coordinated response.
But as a former national security official who dealt frequently with North Korea in the Bush administration, Victor Cha, said just a few hours before the attack began, North Korea is ''the land of lousy options.''
Mr. Obama is once again forced to choose among unpalatable choices: responding with verbal condemnations and a modest tightening of sanctions, which has done little to halt new attacks; starting military exercises that are largely symbolic; or reacting strongly, which could risk a broad war in which South Korea's capital, Seoul, would be the first target.
The decision to send the aircraft carrier came as the South Korean military went into what it termed ''crisis status.''
President Lee said he would order strikes on a North Korean base if there were indications of new attacks.
North Korea's artillery shells fell on Yeonpyeong Island, a fishing village whose residents fled by ferry to the mainland city of Inchon -- where Gen. Douglas MacArthur's troops landed 60 years ago this fall, three months after the outbreak of the Korean War.
Today, Inchon is the site of South Korea's main international airport, symbolizing the vulnerability of one of the world's most vibrant economies to the artillery of one of the world's poorest and most isolated nations.
A senior American official said that an early American assessment indicated that a total of about 175 artillery shells were fired by the North and by the South in response on Tuesday.
But an American official who had looked at satellite images said there was no visible evidence of preparations for a general war. 
Historically, the North's attacks have been lightning raids, after which the North Koreans have backed off to watch the world's reaction. 
This one came just hours after the South Koreans had completed a long-planned set of military exercises, suggesting that the North Korean attack was ''premeditated,'' a senior American official said.
Television reports showed large plumes of black smoke spiraling from the island, as dozens of houses caught fire. 
The shelling killed two marines and wounded 18 people. 
The South put its fighter planes on alert -- but, tellingly, did not put them in the air or strike at the North's artillery bases. 
Mr. Obama was awakened at 3:55 a.m. by his new national security adviser, Thomas E. Donilon, who told him of the attack.
Just 11 days before, North Korea had invited a Stanford nuclear scientist to Yongbyon, its primary nuclear site, and showed him what was described as a just-completed centrifuge plant that, if it becomes fully operational, should enable North Korea to enrich uranium into nuclear fuel and add to its arsenal of 8 to 12 nuclear weapons.
Taken together, the nuclear demonstration and the attack were widely interpreted as an effort to bolster the credentials of Kim Jong-un, the heir apparent as the country's leader, and the son and grandson of the only two men who have run the country. 
When his father, Kim Jong-il, North Korea's ailing leader, was establishing his credentials, the North conducted a similar series of attacks.
''They have a 60-year history of military provocations -- it's in their DNA,'' said a senior administration official. 
''What we are trying to do is break the cycle,'' a cycle, he said, that has North Korea's bad behavior rewarded with ''talks, inducements and rewards.''
He said that the shelling would delay any effort to resume the six-nation talks about the North's nuclear program.
While Mr. Obama was elected on a promise of diplomatic engagement, his strategy toward the North for the past two years, called ''strategic patience,'' has been to demonstrate that Washington would not engage until the North ceased provocations and demonstrated that it was living up to past commitments to dismantle, and ultimately give up, its nuclear capacity.
The provocations have now increased markedly, and it is not clear what new options are available. 
Beijing's first reaction on Tuesday was to call for a resumption of the six-nation talks involving North and South Korea, Russia, Japan, China and the United States. 
The last meeting was two years ago, at the end of the Bush administration.
Mr. Obama's aides made it clear in interviews that the United States had no intention of returning to those talks soon. 
But its leverage is limited.
When North Korea set off a nuclear test last year just months after Mr. Obama took office, the United States won passage of a United Nations Security Council resolution that imposed far harsher sanctions. 
The sanctions gave countries the right, and responsibility, to board North Korean ships and planes that landed at ports around the world and to inspect them for weapons. 
The effort seemed partly successful -- but the equipment in the centrifuge plant is so new that it is clear that the trade restrictions did not stop the North from building what Siegfried S. Hecker, the visiting scientist, called an ''ultramodern'' nuclear complex.
By far the biggest recent disruption of relations came in March, when a sudden explosion sank a South Korean warship, killing 46 sailors. 
South Korean and international investigators said the blast was caused by a North Korean torpedo. 
The North has vehemently denied it. 
If the North was responsible for the sinking, it would be the most lethal military attack since the end of the Korean War in 1953.
President Lee of South Korea decided not to respond militarily to the sinking and was praised by Washington for his restraint. 
To make North Korea pay a price, he imposed new food restrictions on the North and ended trade worth several hundred million dollars that had been intended to induce the desperately poor North Koreans to choose income over military strikes. 
But some analysts believe that the cutoff in food aid was an excuse, if not a motivation, for Tuesday's attack.
Choi Jin-wook, a North Korea expert at the Korea Institute for National Unification, a research institute in Seoul, said, ''It's a sign of North Korea's increasing frustration.''
''Washington has turned a deaf ear to Pyongyang, and North Korea is saying: 'Look here. 
We're still alive. 
We can cause trouble. 
You can't ignore us.'
''
Yet for Mr. Obama, much stronger responses, including a naval quarantine of the North, carry huge risks. 
A face-off on the Korean Peninsula would require tens of thousands of troops, air power and the possibility of a resumption of the Korean War, a battle that American officials believe would not last long, but might end in the destruction of Seoul if the North unleashed artillery batteries near the border.
Pressing against a precipitous reaction is that the North's attacks have a choreographed character, even a back-to-the-future feel. 
The last time North Korea engaged in acts this destructive was in the 1980s, when it blew up a South Korean airliner and also detonated a bomb in Myanmar in a botched attempt to assassinate the visiting South Korean president. 
Both attacks were said to be ordered by Kim Jong-il, who was then the heir to Kim Il-sung, his father and North Korea's founder.
Now Mr. Kim's youngest son, Kim Jong-un, is in that position. 
He was promoted on Sept. 
28 to the rank of four-star general, a prerequisite for his ascendancy to power. 
Many see these attacks as the effort of a man the Chinese now say is 25 years old to establish his military credentials.
