
Once, the sign above this pinched storefront on Essex Street promised skullcaps and prayer shawls. 
Then came snapback hats and deadstock sneakers, and later eel buns and bubble tea.
This is the restless history of just three years on the Lower East Side. 
The latest tenant is Sam's Spring Roll, a snack counter specializing in spring rolls with unorthodox fillings, which may sound like an idea born in a Smorgasburg stall.
But Samantha Chu, the 32-year-old chef and owner, is no interloper seeking to capitalize on the neighborhood's downtrodden chic. 
She grew up on Bowery near Canal Street, less than a half-mile from where Sam's Spring Roll now stands, and lives there still. 
She spent years studying tiger-crane kung fu on East Broadway. 
After college, she worked as an accountant on Hester Street, around the corner.
Her grandmother, an immigrant from Guangdong Province, in southern China, taught her to cook. 
Eventually, Ms. Chu started experimenting. 
As she explained one evening: ''You know how it is when you're a kid. 
I said, 'I'm so bored with spring rolls.'
''
So here is a spring roll in its lustrous armor, hiding the soft heart of an Indian samosa. 
Inside are mashed potatoes infiltrated by green curry paste, then riddled with peas and diced carrots that still retain crunch. 
Wrapped tight, the roll is equal amounts shatter and yield.
Another roll reveals an interior of ground chicken perfumed with cumin, a borrowing from the Xinjiang region, in northwestern China. 
Raw red cabbage and carrots are tossed in at the end, so they slacken only slightly.
Note that these are snacks, not dinner. 
Each spring roll measures around two inches and is gone in nearly an equal number of seconds. 
And each costs $2, a leap from the usual Chinatown deal of four for $5. 
(Here you can get a sampler of eight for $12.) This may be partly because of higher rent, but also credit ingenuity and execution. 
The rolls shine with oil but do not leak, and the crisp flour wrap is skin-thin and cracks up on cue.
Of the two remaining rolls on the roster, one is styled after Korean bulgogi, with ground beef steeped in soy and sesame oil and dashed with sugar, which proves the dominant flavor. 
Another is an adaptation of a Taiwanese dish known as fly heads, perhaps because of the fermented black beans that loll among the scattered nubs of ground pork. 
Ms. Chu subtracts the beans and substitutes leeks for chives, adding them raw to keep their garlicky edge. 
Still, I couldn't quite taste them.
No matter, for the sauces redeem everything. 
(I wanted to smuggle them home.) The inevitably named ''crack'' sauce falls somewhere between Thai and Vietnamese, a nervy synthesis of fish sauce, cilantro, garlic and Thai bird chiles. 
Even hotter is the Mexican salsa verde, spiked with jalapeños that seem hellbent on outpunching the Thai bird chiles, barely mollified by a daub of avocado and an unexpected kiss of cumin.
Loveliest is an Argentine chimichurri mellowed by thick Greek yogurt. 
Least compelling is the most classically Chinese, a meld of ginger and scallions with an odd lingering sourness.
The space is intentionally underdressed, with a few high tables and a concrete counter undergirded by corrugated steel. 
White metal stools are splattered with hot-pink paint; some bear the scribbled names of Ms. Chu's friends and relatives, like a downtown correlative to seat plaques at the Met. 
The bathroom door is a rough smudge of turquoise that Ms. Chu repainted herself because she found the original paint job too neat. 
''That's not what I'm going for,'' she said.
The rest of the menu reads like food for midnight: a basic equation of buttered white bread and nearly liquefied American cheese, with the nice complication of pork and leeks or bulgogi; waffle fries (not made in-house, so ignore); a bowl of rice heaped with meat and a fried egg, with a spring roll slanting alongside.
There are pickles in the rice bowl, too -- a taste of Eastern Europe from the Pickle Guys on the next block, spiritual heirs to the Lower East Side picklers of yore. 
It's a reminder of what it means to live in the neighborhood.
Sam's Spring Roll
23 Essex Street (Hester Street), Lower East Side; 212-777-7211; samsspringroll.com
Recommended Samosa spring roll; cumin-chicken spring roll; ''crack'' sauce; creamy chimichurri; creamy verde.
Drinks and wine No liquor license.
Prices $2 to $9; $12 for sampler platter of eight spring rolls and four sauces.
Open Daily for lunch and dinner.
Reservations Not accepted.
Wheelchair access The entrance is one step up from the sidewalk; the restroom is narrow and does not have a handrail.
