
Stocks on Wall Street rose broadly Thursday, with the Standard & Poor's 500 and Nasdaq composite indexes up about 1 percent as investors were encouraged by Spain's plans for economic reform to deal with its debt crisis.
Shares rose despite weak American data that reflected the nation's sluggish economic growth.
The Standard & Poor's 500-stock index closed with a gain of 1 percent, the Dow Jones industrial average advanced 0.5 percent and the Nasdaq composite index rose 1.4 percent.
Data showed second-quarter gross domestic product growth of 1.3 percent, against the earlier estimate of 1.7 percent. 
At the same time, August durable goods tumbled 13.2 percent, much more than the 5 percent drop expected.
''None of these numbers are really trending upward,'' said Tim Speiss, head of personal wealth advisers at EisnerAmper in New York. 
''A lot of investors are starting to wonder how much markets are overvalued.''
Still, jobless claims dropped by 23,000 to 359,000, significantly more than the 4,000 drop that had been expected.
In China, stocks rebounded from multiyear lows on speculation that the China Securities Regulatory Commission would announce steps to support beleaguered domestic markets, which could include changes to the initial public offering market. 
Traders said China's central bank fed $57.9 billion into money markets this week, the largest weekly injection in history.
Spain announced a detailed timetable for economic reforms and a tough 2013 budget based mostly on spending cuts. 
The tension in Europe, underlined by anti-austerity measures in Madrid and Athens, had contributed to the S.&P.'s 1.9 percent drop over the past five days.
European stock markets were ahead modestly. 
The CAC 40 in France advanced 0.7 percent and the DAX added 0.2 percent.
In company news, Hewlett-Packard stock was up 0.6 percent after Jefferies downgraded the stock to ''underperform,'' expecting continued problems in the company's personal computer segment.
The S.&P. 
500 was up 5.2 percent so far for the third quarter and 1.9 percent for September, historically a weak month for equities. 
Gains were largely tied to economy-boosting actions taken by the Federal Reserve and European Central Bank.
