
This looks like a long, hot summer for Wall Street.
Fears that the global economy will worsen gripped the financial markets again Tuesday. 
Downbeat economic news that investors might have shrugged off in calmer times sent the broad stock market tumbling to its lowest level this year.
The Standard & Poor's 500-stock index sank 3.1 percent. 
Amid the sell-off, anxious investors fled for traditional havens like United States Treasury securities.
But it was really just another bad day in a bad month, a bad quarter, a bad year. 
With 2010 now almost half over, stock investors are glumly tallying their losses -- and wondering when this pain will stop. 
Tuesday's swoon left the S.& P. 500 down nearly 7 percent this year.
Given that showing, some analysts are writing off 2010 as a lost year. 
The stock market is mired in a deepening correction -- a sort of mini-bear market typically characterized by a 10 percent decline over a short period. 
The question on everyone's mind is whether this correction will grow into a full-blown bear market. 
Since late April, when the market reached its high for the year, the S.& P. 500 has lost 14.5 percent. 
A 20 percent decline would signal a bear market is here.
The immediate catalyst for Tuesday's slide was running concern that the hot Chinese economy might go cold. 
Glum news about American consumers added to the unease.
But investors have plenty of other things to worry about, too, perhaps none more pressing than the fragile state of the economy in the United States and the simmering financial crisis in Europe. 
This year has already been full of surprises. 
The economic collapse in Greece, the battles over financial regulation in Washington, the harrowing ''flash crash,'' the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico -- all of this has frayed the nerves of Wall Street professionals and workaday investors alike.
The exuberance of 2009 -- when a remarkable 23 percent rally seemed to bind up some of the wounds from the financial crisis -- has long since faded. 
It has been replaced by a sense of economic uncertainty that many cannot quite seem to shake. 
In this atmosphere, just about the only thing the experts agree on is that this roller-coaster ride isn't over yet.
''We have come through one of the worst downturns in most peoples' investment lifetimes,'' said Stephen F. Auth, chief investment officer at Federated Investors. 
''The market and the economy both pretty much crashed, and that was a searing experience for most people. 
So I think investor sentiment and psychology is very fragile.''
There have been few places to hide in the markets lately. 
Stocks, bonds and commodities are making big moves. 
A decline in Asia, as happened on Tuesday, quickly spills over to Europe and then the United States.
Peter Cardillo, the chief market economist for Avalon Partners, said the storm clouds that began to gather in the first quarter built into a thunderhead in the last few months. 
''Sovereign debt was present before the second quarter but the climax of it, the depth of it, actually exploded in the second quarter,'' he said. 
''We did have a very dramatic market during the second quarter.''
According to Howard Silverblatt, the senior index analyst for Standard & Poor's, as the broad stock market has declined, six S.& P. stock indexes that track particular sectors of the market have fallen 15 to 19 percent -- nearly bear market territory. 
''So the question is: if new money doesn't come in for bargains, should we set a place for the Bear at the Fourth of July barbecue?''
Mr. Silverblatt wrote in a statement.
On Tuesday, the Dow Jones industrial average ended down 268.22 points, or 2.65 percent, at 9,870.30. 
The S.& P. 500 fell 33.33 points, or 3.10 percent, to 1,041.24, and the Nasdaq composite index fell 85.47 points, or 3.85 percent, to 2, 135.18.
Earlier Tuesday, the Conference Board reported that its consumer confidence index this month fell to 52.9, a decline of nearly 10 points. 
And the Standard & Poor's/Case-Shiller index of home prices posted just a slight rise in April, providing no signs of a sustained housing recovery.
All 30 of the stocks in the Dow industrials were lower. 
Boeing fell $4.26, or 6 percent, to $63.04 a share. 
Caterpillar was down $3.55, also 6 percent, at $60.85. 
Microsoft fell 99 cents, or 4 percent, to $23.32.
BP, whose shares have fallen more than 50 percent since the April 20 explosion of its Deepwater Horizon rig, actually bucked the trend. 
Its stock rose 2 percent.
With stocks in distress, investors rushed to the relative safety of bonds. 
The yield on the benchmark 10-year Treasury note fell to 2.95 percent, from 3.02 percent late Monday. 
It was the first time since April 2009 that yields had fallen below 3 percent. 
The price rose 19/32, to 104 22/32.
''I think it all goes back to this deflation trend that seems to be taking place,'' said Tom di Galoma, the United States head of fixed-income rates trading at Guggenheim Partners. 
''The economic slowdown has created this deflationary environment and they don't see how to get out of it,'' he said, referring to investors.
The economic uncertainty pushed oil lower. 
The spot price for crude oil dropped $2.31, to $75.94 a barrel. 
Gold rose, with spot prices gaining $1.70, to $1,240.65.
Some analysts pinned their hopes for improvement on the coming corporate earnings season, or at least some prospect for economic growth in the second half of the year.
Sam Stovall, the chief investment strategist for Standard & Poor's Equity Research, said investors were worried by financial reform and the environmental impact of the gulf spill, among other troubles. 
Hanging over all of this is the risk, however remote, that the American economy will stall again in a double-dip recession.
''What people are now worried about is whether this correction will morph into a bear market,'' Mr. Stovall said. 
''If history is any guide it doesn't look all that great.''
