
Takeover premiums in the United States this year have surged to levels not seen in nearly a decade. 
Acquirers have paid an average of about 40 percent above market prices to get their quarry. 
Investors on the receiving end shouldn't get too excited, though. 
Rather than reflecting ebullience, it looks as if healthy companies are pouncing on laggards while they can.
Boards' willingness to bless juicy takeover attempts does at least suggest a return of some kind of animal spirits. 
And though bid premiums are high, the purchase prices look like bargains relative to previous stock market values.
Take the purchase of Bowne & Company, a printer of financial documents like prospectuses for public stock offerings and merger proxies, by its larger rival RR Donnelley. 
On Feb. 
23, Donnelley plunked down $11.50 a share, 65 percent more than investors thought Bowne was worth before the deal was announced.
That sounds like an outrageous markup. 
But for several years before the late 2008 collapse of Lehman Brothers, a Bowne client, the company's shares traded above $15. 
In that historical context, Donnelley may be getting away with a take-under of sorts.
Another example is the $3.5 billion hostile tender offer that Astellas Pharma of Japan kicked off this week for OSI Pharmaceuticals. 
The $52-a-share offer was a 53 percent premium to OSI's three-month average. 
But OSI stock traded above $50 before the stock market drop of 2008.
The relative performance of acquirers and targets is also a factor in the latest flurry of high-premium deal-making. 
Consider Air Products' hostile offer for its rival Airgas. 
During the post-crisis year of 2009, the predator's share price surged more than 60 percent. 
But the stock of Airgas, which in previous years had consistently outperformed, did not rebound so smartly. 
In 2009, Airgas shares rose by only about a quarter, one argument the company is using to justify its rejection of Air Products' advances.
To be sure, executives on the hunt for acquisitions can be tempted to pony up too much in the way of premiums. 
Indeed, for Air Products to snag Airgas, it will need to pay more than is justified by the net present value of future cost savings. 
But that's not always the story. 
Especially after a steep stock market slide and rapid recovery, historical context can matter at least as much as the headline premium.
Hong Kong's Plan B
The Hong Kong Stock Exchange is the world's second-biggest by market capitalization. 
Call it the China factor. 
Yet as the mainland's own exchanges get bigger, Hong Kong can't count on winning prize listings forever. 
It's time for a Plan B.
Hong Kong has long been the destination for public offerings of China's state-owned companies, because mainland rivals were deemed too small. 
But now, China wants to develop an international financial center on the mainland. 
Even Hong Kong stalwarts, like the lenders HSBC and Standard Chartered, plan to issue shares over the border. 
The next big bank to list, Agricultural Bank of China, may eschew Hong Kong altogether.
Hong Kong can't get away from its Chinese roots. 
Efforts at diversification from Chinese public offerings have had little success. 
In 2009, mainland enterprises still accounted for more than 82 percent of all public offering money raised. 
The failure of the American International Group's Asian life insurer, A.I.A., to go through with a planned listing may cut Hong Kong's pipeline in half.
Charles Li, the exchange's new chief executive -- and a mainlander -- says the exchange seeks to position itself against competition from London, New York and Shanghai by doing things that others can't do. 
One way would be to focus less on initial public offerings and more on other businesses, like derivatives. 
As China's own capital market deepens, the need for more sophisticated products will increase.
The real gold mine, though, could be for Hong Kong to focus on becoming China's offshore renminbi capital. 
China is keen to push the renminbi internationalization agenda, but progress has been slow, mainly because of a lack of products for investment. 
Trading renminbi bonds offshore could be a good start. 
Stocks priced in renminbi could follow.
Hong Kong would need Beijing's approval, and might have to accept a future without blockbuster public offerings. 
But better a partner than a rival.
ROB COX and WEI GU
For more independent financial commentary and analysis, visit www.breakingviews.com.
