
When Wang Chen immigrated to the United States in 2000 after retiring from China's national table tennis team, she never imagined she would keep playing in her adopted country. 
But at 26, when most professional Chinese players have stopped competing, she began a second act that led to the Beijing Olympics, where she reached the quarterfinals, the furthest any American has reached since table tennis became an Olympic sport in 1988.
Wang was not alone on that path. 
A look at national table tennis teams over the last few decades shows hundreds of Chinese players who took their superior game abroad. 
More often than not, they became the best players wherever they landed.
But now, Wang represents an endangered breed of player. 
After the Beijing Games, the International Table Tennis Federation, the sport's governing body, established waiting periods and other restrictions to make it harder for players to represent new countries after relocating. 
The I.T.T.F. said it did so because the widespread presence of Chinese players on national teams around the world hindered the development of local talent.
For decades, China has been the sport's powerhouse. 
When the I.T.T.F. recognized China over Taiwan in 1953, that was enough for Chairman Mao Zedong to put together a system for churning out an army of superplayers who could dominate the sport. 
And they did: China has won a vast majority of world titles in the last 50 years and 20 of 24 Olympic gold medals. 
In Rotterdam, where the world championships started Sunday, the Chinese team featured four of the top five ranked men and all of the top five women in singles competition. 
(Germany, with Timo Boll at No. 2, has the only other top-ranked player.)
Because China has a deep pool of talent, opportunity is scarce there, which is why so many Chinese names appear on the rosters of other national teams at the worlds, including Argentina, Austria, Australia, Canada, the Dominican Republic, France, the Netherlands, Poland, Singapore, Spain, Turkey and Ukraine. 
But even with the new restrictions, players of Chinese descent still dominate in the United States, though many are homegrown players, the children of immigrants.
One of the top players of this new American-born generation is Adam Hugh, who at 9 began training with his mother, Lily Yip, once a provincial team player in China who came to dominate United States table tennis in the 1990s after immigrating.
A Princeton graduate raised in New Jersey and Florida, Hugh, 23, was among the more than 800 players competing at the world championships, which end this weekend. 
(He, along with the rest of the United States team, did not make it past the initial rounds in singles competition.) The I.T.T.F.'s regulation was meant to give greater opportunity to native-born players like him.
''I have no complaints about the rule,'' Hugh said.
Among the three Chinese-American men on the United States team in Rotterdam, there is one Chinese-born player, Yiyong Fan, 42, whom Hugh describes as being in a league of his own. 
The women's team has four United States-born Chinese-Americans, including Hugh's sister, Judy.
Another rising star of Hugh's generation who competed at the worlds was Timothy Wang, 19, of Houston. 
Last year, he won the United States singles title. 
With his Chinese coach, he has been training six hours a day, six to seven days a week. 
Wang, like many other young Chinese-American players, also trains in China, where he will be this summer.
''The training in China is much more systematic,'' his father, Sam Wang, said. 
''That's how players can really strengthen their game.''
No one knows the ins and outs of China's cutthroat table tennis world better than Wang Chen, the Chinese-born United States Olympian, who is now retired. 
Sitting behind her desk at her table tennis club on Manhattan's Upper West Side, she spoke of turning pro at 11 and having to drop out of school to join a government-sponsored program that included children as young as 6.
''Maybe it's a good system for producing professional table tennis players,'' she said, ''but I think they are giving up too much in life, like school and a future.''
Another player born in China who had even greater success in the United States is David Zhuang, who arrived with his family in 1990, won the first of his six national men's singles titles four years later, and at 44 competed in his third Olympics, in Beijing in 2008.
''Table tennis is a mental game like chess, but lots of Americans play it as a physical game,'' he said. 
''In China, the coach analyzes the strategy you play at every part of the game. 
It's all strategy and technique.''
Now Zhuang coaches full time. 
He says he has not made a decision about his future as a player, though hip and lower-back injuries will most likely prevent him from trying for the 2012 London Games.
''I'm happy to see that the new generation is reaching a higher level now,'' he said. 
''But I don't want to say I'm retired. 
Why?
Because I can still win.''
With the older, Chinese-born generation of Wang and Zhuang on the way out, the field is opening for younger American players. 
But not everyone agrees that the I.T.T.F.'s restrictions, which include three-to-seven-year waiting periods on immigrants under 21 and bars all other new arrivals from taking part in its events, are good for the game.
''The drawback is that the younger generation might not have good partners to train with,'' said the Romanian-born Teodor Gheorghe, chief operating officer of the U.S.A. 
Table Tennis Association and coach of the national women's team. 
''Table tennis is like a sparring partnership sport. 
The professional Chinese players we have had on the team mentored the younger ones and helped them develop.''
But Larry Hodges, a veteran player, coach and author of three books and numerous articles on the sport, sees it differently.
''Players would train and train for years under the best coaches, paying tens of thousands of dollars, and then they hit 20, and some 35-year-old guy who's been trained by the Chinese government comes along and the American kid can't make the team,'' he said.
While the I.T.T.F. changes have opened the door for homegrown talent, that does not mean that players of Chinese ancestry still will not dominate national teams.
At the Maryland Table Tennis Center, where Hodges coaches, about 75 percent of the junior players are American-born players of Chinese ancestry. 
One of his prodigies, Tong Tong Gong, 13, is among four Chinese-American boys on the cadet team.
After Gong won his first tournament when he was 8, his parents decided to make an investment in cultivating his talent.
''A lot of my friends see Ping-Pong as a recreational game that requires little skill,'' Gong said. 
''That's the American attitude, but in China, it's the national sport.''
And though lots of young people in China are gravitating toward the bigger-ball games like soccer and basketball, table tennis's high status there shows no signs of decline.
Opportunities for professional players have actually improved. 
Wang said that fewer of them wanted to leave because they could get university scholarships, join leagues and earn a good living. 
It was not that way when she left a decade ago.
Naturally, she plans for her children to excel at table tennis.
''I want to have two boys, and I will give them Chinese training,'' she said. 
''But I still want them to go to Harvard.''
