
MAHLER and Coco Chanel are unusual bedfellows, but the pianist Yuja Wang, on her Twitter feed, quotes both: from Mahler, ''Tradition is tending the flame, it's not worshiping the ashes''; and from Chanel, ''A girl should always be two things: classy and fabulous.''
Fashionable and outspoken, Ms. Wang, who at 25 is one of the most gifted pianists of her generation, would make Mahler and Chanel equally proud. 
She has attracted attention both for her prodigious talents and for her attire, which has raised eyebrows in the tradition-bound world of classical music.
Beginning on Thursday evening Ms. Wang performs Prokofiev's Piano Concerto No. 3 with the New York Philharmonic conducted by Jaap van Zweden at Avery Fisher Hall.
The Prokofiev concerto is one of her favorite pieces, she said in a recent interview backstage at the Kimmel Center in Philadelphia, where she had just performed Rachmaninoff's Rhapsody on a Theme of Paganini with the Philadelphia Orchestra and Yannick Nezet-Seguin, because it fits her ''edgy and kind of sarcastic and naughty personality,'' she said.
Ms. Wang, having changed from the elegant dark-blue gown she wore for the concert into a shorter, fitted dress and heels, said she had hoped to record Prokofiev's Sonata No. 6 for her fourth and most recent Deutsche Grammophon disc, but that the label wanted short pieces and encores. 
The disc, called ''Fantasia,'' features miniatures by Chopin, Rachmaninoff, Scarlatti and Scriabin and various arrangements.
A passionate performer, Ms. Wang meshes an impeccable technique and insightful artistry, evident both on disc and in live concerts. 
Her New York recital debut at Carnegie Hall featured powerful and nuanced interpretations of Liszt's Sonata in B minor and the Prokofiev, demonstrating a crystalline touch and a wide coloristic range. 
Her arresting playing has generated public and critical acclaim, although she says she doesn't read her reviews.
''Music criticism should be to musicians what ornithology is to birds,'' she wrote recently on her Twitter feed.
Her earlier (and equally rewarding) Deutsche Grammophon releases include sonatas and etudes by Chopin, Scriabin, Liszt and Ligeti; Rachmaninoff concertos with the Mahler Chamber Orchestra and Claudio Abbado; and selections by Stravinsky, Brahms, Ravel and Scarlatti.
Until recently Ms. Wang has focused almost entirely on Romantic and 20th-century works in recordings and in solo recitals.
Germanic repertory like Bach, Mozart and Beethoven ''needs much more maturity and growing as a person,'' she said. 
''I can play it for sure, but it's not at the quality that I want. 
Everyone plays it, and if I don't bring something meaningful to it, then I might as well not play it at all.''
Born in Beijing in 1987, Ms. Wang said her mother, Zhai Jieming, a dancer, and her father, Wang Jianguo, a percussionist, were encouraging but never dictatorial about her practicing or career. 
Several videos on YouTube show a girl with pigtails playing Chopin with poise.
''My dad is really good with rhythm,'' Ms. Wang said, ''and was always correcting me and telling me, 'You're rushing.'
That's my weakness. 
Even back then I was rushing.''
After studies at the Beijing Central Conservatory, she went alone at 14 to study at the Mount Royal Conservatory in Calgary, Alberta. 
''I was like, 'Freedom!'
'' she said of being on her own. 
''It was awesome.''
She entered the Curtis Institute of Music in Philadelphia the next year, but her mother was unable to move there as planned because of visa problems. 
Her parents still live in Beijing.
She has performed in China infrequently since leaving, though she will tour there in November with the San Francisco Symphony Orchestra, led by Michael Tilson Thomas.
Speaking about the explosion of classical music in her homeland, she said, ''Being a classical musician is almost like being a pop star in China, and it's more about power and fame and money. 
That's why so many kids are playing. 
It's like sports in America. 
It's for being more famous, and I don't really like that. 
I like Europe more, as people are genuine and it's part of their culture and they love it for the music, for the sake of music, not for being famous.''
Ms. Wang's own journey into the public eye came after high-profile substitutions for pianists including Martha Argerich, Evgeny Kissin and Yefim Bronfman. 
Her talents have also been recognized with prizes like the Gilmore Young Artist Award and the Avery Fisher Career Grant.
The pianist Gary Graffman, who taught Ms. Wang at Curtis, said that during her audition she impressed with her technique. 
''But that's no big deal these days,'' he added, given that ''even the untalented ones'' have practiced so much that they play well.
Rather, he added, ''it was the intelligence and good taste'' of her interpretations that distinguished her. 
During the ensuing years, Mr. Graffman said, he admired the speed at which she learned repertory, her broad range of artistic interests, her sense of humor and her ability to produce a ''gorgeous sound'' from even second-rate instruments. 
She is very self-critical, he added.
Mr. Thomas, the conductor, who has worked with Ms. Wang since she was 17, said: ''When I first heard her, I was struck by how coloristic her playing is and how aware she is of the specific colors and character of the orchestra. 
She will play as a soloist but also as an accompanist when important things are happening in the orchestra. 
That is an unusual quality for a card-carrying virtuoso.''
Certain forces within the industry, he added, ''would like to present her as being a hot young flashy pianist,'' but ''that's not what's she's really like.''
''She is very focused and serious,'' he added.
Mr. Thomas said her independence was also noteworthy. 
Even as a teenager Ms. Wang showed up at rehearsals and concerts alone, without the entourage of mother, teacher, manager and publicist that he said often accompanies young artists.
Being independent at such a tender age, Ms. Wang said, prepared her for the solitary life of a star concert pianist. 
She lives near Lincoln Center but is there so seldom that her doorman doesn't always recognize her.
''Pianists have to be alone all the time, and it's hard,'' said Ms. Wang, whose sociable nature is immediately apparent. 
While at Curtis she found travel exciting, but ''it's kind of like work now,'' she said. 
''It's lonely.''
So she spends her vacation time in New York and hangs out with friends. 
''I love saunas. 
That's my way of relaxing.''
She added, laughing: ''I'm so lazy. 
People ask me, 'What sports do you do?'
None. I love to read, and I have a Kindle now.''
If she didn't have a career as a pianist, Ms. Wang said, she might have opted to be a choreographer, since she loves modern dance. 
Or a clothing designer, since she is interested in fashion.
Ms. Wang's attire has generated lively discussions about what is appropriate for classical artists to wear. 
The orange minidress she wore for a performance of Rachmaninoff's Piano Concerto No. 3 with the Los Angeles Philharmonic at the Hollywood Bowl in August set off debate in newspapers and blogs.
Ms. Wang said she was initially both ''weirded out'' and amused by the reaction, noting that she had already worn the same dress without fanfare in Santa Fe, N.M.; at the Concertgebouw in Amsterdam; and at the Verbier Festival in Switzerland. 
''Europe loved it,'' she said, so she hadn't thought it would be a big deal to wear it in Los Angeles.
''They were paying attention to this rather than the music,'' she said. 
''Which makes sense, as L.A. is kind of superficial and more visual. 
But they have rules about what classical musicians should be wearing, which I think is stupid.''
Yet she acknowledged that the publicity might have helped her Carnegie debut in October sell out. 
For the first half of that concert, she ''looked like a nun,'' she said, in a long black dress.
''I wanted to do the shock value,'' she added. 
''I can wear long and black too. 
I like being versatile.''
The veteran artist manager Edna Landau, who advises young musicians, said: ''This generation is a much more visual generation. 
Every artist has a responsibility to look as good as they can. 
It's not different than if you are going for a job interview. 
You're trying to win over fans and get more engagements, so one should look great.''
The most important factor, of course, will always be a performer's level of artistry, and since Ms. Wang has proved that she has the musical goods, she can wear whatever she wants. 
It is no bad thing if she attracts younger listeners and shakes up the sometimes stuffy classical music business in the process.
Ms. Wang recalled that before her Carnegie debut Mr. Thomas told her: ''You don't need the public. 
The public needs you.''
''That's how I feel,'' she added. 
''I will just be myself. 
If they accept me, they do. 
If they don't, they don't. 
I'm just being myself. 
When I'm 40, I'm not going to wear a short dress, so I might as well do it now!''
