
Ferrari is seizing on the Singapore Grand Prix to bolster its image in the city-state, which counts more millionaire households per square foot than anywhere else in the world.
The number of Ferrari cars, with their prancing horse insignias, on Singapore's streets has grown steadily since 2003, and it jumped from 294 cars in 2009 to 360 in 2010 and 449 last year, a 52 percent increase in two years, according to annual vehicle statistics from the Singapore Land Authority. 
This is in spite of the restricted space available for performance runs and track days.
Simon Inglefield, head of Region Ferrari Asia Pacific, said that while those numbers do not exactly reflect the actual sales number, as some of the cars will have been imported by expatriates moving to Singapore, the trend has definitely been strongly up.
''Singapore is a very important market,'' Inglefield said in a telephone interview from Shanghai.
''The overall population is quite small, with less than 6 million people,'' he added, ''and the whole super sports car market is about 300 cars a year, and we have about a third of that. 
So even if it's small, it's still quite significant.''
By comparison, Malaysia, with a population of 28 million people, has a total of about 500 Ferraris, but Inglefield notes that Ferrari has been present in Malaysia longer than in Singapore and that the growth in Malaysia has slowed relatively in terms of annual sales. 
He added that in Indonesia, where there are an estimated 300 Ferraris for a population of 237 million people, the market has been rising strongly.
''We have now a 24-month delivery wait in Indonesia, the longest delivery time in Asia,'' he said.
While a Formula One race does not usually translate into a direct increase in sales, the brand tries to organize events using the Grand Prix to ''illustrate'' its cars to its customers, Inglefield said.
''The importance for us is to reinforce our link between the technology component of Formula One cars with our road cars,'' he said.
An example is the F12 Berlinetta, the first in a new generation of Ferrari V12s, which made its official U.S. debut in August at the 2012 Pebble Beach Concours, following its official release at the Geneva Motor Show in March, and is now being presented to buyers internationally. 
Ferrari expects to produce 800 units annually and describes it as the fastest, most powerful and high-performance car it has ever built.
The car has already been shown in Indonesia, Japan and South Korea, and is on show in Singapore, then moving onto Australia.
This week, leading up to the Grand Prix, an F12 Berlinetta has been parked in front of the Ferrari boutique at the Marina Bay Sands in Singapore, where until Monday a small photo exhibit of the brand's history will take viewers on a journey beginning in 1929, when Enzo Ferrari founded Scuderia Ferrari.
This year, Ferrari was caught up in an unpleasant storm when critics of Singapore's immigration policy seized on a deadly high-speed crash involving a limited-edition Ferrari driven by a Chinese driver who ran a red light and plowed into a taxi. 
Most of the focus was on the xenophobic sentiment that followed the crash, but questions about the suitability of driving such cars in Singapore's streets were also raised. 
This week, Ferrari was no doubt hoping to keep attention on the beauty of its road cars while celebrating the pedigree if its Formula One heritage.
To complete the marketing effort, Ferrari is hosting for the first time in Singapore a leg of its Ferrari Challenge Trofeo Pirelli, a Formula One support race. 
The challenge was brought to Asia only last year, continuing a tradition that began in Europe in 1993. 
The 2012 Asia-Pacific series started in March in Japan, followed by stages in China and Malaysia, and it now continues in Singapore before the final stage in Europe at the Ferrari Finali Mondiali, where the protagonists from the three divisions of the series -- Asia-Pacific, Europe and North America --will compete for the world title.
