
THE WRECK OF THE KULLUK
I hope that somewhere in his book, McKenzie Funk manages to make the connection between Shell's endeavors to extract and burn every last drop of oil on earth and the fact that ''melt in the high Arctic may put difficult deposits within reach.''
But even if he doesn't, the enormity of the folly exposed in this article -- a meticulous accounting of greed, corner-cutting and the accretion of inevitable human error -- should be sufficient to make it clear to any rational individual (or government) that drilling for oil in the Arctic is something Shell should never be permitted to do. 
ANDREW CHRISTIE, Cambria, Calif.
This is a cautionary tale for those who believe that the private sector is the source of all progress and prosperity and that if government regulation got out of the way, taxes could be reduced to a minimum and we would get ever closer to utopia. 
Well, here we have Shell, one of the largest corporations in the world, in league with specialized contractors, making error after error, leading to a major fiasco. 
And who do the corporations call upon to rescue their property and staff?
The Coast Guard, which is a government agency, of course. 
BOB ASHBY, Annandale, Va., posted on nytimes.com
Humans think we can do anything we like, but in the end, nature always wins. 
In the Arctic, as in so many other instances, nature's might renders us powerless. 
Why can't the oil behemoths figure this out?
The companies ought to be investing in wind, solar and geothermal energy. 
Future generations will look back on misadventures like the Kulluk with disbelief. 
How could people be so foolish, ignorant and arrogant?
EVA LOCKHART, Edina, Minn., posted on nytimes.com
INSIDE A CHINESE TEST-PREP FACTORY
This test will not determine the rest of your life any more than going to a top university will determine your destiny in China. 
Most of the 1.2 million self-made millionaires in China did not attend top-tier colleges. 
Jack Ma, the Alibaba billionaire, failed the university entrance exams twice and limped his way into a mediocre school, where he majored in English education. 
If you want to be a top physicist or engineer in China, you have to do extremely well on the exams. 
But the same is true in the United States. 
Academic pressure isn't the only way to succeed in America, and it isn't the only way to succeed in China, either. 
SUMMERFARE, New York, posted on nytimes.com
The idea that a Chinese student either goes to a university or goes into manual labor is not necessarily true. 
These days, more than half of China's population lives in cities, and as a result, more students who do not get into a university have options similar to those available in the West: vocational colleges and white-collar jobs in service industries. 
Furthermore, many young Chinese people, like their Western counterparts, are dissatisfied with the limited prospects of a corporate job and, encouraged by the success of many Chinese start-ups, are turning to more-entrepreneurial pursuits. 
Chinese people are no longer relegated to such a stark choice between university or manual labor. 
NATHAN AN EXPAT, Shanghai, posted on nytimes.com
THE ART WORLD'S PATRON SATAN
Stefan Simchowitz performs a necessary service. 
Established art collectors may not like it because of the competition, but even they need people like Simchowitz to support the arts. 
The old network of collectors would simply cherry-pick artists with pedigreed backgrounds and leave the rest of us to rot. 
But I'd rather be taken advantage of as an artist, because at least I'd have the hope of someday paying off my student loans. 
GMB, Curitiba, Brazil, posted on nytimes.com
This article is missing any acknowledgment of an art world beyond fairs, museums and top-tier galleries: alternative art spaces, for example, and smaller galleries that offer works under $10,000. 
Most artists I know operate within this strata, and they are just as talented, hard-working and thoughtful about their work as the small percentage of star artists. 
But they're invisible to those for whom money matters more than art. 
CHRISTINE WONG YAP, New York, posted on nytimes.com
