
The global downturn put some United States theme parks into bankruptcy and upended grand plans for new ones in the Middle East. 
But in Asia, a development boomlet is under way as operators race to open parks and add attractions to draw in the region's growing middle class.
A Universal Studios park is set to open early next year in Singapore at Resorts World at Sentosa, a sprawling development that includes a casino. 
Over the border in Malaysia, ground has just been broken on the first Legoland in Asia, scheduled to open in 2012.
In Hong Kong, the roughly $750 million redevelopment of Ocean Park is to be completed in 2013, while Hong Kong Disneyland Resort recently began a $465 million expansion project that is to add three areas by 2014. 
And last month, Disney finally won approval from the Chinese government to build a theme park in Shanghai; it is expected to open in five to six years.
''Even with the economic hardship the world has been feeling, there is still stabilityI in this part of the world, and people are still looking to do things that are out of the ordinary,'' said Tom Mehrmann, chief executive of Ocean Park in Hong Kong.
Overall attendance at the world's top 25 theme parks has declined over the last couple of years, according to a report by Economic Research Associates, a consulting firm, and the Themed Entertainment Association, an international industry association. 
But visits to the 10 most-visited Asia-Pacific parks have continued to increase, albeit at a slow pace. 
With this upward trend expected to accelerate, developers are focusing on the region.
The industry anticipates solid growth in Asia, even though over the last six years, the number of what Mr. Mehrmann called world-class parks in the region has risen to more than 35, from about 15. 
''What it says is that the market is growing, the middle class is growing, discretionary time and money is growing,'' he said.
Ocean Park had a record 5.03 million visitors in the fiscal year that ended in June 2008 and registered a small drop to 4.8 million in its fiscal 2009. 
But Mr. Mehrmann said that attendance had started to rebound in August.
Recent signals from big industry players point to a bleak near-term picture worldwide. 
Revenue at Walt Disney's parks and resorts dropped 7 percent, to $10.6 billion, in the fiscal year ended in September. 
Universal Studios' theme parks, which General Electric sold along with NBC Universal to Comcast, have also been struggling this year, though according to G.E., the company has been able to offset the attendance declines partly with cost-cutting.
Meanwhile, Six Flags, which owns 20 amusement parks, mainly in the United States, filed for bankruptcy protection in June, burdened by high debt and declining attendance. 
It is now working on a restructuring plan with creditors. 
Dubailand, which was to include Paramount, Marvel and DreamWorks Animation theme parks among others, is now only a distant dream.
But some investors see opportunities in the downturn. 
Apollo Global Management said last week that it would acquire the theme park operator Cedar Fair in a deal worth about $2.4 billion, including assumed debt. 
Cedar Fair's properties include Cedar Point in Ohio, Canada's Wonderland near Toronto, Dorney Park in Pennsylvania and Knott's Berry Farm and Great America in Southern California. 
Cedar Fair said that attendance had dropped by 1.2 million visitors during the first three quarters.
The deal follows an agreement in October by the Blackstone Group to buy Anheuser-Busch Inbev's 10 theme parks in the United States for $2.7 billion, including the SeaWorld parks in Orlando and San Diego and Busch Gardens in Tampa, Fla., three of the most-visited theme parks in the world. 
Blackstone already has a majority stake in the Merlin Entertainment Group -- which owns Legoland, among other parks -- and the Anheuser-Busch assets will make the private equity firm the second-largest company in the theme park business, after Disney.
John Ussher, general manager of Legoland development at Merlin, said that his company wanted to introduce the brand across the globe. 
''We've had a good year, we've weathered the storm well throughout our parks in Europe and the United States,'' he said, while declining to provide attendance numbers. 
''We feel very strongly about the potential of the new park in Malaysia. 
The region has terrific potential.''
The company is also working on a Dubai Legoland, although Mr. Ussher said the project had been delayed and the new expected opening date was 2015. 
He said Legoland was also looking for sites in South Korea and Japan and would be interested in developing a park in China.
The arrival of new competitors in Asia has put pressure on existing players in the region. 
Ocean Park opened two major new attractions this year: Amazing Asian Animals, an exhibit spanning 270,000 square feet, and Ocean Express, a 0.8-mile train ride that simulates traveling in a submarine. 
Next year the park will open Aqua City, an ocean-themed area with a new aquarium complex.
Mr. Mehrmann said the redevelopment and expansion of his park were essential to keeping it relevant, especially as China added a string of regional theme parks. 
Chinese news media recently reported that an ''Andersen's Fairy Park,'' based on the fairy tales of Hans Christian Andersen, would open in Shanghai to coincide with the 2010 World Expo.
Japan, with its aging population and stagnating economy, may be one exception to the relatively rosy outlook for Asian theme parks. 
Attendance at most Japanese parks was flat or down in 2008, with the exception of Tokyo Disneyland and Tokyo Disney Sea, according to the research report. 
Admissions at Universal Studios Japan in Osaka decreased by 5.8 percent, to 8.1 million, during the year that ended in March. 
USJ, the operator of the park, was sold for $1.12 billion to a consortium led by Goldman Sachs Group this year.
Gabriel Chan, an Asia gambling research analyst at Credit Suisse, said he doubted the new theme parks would cannibalize one another, as they all had differences in terms of rides. 
For example Universal Studios Singapore will have the world's only ''Madagascar'' attraction, and will also bring to life the first ''Far Far Away'' castle based on the Shrek movie franchise.
One exception, Mr. Chan said, could be Hong Kong Disneyland. 
The Shanghai Disney park, he said could be a threat to Disney's Hong Kong property, ''given the fact that a lot of Disney's Hong Kong visitors are mainland Chinese.''
