
Like being ''locked in overnight at a Starbucks.''
That's how the composer John Adams described a program on Friday, one of two given by the chamber band Alarm Will Sound at Nonesuch Records' 50th anniversary celebrations, part of the Brooklyn Academy of Music's Next Wave Festival.
An oddly dystopian way to talk about a concert devoted to his own music, no?
He didn't mean that the four works were no cooler or more interesting than being forced to live with a behemoth of capitalism. 
(At least I hope not). 
Rather, that this quartet was hyperactively caffeinated, far from the plushness of his operas ''Nixon in China'' and ''The Death of Klinghoffer.''
Even in performances led by Alan Pierson that were less than scalding hot, this was Mr. Adams the jittery eclectic, in works he described as ''antic.''
Here was a rare opportunity to compare his Chamber Symphony (1992) with its offspring, ''Son of Chamber Symphony'' (2007), among the bouncy rock of ''Scratchband'' (1997) and an effective arrangement by Caleb Burhans of ''Coast,'' from ''Hoodoo Zephyr'' (1993). 
After all that kinetic sparkle, I felt almost exactly the way I would part way into a night of dark roast and sugary pastries: on the wrong side of a high.
The Chamber Symphony is that rare thing, a modern masterpiece often heard. 
What Mr. Adams called his ''ur-symphony'' was inspired by Schoenberg's ur-ur-version (1907), one of the pieces played at the ''Skandalkonzert'' of 1913 in Vienna. 
But it owes more of its character to the propulsive cartoon music his son was watching while Mr. Adams studied. 
The result mixes a chromaticism atypical of this composer with kooky instrumentation and rhythmic sass, all wrapped up in an endearing goofiness.
It's in three movements, of which the last, ''Roadrunner,'' is one of those twisting, bucking, wind-it-up-and-let-it-go movements that Mr. Adams has made his own. 
The trick in performance is balance, making sure that the virtuosic individual lines cohere into something more than a noisy babble. 
Subtle amplification helped with that here, but the Technicolor brilliance often associated with this piece, especially with Mr. Adams himself conducting, seemed dimmed.
If the Chamber Symphony is one of Mr. Adams's most enthralling works, its derivative feels too familiar and not as daft. 
''Son of Chamber Symphony'' sounds more like Stravinsky than its parent ever echoed Schoenberg, and its allusions are also more obvious. 
A three-note rhythm from Beethoven's Ninth dominates the first movement, while the third updates the ''news'' aria from ''Nixon in China'' for the 24-hour cycle, with an insistent thump that just attenuates away. 
The parent is funny, but the son is trying too hard.
Saturday's concert was shorter and found Alarm Will Sound in its more usual, better form. 
Mainly the program showed how far Minimalist techniques have been moved beyond by today's younger composers. 
Steve Reich's ''Radio Rewrite'' (2012) takes two songs by Radiohead -- ''Everything in Its Right Place'' from ''Kid A'' and ''Jigsaw Falling Into Place'' from ''In Rainbows'' -- and uses them as riffs, almost as folk tunes. 
It's as unnervingly catchy a piece as it is a banal idea.
But without Mr. Reich, the furious celebrations and zooming patterns of Tyondai Braxton's ''Fly By Wire'' (2013) would have been impossible. 
So, too, Donnacha Dennehy's mighty cantata ''Gra Agus Bas'' (2007), a haunting work of Gaelic folk incantations vocalized by Iarla O Lionaird over a seething, lung-constrictingly tense orchestral fabric. 
Softly evocative at times, it expands to a deafening roar at a climax of fiery death. 
Lock me anywhere with that piece, any time.
