
Tiffany's strong sales in China and higher prices made up for some disappointing business in its home market in the latest quarter, leading the jeweler on Tuesday to raise its profit forecast for the year.
This summer, fears rose that luxury spending in China might slow as the economy there weakened, but Tiffany is the latest Western brand to report good sales there. 
Prada and Coach recently posted big gains in the market for luxury goods.
Sales at stores open at least a year in Asia, except for Japan, rose 13 percent in the second quarter, which ended July 31.
But same-store sales were unchanged in the Americas, which is still Tiffany's biggest market. 
This suggests the company may have faced the same summer pullback that dented sales at chains like Saks and Target.
''Business in the Americas is light,'' said Brian Yarbrough, an Edward Jones analyst. 
Tiffany continues to struggle with low-end jewelry sales, he added.
Tiffany executives told analysts in a conference call that tourists' purchases had helped business increase at the Fifth Avenue flagship in Manhattan, which generates about one-eighth of sales. 
Elsewhere, though, there was still reason to be prudent, they said.
''We are maintaining a cautious sales outlook for the Americas until we see solid evidence of an upturn,'' said Patrick McGuiness, the chief financial officer.
Last year, Tiffany's shares came under pressure after it repeatedly lowered its forecasts.
The company now expects a profit of $3.50 to $3.60 a share for the full fiscal year, up 7 cents from its previous forecast range.
Shares of Tiffany fell 85 cents, down 1.04 percent, to $80.82.
The company has struggled to find the right mix of the expensive jewelry for which it is known and the more-affordable silver items that make up its most profitable category.
Still, the pickup in business outside the Americas, where Tiffany is focusing its expansion, reassured Wall Street that the jeweler's growth prospects remain good, Mr. Yarbrough said.
Sales in Asia outside Japan now account for about 22 percent of overall revenue, compared with 11 percent five years ago.
