
Glencore, the commodities trader, has yet to start its initial public offering in Hong Kong, but is already acting like a local. 
It has talked with big investors about taking a stake ahead of a share sale of up to $12 billion in return for staying put for a few months. 
Those investors, called ''cornerstones,'' are de rigueur in Hong Kong, though they serve little purpose. 
A company of Glencore's stature can afford to break with tradition.
The list of possible cornerstones for Glencore will be long, since the company, which is likely to seek a $60 billion equity valuation, is one of a kind. 
Large sovereign funds like Kuwait's have appeared in past deals. 
Qatar's fund and the billionaire Li Ka-shing are other possibilities. 
Investors would be assured of getting the amount of equity they want if the shares were hugely oversubscribed. 
And if they plan to be long-term holders, the lockup shouldn't sting.
These investors used to lubricate the listing process for companies with no track record outside China. 
That was particularly useful a decade ago as China began to privatize state-owned firms unknown beyond its borders. 
Tycoons and entrepreneurs, trusted by the local populace, would lend their name to an initial public offering, and their cachet would ensure it got away.
Today, it's hard to see what such investors add other than to feed the exuberance. 
Underwriters appreciate them for two reasons. 
First, by tying up a chunk of the issue, cornerstones create an enhanced sense of scarcity. 
Second, the structure plays to the ''me too'' character of small investors, who still carry a lot of weight in Hong Kong listings.
Glencore would merely be the latest in a long line. 
A.I.A., the insurer, signed up cornerstones, as did the Agricultural Bank of China. 
Hong Kong's regulator has acquiesced to the practice even though such big names shouldn't need a helping hand. 
But a process that creates a false sense of competitive tension between two sets of investors, and fuels demand based on buzz rather than fundamentals, is hardly worth preserving. 
It would be a shame if a company of Glencore's visibility reinforced it.
Defining Banking
Britain has put the scope of investment banking up for grabs. 
The Independent Commission on Banking led by John Vickers has recommended that lenders be required to ''ring-fence'' their domestic retail arms from their wholesale operations. 
But it has deliberately left open the question of where to draw the line.
The commission's proposal should make it easier to protect retail banking customers in a crisis. 
But state-insured deposits aside, it has not said which bits should be protected. 
Mortgages, credit cards, business loans and even trade finance could be included in the protected subsidiary. 
Or they could be lumped together with wholesale banking.
To see why this matters, consider Barclays. 
The bank's balance sheet at the end of 2010 was $:1.5 trillion. 
Its insured British deposit base was just $:100 billion. 
On a narrow interpretation of the commission's thinking, Barclays could take those deposits, matched with an equal amount of domestic mortgages, and place them in a separate subsidiary. 
The bank's remaining activities would carry on as before.
But now assume the commission adopts a broad definition of ring-fencing. 
Credit card, corporate banking, wealth management and asset management operations at Barclays had assets of $:140 billion at the end of last year. 
Even allowing that some are outside Britain, a broad definition of retail banking would force Barclays to isolate twice as much of its business.
If this were the case, investors and rating agencies would begin to think differently about the nonring-fenced operations dominated by the investment bank at Barclays. 
They might demand higher spreads on the bank's debt, and ask Barclays to hold higher levels of capital to reflect that the nonretail part of the business no longer enjoyed government protection. 
In the extreme, shareholders might even wonder whether there was any benefit to keeping the two parts under one roof.
The question of how to define retail banking, and therefore what is excluded from the government-protected umbrella, is likely to dominate the commission's discussions as it prepares its final report in September. 
The answer will largely determine whether the plan is a minor inconvenience for big British banks, or a major headache.
JOHN FOLEY and PETER THAL LARSEN
For more independent financial commentary and analysis, visit www.breakingviews.com.
