
HONG KONG - Stocks in China plunged 7.7 percent Monday, the largest one-day sell-off since the 2008 financial crisis. 
But China's top securities regulator, Xiao Gang, showed no sign of concern as he addressed a financial forum here.
After all, the sell-off was largely engineered by Mr. Xiao's agency. 
On Friday evening, the China Securities Regulatory Commission cracked down on borrowing to invest in shares by placing a temporary ban on margin financing against three of China's biggest brokerages. 
Lending money to investors so they can trade shares has played a big role in the phenomenal rise in Chinese shares.
Containing risk is a key priority for Mr. Xiao, who as the chairman of the C.S.R.C., presides over what was the world's best-performing stock market last year. 
Many economists and analysts said that the nearly 40 percent rise over the past three months was unsustainable, a bubble waiting to pop.
''The C.S.R.C. worries that some brokers have not been fully compliant in their margin finance operations, which may lead to substantial losses of their clients, and brokers themselves, in case of a market correction,'' Leon Qi, an analyst at Daiwa Capital Markets, said Monday. 
''Hence it 'engineered' a market correction.''
Mr. Xiao did not specifically refer to Monday's market sell-off. 
Instead, Mr. Xiao offered high praise for a new pilot program linking the Shanghai and Hong Kong stock exchanges, describing it as ''a very important innovation'' because - while it cracks open the door to China's still largely closed capital account - the program does so in a way that ''the risk can be controlled.''
In the broader context of moves by policy makers to soften China's economic slowdown, the securities regulator's actions follow steps by the central bank, the People's Bank of China, to cut interest rates and loosen lending restrictions on banks. 
Analysts said Beijing's overall goal was to ensure that new liquidity created by the easing of monetary policy found its way into productive sectors of the economy, where it can help create jobs, and doesn't just get plowed into the stock market.
This coordinated approach among financial regulators ''should also help provide the People's Bank of China with more flexibility on future monetary policy with less concern on the potential negative 'side effects' if further easing is needed,'' Morgan Stanley analysts led by Richard Xu wrote Monday in a research report.
The C.S.R.C. said Friday it had investigated 45 brokerages and announced a three-month ban against three of them from opening new margin financing accounts on behalf of clients. 
Those three were Citic Securities, Haitong Securities and Guotai Jun'an Securities - all large, state-owned companies that were discovered by the regulator to have violated regulations by extending margin financing and securities lending to a large number of clients beyond the contracted term, usually six months.
The suspension of new margin financing accounts is likely have a significant impact on the brokerages, which had been ramping up such activity in recent months. 
Several, including Citic and Haitong, had taken advantage of their own surging share prices to announce new offerings of stock - the proceeds of which would partly have been used to invest further in margin financing.
In an announcement late Sunday responding to the C.S.R.C.'s ruling, Citic Securities said it would take a number of steps to reduce risk in its existing margin finance business, including raising the minimum amount of assets that a client must have to secure such financing, to 500,000 renminbi, or about $81,000, from 300,000 renminbi previously.
''The company will seriously implement the corrective measures, fully review its existing business process and systems and rules, and conduct business in strict compliance with existing business rules,'' Wang Dongming, the chairman of Citic Securities, said in the announcement. 
Shares in Citic Securities and Haitong Securities both fell by 16.5 percent in Hong Kong on Monday.
While the C.S.R.C.'s move to let some steam out of the share market rally is probably a good thing, there are many risks to such a strategy, and they are compounded by the record amount of leverage that investors have taken on in recent weeks.
Outstanding margin financing had more than doubled in the past six months, recently exceeding 1 trillion renminbi, or about $160 billion. 
Frances Feng, an analyst at Credit Suisse, wrote Monday in a research not that margin financing has been accounting for around 18 percent of the average daily trading volume in China recently, more than double what it was a year ago.
Before Monday's market rout, the benchmark Shanghai Stock Exchange Composite Index had surged 38 percent in the past three months. 
But there were signs that the rally was increasingly precarious and losing momentum. 
Trading volumes peaked on Dec. 
9 when shares worth 77 billion renminbi, or about $12.5 billion, changed hands. 
The current five-day trading volume is less than a third of that level, at around 22 billion renminbi, signaling less active support for shares at their current levels.
At the same time, the pace of new investors piling into the market has slowed. 
The number of new trading accounts opened on the Shanghai and Shenzhen stock exchanges declined to 550,000 in the week that ended Jan. 
9, down from a peak of nearly 900,000 the week that ended Dec. 
12.
The slowing momentum means the C.S.R.C. must act delicately as it seeks to prune the excesses of the rally. 
But the need to act is clear when weighed against the overall slowdown in China's economy.
Figures to be released on Tuesday are expected to show that China's economy expanded last year at the slowest pace in more than 20 years.
''The stock market fever has made it difficult for the People's Bank of China to further loosen monetary policy,'' Daiwa's Mr. Qi said. 
The securities regulator ''is helping to cool the sentiment on stocks, with the aim that some of the incremental liquidity will go to the real economy.''
