
Chinese regulators ordered state-owned banks on Tuesday to set aside a larger share of their deposits as a reserve against failed loans, another in a string of indicators that Beijing is concerned about speculation in the nation's fast-growing economy.
In a posting on its Web site, the central bank raised the reserve requirement for major banks to 16 percent of assets as of Jan. 
18, a half-percent increase from the current rate. 
Smaller banks would jump to 14 percent, from 13.5 percent.
The requirement, which forces banks to keep more assets internally instead of lending them out, is apparently aimed at curbing a yearlong lending spree by major Chinese banks that has shown few signs of abating.
China's government news service, Xinhua, reported on Tuesday that banks had made loans totaling almost 600 billion renminbi, or $87.7 billion, in the first week of January. 
At that rate, Chinese banks would lend almost 50 percent more this January than in the month a year ago, when the Beijing government increased spending to bolster an economy staggered by the global financial crisis.
Moreover, Chinese bank lending in the first 11 months of 2009 -- 9.2 trillion renminbi, or about $1.38 trillion -- was twice as much as had been lent the previous year.
''China's banking regulators have been attempting since later last year to prevent another lending glut in 2010, and this policy change reflects that effort,'' Nicholas Consonery, a China economics specialist at Eurasia Group, a New York-based political risk research firm, said in an e-mail message.
Mr. Consonery said regulators were probably unnerved by the burst of lending early this year, which most likely included many loans that were held up when the government put quotas on some lending at the end of last year.
Even so, he said, it was unclear whether the latest move represented a serious effort to dampen expansion. 
Though inflation forecasts are rising -- recent private estimates are edging over a 3 percent annual rate -- government officials remain fearful that tightening credit too much will raise the cost of manufacturing, slow China's export-based economy and raise unemployment.
Regulators hope for a twofold effect: to reduce inflation, by taking excess liquidity out of the economy, and to curb the flow of easy cash into China's securities and property markets, where some economist are warning of bubbles.
The new reserve requirements follow other government moves to cool the economy, which appears to have grown by 8 to 9 percent last year and could expand even faster this year. 
Regulators raised the interest rate on a key interbank loan last week, signaling further increases intended to rein in spending. 
The government also took steps to cool speculation in housing, announcing that it would pay special attention to loans given to buyers of second homes.
Because the government so far has refused to wield one effective monetary tool -- loosening its control of currency exchange rates -- regulators have been forced to rely on bank reserve limits, changes in interest rates and other indirect measures to save the economy from inflation and overexpansion.
Chinese banks have generally been exceptionally profitable, in part because the rate they pay on consumer deposits is far below the rate they charge for loans. 
Because they are government-controlled, they have little incentive to compete for consumers' deposits.
The banks' reserve requirements also are considerably more conservative than those of United States financial institutions. 
As China's growth has picked up this decade, regulators have steadily raised the reserve requirement, including nine times in 2007 alone.
The United States Federal Reserve requires big American banks to withhold about 10 percent of their deposits from the lending market as a safeguard against bad loans -- more than a third less than the reserves held by big Chinese banks.
