
HONG KONG -- Exports from China inched up in August and imports shrank unexpectedly, data released Monday showed, cementing the view that the Chinese economy has slowed abruptly in recent months despite a string of government measures devised to bolster it.
The data, released by the Chinese customs agency, capped a series of feeble statistics for August and fanned expectations that the government would speed up the flow and range of stimulus measures.
Growth in exports, which represent about 25 percent of the Chinese economy and account for millions of jobs, slowed sharply in recent months because of weaker economic growth and austerity measures in Europe. 
Exports were up 2.7 percent from the level of a year earlier.
Although that increase was better than the 1 percent growth recorded in July, it fell short of analysts' expectations and was well below the double-digit growth rates that the export sector has managed in the past.
Given the lingering turmoil in Europe and the anemic pace of recovery in the United States, there is little prospect that exports will rebound anytime soon.
An unexpectedly sharp slump in imports to China showed that domestic demand, too, had weakened. 
Imports fell 2.6 percent in August from a year earlier; analysts had expected, on average, a gain of 3.5 percent.
''Demand for the hard commodities, such as iron ore and coal, is likely to remain soft for a while, given a large amount of port inventories,'' Liu Li-gang, chief economist for China at Australia and New Zealand Banking, said in a note.
The government has moved to counter the slowdown by approving more infrastructure investment and trying to get banks to increase lending.
The measures have come in dribs and drabs, however, and judging from the weak data, they have failed so far to provide the punch needed for a marked increase.
''We believe government policy will become more proactive, and further supportive policies will be rolled out in September,'' Zhiwei Zhang, China economist at Nomura in Hong Kong, said in a research note.
Further stimulus measures are likely to take the form of tax rebates for exporters, incentives to encourage consumption, more infrastructure projects and further cuts to the reserve requirement ratio for banks, which would free up more cash for them to extend as loans.
Although many economists say they believe that such measures will bolster economic growth later this year, many have cut their forecasts for China.
UBS, for example, lowered its forecast for 2012 on Friday to 7.5 percent from a previous projection of 8 percent. 
Its 2013 forecast was cut to 7.8 percent from 8.3 percent.
