
CHENGDU, China -- A former Chinese p olice chief helped to cover up the murder of a British businessman by the wife o f Bo Xilai, the Communist official toppled from power this year, but he also sec retly collected evidence used to convict her, according to a lawyer for the poli ce chief and an official account released Tuesday at the end of his trial.
Du ring the trial, the former police chief, Wang Lijun, confessed to the most serio us charge against him, defection, and did not contest the other three charges -- abuse of power, taking bribes and bending the law for personal gain, a court sp okesman said. 
The first two charges were heard in a closed-door session Monday b ecause they involved state secrets, said the spokesman, Yang Yuquan, while the s econd two were reviewed Tuesday in a so-called public hearing from which journal ists were barred.
It was unclear when a formal verdict or senten ce would be announced. 
Like the trial of Mr. Bo's wife, Gu Kailai, who was convi cted last month of the murder of the Briton, Neil Heywood, the opacity of Mr. Wa ng's trial raised questions about the fairness of China's legal process. 
Verdict s in Chinese trials are often predetermined, especially when the trial is tied t o elite politics.
Mr. Wang helped catalyze the downfall of Mr. Bo, and the biggest eruption in Chinese politics in a generation, when he fled to the Unite d States Consulate in Chengdu, the capital of the southwestern province of Sichu an, in February and told diplomats there about Mr. Heywood's murder last year. 
M r. 
Wang, 52, had been the flamboyant police chief of the nearby city of Chongqin g, which Mr. Bo ruled until his removal as party secretary this spring.
Mr. Yang read a statement after the hearing ended that detailed Mr. Wang's crimes, while also discussing mitigating factors cited by the prosecution and the defens e, including Mr. Wang's help to investigators in other cases.
The mention o f those factors indicated that Mr. Wang probably would not be given the death se ntence, but perhaps would be given life in prison through a suspended death sent ence or be treated even more leniently. 
Wang Yuncai, a defense lawyer for Mr. Wa ng who is not related to him, said in an interview after the trial that ''Wang L ijun regrets his crimes.''
The defense lawyer added that Mr. Wang had provi ded ''blood samples and other material'' to Chinese investigators that helped le ad to Ms. Gu's conviction. 
''He defected because his life was under threat,'' Ms . Wang said. 
She did not mention the Bo family specifically as the source of the threat, and she declined to say whether Mr. Bo's name came up at the trial.
With Ms. Gu's trial finished -- she was given a suspended death sentence -- an d Mr. Wang's nearing completion, the one remaining case in the scandal is that o f Mr. Bo. No date has been announced for a trial, and some party insiders say Mr . Bo could simply face party disciplinary procedures rather than criminal charge s.
A once-a-decade handover of power is expected to take place this autumn in China, and party officials apparently have still not decided whether to anno unce the fate of Mr. Bo before the transition.
The court statement Tuesday revealed additional details about the prosecutors' case against Mr. Wang. The pr osecutors accused Mr. Wang of taking 3.05 million renminbi, or about $475,000, i n bribes. 
The statement did not say who paid the bribes; Ms. Wang said Mr. Wang took the bribes while in Chongqing.
As for the abuse of power charge, the s tatement said that Mr. Wang forged approvals for technical surveillance. 
Party i nsiders have said the wiretapping campaign run by the police chief and overseen by Mr. Bo resulted in the surveillance of senior officials visiting from Beijing .
Like the defense, the prosecution argued that Mr. Wang had helped the sta te in certain ways, the court statement said. 
He asked police officers in Chongq ing to collect and keep evidence for a case against Ms. Gu, the court said.
A resident of Chongqing with police contacts said that Mr. Wang would probably receive either a suspended death sentence or a 20-year prison sentence, given th e nature of the case. 
He added that in sparing Mr. Wang from execution, some par ty officials could employ Mr. Wang as a ''time bomb'' against Mr. Bo and his all ies, because Mr. Wang knows secrets about Mr. Bo.
The second day of the tri al began quietly Tuesday morning, with more than 15 police officers in light blu e uniforms standing at the front of the courthouse. 
Shops on blocks surrounding the court building were closed and only opened a couple of hours after the trial had begun. 
Dozens of foreign journalists stood in a roped-off section of the si dewalk.
One of the few moments of excitement occurred around 8:45 a.m., whe n a white-haired man carrying a leather satchel walked up to the journalists and yelled Mr. Wang's name. 
''Everyone must be treated equally by the law,'' he sho uted.
He said he had been a petitioner who had tried to inform officials in Beijing of his grievances, though he did not say what those grievances were. 
A half-dozen security officers ushered him away.
''Wang Lijun should be a le sson to you,'' he told the officers.
