
SHE WAS SCHOOLED to build a nuclear bomb. 
As a sophomore at Bennington College, Joan Hinton -- a physics major, a violinist and a champion slalom skier who shunned high heels, lipstick and her mother's attempt to make her ''graceful'' by sending her to dance school -- built her first cloud chamber to detect subatomic particles. 
A few years later, after colleagues from her physics grad program disappeared one by one for secret locations, it was her turn: it was 1944, and she was 22 when she joined the Manhattan Project.
By day, in a canyon in Los Alamos, N.M., she and a team of scientists built reactors to test enriched uranium and plutonium. 
By night, she played in a quartet with the physicists Edward Teller and Otto Frisch.
At 5:30 a.m. on July 16, 1945, that first test bomb detonated. 
Hinton, who like some other lower-level scientists had not been invited to attend, watched from a dirt mound 25 miles away. 
She felt the heat on her face. 
''It was like being at the bottom of an ocean of light,'' Hinton wrote in a letter to Ruth Howes and Caroline Herzenberg, authors of ''Their Day in the Sun: Women of the Manhattan Project.''
''We were bathed in it from all directions. 
The light withdrew into the bomb as if the bomb sucked it up. 
Then it turned purple and blue and went up and up and up.''
Three weeks later, Little Boy landed on Hiroshima and Fat Man detonated over Nagasaki. 
Hinton, who had believed the bomb would not be used on civilians, became a peace activist. 
She sent bits of glassy, melted residue from the test site to several mayors. 
Included was a note: ''Do you want this to happen to your city?''
Then, as other disillusioned progressive activists had before her, she left the United States for a revolution. 
Her brother, William Hinton, who wrote ''Fanshen: A Documentary of Revolution in a Chinese Village,'' was in China. 
So was his college roommate and Joan's boyfriend, a dairy-cattle expert named Erwin (Sid) Engst. 
In letters to Hinton, Engst waxed about Mao Zedong's plans to build a new society. 
She penned passionate descriptions of black holes and supernovas.
In March 1948, Joan Hinton boarded a steamship for Shanghai with $500, a typewriter, a sleeping bag, a slide rule and her violin. 
Westerners were a rare sight in rural north-central China where Hinton eventually landed -- an American woman even more so. 
Hinton's blue eyes and blond hair peeked out from under her cap. 
Rather than wearing a cloth to wrap her breasts as many Chinese women did, she wore a bra.
In most ways, though, Hinton and Engst, who soon married, lived like the rural Chinese. 
They worked in an iron factory and lived in a cave carved out of the hillside with rice paper for a door. 
They had three sets of government-issued clothing, as she recounted in ''Silage Choppers and Snake Spirits: The Lives and Struggles of Two Americans in Modern China,'' by Dao-yuan Chou. 
When they moved to a dairy farm, Engst bred cows, and Hinton used her mechanical expertise to create labor-saving technology, including an automatic milk pasteurizer.
If she longed for a soft bed or water that splashed out of a faucet, she never said so. 
Physical labor and self-reliance were Hinton family values. 
Her mother, Carmelita, was the founder of the Putney School in Vermont, a progressive prep school where learning took place on the 500-acre farm as well as in the classroom.
Joan Hinton, too, raised her three children on a farm with a strong work ethic. 
In their case, though, Chinese was their first language; their farm was a commune; and they had no electricity, no car, no running water.
By the mid-'70s, when even many of the most ardent Maoists expressed doubts about the revolution, Hinton and Engst never wavered. 
Some friends -- at least those who were no longer Maoists -- said the couple seemed religious about their politics, reinforcing each other's beliefs. 
After devoting their lives to the cause, it may have been too painful to see, much less acknowledge, the underbelly.
Regardless, those who knew Hinton remained captivated by her. 
She was stubbornly orthodox, but with an exuberant laugh and unflagging vitality. 
At 88, she still played the violin and attended a weekly discussion group filled with food and politics. 
And on many mornings Hinton could be found on the farm that she and Engst tended for decades, wearing her Mao cap and checking on her dairy cows.
