
Each year since their introduction 15 years ago, China's state-mandated, nationwide vacations - the so-called Golden Weeks - have produced larger and larger crowds, leading to melees at tourist spots as millions of people fight over entry, transportation or just space to be able to move.
"Many complained that the system crushed their dreams of quality leisure time," according to Xinhua, the state news agency.
This week, the Chinese government responded by shutting down the National Holiday Office that since 2000 had set the dates for the country's vacations and moving decision-making up the chain to "a higher ministerial joint conference presided over by Vice Premier Wang Yang," Xinhua reported. 
Previously, vacation times were scheduled in consultation with 17 government ministries and changed each year.
One purpose of the arrangement was to boost tourist spending by creating longer breaks when people might be able to travel more. 
Another was to ensure that most people would be released from work on the most important holidays, such as the Mid-Autumn Festival and the Lunar New Year. 
Too often, employers would refuse employee requests for time off or tell those who insisted on going that they should not bother to return to work.
But in practice, guaranteeing a holiday that happens to fall in the middle of the workweek has often been achieved by requiring people to make up the time by working on weekends before and after those holidays. 
In schools, children as young as 6 sometimes find themselves having to attend class for seven days in a row.
The next such mass vacation event is the imminent National Day Golden Week Holiday, from Oct. 
1 to 7, when all of China will rest. 
However, Sunday, Sept. 
28, and Saturday, Oct. 
11, have been designated as official working days.
Public anger with the system was particularly acute this year when the government instructed the country to work on Lunar New Year's Eve, the biggest holiday in the traditional calendar.
Any changes should move in the direction of privately scheduled, paid holidays, Cai Jiming, a professor at Tsinghua University, was quoted by Xinhua as saying. 
"Pieced-together vacations might still be in existence for a while, but paid vacations are definitely the way to go," he said.
It wasn't immediately clear how the new decision-making system would simplify things. 
While Mr. Wang, as a vice premier, may have greater executive power, Xinhua said, 28 ministries would be involved in deciding vacation dates for the nation - more than before.
