
CRUDE oil prices have risen this year, and this week they briefly touched $100 a barrel for the first time since 2008.
But not everyone felt the pinch. 
While gasoline prices were rising in the United States, the cost of heating most homes was actually falling a bit. 
Natural gas prices are well below their levels at the end of 2010.
As the accompanying charts show, natural gas fell to a historical low relative to oil this week. 
The price of natural gas is now less than one-quarter that of oil on an energy-equivalent basis.
That steep divergence reflects the fact that while natural gas and oil can sometimes be used as substitute fuels, for the most part they are two different markets. 
One is global, while the other is continental. 
And that can make all the difference.
As the charts show, the prices of the two can vary sharply. 
In the early 1990s, gas was relatively cheap because of what was called the ''gas bubble'' in the United States. 
Then excess supply held down the price. 
As the American economy picked up steam, the price difference all but vanished by early 1994.
By late 2000, the price advantage had moved sharply in the other direction. 
That was when California briefly experienced a shortage of electricity generation, and prices for gas to fuel power plants went through the roof. 
But the advantage did not last long, and with the American economy in recession the price of gas fell rapidly in 2001.
More recently, something similar has happened. 
In mid-December 2008, with world trade flows plunging and virtually all economies stumbling, oil and gas prices neared parity. 
But since then oil prices have risen by about 175 percent, adjusted for inflation, while gas prices are down by more than 25 percent.
While the lack of rising demand has played a role in holding down the North American price for natural gas, increased supplies from exploitation of shale oil have also played a role. 
Josef Auer, an analyst at Deutsche Bank, speculated this week that efforts might be made to build an infrastructure that would allow the United States to export liquefied natural gas in ships. 
But any impact of that on markets would be years off.
A generation ago, the developed world, and particularly the United States, provided the marginal demand for oil. 
That gave the United States something of a self-correcting mechanism. 
If high oil prices damaged the American economy, that would in turn reduce demand and help to bring world oil prices back down.
But now the marginal demand is more likely to come from China. 
In 2009, the last year for which figures are available, the world consumed 11 percent more oil than it had used a decade earlier. 
The regional pattern changed sharply in that time. 
The United States, Japan and the developed countries of Europe all used less oil. 
The rest of the world increased consumption by about a third.
As a result, the stronger recovery in developing countries has helped to push up oil prices over the last 15 months, even though the Western economies have been stumbling. 
Oil can be shipped anywhere, and tankers can be diverted rapidly from one country to another if demand patterns change. 
For now, at least, natural gas in North America can move only in pipelines.
Over the last several weeks, the upward price pressure on oil from a booming China has been supplemented by worries about a reduction of supply as revolutions grip the Middle East. 
The run-up to $100 oil came as Libyan production was falling. 
The price retreated a bit when Saudi Arabia promised to produce more if necessary to offset a cutoff of Libyan exports.
Signs of Mideast stability would no doubt reduce upward pressure on oil prices. 
But sharp price declines may be unlikely unless, and until, Asian economies stumble and decrease their demand for oil.
