
SEOUL, South Korea -- After meeting Monday with South Korean officials, American officials elaborated on Washington's intention to increase pressure on foreign banks and businesses that help North Korea in illicit activities.
The action raised the possibility that the tough new measures would mirror those that escalated tensions in the region five years ago, contributing to the North's test-firing of an intercontinental missile and testing of a nuclear device in 2006.
Washington will soon announce a new list of entities and individuals involved in arms trading, counterfeiting American currency, drug trafficking and other illicit activities that provide North Korea with ''hundreds of millions of dollars annually,'' Robert Einhorn, the State Department's special adviser for nonproliferation and arms control, said at a news conference here after meeting with South Korean officials.
On a visit here last month, Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clintonannounced that the United States would impose new financial penalties on the North in the wake of the sinking of a South Korean warship in March that killed 46 sailors. 
A South Korean-led investigation found that a North Korean torpedo had split the ship in two.
Mr. Einhorn said that Washington was seeking to block access by members of the blacklist to property or assets under the control of a United States citizen or bank. 
The move is an effort to cut off the money that international intelligence officials say is used to help the North Korean leader, Kim Jong-il, finance his country's nuclear weapons program and bribe his party and military elite with luxury foreign goods.
''By publicly naming these entities, these measures can have the broader effect of isolating them from the international financial and commercial system,'' Mr. Einhorn said. 
''Those entities don't have to be all North Korean.''
Daniel Glaser, the Treasury Department's deputy assistant secretary for terrorist financing and financial crimes, who was also in Seoul for the meetings, compared the new measures to the Treasury's 2005 move to blacklist Banco Delta Asia, a bank in the Chinese territory of Macao with links to North Korea. 
That move angered North Korea more than any other.
About $24 million of North Korea's money at Banco Delta was effectively frozen, and financial institutions around the world were loath to deal with Pyongyang for fear they would also be blacklisted and denied access to the international banking system.
''We have seen on prior occasions how powerfully the private sector reacts to U.S. actions that expose entities that facilitate North Korea's illicit activities,'' Mr. Glaser said.
In 2005, North Korea considered the American actions a plot to topple its government, and it boycotted six-nation talks on ending its nuclear weapons program. 
The next year, North Korea launched a Taepodong-2 long-range missile and conducted its first nuclear test, prompting the United Nations Security Council to tighten sanctions further. 
North Korea returned to talks only after Washington promised to release the frozen money.
Mr. Einhorn said Washington was concerned about a global network of trading firms using aliases, subsidiaries and front companies to flout international sanctions and carry on proliferation-related activities. 
He said the United States would urge other nations to press banks to freeze those companies' accounts, noting that similar pressure was being brought to bear on Iran. 
North Korea and Iran are Washington's two biggest concerns regarding nuclear proliferation.
''One means of addressing these challenges is to increase the pressures felt by these two governments so that they recognize that it is in the best interests of their countries to meet their international obligations and forsake nuclear weapons,'' Mr. Einhorn said.
Though North Korea suffers from sanctions that already exist, it tends to grow more belligerent under pressure.
China has weakened the sting of some sanctions, intervening with emergency aid to forestall instability in North Korea and avert a crisis at the border between it and the North.
