
GLASGOW -- Four years ago in Beijing, Carli Lloyd provided the climax to the women's soccer tournament at the Olympics with a wicked shot that was, for the United States at least, a truly golden goal. 
On Wednesday, Lloyd produced another dazzling finish that the Americans can only hope will send them along a similar path.
An enterprising YouTube savant might find the shots suitable for a mash-up, as they were virtually mirror images. 
In China, Lloyd's strike came off her left foot from outside the left edge of the penalty arc in the final against Brazil; here it was her right foot, from the right side, in the first match of the London Games, a wondrous dart that pushed the Americans ahead in a 4-2 comeback victory over France.
Although the Beijing blast surely came under more meaningful circumstances, Lloyd's latest might have been more impressive to witness. 
After dribbling a few steps to her right, Lloyd -- who was left out of the starting lineup and only came on as a first-half substitute -- unleashed a rising shot that zoomed past goalkeeper Sarah Bouhaddi and broke a 2-2 tie in the 56th minute.
Lloyd immediately turned and sprinted toward the United States bench, sliding on her knees near the touchline before being tackled by a mob of teammates. 
Lloyd said afterward that she took an extra measure of satisfaction in the goal because she began the game on the bench, an assignment she is still getting used to.
In 2011, Lloyd started all 19 games in which she played; this year, she had started 13 of 16. 
Still, she said she was ''at peace'' with Coach Pia Sundhage's decision and was determined to make an impact if she got a chance to play.
That opportunity came when the veteran midfielder Shannon Boxx injured her right quadriceps and was replaced in the 17th minute. 
Lloyd quickly fell into her familiar routine with teammates but said she was not expecting to hit such a pure shot from distance because she and other players had struggled to get comfortable with the Adidas balls being used in the Olympics.
The balls are a little bit harder, Lloyd said, so ''it's not very often you hit in the sweet spot.''
She added, ''Fortunately on that one, I did.''
Lloyd's magic was the final salve on a brutal beginning for the United States, which looked ragged at the start and trailed, 2-0, after 14 minutes. 
The French attacker Gaetane Thiney provided the opening score, dribbling forward essentially uncontested in the 12th minute and ripping a shot that Hope Solo dived for but could only graze.
Two minutes later, a scramble in front of the American goal was defended equally poorly, and after five United States players had chances to clear but failed, Marie-Laure Delie drilled a shot in from 6 yards to stun the American fans in the small crowd at Hampden Park.
When Boxx went off moments later, it seemed as if there might be reason for the United States to worry. 
France lost to the United States in the World Cup semifinals last summer but had won its 17 matches since, and the French players appeared in control, showcasing a smooth, silky style of passing.
But the Americans were unmoved. 
''We were ice cold -- we weren't even fazed going down two goals,'' Solo said. 
''We knew France was good, but we knew we were better.''
While France tried to push its advantage, the United States quickly rebounded. 
Alex Morgan said she and Abby Wambach told each other, ''All right, a goal each'' and they delivered, with Wambach heading in a goal from a Megan Rapinoe corner kick and Morgan running onto a long punt from Solo before burying a short-range shot to tie the score at 2-2 just after the half-hour mark.
''We're going to need her,'' Sundhage said of Morgan, who also scored the final goal in the 66th minute in her Olympic debut.
''Every single game going forward, we're going to need her,'' Sundhage added.
Sundhage attributed her team's sluggish start to a bit of nerves; after the second French goal, she said she immediately thought back to Beijing. 
In China, the United States also fell behind early, conceding two goals to Norway in the first five minutes of the opening match.
On that day, the Americans did not rally (they lost, 2-0), but Sundhage said she was heartened by the overall resolve her players showed, bouncing back from that defeat to go on to win the gold medal.
This time, the comeback was quicker, and Lloyd's shot allowed the United States to revel in a way they could not at this stage in Beijing. 
In contrast to four years ago, the United States is now on course to win its group -- it has matches left against weaker teams, Colombia and North Korea -- which would put it in a strong position going into the knockout round.
Most American athletes look forward to the opening ceremony in London on Friday night, but the women's soccer team will remain here, where it faces Colombia on Saturday.
There are plans for the team to dress in the Team USA-issued opening ceremony outfits and watch on television together, but disappointment over missing the event did not appear to run deep.
''There's nothing that's going to stop us,'' Wambach said. 
''Two goals, people getting injured -- there's one thing that we have on our mind, and it's gold.''
FLAG MISCUE DELAYS GAME The kickoff of the women's soccer match between North Korea and Colombia was delayed more than an hour in Glasgow after a scoreboard error: The wrong flag for North Korea was displayed as the teams were preparing to take the field.
The scoreboard at Hampden Park showed the South Korean flag, a sight that stunned the North Koreans, who returned to their dressing room.
Once the mistake was realized, officials displayed the North Korean flag on both video boards in the stadium and the North Koreans agreed to return to the field.
In a statement, the London Organizing Committee said: ''We will apologize to the team and the National Olympic Committee and steps will be taken to ensure this does not happen again.''
2012 London
