
TAIPEI, Taiwan -- The ride-hailing service Uber is under fire in Taiwan and the mainland Chinese city of Chongqing, officials announced Monday, over concerns that the company and its drivers are not appropriately licensed, adding to a string of official complaints aimed at the fast-growing American start-up.
Uber has been subject to similar action in countries like Thailand and Spain. 
But an investigation in Chongqing -- a city with a population of nearly 30 million - marks the first time Uber's legality has come under scrutiny in mainland China. 
It also comes less than a week after Uber won an investment from the Chinese Internet giant Baidu.
Uber, through its apps, charges a fee to play matchmaker between passengers and drivers, some of whom are registered taxi drivers. 
But a lack of regulation for the relatively new business model has brought Uber and similar ride-hailing companies to the attention of authorities worldwide.
In Taiwan, the transport ministry said Monday that Uber was licensed to provide information services rather than transportation. 
The ministry is investigating whether it has the authority and enforcement capabilities to block access to Uber's website and mobile apps.
''If Uber obtains the proper license, it can continue operating in Taiwan,'' said Liang Guo Guo, deputy director of the Ministry of Transportation and Communications. 
''The company has not made clear how it plans to proceed.''
Mr. Liang said that as of the end of this week, Uber would face fines in excess of 3 million Taiwan dollars, or about $95,000, over a number of transgressions, including operating a transportation service without a license. 
The company has paid 150,000 dollars and is contesting the remainder in court, Mr. Liang said.
Uber did not respond to a request for comment regarding Taiwan's announcement.
Also on Monday, the Chongqing government said it was investigating the legality of Uber's business model regarding private drivers. 
It said private drivers' operating as ride services without commercial licenses would be ''classified as illegal behavior.''
The Chongqing government said it would fine unlicensed drivers operating through car-hailing services 30,000 renminbi to 100,000 renminbi, or about $5,000 to $16,000. 
It did not state any action against car-hailing service providers.
Uber, valued at around $40 billion, already has full operations in eight Chinese cities. 
Chongqing, where it has been carrying out a free trial, would be the ninth.
''We are actively communicating and seeking clarification with the Chongqing government,'' Xue Huang, a spokesman for Uber in China, said in emailed comments.
The announcements on Monday add to an array of challenges that have hit the San Francisco-based company in recent weeks. 
As well as bans in cities and countries around the world, Uber has faced accusations of violating user privacy and has had to tighten screening after a driver in India was arrested on suspicion of raping a rider.
