
Volkswagen announced on Wednesday that it would buy a 20 percent stake in Suzuki Motor of Japan for $2.5 billion, another step in the German giant's aggressive bid to become the world's biggest automaker.
The alliance would create a formidable new force in the global car industry by allowing Volkswagen, Europe's biggest carmaker, to tap Suzuki's strengths in small cars and its dominance in a fast-growing Indian market. 
It is also the latest in a flurry of realignments and alliances in the auto industry, which has been battered by falling demand in the United States and Europe and is facing stricter environmental standards in many markets.
''In partnership with Suzuki, the Volkswagen group can take a big step forward in the compact car segment, particularly in the emerging markets in Asia,'' Volkswagen's chief executive, Martin Winterkorn, told reporters. 
''In turn, Suzuki can benefit from our experience with efficient and environmentally friendly vehicles.
''In eight to 10 years from now, we want to become No. 1 in the world. 
I believe we will be able to accelerate that with the cooperation with Suzuki.''
The deal is subject to regulatory approval and is expected to close in January. 
Volkswagen will buy 19.9 percent of Suzuki's issued shares for 222.5 billion yen ($2.5 billion). 
Suzuki will invest up to half of that amount received from Volkswagen into shares of Volkswagen.
Shares of Suzuki rose 3.5 percent in Tokyo on Wednesday on reports of the deal. 
Volkswagen rose 2.3 percent in Germany.
Many manufacturers are eager to raise their profile in Asia's fastest-growing countries -- notably China and India -- in a bid to tap soaring demand there.
Last week, PSA Peugeot Citroen of France and Mitsubishi Motors of Japan said they were exploring deeper ties, which had so far been limited to a project-based partnership.
General Motors and the Shanghai Automotive Industry Corporation of China said last week that they would make small cars and vehicles in India, building on a successful 12-year Chinese partnership. 
Another longstanding alliance between Renault of France and Nissan Motor of Japan has led to some success in developing low-emissions vehicles.
But it has been Volkswagen that has weathered the global recession better than many of its counterparts, thanks to its big exposure to dynamic emerging markets like China and Brazil; the company is now taking bold steps to buttress its world standing.
The German automaker -- with 10 brands under its wing including Audi, Skoda, Seat and now Porsche -- sold 3.265 million vehicles in the first half of 2009, just behind Toyota's sales of 3.564 million. 
Suzuki sold about 1.15 million vehicles in the same period. 
A combined Volkswagen and Suzuki would have global sales numbers above Toyota's.
In October, Volkswagen announced that it would acquire a 49.9 percent stake in Porsche for about 3.9 billion euros ($5.7 billion), the first step in combining the two.
Analysts said that through Suzuki, Volkswagen could increase its presence in the growth markets of India and Southeast Asia, as well as expand its production line in compact cars.
