
Some argue that banh mi, the Vietnamese sandwich, lives and dies by its bread, a cloud in crisp armor, preferably made with a pinch of rice flour for extra spring and crackle.
Others keep score by what lies within: layers of fish-sauce-laced charcuterie and musky pâté; cooling strands of pickled daikon and carrots; a jalapeño ambush; a wand of cucumber; sunny cilantro; mayonnaise cut with butter; and a douse of ''Vietnamese soy sauce'' -- typically code for Maggi seasoning.
For me, it comes down to ratios, and at Violet's Bake Shoppe in Forest Hills, Queens, they are golden. 
The crust snaps like kindling, and then the sandwich is all creaminess, salt and heat, deeply basal flavors and brisk, bright ones, every note seemingly struck at once.
Chris Tang, the chef, is of Chinese descent, Manhattan-born and Queens-bred. 
His parents have roots in Hong Kong and Guangdong Province. 
For a decade he worked alongside them in a factory in East Williamsburg, Brooklyn, making noodles and dumplings to sell to stores and restaurants.
When he and his wife, Flora Liu, opened Violet's in January (naming it after their 3-year-old daughter), they intended it to be a Chinese bakery, focusing on the likes of egg tarts. 
But Mr. Tang has always loved banh mi, and last spring he turned to his ''Auntie'' Kim, a Vietnamese friend of the family, for recipes.
Into the loaves he tucks classic cold cuts like thit nguoi, cured pork interleaved with fat, which the menu calls Vietnamese salami. 
(Pronunciation is key: Written with different accents, thit nguoi means ''human flesh.'')
Grilled pork comes not as slabs of meat but as broken-down nem nuong, ground-pork meatballs with 70 percent lean to 30 percent fat, like a great burger. 
Infiltrated by fish sauce, sugar, garlic and shallots and stained red by tomato paste, the meat is salty-sweet, somewhere between American barbecue and Chinese char siu.
Cha lua, identified here alternately as Vietnamese pork roll or ham, is pork pounded into a paste and then steamed in banana leaves. 
Appropriately pale and spongy, it is spiked with fish sauce, its taste half earth, half undersea.
There is no head cheese on the menu, which purists will mourn. 
But the house-made pâté brings lushness and an honest funk, the flavor of the chicken livers barely tempered.
Other fillings include chicken caramelized in lemongrass and flounder baked with turmeric, fragrant and fine, faintly evoking the fabled Hanoi dish cha ca la Vong. 
Each sandwich spans some 10 inches; the average price is $6.50, higher than in Chinatown but still confoundingly cheap.
All are brought into focus by the exacting calibration of daikon and carrot. 
Elsewhere in town I'm often conscious of an extra fingertip's worth of sugar, tipping the balance of the pickling brine. 
Here the daikon and carrot do not over-announce themselves. 
They do what they're supposed to: brace and refresh.
The bread, from an Italian distributor in New Jersey, contains not a trace of rice flour. 
But it's delivered daily and shatters and sinks under the teeth, at least if you eat it immediately. 
Once, after an hour on the subway, it had stiffened slightly, which didn't stop anyone from happily devouring it.
Auntie Kim also taught Mr. Tang to make bun rieu cua, rice noodles in a dusky red tomato broth with brine leaching from a rubble of crab paste, ground pork, egg and dried shrimp. 
My dining companion, whose parents grew up in Vietnam, greeted the bowl as an old friend, reminiscing how her grandmother always served it with snails and blood tofu.
There's not much room for dining in, beyond two little tables and a reclaimed-wood counter. 
Still, the place is inviting, a glowing cube on a busy strip that is also home to a Shake Shack. 
Paintings of violets hang on one wall and pictures of anthropomorphized food -- an egg tart with stick feet, a grilled cheese exclaiming, ''You make my cheese melt!''
-- on another.
Mr. Tang is still faithful to the bakery's original mission, making firm blocks of coconut pudding and oversize cream puffs (in Vietnamese, banh choux) that quickly spill their guts.
Come at the right hour and there will be two kinds of egg tarts: Cantonese, with a glossy finish and frank sweetness, and Portuguese, denser and slower to release the tongue. 
They are small enough that you won't have to choose.
Violet's Bake Shoppe
72-36 Austin Street (72nd Road), Forest Hills, Queens; 718-263-3839.
Recommended House special banh mi; grilled minced pork banh mi; pork belly banh mi; baked fish banh mi; pâté banh mi; cold noodles; summer rolls; bun rieu cua (crab noodle soup); egg tarts.
Drinks and Wine No liquor license.
Prices $2 to $9.75; no American Express.
Open Daily for breakfast, lunch and dinner.
Reservations Not accepted.
Wheelchair Access The entrance is up a slight slope from the sidewalk. 
There is no public restroom.
