
BEIJING -- The United States Embassy was denied access to an appeal hearing for an American geologist sentenced in July to eight years in prison for buying a database on China's oil industry, an American official said here Tuesday.
The hearing began in the morning, and no result had been announced by the evening.
Robert Goldberg, the embassy's deputy chief of mission, said outside the courtroom in Beijing that the embassy had made a formal request to attend the hearing of the geologist, Xue Feng. 
The Beijing High People's Court denied the request, he said, even though Dr. Xue is entitled to consular representation under the 1980 United States-China Consular Convention.
''Regardless of the outcome of today's hearing, we urge the High Court and the Chinese government to ensure fairness and transparency in the process of Dr. Xue's appeal,'' Mr. Goldberg said. 
''We urge the Chinese to grant Dr. Xue humanitarian release and immediate deportation, so that he can return home to the U.S. and reunite with his family.''
Mr. Goldberg said the embassy had filed a formal protest with the Foreign Ministry over the denial of consular representation. 
Asked about the complaint at a news conference on Tuesday afternoon, a ministry spokesman, Hong Lei, said, ''The Chinese judicial authorities will handle the case according to law and continue to fulfill our obligations according to the China-U.S. treaty on consular affairs.''
Dr. Xue was detained three years ago and later charged under a vague state secrets law. 
He had signed a purchase contract on behalf of an energy consulting company based in Colorado, IHS Energy, for a database on the Chinese oil industry. 
A court sentenced him on July 4 to eight years in prison and immediate deportation afterward. 
It also fined him $30,000. 
American officials were present at his first trial.
Dr. Xue was born in China but received citizenship in the United States before returning here as a businessman. 
The White House had lobbied Chinese leaders on his behalf, and American officials had visited him in jail nearly 30 times. 
The American ambassador to China, Jon Huntsman, has called for his release.
The harsh sentence imposed on Dr. Xue reveals China's sensitivities to business dealings related to natural resources. 
In March, an Australian businessman born in China, Stern Hu, was sentenced to 10 years in prison by a Shanghai court partly on charges of stealing commercial secrets involving Chinese purchases of iron ore. 
As in Dr. Xue's case, that trial called attention to the opacity of China's justice system.
