
The World Bank lowered its forecast for economic growth in China on Wednesday to 6.5 percent in 2009, reflecting the influence of the global slowdown.
The figure, down from the bank's earlier forecast of 7.5 percent growth, is well below the 8 percent projected by the Chinese government for its market, the fastest-growing major economy. 
It is more in line with what many independent economists expect for China, which has the world's third-largest economy after the United States and Japan.
China's banks have been largely unscathed by the international financial turmoil, and the authorities still have plenty of leeway to enact additional stimulus measures on top of steps already announced by Beijing.
Recent economic data has shown, however, that exports -- a significant factor behind China's stellar growth -- have fallen sharply.
The Chinese prime minister, Wen Jiabao, called on Wednesday for rapid adoption of policies meant to stimulate growth, saying ''big difficulties'' continued to confront the nation, Reuters reported.
Some industrial sectors and geographical areas were improving, Mr. Wen said at a regular meeting of the cabinet, according to the central government's Web site. 
But, he added, the government should waste no time in starting stimulus measures.
In its quarterly review of China, the World Bank stressed that the country's economy was holding up relatively well in the face of the most severe global downturn in decades.
''China is a relative bright spot in an otherwise gloomy global economy,'' the World Bank's country director for China, David Dollar, said in a statement Wednesday, adding that the bank still expected China to continue to outgrow most other countries.
The World Bank also echoed what many other China watchers were saying: that greater domestic consumption and a reduced reliance on exports were crucial to China's long-term growth prospects.
Only 5 of 12 economists polled by Reuters say they think the government's 8 percent goal is achievable; the average expectation is for growth of 7.8 percent.
The Reuters poll, published Wednesday, also found that economists expect India, Indonesia and the Philippines to be the only other emerging Asian economies to grow this year. 
Worst hit in the region will be Singapore and Taiwan, which are both expected to shrink 4.9 percent, according to the poll.
Despite Wednesday's revision, the World Bank's comments on China also reflect a broad consensus that the country is better placed than many others to get through the downturn relatively well -- even if a tangible recovery remains some way off.
This has also been reflected in China's stock market -- one of the world's best performers so far this year.
While most indexes around the world have fallen more than 10 percent so far this year and the Dow Jones industrial average is down 15.7 percent, the Shanghai stock exchange is up 22 percent since Jan. 
1, and added a further 0.3 percent on Wednesday.
Jonathan Garner, chief equity strategist for Asian and emerging markets at Morgan Stanley, speaking to reporters in Hong Kong on Tuesday, said he believed much of emerging Asia -- outside Japan, which is in a recession -- was better positioned than other regions of the world, and that stock markets here might have bottomed out last October.
By contrast, the market in the United States ''could still see new lows before it troughs,'' he said.
