
The chief executive of WPP, the world's largest advertising holding group by revenue, said on Monday that caution remained the watchword for marketer clients of agencies owned by WPP and others.
''Net net, 2014 better than 2013,'' Martin Sorrell said, tersely summarizing his expectation for ad spending growth next year compared with this year.
However, he added, ''I have to underline yet again, clients are exceptionally cautious.''
One reason for that caution, Mr. Sorrell said during a presentation on the opening day of the 41st annual UBS Global Media and Communications Conference, is that marketers exist ''in a world where economic growth is limited, where it is still below trend.''
There is growth, he added, but marketers need to ''wage hand-to-hand combat to get that growth.''
Another reason for being cautious is the continued uncertainty created by the ''deadlock in Washington,'' Mr. Sorrell said, and how the next installment of the wrangling over the federal budget, in January and February, will turn out.
That doubt is ''still the biggest gray swan,'' Mr. Sorrell said, riffing off the expression ''black swan,'' meaning a major, unforeseen event; a gray swan, he said, is ''a known unknown.''
Earlier on Monday, before Mr. Sorrell's presentation, the senior managers of three major media agencies -- including the GroupM division of WPP -- presented their forecasts for worldwide ad spending for next year. 
Although all three forecasts predict an increase in worldwide ad spending in 2014 compared with 2013, the GroupM forecast was the only one to be revised downward from its most recent previous forecast; GroupM is now forecasting a gain of 4.6 percent in 2014 compared with 2013 rather than a gain of 5.1 percent as it had earlier predicted.
''GroupM is not as bullish as the other forecasts,'' Mr. Sorrell said, citing questions about the demand for ad time and space next year in big markets like Japan and the United States.
In an interview, Adam Smith, futures director of GroupM, who presented the GroupM forecast, said, ''We can call this a recovery when the U.S. recovers.''
Another question mark for next year comes in the form of ad demand in Europe. 
Mr. Sorrell characterized France as having ''further to fall,'' Italy as ''bumping along the bottom'' and Spain as ''getting slightly better'' although still suffering high unemployment.
Europe was on the mind of another presenter, Vincent Letang, executive vice president and director for global forecasting at Magna Global, part of the Interpublic Group of Companies.
''Western Europe, I think, has hit bottom,'' Mr. Letang said, ''and can pick up momentum quite easily.''
Thus, recovery there ''could be even faster,'' he added, than is being predicted by him, Mr. Smith and the third forecaster, Steve King, global chief executive at the ZenithOptimedia division of the Publicis Groupe.
Despite the worries at WPP over the global economy next year, Mr. Sorrell said he remained ''an unashamed bull on China,'' adding, ''The new regime is first-class.''
''China and the Internet'' still give him cause to feel good about the prospects for ad growth in 2014 compared with 2013, he added, as does the ''mini-quadrennial'' stimulative effects of the Winter Olympics, the World Cup and the midterm American Congressional elections.
Mr. Letang said he estimated that ad spending for the midterm elections would total $3 billion, ''a third bigger than'' the midterm elections in 2010 and ''slightly more'' than was spent in the presidential election year of 2012.
Mr. Sorrell paired his reference to ''mini-quadrennial'' effects with an explanation of ''maxi-quadrennial'' stimulus, which occurs in even-numbered years like 2016, he said, when there are a Summer Olympics, the European championship for men's national soccer teams (UEFA Euro 2016) and an American presidential election -- which, he said parenthetically, ''Hillary Clinton will win.''
Although WPP has already made almost 60 acquisitions this year, it will make more, Mr. Sorrell said, including ''a fair amount before the end of the year.''
In fact, WPP announced a deal on Monday morning before his presentation, to acquire an agency named Crystal Semantics, based in London, which will become part of the 24/7 Media division of WPP.
There is also an acquisition coming in Russia before the end of the year, Mr. Sorrell said, along with a deal for a social media agency in Europe.
As many acquisitions as WPP may make, it will still probably sometime next year become the No. 2 advertising holding group after the expected closing of the pending merger of two rivals, the Omnicom Group and the Publicis Groupe, to form the Publicis Omnicom Group.
As has been his wont since the merger was announced in July, Mr. Sorrell made light of the deal and questioned whether it would accomplish what the executives of Publicis and Omnicom hope it will.
''Strategically, it was a strange move for both companies,'' Mr. Sorrell said. 
''Structurally, it's clunky.''
There has been ''no articulation of client benefit or employee benefit,'' he added, ''and the churn among clients and people is significant.''
All told, Mr. Sorrell said, perhaps stifling a grin, ''there is a considerable amount of uncertainty,'' adding, ''It's quite messy and it gives us a lot of opportunities.''
Executives at Omnicom and Publicis have declined numerous requests from reporters to respond to Mr. Sorrell's efforts to poke holes in the merger.
The UBS conference -- taking place at a hotel in Times Square after years at a hotel at Grand Central Terminal -- is scheduled to continue through Wednesday.
