
SHANGHAI -- It was an unexpected dispute over two continents that floored technology investors.
But just as quickly as it began, Yahoo and the Alibaba Group, the Chinese Internet giant that Yahoo partly owns, said Sunday that they were working to quickly resolve the fight.
The announcement is a bid to end a feud that erupted after Yahoo said in a regulatory filing last week that Alibaba had transferred the assets of its online payment unit, Alipay, to a Chinese company controlled by Alibaba's chief executive, Jack Ma.
Shares of Yahoo plunged after the statement over concern that the transfer may have eroded the value of Yahoo's holdings in Alibaba, one of its prized assets.
Confused by the dispute, investors punished Yahoo's stock last week, wiping out more than $2 billion in market value. 
Investors had bid up shares of Yahoo in recent months, partly because of projections about the future value of its Alibaba holdings.
Some investors accused Yahoo of failing to properly disclose the asset sale; others said the sale could be a sign that Yahoo was losing control of its stake in Alibaba.
The fight over the asset sale has become the latest wedge in a partnership that began five years ago, with a confetti-filled news conference in Beijing to announce that Yahoo had agreed to pay $1 billion for a 40 percent stake in Alibaba. 
As part of that deal, Alibaba also agreed to take control of Yahoo's Chinese language Web site.
Since then, Alibaba has grown into a Chinese Internet powerhouse, with an array of fast-growing units, including a business-to-business Web site called Alibaba.com.
Yahoo, on the other hand, has had its fortunes decline after a takeover battle with Microsoft and the decision of a co-founder, Jerry Yang, to step down as chief executive. 
He was succeeded by Carol A. Bartz in January 2009.
With Google holding much of the online search market and Facebook the dominant social networking site, investors believe much of Yahoo's value is tied to Asia, locked up in its stakes in Yahoo Japan and China's Alibaba.
Investors in Yahoo became nervous after privately owned Alibaba last week released a series of statements saying the asset transfer began in July 2009 and was completed a year later.
Alibaba executives say the transfer was legal and necessary because of China's new regulations governing electronic payment platforms. 
But on Friday, Yahoo suggested that it did not know about the transfer of the Alipay division until this March and that Yahoo and other Alibaba shareholders had not approved the sale.
''There is clearly bad blood between Jack Ma and Carol Bartz,'' said Colin Gillis, an analyst with BGC Financial. 
''The soap opera continues.''
The two companies on Sunday, however, said they would work with another Alibaba shareholder, Japan's Softbank Corporation, to resolve the issue. 
Japan's Softbank and Yahoo together own about 70 percent of the Alibaba Group.
''Alibaba Group, and its major stockholders Yahoo!
Inc. and Softbank Corporation, are engaged in and committed to productive negotiations to resolve the outstanding issues related to Alipay in a manner that serves the interests of all shareholders as soon as possible,'' Yahoo and Alibaba said in a joint statement.
John Spelich, an Alibaba spokesman in Hong Kong, said Sunday that the Alibaba Group had already received some compensation for Alipay, though he declined to say how much.
Speaking on Saturday at an annual general meeting in Hong Kong, Mr. Ma, the Alibaba chief, said that the transfer was made to help Alibaba's fast-growing e-commerce site, Taobao, which uses the Alipay system.
''If Alipay were illegal or didn't get the license, Taobao would be paralyzed,'' Mr. Ma said referring to the Chinese government's new requirement regarding online payment licenses. 
''If Taobao were paralyzed, how could Alibaba reform and develop?''
Yahoo, which is based in Sunnyvale, Calif., declined to comment over the weekend. 
But a person close to the company said that Yahoo executives knew as early as 2009 that a majority stake in Alipay would be transferred temporarily but the company was unaware until March that the transfer had been completed.
Alibaba is also trying to reduce foreign shareholders in the company. 
Mr. Ma has said that China's increasingly strict Internet regulations are making it difficult for Alibaba to operate as a company that has foreign investors holding a majority of its shares.
The two companies have locked horns over other issues in recent years. 
Last year, Alibaba negotiated to buy back part or all of Yahoo's stake. 
But the two sides could not agree on a price.
The two companies have also fought over the issue of Internet censorship in China and the number of seats Yahoo should have on Alibaba's board. 
Yahoo now occupies one of the four seats.
The latest problem are new regulations governing China's electronic payment platforms. 
Alibaba says that if Alipay did not succeed in getting a Chinese license without foreign ownership, Alipay may have been rendered illegal, and that could have undermined the company's fast-growing electronic commerce unit, Taobao.com, which relies heavily on online payments.
Alibaba said it had been discussing restructuring the Alipay unit for several years with the four board members: Mr. Ma; Alibaba's chief financial officer, Joe Tsai: Softbank's chief, Masayoshi Son; and Mr. Yang of Yahoo.
But people close to the negotiations say the board never came to a unanimous decision about what to do, so Mr. Ma and Mr. Tsai of Alibaba acted independently, and transferred a majority of the Alipay stake into a company controlled by Mr. Ma in 2009, and the rest in August 2010.
Yahoo insists it did not fully understand what was happening until March of this year and that the two transactions ''occurred without the knowledge or approval of the Alibaba Group board of directors or shareholders.''
Alibaba.com, however, has faced some issues of its own in recent months. 
It said in February that its chief executive at the time, David Wei, and chief operating officer, Elvis Lee, had resigned amid an internal investigation of fraud at the company.
In a statement released then, Alibaba said the two executives had not been involved in the fraud but that they had resigned after accepting responsibility for failing to stop it. 
The company said the fraud had been small and would not affect its financial performance. 
But the announcement stunned the technology community in China because Mr. Wei was one of the country's most prominent chief executives and Alibaba.com was one of the most successful Chinese Internet start-ups.
The company said in its statement that 100 sales officers at Alibaba had helped perpetrate the fraud by allowing fake companies in China to register and sell products on Alibaba's international Web site as ''Gold Suppliers,'' which suggested that they were among the more trustworthy.
