
Well educated and deeply committed to helping their fellow Chinese, Liu Jianshu and Zhao Sile are the kind of idealistic young people who pepper the story of China's transformation over the past century as it searches for a modern identity.
But on Nov. 
26, calamity struck the couple, married for barely a year. 
The police took away Mr. Liu, 28, who holds a law degree from Oxford and was setting up a legal aid organization in Beijing, on suspicion of "illegal business operations," his wife said.
According to friends and colleagues of the couple, however, the root of the problem lay elsewhere.
They said the police suspected Mr. Liu of being part of a group of about 10 people who were spreading word in China about theOccupy Centraldemocracy movement in Hong Kong and the   Sunflower Movement in Taiwan. 
Both are highly critical of the Communist Party and have called for greater citizen participation in politics. 
That one is in Hong Kong, a semiautonomous Chinese city, and the other in Taiwan, a self-ruled island that China claims as its territory, exacerbates party authorities' fear of the spread of a "color revolution" on the Chinese mainland.
Infusing the affair with a Kafkaesque absurdity, the couple's agony may have begun inadvertently, with a slip-up in late September by a young woman who was previously linked to them through the Liren Rural Libraries, a grassroots project, and the Transition Institute, an independent think tank in Beijing, according to two sources, who spoke on condition of anonymity for fear of retribution for speaking about a politically sensitive topic.
"It's like the 'butterfly effect,' " said one, alluding to chaos theory, whereby a butterfly flapping its wings sets off a chain of events that results in a hurricane elsewhere.
In an attempt to ride out the hurricane, Ms. Zhao, 24, has taken unpaid leave from her job as a journalist at the Media Monitor for Women Network. 
She has helped her husband find a lawyer, has deposited money into an account at the Beijing No. 1 Detention Center, where he is being held, so he can survive better in detention, and done other things that an incarcerated person cannot do himself, she said, including alerting friends and relatives. 
She's on edge, reflecting the heavy emotional toll of her husband's plight.
As Mr. Liu's wife, she felt emboldened to speak to a reporter about his situation. 
But she declined to comment on broader political issues, or a wave of recent detentions connected to the movements in Hong Kong and Taiwan.
"I had talked to Xiaoshu" - a nickname that means "little tree" - "at 10:30 that morning," said Ms. Zhao, a slender woman with a master's degree in financial engineering from Nanjing University and a passion for gender equality. 
A few hours later he was gone.
"Now if I don't hear from a friend for three hours I get nervous," she said in a Beijing restaurant, fiddling with her smartphone.
"We are all in touch every day to see who's missing," she said, referring to the couple's circle of friends, many involved in gender issues or the law. 
"I'm worried that I'll disappear one of these days, too."
Others detained in the sweep include a magazine editor, Xu Xiao; a think tank founder, Huang Kaiping; and Chen Kun, who administered Liren College, an educational institution affiliated with the Liren Rural Libraries. 
All had ties to either the Transition Institute, co-founded by Guo Yushan, an economist who has also been detained, or the Liren Rural Libraries, founded by Li Yingqiang to advance rural education. 
There was crossover between the two nongovernmental organizations. 
Mr. Guo's colleague, Huang Kaiping, is also in detention.
Contacted by telephone at his home in the southwestern province of Sichuan, Mr. Li declined to speak on the record, citing the risk of detention. 
The Liren Rural Libraries, begun in 2007, were shut by the authorities in September. 
Liren College, set up some years later, was also forced to close, Mr. Li said in an interview last month.
"Liren" means "upright person," or "to be raised up," reflecting its founder's belief that China needs more people capable of advanced and independent thought. 
Similar to the California-based Minerva Schools at KGI, Mr. Li said, the college was loosely organized and hired outstanding teachers. 
Students - at its peak it had about 500 - studied online.
But that was all before late September, when a young woman, whom the two sources separately identified as Ling Lisha, made copies in a commercial photocopy shop of materials that touched on the Occupy Central movement in Hong Kong. 
Her purpose was to inform and educate others, the sources said.
In line with common practice, she requested an official receipt for the photocopying and put down as the purchaser the Transition Institute, where she had previously worked.
"Everyone does this. 
We collect official receipts related to work, because it proves what we spend our money on," said one of the sources, a member of a Chinese nongovernmental group. 
Such groups are obliged by the government to register as businesses and the receipts, known as fapiao, can be used to document expenses and defray taxes.
But what Ms. Ling apparently did not know - or remember - was that many commercial photocopy shops in Beijing are linked by computer to the police, who can scan their business for just such activities, especially in times of political tension, said the two sources. 
Spotting the Occupy Central content, they said, the police pounced.
Ms. Ling was detained on Oct. 
3. Next to be taken into custody was Mr. Chen, the Liren College administrator and her boyfriend, on Oct. 
5. He had just returned from Taiwan, the sources said.
From there the detentions cascaded to take in more people connected to Liren or the Transition Institute. 
In addition to Mr. Liu and Ms. Xu, this included Mr. Guo, the Transition Institute's co-founder; He Zhengjun, a colleague at the institute; and the social activists Huang Kaiping, Xue Ye, Kou Yanding, Liu Bin and Zhang Qibin. 
In all, about 10 people.
When Ms. Zhao met Mr. Liu, in 2012, he was back from Oxford and had helped set up Liren College. 
It was a stressful job, as the government was shutting down its classes. 
Virtually all education in China is controlled by the party, which imposes strict ideological parameters.
Before going to Britain, Mr. Liu, who is from Qinhuangdao, a coastal city in Hebei Province, had also been involved in running the Liren Rural Libraries. 
In the seven years until they were shut down this year, nearly two dozen had been set up across China, aiming to help poor rural families gain access to education. 
The couple met when she interviewed Mr. Li, the founder, about the project, she said.
"In the beginning Xiaoshu was someone helping to set up libraries in the countryside," she said, speaking rapidly but quietly as she tapped on her phone with long, thin fingers, her hair falling over her face. 
"And I was a journalist."
"We wanted to do something for our society. 
But we didn't anticipate this danger and fear. 
And we still don't choose it. 
I feel like I've been 'oppositioned,' " she said, meaning cast as an opposition force she is not.
"Xiaoshu was a victim," she said. 
"And I'm the comrade-in-arms of a victim. 
We're young, and there has been a lot of heaviness in these few years that I never expected."
On Tuesday, after 13 days of waiting with no news other than the mailed notice of his criminal detention that she received on Dec. 
1, she was told by the lawyer she had chosen, Liu Wei, that the police had granted a meeting with Mr. Liu at which Ms. Liu will be able to formally request his permission to represent him. 
"I feel very happy knowing that," Ms. Zhao said.
The meeting is set for Thursday, more than two weeks after he was taken away.
Even as his wife, Ms. Zhao may not meet Mr. Liu while he is in custody "unless he is sentenced," she said. 
"And I don't want that."
In China, a criminal detention is often a first step, followed by a period of investigation to determine if charges will be filed.
One source said that Mr. Liu is the only one of the 10 who has so far been granted permission to meet a lawyer. 
The families of several in the group have not yet been notified of their detentions, the source said, and some, such as Ms. Ling, have now spent longer than the 37 days in jail without the formal arrest - or release - that should take place at that point.
Contacted by telephone, a person at the Beijing No. 1 Detention Center declined to confirm which, if any, of the 10 were there.
Temperatures in Beijing have recently dropped below freezing, and Ms. Zhao worries that her husband does not have enough warm clothes. 
According to regulations, clothes brought in for inmates may not have zippers, strings or certain types of buttons, so she patches together acceptable clothes for him from other items in his wardrobe.
Acquaintances of the couple said it was possible the affair would drag on into next spring, with Mr. Guo, the Transition Institute co-founder named on the receipt, expected to be held for prolonged questioning and the police reluctant to release anyone else until his case is resolved.
