
The International Monetary Fund today approved a $550 million loan to China, marking that country's largest borrowing from any financial institution.
The Washington-based I.M.F., which makes funds available to countries in balance-of-payments difficulties, said it had approved a so-called standby borrowing arrangement under which China would draw down 450 million special drawing rights (an internationally created reserve asset), equal to $550 million, over the next 12 months.
The fund said that China would also borrow an undisclosed amount from the institution's trust fund, a pool of money raised from the sale of gold. 
It is used to help countries particularly strapped financially. 
The advent of China as a significant borrower at a time when other poor countries are having increasing economic trouble because of higher oil prices could have major financial implications.
China gets $550 million loan approval from International Monetary Fund
Analysts noted that China's demands could reduce funds available for other prospective borrowers. 
China joined the monetary fund and World Bank last year as part of its efforts to draw closer into the world financial and trading network.
The World Bank, the official name of which is the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, chiefly makes development loans to build up the economies of poorer countries. 
It has not announced any loans to China, but a mission from the bank recently returned from a project study, and a lending program could be announced later this year.
In approving China's request for the $550 million, the monetary fund noted that China had started a necessary stabilization program to reduce inflationary pressures and whittle down a deficit in trade and services.
The fund makes loans conditioned upon a country's adoption of economic measures to strengthen its international accounts. 
An analysis by the fund of China's latest measures concluded that the Chinese authorities had embarked on the proper course.
 
Reluctant to Borrow Heavily
Although China's foreign exchange position is believed to be relatively healthy, the Chinese have so far been reluctant to borrow heavily in Western capital markets, especially while interest rates remain high.
Analysts noted, however, that China had already been borrowing more heavily in short-term financial markets, especially in Europe and Japan. 
Proceeds have been used mainly to finance energy developments.
The Chinese authorities began a program of rapid economic expansion four years ago. 
But when the steel mills and other heavy manufacturing operations began costing more than the planners contemplated, the program was sharply scaled back.
 
Main Objectives Listed
''The main objectives of the Government's economic program for this year,'' the fund said, ''are the elimination of inflationary pressures, the readjustment of the investment pattern to foster resumption of rapid economic growth and to maintain the current account (trade and services) deficit at a sustainable level.''
The fund noted that priority was now being given to investment in light industry, agriculture and energy. 
Last Saturday China's chief economic planner, Deputy Prime Minister Yao Yilin, announced a program of sharp spending cuts and said the Government intended to monitor supply more closely to improve the economic performance.
