
In an unusual move, a group of 160 senior American scholars have appealed to the Chinese Government to stop its crackdown on liberal intellectuals.
The scholars, in a letter sent today to the Chinese Ambassador in Washington, Han Xu, said they were ''deeply concerned by the punitive measures adopted against some of China's leading intellectuals in the sciences, social sciences and humanities.''
The authors of the letter, experts on China from 40 American colleges and universities, said they feared the campaign ''will adversely effect China's intellectual vitality'' and might ultimately ''undermine China's effort toward modernization.''
The letter marks the first time American scholars have spoken out as a group about domestic politics in China. 
By contrast with American experts on the Soviet Union, who have often been critical of Moscow for human-rights abuses, China specialists have remained silent and sought to maintain good relations with Beijing.
'We Tried to Be Neutral'
''In the past we tried to be neutral, objective scholars not passing judgment, even during the Cultural Revolution,'' said Merle Goldman, a professor of Chinese history at Boston University who was one of the two organizers of the petition.
''But that was like the Holocaust,'' she said. 
''We can't remain silent again.''
In the Cultural Revolution, from 1966 to roughly 1976, millions of Chinese, especially writers, artists and scholars, were attacked, beaten, shipped off to exile in the countryside or killed.
Mrs. Goldman said the signers of the letter might risk angering the Chinese Government and lose their chance to do research in China, a highly coveted privilege after years in which China was closed to the outside world.
Among the prominent American scholars signing the letter was John K. Fairbank, professor emeritus of history at Harvard University, who is widely regarded as the father of modern Chinese studies in the United States. 
Others included Frederic Wakeman, professor of history at the University of California at Berkeley; Lucian Pye, professor of political science at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and Wm. 
Theodore DeBary, professor of East Asian civilization at Columbia University.
The letter was also signed by Chinese-American scholars, including Tu Wei-ming, a professor of history at Harvard; Victor Nee, a sociologist at Cornell University, and Leo Lee, a professor of Chinese language and East Asian civilization at the University of Chicago. 
Professor Lee was the other organizer of the petition.
 
University of Michigan Statement
In a separate effort, 21 China specialists at the University of Michigan, which has one of the largest China studies centers in the country, signed a statement that was read in Congressional testimony earlier this month expressing ''concern'' about the campaign in China.
Another open letter to Mr. Deng, expressing shock at ''the severe criticism and punishment'' of intellectuals, has been signed by mostly ethnic Chinese authors and scholars in the United States and Hong Kong, including Chen Ruoxi, who is perhaps the most important Chinese writer outside China.
The statement from Michigan, read by Kenneth Lieberthal, a professor of political science, said events since the ouster in January of Hu Yaobang, the General Secretary of the Communist Party, were ''sadly reminiscent'' of the beginning of the anti-rightist campaign of 1957 and the Cultural Revolution in 1966.
Mr. Lieberthal testified before the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Asian and Pacific Affairs.
In a telephone interview, Mr. Lieberthal said, ''People here felt it was not productive for American scholars to write directly to China telling them what policies to have.''
But at the same time, he said, the scholars at Michigan, who have been heavily involved in intellectual exchanges with China, felt ''it was not too early to voice our anxieties.''
 
Opinions Vary on Crackdown
Among those who signed the Michigan statement was Michel Oksenberg, a professor of political science who was the China specialist on the National Security Council under President Carter and helped work out the normalization of relations between Washington and Beijing in 1978.
Mr. Lieberthal and Mrs. Goldman differed in their interpretation of how serious the current crackdown is. 
The campaign, which began after a series of student demonstrations calling for greater democracy, has led to the ouster from the party of several promiment writers and scientists and widespread attacks in the Chinese press on ''bourgeois liberalism.''
Mr. Lieberthal acknowledged that ''serious damage'' had been done to the efforts by Deng Xiaoping, China's paramount leader, to arrange an orderly succession and build confidence among the country's intellectuals who are needed for its modernization drive. 
But he added, ''the events have not been as negative as one could have feared'' and fewer people have been purged than some experts expected.
On the other hand, Mrs. Goldman said she believed that ''the campaign seems to be intensifying, with the conservatives having the edge.''
Visiting Chinese have told her in the last few days that a famous writer, Liu Xinwu, has been removed as editor of the magazine People's Literature and that another writer, Wang Meng, may have been ousted as Culture Minister.
