
Two Americans detained by the Chinese in Tibet during violent demonstrations a week ago remain in custody, a State Department spokesman said yesterday.
Officials of the Chinese Foreign Ministry in Chengdu told American officials that the two men - John Ackerly, 31 years old, of Cambridge, Mass., and Dr. Blake Kerr, 29, of East Hampton, L.I. 
- were still being held by the Chinese authorities, according to Nancy Beck, the department spokesman in Washington.
The Chinese did not disclose where the Americans were being held or whether they faced criminal charges.
News organizations had reported that the two Americans, who were described as tourists, were detained by the authorities in Lhasa, the Tibetan capital, during nationalist demonstrations last Sunday. 
But until yesterday, it was not known whether they remained in custody.
 
Mother 'Desperate to Know'
''We are very glad it has been confirmed that they are detained, that they are alive,'' said Margaret Kerr Richenburg, the mother of Dr. Kerr, who was traveling with his friend from college after graduating from medical school this year. 
''I am really desperate to know they are all right.''
Mr. Ackerly, a lawyer, and Dr. Kerr were in the middle of a three- to four-month tour of Asia and had been in Lhasa for five to six weeks before they were taken into custody, according to Dr. William C. Ackerly, Mr. Ackerly's father, who was interviewed at his home in Cambridge yesterday.
The two men had been friends since they were both undergraduates at Dartmouth College. 
Mr. Ackerly attended law school at American University in Washington, D.C., and Dr. Kerr attended medical school at the State Univesity of New York at Buffalo.
Dr. Ackerly, who last heard from his son by telephone two weeks ago, said: ''John never mentioned a word about politics to us; when he called, he said he was going to visit monasteries.''
''They had been having a wonderful time,'' the father said. 
''We thought they would be in Katmandu by now. 
They are experienced outdoorsmen.''
Climbed Mountains in Peru Dr. Ackerly, who described both men as tall and in good health, said that they had climbed mountains in Peru together and that they liked roughing it and meeting natives in foreign cultures.
The last postcard the family received, on Aug. 
23, seemed untroubled and did not mention political unrest, Dr. Ackerly said.
''This place is like Peru, no showers, no fresh food,'' the postcard from Tibet said. 
''The restaurant serves three things: beer, tea and yak dumplings.''
Telephone calls yesterday from the State Department to the families of the two men in Massachusetts and New York provided their parents with the first official information after 24 hours of anxious waiting. 
They were first told of their sons' plight on Friday in calls from news organizations, and they had been trying to learn more by telephoning China and State Department officials in Washington through the night.
According to Ms. Beck of the State Department, an American consular official from Chengdu will be sent to Lhasa to learn more about the situation.
