
In the latest of several arrests aimed at curbing the theft of sophisticated technology from companies in California's Silicon Valley, the Federal Bureau of Investigation said yesterday that it had arrested two men on charges of attempting to sell stolen electronics hardware to an agent posing as a representative of the Chinese Government.
In an affidavit filed in New York, the agency said the electronics components involved in the case had been stolen from a division of the General Electric Company in San Jose. 
The parts, worth about $200,000, included integrated circuits, diodes and other components used in the control systems of nuclear plants.
In the latest of several arrests aimed at curbing the theft of sophisticated technology from companies in California's Silicon Valley, the Federal Bureau of Investigation said yesterday that it had arrested two men on charges of attempting to sell stolen electronics hardware to an agent posing as a representative of the Chinese Government.
The affidavit also charged that one of the defendants, John Henry Jackson, had told the F.B.I undercover agent that he would be able to obtain and sell about $20 million worth of hardware used in military radar systems. 
Mr. Jackson, 44 years old, also faces criminal charges that he led a crime ring that stole and remarketed more than 100,000 semiconductors in recent years. 
He is awaiting trial on those charges.
 
Inquiry Began Last September
The F.B.I. said the other defendant in the case, Gary Wayne Dotson, 33, was a stockroom employee at General Electric's San Jose facility for three years until he resigned in December. 
The agency declined to provide information on Mr. Jackson's occupation.
An F.B.I. spokesman in San Francisco, Larry Holmquist, said the arrests of the two men, both San Jose residents, followed an undercover investigation that began last September. 
The undercover identity of the agent on the case - a representative of the Chinese Government - ''was pulled out of the air'' and was not selected because of any suspicion that China is involved in the illegal acquisition of proprietary technology, he said.
A spokesman for General Electric's San Jose operation, Bob Bell, said yesterday that the case involving Mr. Jackson and Mr. Dotson was the most serious breach of his company's security that he could remember and that the company's attempts to prevent theft of its products were being intensified.
Nonetheless, Mr. Bell added that the parts involved in the case did not reveal any highly advanced or proprietary technology. 
''You could buy that stuff at any Radio Shack store,'' he said.
 
Growing Concern About Losses
The arrests of the two men came a month after the F.B.I. charged 18 Japanese businessmen, many of them employees of Hitachi Ltd. and the Mitsubishi Electric Corporation, with conspiring to steal confidential computer information from the International Business Machines Corporation. 
In that case, the F.B.I. used undercover agents who had established a small electronics company in Silicon Valley as a front for their investigation.
The agency's undercover work has been increased in response to growing concern about the loss of trade and military secrets at electronics companies where employees are sometimes able to conceal tiny, but sophisticated semiconductors in their pockets or clothing as they leave.
In its complaint, the F.B.I. said that in meetings between the two defendants and the F.B.I.'s undercover agent, who is of Chinese descent, an agreement was reached in which the agent would pay $200,000 for the the nuclear plant components. 
Although no money changed hands, the F.B.I. said the parts were shipped by the two defendants to Newark and seized by Federal agents there.
The complaint also said that Mr. Jackson, in conversations with the undercover agent, had said he needed to sell the nuclear plant parts to raise money so he could buy the military radar components. 
The agency did not say where Mr. Jackson had intended to obtain the military hardware.
