
Against the scale of suffering that was commonplace here in the first 30 years of Communist rule, the two women were minor casualties, incidental figures in a huge tableau of repression.
But they were Americans, and the punishment they endured seems to have been senseless even by the obscure standards of the time. 
Seraphine and Marjorie Fuller, a devoutly Christian mother and daughter living quietly by themselves in Shanghai, answered a knock on the door one day in 1959 to find agents of the feared Public Security Bureau waiting to take them to a labor camp.
They remained there, somewhere outside Shanghai, for 21 years, sleeping on bedrolls on concrete floors, often desperately hungry, always fearful of marauders among the other foreigners incarcerated with them. 
In the last nine of those years an American President, Richard M. Nixon, visited Shanghai, as did hundreds of other prominent Americans. 
But for all the good it did the Fullers the visitors might as well have never come.
Interview with two women--81-year-old Seraphine Fuller and 62-year-old daughter Marjorie--who from 1959 to 1980 were inmates in Chinese labor camp for foreigners; women, who now live at home for elderly foreigners in Harbin, have declined offer of opportunity to renew their American citizenship, which they renounced after Seraphine's husband abandoned them in 1930; photo; map (M)
To the Chinese the two women were technically stateless, although to guards and fellow inmates at the camp they were never anything but the ''meiguo nuren,'' or American women. 
Three decades before the knock on the door, in bitterness at a husband and father who abandoned them for another woman, they renounced their American papers and vowed to remain together in China.
 
Human Tourist Attraction
Five years after they got out of the labor camp, with no more notice or explanation than was vouchsafed when they were seized, they are still the ''American women,'' offered like a tourist attraction to American reporters reaching Harbin. 
In this northeastern China city, 1,000 miles from Shanghai, they live out their lives in a second-floor room of a home for elderly foreigners, the only one in China, resolved to neither regret nor reverse their decision to forsake the United States.
''We're not regretting anything,'' said Seraphine Fuller, 81 years old, sitting at a table on the second-floor landing with her daughter, Marjorie, 62. 
''There is just nothing to regret.''
It was one of the few times that the older woman spoke during a 45-minute conversation that Miss Fuller said was one of the longest she or her mother had had with anyone in years.
The serene look on Mrs. Fuller's face and the way she folded her hands calmly across her lap conveyed the impression of a proud woman at peace with her fate, content to allow her daughter to do the talking. 
From time to time, especially when the talk turned to religion, she smiled or nodded.
To an outsider, their story sounded like a tale of innocent lives wasted. 
But at the table in a ramshackle suburb of Harbin, amid a vista of muddy roads and redbrick factories, there was scarcely a trace of bitterness or even chagrin, save for a moment when a visitor suggested that in renouncing the United States the two women had struck out at the man who abandoned them in the only way they could.
 
An Evangelical Conviction
''I suppose in a way we were,'' Miss Fuller said.
The conversation was laced with the younger woman's quick wit and evangelical conviction. 
Her starting point was that they had brought their fate upon themselves by remaining in Shanghai in 1949 when thousands of other foreigners were fleeing before the advancing Communists.
''We elected to stay, so we can't complain,'' she said. 
''We thought they were going to be democratic.''
She laughed, and added, ''You know what the Italians say: Every liberation begins with the hope of freedom and ends in tyranny.''
Seraphine Fuller was born in Harbin at a time when the city was one of the liveliest in the Far East. 
Her father was a Russian who had come to build the railroads that ran east to Vladivostok and south to Port Arthur, now Dalian; her mother was a Polish woman born in the Ukraine.
 
European Flavor Once Strong
Though the city was in China the Russian concession at its heart gave it a strongly European flavor, enhanced after 1917 when thousands of White Russians poured across the border to escape the pursuing Red Army.
''Oh my, Harbin. 
It was a beautiful city,'' she said in one of her rare conversational sallies. 
''They called it the Paris of the Orient.''
In the 1920's she was drawn to Shanghai, an even greater center of European settlement. 
There she met and married her husband, a freewheeling merchant who was the son of an American and the child-bride whom he had married in the Chinese community in San Francisco.
Seraphine Fuller's brief marriage ended in 1930, and her husband left for San Francisco. 
Mrs. Fuller and her daughter were left in Shanghai, American citizens who had never been to the United States.
Marjorie Fuller saw her father again in 1939, when he visited the two women in Shanghai and brought his daughter a gift from Japan, an antique ivory carving of a geisha. 
It was one of a pair, and Miss Fuller's last memory of her father is him telling her that one day they would be reunited in America, where they would place the two geishas side by side on the mantelpiece.
 
Prized Possession Remains
Nearly half a century later the geisha is Miss Fuller's prized possession, next to her Bible, in the room she shares with her mother. 
In 1962 her father wrote to the two women in labor camp, suggesting that they resume their old lives. 
His daughter said they never replied. 
He would be 89 if he is still alive, but the two women said they had no idea what had become of him.
''It's too late for anything like that now,'' Miss Fuller said, in a phrase that recurs often as she talks of the perspectives that govern their lives. 
''Much too late.''
Although the Chinese provide three meals a day in a dining room at the home, and take residents on trips to the movies and parks, the Fullers keep their distance.
They eat in their room, and have asked to be excused from birthday celebrations. 
They spend much of their time reading the Bible and literature sent to them by an evangelical organization in the United States.
''Everything is dust compared with the word of God,'' Miss Fuller said. 
''Beside that, nothing matters at all.''
Confrontation Over Bible The women said that in the labor camp faith sustained them - but, they said, it also nearly cost them their lives. 
The Cultural Revolution that swept across China in 1966 penetrated even the labor camp, and militants who had set a fire seized their Bible along with other ''bourgeois'' possessions. 
The women clung to the Bible, telling their tormentors that if they wanted it, they would have to throw the women on the fire, too. 
The Bible survived.
In 1980, mother and daughter were summoned by camp guards, told to pack, and driven to the railway station in Shanghai, where they boarded a train for Harbin.
Miss Fuller says the greatest relief was not in leaving the camp but their fellow prisoners.
''There were decent people,'' she said, ''but there were also horrible ones, some of them were murderers, plain and simple. 
If anybody complained the guards would only say, 'You're all foreigners, you sort it out among yourselves.'
''
Since coming to Harbin they have been visited by the United States consul in Shenyang, an industrial city 300 miles south of here, and offered an opportunity to renew their American citizenship. 
Miss Fuller said they had refused because there is nothing for them in the United States that they cannot find here.
''We crossed the Rubicon on that one many, many years ago,'' she said, ''and there's no point in changing things now.''
