
Though they have markedly different political styles and personal backgrounds, Zhao Ziyang and the man he replaced yesterday, Hu Yaobang, both owe their rise through the Chinese hierarchy to the same factor: the sponsorship of the country's paramount leader, Deng Xiaoping.
Until Mr. Hu's dismissal, the two men largely had parallel careers, and were often variously regarded as Mr. Deng's successors. 
Their fortunes climbed with Mr. Deng, and they fell into disgrace with him during the Cultural Revolution, only to be appointed to the most senior posts in the party and Government after Mr. Deng rose again and consolidated his power in the early 1980's.
Over the last six years, the two worked closely together but maintained a fairly clear division of labor. 
As Prime Minister, Mr. Zhao presided over the economic changes that are the centerpiece of China's modernization program and traveled widely overseas, including a visit to the United States in 1984, while Mr. Hu concentrated on party policy and internal discipline.
To many in Beijing, both foreigners and Chinese, the two men seemed ideally suited by personality to the roles in which Mr. Deng had cast them. 
Zhao Ziyang (pronounced JOW dzeh-YANG), son of a landlord family, emerged as a polished, articulate and well-dressed statesman, while the diminutive and fiery Hu Yaobang (prounced WHO yow-BANG), born to a poor peasant family, came to be known for his bluntness, earthy wit and impulsiveness.
 
'Good Cop' and 'Tough Cop'
As some foreign diplomats saw it, Mr. Zhao often played the role of the ''good cop'' to Mr. Hu's ''tough cop,'' and reaped the benefits that went with that role. 
But in replacing Mr. Hu as General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party, Mr. Zhao now also assumes responsibility for supervising the party's 44 million members, a task expected to test all of his considerable finesse and managerial skills.
Early in his career, in the years immediately following the Chinese Revolution in 1949, Mr. Zhao, now 67, supervised purges of ''class enemies'' in the southern Chinese province of Guangdong, where he was later to serve as party secretary. 
But he is best known within China for the sweeping economic experiments he introduced after he was appointed party secretary and Governor of Sichuan, China's largest province and Mr. Deng's home ground, in 1975.
By dismantling the commune system in the countryside and introducing material incentives, Mr. Zhao freed the pent-up energies of Sichuan's 100 million people and was able to turn the province into the breadbasket of China. 
That success, which led to the liberalization of agricultural policies across China, was particularly appreciated by the country's 800 million peasants, who quickly coined a rhyming couplet, ''for grain (liang), look to Zhao Ziyang,'' in his praise.
''The defect of management in China is that state control is too tight,'' Mr. Zhao said not long after his elevation to Prime Minister in 1980, explaining the decision to extend the Sichuan reforms. 
''It does not provide for enthusiasm for the enterprises.''
 
An Earlier Denunciation
Though seen as an innovator in the field of economics, in politics Mr. Zhao has demonstrated the ability to adapt himself to shifts in the party line. 
When the leftist ''Gang of Four'' led by the wife of Mao Zedong purged Mr. Deng toward the end of the Cultural Revolution, Mr. Zhao joined in the denunciation of his patron.
Earlier, at the height of the Cultural Revolution, Mr. Zhao had himself been purged as one of the ''capitalist roaders'' associated with Mr. Deng. In a humiliating public ceremony, Mr. Zhao was paraded through the streets of Canton, capital of the province in which he served, with a dunce cap on his head.
The ''consummate bureaucrat,'' in the words of one Western diplomat, Mr. Zhao has served as a member of the standing committee of the Politburo of the Chinese Communist Party while Prime Minister and has a strong following among younger, modernization-minded party members. 
His major weakness, according to diplomatic and academic analysts, is his lack of military experience or personal ties to leaders of the People's Liberation Army, an institution said to contain large numbers of hard-liners opposed to Mr. Deng's modernization program.
Mr. Hu, 71, is also said to have suffered from a limited military background, though as a teen-ager he accompanied many of the senior party and army leaders on the ''Long March'' through the Chinese countryside. 
Born in Hunan, Chairman Mao's home province, Mr. Hu, who measures less than 5 feet tall, first came into the party as a ''Little Red Devil,'' the Communist youth group.
 
Party Boss in Sichuan
Following the Communist victory in 1949, Mr. Hu became the party boss in northern Sichuan, where his performance attracted the attention of Mr. Deng. In 1952 he was transferred to Peking, where he became the head of the Communist Youth League and built up a strong network of relationships with young hopefuls who subsequently emerged, with his help, as party leaders.
Like Mr. Zhao, Mr. Hu was also purged during the Cultural Revolution as a ''revisionist'' and ''counterrevolutionary'' because of his associations with Mr. Deng, with whom he shares a passion for bridge and has often played as partners. 
He is said to have been ''sent down to the countryside'' for menial labor for three years and to have spent an additional five years under house arrest.
