
Two Japanese newspapers quoted Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone on Tuesday as having said that because of the presence of ethnic minorities in the United States, that country's ''level is lower'' than Japan's.
The newspapers asserted that Mr. Nakasone was referring to the intellectual level. 
But a spokesman for his party said the Prime Minister had meant the literacy level.
The newspapers, Yomiuri Shimbun and Tokyo Shimbun, reported that on Monday, Mr. Nakasone told a party gathering:
''In a highly developed information society and a highly educated society such as Japan, the people require politics that bravely faces problems. 
In the United States, because there are a considerable number of blacks, Puerto Ricans and Mexicans, the (intellectual) level is lower.''
Word in Parentheses
The two newspapers placed the word meaning ''intelligence'' or ''intellectual'' in parentheses, implying that the reporter had supplemented a direct quote. 
This is common procedure in Japan because Japanese often leave out parts of sentences expecting that their listeners will know what they mean.
Fumikazu Okada, an official of Mr. Nakasone's Liberal Democratic Party, said Mr. Nakasone was referring not to intellectual levels but to literacy rates and had commented that there were many blacks, Puerto Ricans and Mexicans who could not write English.
In a statement issued this afternoon, the Prime Minister said:
''What I was saying there was that the United States made great achievements in the Apollo program and in S.D.I., but there are things Americans have not been able to reach because of multiple nationalities. 
On the contrary, things are easier in Japan because we are a homogeneous society.''
He added, ''I had no intention of committing any racial discrimination or of slandering other countries.''
S.D.I. stands for the Strategic Defense Initiative, the missile defense program also known as ''Star Wars.''
Mr. Nakasone's remarks came just two weeks after he dismissed his Education Minister for comments that offended South Korea and China and just a few days after he returned from Seoul, where he apologized to South Korea's President.
Masayuki Fujio, the former Education Minister, had angered South Koreans by suggesting that they had agreed to Japan's annexation of their nation in the early part of this century - an annexation that Koreans still consider humiliating. 
He also offended Chinese by virtually dismissing Japanese atrocities in China in 1937.
 
Views of Nakasone
Early in his political career, Mr. Nakasone gained a reputation as an outspoken nationalist. 
His associates say he has modified these views.
In speeches and campaign slogans, he often refers to ''postwar settlement of accounts,'' a term widely interpreted to mean that Japan should begin a new era unfettered by the concerns and problems of the postwar period.
Mr. Nakasone repeated his call to move to a new political era at the Liberal Democratic Party meeting at which he is reported to have made the remarks about blacks, Puerto Ricans and Mexicans.
Regardless of Mr. Nakasone's intent, minority groups in the United States are not always portrayed positively in Japan. 
In newspapers, television shows and films, blacks are often depicted as poor and as violent.
Japan is a homogeneous society, and most Japanese have little experience of living with other ethnic groups. 
In official and casual conversations, Japanese often attribute part of their economic success to this homogeneity. 
ANGRY REACTION IN U.S. 
WASHINGTON, Sept. 
23 (Reuters) - Black and Hispanic members of Congress reacted angrily today to what they called derogatory racial and ethnic remarks by Prime Minister Nakasone, but the Reagan Administration had no immediate reaction.
Representative Esteban Torres, Democrat of California and chairman of the Congressional Hispanic Caucus, urged Mr. Nakasone to retract the statement that appeared to him to suggest that the presence of black and Hispanic Americans lowered the overall level of intelligence.
The Congressional Black Caucus sent a telegram to the Japanese Embassy here asking for an urgent clarification of the remarks.
