
More than 120 years after an intrepid French missionary peered into an imperial hunting park here and discovered a breed of deer unknown in the West, a joint enterprise by a British aristocrat and American benefactors has brought the animal back to China.
The Pere David deer - named after Father Armand David, a Lazarist missionary and naturalist who toured China in the 19th century - has been extinct in China since at least 1900. 
But an Air France plane that arrived here Saturday from Paris brought 22 of the animals back to their native habitat.
The animals were immediately driven to the location 15 miles southwest of Peking where Father David first saw them in 1865. 
It was then the imperial hunting park of the Manchu emperors, and any unauthorized person killing one of the animals was subject to execution. 
Now it is farmland worked by peasants, part of it recently enclosed to provide a breeding ground for the deer.
British Lord Andrew Howland, great-great-grandson of Duke of Bedford, who acquired Pere David deer from Manchu emperors in 1894, formally hands over 22 deer from species, extinct in China since at least 1900, to Chinese officials at former imperial hunting park at Nanhaizi; photo (M)Called a Precious Gift
As the two crates containing the deer were being taken from the aircraft, Lord Andrew Howland, great-great-grandson of the Duke of Bedford, who acquired examples of the deer from the Manchu court in 1894, formally handed over the animals. 
They were selected from a herd of more than 400 that roam the parkland at Woburn Abbey, the ducal home 45 miles northwest of London.
''This is indeed a precious gift to the Chinese people,'' said Jin Jianming, of the Chinese Government's environmental protection office. 
''The return of these animals has a great historical significance, not only for the preservation of a rare species but for the pleasure of future generations of the Chinese people.''
The deer originally were found in China's northeast provinces but are thought to have been extinct in the wild for hundreds of years. 
They were installed in Nanhaizi, the imperial hunting park, after the Manchu invaders established their dynasty in Peking in 1644. 
In 1894, shortly after the Duke of Bedford acquired the animals that started his herd, a flood breached the wall of the hunting park and the imperial animals escaped.
Contemporary accounts said most of the deer were captured and eaten by local peasants, but some evidently were still living in the Chinese capital at the time of the Boxer Rebellion in 1900. 
Contemporary accounts say the foreign forces, including American marines, who entered Peking to relieve the siege of the diplomatic legations killed and ate the last of the deer.
 
Largest Herd at Abbey
Since then, the largest collection of the deer anywhere has been at Woburn Abbey, helping make the abbey one of Britain's largest tourist draws. 
The idea of bringing the deer back to China originated with the owner of the abbey, the Marquess of Tavistock, and with a Czechoslovak-born researcher in animal behavior, Maya Boyd, who works at Oxford University.
Miss Boyd made several journeys to Peking over 18 months to arrange the return of the deer. 
The Chinese authorities spent about $590,000 to acquire the land at Nanhaizi from a local agricultural commune, to enclose it with a 2.4-mile brick wall and to drain and refill the lake that was the centerpiece of the imperial park. 
Grass and trees have also been planted.
The costs of transporting the animals were shared by the Marquess of Tavistock and by several amateur naturalists, among them Lars-Erik Lindblad of Westport, Conn., who owns a travel company that brings American tourists to China.
The return of the deer has created something of a stir among the Chinese, who call the species Sibuxiang, meaning ''the four unlikes.''
According to folk tradition, the reddish-gray animal acquired the name because it was not like the horse, not like the ox, not like the goat and not like the deer traditional in other parts of northern China when the Manchus moved south.
