
A Federal law-enforcement official said today that a former analyst for the Central Intelligence Agency had admitted that he provided the Chinese Government with extensive intelligence information for 30 years.
The analyst, Larry Wu-Tai Chin, was indicted today by a Federal grand jury on a single count of conspiracy to commit espionage. 
According to the law-enforcement official, the account of Mr. Chin's activities was based largely on his his statements to the authorities. 
The account included the names of the Chinese Communist officials who recruited him and Mr. Chin's rank within the Chinese intelligence service, the official said, Mr. Chin, who the authorities said had been under investigation since December 1983, was arrested early Saturday. 
He has not yet entered a plea but his lawyer, Peter Meyers, said in court last Saturday that Mr. Chin would plead not guilty.
The eight-page indictment said that Mr. Chin had access to classified material ''at all levels, including secret and above,'' in his job as an analyst at the Foreign Broadcast Information Service, an arm of the C.I.A.
Mr. Chin was able to see ''virtually all levels of classified information dealing with China and other aspects of American Far Eastern intelligence,'' another Federal law-enforcement official said.
An Administration official said the security breach caused by Mr. Chin was a serious one and that he ''could have done a lot of damage.''
According to the indictment, the broadcast information service monitors foreign broadcasts and does translation work for other components of the intelligence agency. 
Its analysts would use classified intelligence reports to help assess the foreign broadcasts recorded by the American authorities. 
Additionally, other officials said Mr. Chin's language skills could have involved him in translating documents for a variety of sensitive C.I.A. operations in other segments of the agency.
 
A 'Deputy Bureau Chief'
These officials noted that at some points in Mr. Chin's career, he might have been called on by the espionage branch of the agency, which deals with covert agents in the field, as a translator.
The indictment disclosed new details about Mr. Chin's frequent travels to China. 
It said he was promoted to ''deputy bureau chief'' in the People's Republic of China intelligence service in a 1982 trip to Peking.
Prosecutors revealed for the first time that Mr. Chin continued working for the intelligence agency as a contract employee after his retirement in 1981. 
The indictment said that from 1981 to 1985, he worked with the United States Joint Publications Research Service, a division of the agency that does translation for broadcast information service.
The indictment did not specify the type of information Mr. Chin dealt with in his four years with that division. 
But in a criminal complaint filed over the weekend, the Government charged that Chinese intelligence paid Mr. Chin $50,000 in 1982, about a year after he had become a contract employee for the Central Intelligence Agency. 
The indictment charged that Mr. Chin was paid more than $140,000 for all of his activities.
 
Kept in Touch at Agency
According to the indictment, Mr. Chin kept in contact with his friends and associates at the agency after his retirement. 
At one point, he told Chinese intelligence about a C.I.A. employee he believed was ''susceptible to recruitment.''
The picture of Mr. Chin that emerged from those who know his family was of an immigrant who had succeeded in the United States and was proud of the accomplishments of his three children.
A family acquaintance described Mr. Chin today as a ''sweet, kind good humored'' family man who had a close relationship with his two sons and daughter. 
One of his sons attended Dartmouth College and is an a doctoral program at Stanford University.
