
AN ECLECTIC quintet of recent cookbooks might be just what is needed for that last-minute Christmas gift. 
In addition, they contain ideas for food gifts to make and for elegant holiday-entertaining dishes.
All the books are by New Jersey authors. 
Three are from the kitchens of popular cooking teachers; the two others are compilations of recipes from a mixed bag of contributors, and the proceeds from their sale will benefit the Paper Mill Playhouse in Millburn and the Newark Museum.
Subjects range from festive Chinese banquets to homey Italian casseroles and from sophisticated international dishes to favorite recipes of actors.
In ''Cooking at Cooktique'' by Silvia Lehrer (Doubleday & Co. 
Inc., $19.95), ''The Chinese Banquet Cookbook'' by Eileen Yin-Fei Lo (Crown Publishers Inc., $17.95) and Anne Casale's ''Italian Family Cooking'' (Ballantine Books, $9.95), the recipes, with their clear, step-by-step instructions, reflect these authors' many years of teaching the culinary ropes in their kitchen-classrooms. 
Questions that might be posed by inexperienced cooks are often anticipated and procedures are well spelled out.
Mrs. Lehrer, whose Tenafly cooking school, Cooktique, often is host to well-known guest chef-instructors, has compiled more than 200 recipes, several of them classics with a contemporary twist. 
Any do-ahead steps are pointed out and, in the lead to each chapter, Mrs. Lehrer provides tips on the best ingredients and techniques.
Herbed squash bisque, a salad of goat cheese, green beans and pine nuts, grilled chicken with two mustards, steamed red snapper with ginger Hollandaise and chocolate-coated pears in raspberry sauce are a few of the cosmopolitan offerings.
One cavil, however, is with the skewered sesame shrimp, which should be marinated for a shorter time in light, rather than dark, soy sauce so as not to be puckeringly salty.
In ''The Chinese Banquet Cookbook,'' Miss Lo has compiled 10 complete banquets from China's regions and more than 100 recipes, many preceded by personal anecdotes about the author's childhood in Canton.
Besides banquets from Canton, Peking, Shanghai, Szechuan and Hunan (including a delicious version of orange beef), there are also dishes from the nomads called the Hakka, as well as vegetarian and traditional New Year celebration recipes.
A teacher at the China Institute in Manhattan and at her Montclair home, Miss Lo's instructions are straightforward. 
Techniques are illustrated with dozens of line drawings.
The subtitle of ''Italian Family Cooking'' is ''Like Mama Used to Make,'' and for Mrs. Casale, a resident of Watchung, it could also read ''Like Father and Father-in-Law Used to Make.''
Both men were professional cooks whose influence on Mrs. Casale was strong.
Proprietor of Annie's Kitchen Cooking School in North Plainfield for several years, Mrs. Casale manages to convey in her writing the cozy enthusiasm and wealth of helpful hints that she has brought to her students.
A fan of the food processor, the author has adapted many of her 250-odd recipes from Northern and Southern Italy, as well as Italian America, to take advantage of shortcuts. 
For example, the pasta chapter gives detailed instructions for both machine and hand methods of preparation.
Desserts are particularly appealing, from the glazed orange cake and the ricotta mousse with raspberry sauce to the espresso cream pie.
The glossy cover of ''The Newark Museum Cookbook'' displays an elegantly set table (actually the opulent Victorian dining room of the museum's Ballantine House).
The comb-bound cookbook - it was edited by a museum trustee, Mrs. Theron L. Marsh of Bernardsville -is a collection of more than 300 recipes contributed by curators, trustees, members and staff of the museum. 
Appropriately, the book is liberally illustrated with black and white pictures of many of the museum's food-related art and objects.
As one would expect from such a communal effort, the originality of the recipes is as diverse as the contributors. 
But with some careful perusing, a number of choice dishes turn up, from Swiss onion soup and honey-curried bay scallops to Greek ragout of lamb and cheesecake with fresh lemon glaze.
The book is available at the museum for $10.95 ($9.95 for members) or by mail from the Publications Department, Newark Museum, 49 Washington Street, P.O. 
Box 540, Newark, N.J. 
07101. Add $2 for postage, handling and, if requested, gift wrapping.
The newest and also most lighthearted of the cookbooks is the comb-bound paperback called ''Cookbook of the Stars,'' a collection of about 116 recipes, some tongue-in-cheek but most serious, contributed by actors and actresses who have appeared at the Paper Mill Playhouse over the years. 
Photographs from the plays are scattered through the book.
Phyllis Diller sent Red and Yellow Catch-a-Fellow squash, Julie Harris contributed lettuce bread (which tastes much like it sounds), Eva Gabor sent a cookie recipe called Kisses of the Officer and there is a marinara sauce from Dom DeLuise. 
(President Reagan's macaroni and cheese recipe shows up in both this and the Newark Museum cookbook.) King's Supermarkets Inc. supplied a grant for the cookbook, and some of the most sophisticated recipes are those in a special section contributed by Joanna Pruess, director of the store's cooking school.
Available at the Paper Mill Playhouse gift shop before performances and at King's Supermarkets, ''Cookbook of the Stars'' is $10.
Often served as an appetizer or garnish for cold meats at Chinese banquets, these habit-forming glazed nuts make an equally tasty nibble with cocktails or, with additional sugar, with after-dinner coffee. 
Honey Walnuts #4 to 5 cups water #12 ounces walnuts, preferably freshly shelled #1 1/2 ounces sugar (about 3 to 4 tablespoons or more, if desired) #6 tablespoons water (to make sugar glaze) #3 to 4 cups peanut oil. 
1.
* Bring four to five cups of water to a boil in a wok. 
Place walnuts in boiling water for five minutes to remove bitter taste. 
Remove from water and drain, then run cold water over the walnuts. 
Drain again, then place back in the wok with another four cups of water. 
Bring to a boil and cook for another five minutes. 
Repeat draining process. 
Set aside and let drain. 
2.
* Wash wok. 
Add 6 tablespoons of water and bring to a boil. 
Then add sugar, constantly stirring. 
Let boil for 1 minute and add walnuts. 
Stir until the nuts are coated with glaze and remaining liquid in wok has evaporated. 
2.
* Remove walnuts and set aside. 
Wash wok with extremely hot water to remove sugar and dry. 
3. Place peanut oil in wok. 
Bring to a boil (look for a wisp of white smoke), then add walnuts. 
Fry for 4 to 5 minutes, or until walnuts turn light golden brown.
Note: Honey walnuts can be frozen for 3 to 4 weeks.
From ''The Chinese Banquet Cookbook.''
 
Green Bean, Chevre
And Pignoli Nut Salad 1/2 pound firm, crisp green beans, stems trimmed 1/4 pound chevre (goat cheese), preferably aged domestic 1/4 cup pignoli nuts, lightly toasted Vinaigrette: #1 large shallot, minced #2 teaspoons Dijon mustard #1 tablespoon raspberry vinegar #3 tablespoons light, fruity olive oil Freshly ground pepper. 
1.
* Bring 2 quarts of water to a boil, add salt, then beans. 
Cover and cook in briskly simmering water for 2 to 3 minutes. 
Drain in a collander and quickly refresh under cold running water. 
Pat dry, place in a mixing bowl and set aside. 
2.
* In a small bowl, combine the shallot, mustard and vinegar. 
Whisk in the oil in a thin, steady stream until mixture is thoroughly blended. 
Season to taste with pepper. 
3.
* Pour the vinaigrette over the beans and toss to mix. 
Transfer green beans to a salad bowl, crumble the chevre into bite-size pieces and scatter over the beans. 
Top with a sprinkle of toasted pignoli nuts and serve. 
Serves 4 to 6. 
From ''Cooking at Cooktique.''
Pasta With Salmon #4 ounces sweet butter 1/2 medium onion, chopped #1 1/2 cups heavy cream 1/4 cup Cognac or white wine 1/2 cup grated Romano cheese #5 sun-dried tomatoes (available at specialty food shops) or 2 plum tomatoes, cut in julienne slices 1/2 pound Nova Scotia salmon, cut into 1-inch pieces Salt and pepper to taste #1 pound linguine or fettuccine Fresh dill, optional. 
1.
* In 9-inch frying pan, melt the butter and saute the onions over low heat until tender but not brown. 
Stir in cream, increase heat to medium-high and simmer 5 minutes to reduce cream. 
2.
* Stir in Cognac or wine, grated cheese and sun-dried tomatoes. 
Mix in salmon, and season to taste with salt and pepper. 
Simmer for 2 minutes more and set aside. 
3.
* Cook pasta in plenty of boiling salted water with 1 teaspoon of salad oil, according to package directions; if fresh pasta is used, cook for 3 minutes. 
4.
* Drain pasta and toss with salmon sauce in a bowl. 
Sprinkle chopped fresh dill on each serving, if desired. 
Serves 5 to 6. 
Adapted from Sylvia Syms' contribution to ''Cookbook of the Stars.''
