
About 60 people shouting the name of the Dalai Lama, Tibet's former civil and religious leader, marched today to a Government office, where armed Chinese security forces quickly arrested them.
The marchers, believed to be Buddhist monks in street clothes, did not resist arrest. 
About 2,000 bystanders made no attempt to help them or four monks who were arrested at about the same time in the Jokhang Temple square, where pro-independence protests last week left several people dead.
The Chinese Government has reportedly sent 1,000 armed policemen to Lhasa, the Tibetan capital. 
The troops are to guard against further unrest on Wednesday, the 37th anniversary of the day China occupied Tibet.
 
Quiet Day Expected
Tibetans and Chinese questioned on the street said they expected the anniversary to be quiet because of fears that the police would fire on protesters.
Western witnesses said the police fired last Thursday on demonstrators who burned a police station and vehicles in the temple square.
Western doctors in Lhasa said eight Tibetans were shot to death and one unidentified Chinese was stoned to death. 
The authorities said six Chinese policemen were killed. 
It was not known if the Chinese was one of the six.
There was a smaller, less violent protest on Sept. 
27 that resulted in about two dozen arrests. 
The march today was the first significant public protest since Thursday.
 
Dalai Lama's Name Chanted
About 100 marchers raised their fists and chanted the name of the Dalai Lama, who fled to exile in India after an uprising against Chinese rule in 1959. 
China annexed Tibet in 1950.
The marchers did not wear the saffron robes usually worn by monks, but they came from the direction of the Drepung monastery, one of three leading monasteries whose members led the independence demonstrations last week. 
The monastery is about five miles west of Lhasa.
Western witnesses said a few were arrested quietly on the way and that others left the march. 
About 60 marchers continued to the gate of the Tibetan regional government office. 
About 100 members of the security forces carrying submachine guns and automatic pistols immediately herded them onto trucks.
 
'Very Thoroughly Searched'
''I don't think they were resisting,'' said Derek Olson of Oak Park, Ill. 
''They were very thoroughly searched before being put in the truck.''
Another American witness, Cliff Toliver of Cincinnati, said some bystanders surged forward and shouted when policemen and soldiers struck a marcher. 
No clash ensued.
Mr. Olson said the crowd started to scatter twice, apparently in response to threatening moves from the security people. 
''It was definitely a very panicky situation,'' he said.
Amber Kvanli, like Mr. Olson a student from St. Olaf College in Minnesota, said Tibetans fled in panic from the busy market next to the temple when about 30 armed policemen marched up to four monks who were sitting on the ground chanting.
 
Children Gathered Up
''Suddenly people started yelling, moms started gathering their kids, and one young Tibetan came up to me and put me in a doorway,'' she said. 
''The monks stopped chanting, got up and went with the police. 
They left behind their song books and the blankets they were sitting on.''
It was not known what happened to those arrested. 
Monks at the Sera and Drepung monasteries said previously that police came and arrested 47 members and that others were missing after the demonstration Thursday.
