
PEKING WHEN China went to its first Olympic Games, in Los Angeles in 1932, its squad consisted of a 100- meter sprinter, who was eliminated in the trials, and his coach.
Fifty-two years later, China is returning to Los Angeles with an Olympic squad of 200 athletes and 100 coaches, doctors and other officials. 
''So after a half-century, the number of people has increased 150 times,'' Wu Zhongyuan, the spokesman for the Chinese Olympic Committee, quipped recently.
The Chinese admit that they do not expect to do very well. 
But their participation in the 1984 Olympics marks the most significant step yet taken toward Peking's announced goal of developing into a major sports power by the end of the century.
China's hopes for a respectable showing, and maybe even a gold medal, are focused on the Summer Games at Los Angeles. 
Only 40 Chinese are going to the Winter Games next month at Sarajevo, Yugoslavia, to compete in the Alpine and Nordic skiing, speed and figure skating and biathlon. 
The hockey team is being kept home. 
The Chinese sports newspaper has conceded that in winter sports ''China is still a long way from the advanced world levels.''
China intends to compete in 15 events at Los Angeles, with selective strengths in track and field, weight lifting, gymnastics and women's volleyball. 
It will be the first time that the Communist mainland will be represented at an Olympics by a full contingent of athletes.
Some Chinese swimmers showed up late at the Helsinki Olympics in 1952 to put in a desultory showing. 
China was readmitted to the Olympic movement in 1979, and it sent a small team to the 1980 Winter Games at Lake Placid, but it joined the boycott of the subsequent Summer Games in Moscow to protest the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan.
With its propensity for slogans, China has coined a militant challenge for sports: ''Break out of Asia and advance on the world.''
It has already come a long way. 
China had a weak sports tradition and was debilitated by famine, war and revolution well into the 20th century. 
After the Communists took over in 1949, they began developing organized sports, but the effort unraveled when radical politics took priority during the 1966-1976 Cultural Revolution.
''Before the Cultural Revolution, we were doing quite well,'' recalled Li Pingta, an official of the All-China Sports Federation. 
''Our weight lifting, track and field and swimming were all good. 
Due to the cultural revolution, some of these were dragged back down again.''
Sports have been revived under the pragmatic regime of Deng Xiaoping, China's current leader. 
The Government claims that 300 million Chinese, nearly a third of the population of 1 billion, now engage in some kind of physical training.
Children are being selected early for their potential and sent after classes to thousands of ''spare-time'' sports schools, a less intense version of the Soviet sports-training machine. 
And the five proficiency grades for athletes, borrowed from the Russians in 1956, and dropped 10 years later, have been restored for 37 sports categories.
Li Menghua, the minister in charge of the State Physical Culture and Sports Commission, told a conference last March that the goal of China's physical culture in this century was to produce athletes with both sportsmanship and outstanding skills who would rank China among the major world sports powers by the year 2000.
Some of the sports that China does best, like table tennis, badminton and kung fu, are not yet recognized as Olympic events. 
Mr. Wu said that Chinese athletes had reached world competition levels in only a third of some 40 popular sports.
''Except for a few events, our track and field is weak,'' Li Pingta said. 
''Swimming on the whole is weak. 
Of course, everyone knows our soccer team cannot break out of the pack in Asia. 
This is something everybody is concerned about.''
Ironically, China, which has the most bicycles in the world, also does poorly in cycling. 
''In China, we take cycling as a means of transport,'' Mr. Wu explained.
The Chinese have not been hesitant about importing foreign expertise. 
An American skier quietly helped coached the ski team. 
A Bulgarian has taught rhythmic gymnastics, and a Brazilian is being brought in to coach the lackluster soccer team.
In the race to catch up, China has joined 46 international sports organizations, according to Mr. Wu. Chinese athletes began to dominate regional competition by capturing 61 gold medals at the 1982 Asian Games in New Delhi. 
China has applied to hold the 1990 Asian Games in Peking, and plans to build new sports facilities if it is chosen.
China used to denigrate the importance of winning with the old Maoist motto, ''Friendship first, competition second.''
Now its athletes are taught that victories are necessary to earn respect for China in the eyes of the world.
''We'll require our sportsmen to get the best achievements and win honor for the motherland, and our players are determined to do so,'' said Li Pingta, in discussing China's attitude toward the Summer Olympics.
China's best chance for a gold medal at Los Angeles is Zhu Jianhua, a lanky Shanghai student who broke the world record for the high jump twice in 1983. 
The 20-year-old Zhu cleared 2.38 meters (7 feet 9 3/4 inches) at the National Games last September in Shanghai. 
The Chinese press has treated the Shanghai Games as a dress rehearsal for the Olympics.
Although Zhu remains the world champion high jumper, it is uncertain how well he will do under the pressure of international competition, since he took only a bronze medal at the world track and field championships in Helsinki last August.
Another hopeful is Wu Shude, a 24- year-old weight lifter in the 56-kilo class who set a world record by snatching 128 kilos (281.6 pounds) at Shanghai. 
China also has some strong divers, like Li Yihua and Tan Liangde. 
Li Qiaoxian, a 16-year-old diver, was recently identified as a new star by the Chinese youth newspaper.
With Li Ning and Tong Fei, China is fielding its best men's gymnastic team, which beat the Soviet team to capture the team title at the world gymnastics championships in Budapest last October. 
The women's volleyball team, which took two world championships in a row, is also a serious contender. 
Its strongest player, Lang Ping, has been nicknamed The Hammer for her powerful spikes.
But the Olympic committee has played down the likelihood of a strong showing. 
Wu Zhongyuan told reporters: ''We predict that we will not get good results. 
We predict that we will do better in shooting, women's volleyball, diving, some track and field, weight lifting, fencing and gymnastics and maybe in archery. 
As for the other events, we still have quite a distance to catch up.''
China's Olympic team theoretically still has to be selected, but the principal criteria are the performances at Shanghai last September. 
Mr. Wu said that the athletes chosen would meet in Peking next April to begin final training. 
''There is a half- year left before the Summer Games, so our athletes will still have a lot of international competition,'' he said.
China expects to spend 3 million yuan, about $1.5 million, on its participation in the Winter and Summer Olympics, according to Li Guochang, the director of the secretariat of the Chinese Olympic Committee.
Mr. Li said that this covered training, accommodation and travel expenses for the athletes. 
He did not specify whether this budget included services supplied by state-run organizations such as China's airline, C.A.A.C. 
(Civil Aviation Administration of China). 
By comparison, the United States Olympic Committee budget is $80.1 million.
Chinese athletes have not been exempted from ideological obligations. 
A Peking newspaper reported not long ago that the swimming team was studying the writings of Deng Xiaoping as part of its preparation. 
Mr. Wu explained: ''Every day the swimmers will take a half hour or an hour. 
That's not the whole day.''
Mr. Wu said that the Olympic athletes would be educated in Socialist spiritual civilization, a patriotic concept of behavior that rejects Western values, before they went to Los Angeles. 
He recalled that the high jumper Zhu Jianhua has undertaken political study.
This is intended partly to discourage embarrassing defections. 
After the tennis player Hu Na was given political asylum in the United States in 1982, China angrily suspended official bilateral sports and cultural exchanges for the next year.
Mr. Wu insisted that ''we are not afraid,'' because China held the United States responsible for preventing such incidents as part of the security measures for the Summer Games.
