
''CINEMA IN CHINA'' surveys, respectfully, some 50 years of Chinese film making. 
Are the films any good?
It's hard to tell. 
Most of what we see looks wooden, although perhaps Western standards shouldn't apply. 
Chinese films, the documentary tells us, have been ''inextricably involved with the political and social changes'' in China. 
The documentary will be seen on Channel 13 at 9 o'clock tonight.
Tony Rayns, the host, narrator and writer of the program, which was originally produced for Britain's Channel Four, says that China has a ''very rich film heritage,'' and that something like 80 million Chinese go to the movies each week. 
The film industry, still recovering from the depredations of the Gang of Four, Mr. Rayns says, produces more than 100 features each year.
In an interview, we see Sun Yu, who studied at Columbia University in the 1920's, and became, Mr. Rayns says, ''one of the first leftist intellectuals'' to make movies in China. 
''Cinema in China'' shows excerpts from his 1931 ''The Highway.''
A crew of road builders give their lives to defend China against invaders, presumably the Japanese.
What's interesting here are the exhortations. 
In subtitles, the road builders sing: ''Pull the roller!
Don't slacken your efforts!
/ All together!
Make light the weight of the roller!''
Then the refrain: ''Let all work hard!
Go forward together.''
The English subtitles may not be absolutely accurate, although presumably they catch the general flavor. 
Most of the film excerpts, no matter what the decade, are intent on sending messages. 
This doesn't mean they are all without charm; a 1962 film on women's equality looks promising. 
We do, however, get an impression that Chinese films aren't much for frivolity.
Mr. Rayns, meanwhile, has some difficulty in describing the state of film making now. 
The excesses of the Cultural Revolution, he says, have disappeared: ''China's studios are now free to make whatever films they want.''
Then, almost in the same breath, he says that ''if a studio chooses to tackle a controversial subject, it runs the risk of having the Film Bureau refuse to release the film.''
And does the Film Bureau ever refuse to release films?
We're not told, although Mr. Rayns does say that Chinese studios now make movies on ''controversial'' subjects. 
He doesn't identify the subjects, however, and one wishes he did. 
By the documentary's own evidence, film making in China seems to be a very cautious affair.
Thus we get the head of a studio script department. 
His job, he says, is ''to guide the group properly so that it follows the right path.''
Meanwhile, an actor describes a 1949 film about a man who supposedly loved both his country and money. 
In the old days, the actor says seriously, ''such two-faced people really existed.''
We also see an excerpt from the 1982 ''The Herdsman.''
The ingenue says it doesn't matter if her fiance is a teacher or a goatherd, ''as long he isn't a rightist.''
''Cinema on Cinema,'' part of Channel 13's ''Film on Film'' series, is solemn about this. 
Mr. Rayns is an enthusiast, not a critic, and he is reluctant to say that Chinese films are Government instruments. 
It would be a better documentary if he were a shade more judgmental.
