
A minor official named Liu Baoqin had an eager audience when he told villagers outside Peking last summer that he could get 200,000 Japanese television sets through contacts in Hong Kong.
With a new form of prosperity sweeping rural China, imported television sets have taken the place of bicycles and sewing machines among the most prized of household possessions. 
So officials in Yutian County were all ears when Mr. Liu sketched a deal under which the sets could be imported and resold for a profit of 30 million yuan, about $10.7 million.
As it turned out the whole thing was a fraud. 
After Mr. Liu had taken 12.6 million yuan in advance payments for the nonexistent sets, and placed two million yuan in his own bank account, he was arrested in a luxury hotel across the border from Hong Kong. 
With his fellow swindlers, he is awaiting trial on charges that carry a maximum sentence of death.
Article on 'epidemic' of official corruption that has developed in China in aftermath of market-oriented economic policy changes instituted by Deng Xiaoping; as people seek more consumer goods, some officials in charge of trade and pricing have sought to enrich themselves through scams; photo (M)
When the official New China News Agency carried an account of the fraud last month, it offered it as an example of the ''epidemic'' of official corruption that has developed in the aftermath of market-oriented economic policy changes. 
While the Government is trying to unshackle the country's productive forces from the bureaucracy's deadening hand, officials at every level have taken the new freedoms as an opportunity to enrich themselves.
 
Powers Widely Abused
The new leeway for importing foreign goods has been widely abused. 
So too have the freedoms Peking has given for the establishment of new companies, some of which have proved to be ''shell'' concerns created solely as a means of making profits as state- owned goods move along the economic chain. 
The power to raise prices has been widely exploited for private gain.
Officials have created jobs for relatives and friends, taken kickbacks in return for unearned wage increases and promotions, inflated expense accounts and taken bribes. 
The practices have spread to the army, once held up as a model of proletarian rectitude, which disclosed two weeks ago that officers in the Fuzhou Military Region, in the southeast, had turned a profit of more than $1.3 million with a variety of commercial scams.
For Deng Xiaoping, the country's 80- year-old leader, the corruption is of serious concern. 
If instead of inspiring the kind of entrepreneurship that creates wealth his policies serve only to fatten the lives of the official class, he will be handing a ready-made issue to opponents who see the policies as a betrayal of Marxist ideology.
The trouble is that it is the country's nine million cadres, or officials, who are in charge of putting the new system into effect. 
As centralized controls are relaxed a host of loopholes have been exploited, with results that are insistently denounced at high-level party meetings and in editorials in the party press.
 
'An Unhealthy Mood'
''At present, there is an unhealthy mood,'' the principal party paper, People's Daily, said in a commentator's article three weeks ago.
It added: ''Certain comrades turn a deaf ear to regulations such as the ban on the indiscriminate payment of bonuses and goods in kind and the prohibition on indiscriminate price increases, even though these have been reiterated again and again. 
They do just as they like.''
Mr. Deng's primary weapon so far has been a powerful party body called the Central Discipline Inspection Commission, aided by agents of the Ministry of Public Security, the Chinese equivalent of the K.G.B.
The Chinese leader has delegated one of his closest political confidants, 77-year-old Bo Yibo, to oversee the process of ''party rectification,'' which includes vetting political loyalties as well as seeking out embezzlers and profiteers.
At a gathering of party officials from across the country last month, Mr. Bo said that ''using one's position and powers to make a fortune from reform'' had become widespread, infecting not only factories, mines and other local institutions but officials all the way up to national ministries.
Since allowing such practices to go unchecked would threaten the basis for the economic changes, he said, it was essential ''they should not be tolerated.''
 
Cars Sold for Profit
One precaution ordered by Mr. Deng is a ban on party or government officials engaging in business. 
This is designed to stop the sort of abuse that developed among senior officials on Hainan Island, in the south, who were said by People's Daily to have imported dozens of duty-free cars, ostensibly for use in economic development, then sold them for a large profit to buyers on the mainland.
A circular put out by the inspection commission last month gave other examples of senior officials who had set up companies to trade in state-owned commodities in short supply, dividing the profits among themselves. 
The document cited the party committee in the steel city of Anshan, which was said to have set up an economic and technical cooperative company that bought 10,000 tons of low-priced steel from the city's huge steelworks, then resold it for a profit of $157,000.
In the central China city of Sanmenxia the culprits were officials of the city's ''propaganda and journalism departments,'' according to a People's Daily account.
The paper said that for more than two years, the officials had conspired with contacts from the Portuguese colony of Macao to smuggle cameras and other photographic equipment into the country for resale on the black market, making illegal profits of $150,000.
The army scandal in Fuzhou, also disclosed by People's Daily, involved 19 dummy trading companies that traded in army property and otherwise used the army's name to profiteer. 
The paper said that the party committee of the Fuzhou Military Region had cracked down last month, winding up the illegal companies, confiscating the $1.3 million in profit that had already been made and canceling 14 contracts worth $2.9 million more.
Many of the published accounts stopped short of detailing the punishments meted out to those responsible. 
But something of the scale of the trickery was suggested by a December report in the English-language newspaper China Daily, which said that 279 party officials in Tianjin, east of Peking, had been subjected to ''disciplinary measures'' and that 85 had been stripped of their party memberships in the preceding 13 months for ''crimes ranging from corruption to embezzlement.''
