
When Thubten Samphel visited a Tibetan monastery near Clifton, N.J., he was surprised to find one of the monks waiting at the bus station in a car to drive him there.
''As the foreigners are fond of saying, the only wheel in Tibet is the prayer wheel,'' said Mr. Samphel, one of four native Tibetans studying in the United States under a new Congressional scholarship program.
Monks with driver's licenses and monasteries with hot and cold running water are the least of the cultural differences that Mr. Samphel, whose parents were servants 30 years ago of the Dalai Lama, the exiled leader of Tibet, has encountered in the last two months.
Recently, Mr. Samphel, who is studying at the Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, watched a game of touch football in Sakura Park in Morningside Heights and spoke of such differences.
'Getting Your Facts Straight'
''Tibetan culture and American society are so totally different,'' said Mr. Samphel, 32 years old, who followed the Dalai Lama to India after a Tibetan uprising against the Chinese was put down in 1959. 
In India, he attended Western-style schools and learned English.
''Tibetans are considered very spiritual,'' he said. 
''Here everything is material. 
Everyone seems to be working all the time.''
An experienced writer and editor in India - from 1980 until last August he edited the official English organ of the Dalai Lama's Government-in-exile in Dharmsala, India - he nonetheless is now getting his first formal training in journalism.
''The most important thing is getting your facts straight,'' said Mr. Samphel, who for class was recently assigned to cover the Larry Davis trial in the Bronx. 
''In India it's more laid back toward getting the story; you use the first word that comes to your mind. 
In China and Tibet, the Government is the newspaper. 
What the Government decides to inform the public becomes the daily news.''
 
Making Adjustments
One of Mr. Samphel's professors, Stephen D. Isaacs, said that Mr. Samphel had asked not to be treated differently from other students because of his language problems or cultural differences.
''You take anyone from out of town, much less out of this world, and send them to the Larry Davis trial - it's going to be difficult,'' Professor Isaacs said. 
Perhaps the most challenging assignment of all has been learning aggressive street reporting.
''We tend to be very polite,'' Mr. Samphel said. 
''Here you have to leave this pretense and get what you want.''
For now he hopes to work for an American newspaper after he graduates, but he can see himself ultimately returning to his old job in India. 
He even holds hope for an independent Tibet someday.
''We Tibetans have not too many choices,'' he said. 
''Emotionally we would like Tibet to be independent, free. 
But you run into these practical problems: How do you proceed to do that without an army, without anything, without the support of one single government?''
''Whether we like it or not, we have to adjust to the modern world,'' he said. 
''We must be absolutely realistic.''
Such feelings are common among young Tibetans, said Tenzin Chhodak, the director of the Office of Tibet, a New York branch of the Dalai Lama's government and a friend of Mr. Samphel for more than a decade. 
Mr. Chhodak, who administers the scholarship program for Congress, hopes to bring 11 more young Tibetans to the United States by next year.
Although Mr. Samphel received both his bachelor's and master's degrees in modern Chinese history, and his one visit to Tibet in almost 30 years was as part of a tour sponsored by the Chinese Government in 1985, like most Tibetans he retains deep hostility toward China.
''My next-door neighbor is from Beijing,'' Mr. Samphel said. 
''We have been very polite to each other.''
