
The departure of Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. surprised most of the American foreign policy establishment, dismaying those who saw him as a force for moderation in the Administration and pleasing those who regarded him as too moderate.
Some suggested that the resignation would be felt most keenly in Europe, where Mr. Haig had special ties dating from his days as commander of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization's military forces, and in China.
At the same time, specialists throughout the political spectrum praised Mr. Haig's successor, George P. Shultz, but raised questions about his business connections in the Middle East.
''I'm stunned,'' said Richard C. Holbrooke, former Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs in the Carter Administration, who expressed regret at the resignation, which he suggested would pose special problems for the nation's relations with China.
The departure of Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. surprised most of the American foreign policy establishment, dismaying those who saw him as a force for moderation in the Administration and pleasing those who regarded him as too moderate.'Appalling Piece of News'
''For the Europeans,'' said Fritz Stern, a professor of history at Columbia University and a member of the editorial advisory board of Foreign Affairs magazine, ''this will be an appalling piece of news.''
Mr. Haig, he said, ''was the person in the Administration the Europeans regarded as the most understanding, the most responsible and the one who understood them best.''
''At a time of considerable disarray in European-American relations,'' he said, ''this will be a considerable blow.''
''This is out of the blue,'' said Winston Lord, president of the Council on Foreign Relations, who described himself as ''very sad'' at the news.
''He was a very able man who was doing a good job - but I'm high on George Shultz,'' said Mr. Lord, who expressed surprise that Mr. Haig had resigned at a time he seemed to be at the point of ''prevailing'' over his chief political rival, Caspar W. Weinberger, Secretary of Defense.
 
Friction With Other Officials
Mr. Haig's troubled relations with a series of Administration figures were cited by Mr. Holbrooke, who praised Mr. Haig. ''All his life,'' he said, ''he had been the hardest-line man in Government, in bureacratic disputes. 
In this Administration, without changing his position he became a moderate in an Adminisration more hard-line than he had anticipated.''
Mr. Holbrooke, who is now with Lehman Brothers, the investment banking firm, said that the resignation would pose special problems for the nation's relations with China.
''China,'' he said, ''regarded him as the one person in the Administration who understood both the strategic and bilateral implications of Sino-American relations.''
 
'Fought the Heroic Fight'
''I believe,'' he added, ''that Al Haig fought the heroic fight to prevent the complete collapse of Sino-American relations,'' a reference to Mr. Haig's role in turning aside a drive within the Administation last year to strengthen American ties with the Nationalist Chinese Government on Taiwan.
''Absent Haig,'' he said, ''there would have been a major, frontpage crisis last year.''
Viewing the resignation from opposing perspectives, Bertram Gold, the president of the American Jewish Committee, called Mr. Haig ''a good Secretary of State,'' who had been ''supportive'' of Israel, while M..T. 
Mehdi, president of the Arab-American Relations Committee, called his resignation ''healthy.''
Mr. Haig, he said, was a ''militant militarist,'' who had been ''annoying and alienating.''
He said that partly because of his extensive business dealings with Arab nations, Mr. Shutlz promised to have a ''better understanding'' of the third world.
 
No Comment by Vance
There was no immediate comment from Cyrus R. Vance, who resigned as Secretary of State in a dispute over the decision to attempt to rescue American hostages from Iran during the Carter Administration, although he did not announce the move until the immediate crisis was over.
Henry A. Kissinger, who served as Secretary of State during the Nixon years, issued this statement: ''The nation owes an enormous debt to Alexander Haig for an extraordinary career of public service. 
He has served the nation well. 
George Shultz is one of the outstanding public men and finest human beings I have known. 
I know he will be a great Secretary of State in pursuit of President Reagan's goals of peace and justice.''
In Atlanta, where he is recovering from a hernia operation, Dean Rusk, who served as Secretary of State in the Administration of Lyndon B. Johnson, declined comment pending the ''unfolding'' of the full reasons behind the resignation,
