
This is the town the White Rajahs built, and it revels in the distinction of having been the heart of one of the most eccentric ventures in the history of European colonialism.
From the polished brass cannon at the small fort on the hill to the stuffed animals in the museum near the Anglican Cathedral, there are reminders of the family that once ruled this territory on the northwest coast of Borneo with a mixture of pluck, paternalism and absolute authority.
Though Sarawak has been part of Malaysia for a quarter of a century, the people of Kuching are proud of their special geography and history. 
''It is hard to express to the rest of the world how we feel about Sarawak,'' Caroline Goh-Cheong, a publisher, said. 
''We have a special place.''
From 1841 to 1946, three men -James, Charles and Vyner Brooke -more or less owned Sarawak, a gift to James from a Brunei sultan grateful for help in quelling a local rebellion.
 
A Colonial Oddity
The Brookes were British, but England wanted nothing to do with this troublesome territory, populated by headhunters and perenially short of income. 
So the Brookes were free to rule as potentates, with the help of Malay aristocrats and tribal warriors.
Until 1946, when the territory was turned over to the Crown, there was no British colonial service here, only a few hardy freelance Europeans.
Resentful of Western intrusion, Chinese gold miners and traders from the interior attacked Kuching in 1857, burning the newly created symbols of authority and killing members of the first Rajah's entourage.
His nephew Charles (later the second Rajah) replied by unleashing his upcountry Iban tribesmen on the Chinese. 
The Ibans, headhunters, quickly sent the Chinese back to the hills.
 
Architectural Treasures
When James Brooke saw Kuching for the first time in 1839, the small village was the nearest permanent settlement to the muddy Sarawak River delta, where as early as the 11th century a ramshackle bartering center had been established. 
To the delta in their wooden boats came people from the interior and coastal settlements to trade their turtle eggs, feathers, camphor and hornbill ivory for manufactured goods from China and India - ceramics, textiles and metal objects.
Kuching grew rapidly under the Brookes. 
A classic, cloistered courthouse was built in 1874. 
A fort followed in 1879. 
In 1891 a museum opened. 
There were other homes and public buildings of distinction, among them several noteworthy Chinese temples.
Kuching has kept much of its character intact. 
Small wooden sampans are still ''taxis'' to the 300,000 residents, ferrying them along and across the river from dozens of landings. 
The fare is about 5 cents.
 
The 20th Century Encroaches
Lucas Chin, curator of the Sarawak Museum - housing one of Southeast Asia's most remarkable ethnic collections - told a visitor how committed Kuching was to saving and embellishing its architectural heritage.
''This whole part of Kuching has been preserved as a cultural center,'' he said, gesturing to take in the hill where his museum stands and the old downtown area, its open, grassy square leading to the waterfront markets.
But high-rise buildings are in evidence, primarily on the less-populated western bank of the river, and Kuching has begun to experience some of the problems common to urban life elsewhere.
Squatter settlements are mushrooming on the city's edges, the product of what the state's Chief Minister, Abdul Taib Mahmud, calls the ''one-way drift'' from Sarawak's interior with its mammoth rivers and uncharted jungles.
''We have been very secluded here,'' said Miss Goh-Cheong, the publisher. 
''We have not really been in touch with the world. 
TV came here only six years ago.''
