
THERE'S a little slice of China in Chester. 
Free public lessons in tai chi, the ancient Chinese system of exercises, are being offered by the National Theater of the Deaf, which is based in the Connecticut River Valley town.
Three mornings each week, 70 to 100 people assemble on the green by the 1793 Chester Meetinghouse to learn the traditional routines aimed at promoting harmony of mind and body.
The theater, made up of deaf and hearing actors, is known for its performances that combine sign language with the spoken word. 
Over the years, several members have practiced tai chi, according to David Hays, founder and artistic director of the company. 
But actors in the troupe became particularly interested in the exercises last year when they toured China with two plays.
One actor, wandering through the streets of Beijing, met an 80-year-old man who knew some English and taught tai chi. 
Soon the actor rounded up others from the theater to attend his new acquaintance's classes.
Mr. Hays had tried tai chi before and knew his level of ability. 
''I'm enormously unskillful at it,'' he said. 
Nonetheless, he joined the Beijing classes and attends those in Chester when his schedule permits.
Shanny Mow, a deaf actor with the troupe, attended the classes in Beijing and now leads those in Chester. 
He said he began practicing tai chi several years ago after receiving several bloody noses while learning karate.
''I decided there had to be something more gentle,'' Mr. Mow said through a sign language interpreter. 
Tai chi, he said, ''tones your nerves.''
''If you do it first thing every morning, you start the day feeling good,'' he added.
When members of the theater decided to make tai chi routines part of their summer schedule, they sought a spot large enough to accommodate actors, staff members, students from the National Theater of the Deaf's summer school for deaf theater personnel, and any friends, neighbors or others who might be interested. 
They settled on the tree-shaded green.
Tai chi on the green is not the same as tai chi in Beijing. 
For one thing, the Beijing exercises took place at 5 A.M., while the sessions on the green are conducted at the more acceptable 7:30 A.M. For another, many Chinese brought their pet birds in cages to the Beijing exercises, and although the theater has invited its tai chi students to bring birds, nobody has yet done so.
''But I'm still hopeful,'' said Germaine Schumacher, a copy editor and proofreader from Middletown who attends the classes and thinks birds would be a fine addition.
The lack of birds has apparently not discouraged attendance.Mrs. 
Schumacher and dozens of others have shown up faithfully for the lessons, undaunted even on a recent morning when rain had fallen most of the night, the skies were gray and the green was so wet that the class had to be conducted in the adjoining gravel parking lot.
That day, as usual, the participants carefully followed Mr. Mow, stretching their arms, raising their legs and bending their bodies in the slow, balanced, flowing movements of tai chi.
Only occasionally did Mr. Mow issue instructions through the interpreter.
''Please remember to keep your back straight; don't lean over,'' he reminded his followers at one point. 
Then he added, ''But don't worry if you don't get it right.''
The followers - encompassing teen-agers to the elderly - looked intent, but not worried. 
Some, like Rosemary Bleyer, a clinical psychologist from Middletown, were attending on their way to work.
A few, like Ruth Thayer, a retired newspaper photographer from Old Saybrook, were trying the routines for the first time. 
''They seem to exercise every muscle,'' Mrs. Thayer said.
Among those going through the paces set by Mr. Mow were five students from China who are attending the theater's summer school. 
These students were hardly more familiar with the tai chi routines than the other participants, noted Andrew Vasnick, director of the summer school.
In China, Mr. Vasnick explained, most of the practitioners of tai chi are older people. 
The theater invited foreign students to its summer school as part of its effort to encourage the formation of theaters of the deaf in other countries, he added.
Mr. Mow's students seemed to agree with him that tai chi was a good way to start the day. 
''I'm a terrible person in the morning,'' said Cathleen Riddley, a hearing actor with the theater. 
''I need a slow, pleasant way to get the body moving.''
''The exercises are so beautiful and graceful, and there's no strain on the body,'' said Mrs. Schumacher.
Robert Scheifer, a theater summer school student who lives in Chicago, said, ''I feel balanced; it helps my mind.''
Mr. Mow said that he had taught his students about a dozen moves. 
He uses a tai chi textbook in which photographs of the moves have titles like ''Moving Hands Softly Like Clouds'' and ''Stork Beginning to Spread Wings,'' but he said it was not important to memorize such romantic names.
What is important, he said, is to learn the movements well enough to ''concentrate on what you're doing, not on what you should be doing.''
''It's gratifying to see so many people want to learn,'' he added.
The classes will continue on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday mornings through July 11. 
Soon after that the actors are to begin rehearsals for their 1987-88 production, ''The Dybbuk'' by S. Ansky.
