
She played her first match of the 1982 Federation Cup tournament on a July evening in Santa Clara, Calif., and wasn't seen again in public for eight months. 
Hu Na hid in the homes of sympathetic Chinese families on the West Coast during that time, hoping one day to be granted asylum in the United States. 
Her second wish was to pursue a professional tennis career.
Miss Hu's defection caused an international incident and her whereabouts had all the intrigue of a spy novel. 
The Chinese Government suspended several cultural exchanges with the United States, which eventually granted Miss Hu asylum on April 4, 1983, in Washington. 
She played her first professional match two months later.
Hu Na, who defected to United States from China in 1982, defeats Annabel Croft of Britain in first-round match at Wimbledon; photo (M)
But Miss Hu was not to become another Martina Navratilova, who defected to the United States from Czechoslovakia when she was already one of the highly ranked players in the world. 
Miss Hu was a champion in China but only a qualifier on the women's tour.
''It was very hard because the players were so good,'' she said. 
''I got discouraged because every time my game went up, I'd get injuries.''
Miss Hu is ranked 150th in the Women's Tennis Association rankings but has made the biggest tournament in the world the site of her professional breakthrough. 
She qualified for Wimbledon by winning three difficult matches last week and today became the first Chinese-born player to win a match in the main draw, defeating Annabel Croft of Britain, 6-3, 7-5, in a first-round match.
 
'Cracks Under Pressure'
Although Miss Croft may not be well known herself, she is ranked 40th and was the favorite of the hometown crowd. 
It earned her a place on Court One, which is adjacent to Centre Court and usually draws the second- biggest crowd. 
''I was nervous,'' Miss Hu said. 
''There were so many people who came out to see us.''
Miss Hu is 22 years old but her game is just developing. 
The lack of top quality competition in China is one reason, and the customary slow progress made by serve-and-volley players is another. 
At times, it seems as if she has disappeared once again. 
''I think she's improved a lot,'' Miss Croft said. 
''I've been told by other players that she cracks under pressure.''
Any pressure she may face on the tennis court, however, would not begin to compare to what she encountered when she defected. 
She received letters that were reportedly written by her parents, pleading for her return to China. 
She was homesick and did not speak English.
''My English wasn't very good,'' Miss Hu said. 
''I watched 'Three's Company' and 'The Love Boat.'
Jack Tripper was my first teacher.''
 
Potential in Question
Jack Tripper is the character played by John Ritter in the television show ''Three's Company.''
Miss Hu has since had other instructors. 
She is attending the United States International College in San Diego, where she lives in a Chinese community with several families, spending a few months with each. 
She speaks English well enough to face her interviews without the aid of an interpreter.
She said she never questioned her decision to leave China. 
Newspaper accounts at the time said that Miss Hu was reluctant to join the Communist Party, as her coach in China requested. 
She said she preferred not to talk about those things today.
Her potential as a player remains in question. 
She has been tutored by such notable coaches as Vic Braden, Harry Hopman and Nick Bollettieri, but has advanced as far as the quarterfinals only three times in 23 tournaments, and those were on the satellite tour. 
She has earned $7,000.
At this point, however, she appreciates some things that most players take for granted. 
It was a thrill for her, she said, to be able to play a match without braiding her hair.
