
Farmers outside Peking are being asked to return any pieces of the Great Wall that they carried off to build houses and pigpens.
The request is part of a campaign begun this month to restore the section of the ancient wall that runs through the mountainous northern rim of the municipality of Peking.
The drive, organized by four Peking- based newspapers, is concentrating initially on Badaling, a section 50 miles north of Peking frequented by tourists. 
But the organizers hope that enough money will be raised to extend the restoration to other parts of the world's most prominent landmark.
Wall Was Built in Sections
Construction of the Great Wall started about 2,500 years ago. 
It was intended to keep out the marauding northern nomads who lived in the regions that are now Mongolia and Manchuria. 
The wall was built across China in sections using slave labor and was finally linked in 214 B.C.
The Great Wall snakes more than 1,500 miles from Shanhaiguan on the Gulf of Bohai westward to Jiayuguan in the desert of Gansu Province. 
The Chinese called it the ''10,000 li wall,'' partly because it so twisted and turned that no one was quite sure of its length. 
Three Chinese li equal an English mile.
American astronauts said the Great Wall was the only man-made feature on Earth visible from the Moon. 
But extensive portions have crumbled away over the centuries. 
Some sections were damaged in a dozen years of war that began with Japan's invasion of China in 1937 and ended with the Communist defeat of the Nationalists in 1949. 
Other parts eroded through neglect.
Since 1950, the Government has allocated more than a million dollars to repair the wall, notably at Badaling, which was made a historical site in 1961. 
Beyond this showcase, whose visitors included President Reagan last April, the once formidable wall has been allowed to deteriorate.
 
'Only Dikes of Earth'
The current campaign was galvanized by a recent aerial survey that found only a sixth of the Great Wall north of Peking still intact; two-thirds was in virtual ruins. 
''In some areas, the damage is relatively great,'' said Peking Evening News last month. 
In one 12-mile section, it said, ''there are only dikes of earth amidst the wild grass.''
The survey did not include the remainder of the Great Wall.
Peking Evening News teamed up early this month with Peking Daily, Workers' Daily and Economic Daily to kick off the drive to renovate the Great Wall as a national heritage.
''The Great Wall is the symbol of the Chinese nation,'' said Zhang Zhihua, a Peking Evening News correspondent who is helping to run the campaign. 
''Loving and repairing the Great Wall will reflect the patriotic feelings of the Chinese people.''
Peking Evening News announced that about $240,000 was sent in by donors up to last Saturday. 
Mr. Zhang said that 80 percent of this came from organizations and 20 percent from individuals.
When China launched another fund- raising campaign earlier this year to save the endangered panda, Chinese companies using the panda as their brand name were urged to contribute. 
No such pressure has been put on companies using the Great Wall brand, which is almost as common in China.
But the Great Wall Hotel, a Chinese- American joint venture in Peking, and a factory manufacturing Great Wall raincoats have each sent in $4,350. 
Other contributors have included the state Cultural Relics Bureau, the Ministry of Nuclear Energy, the China Travel Service and the state-run airline C.A.A.C. 
Mr. Zhang said a few foreign donations had come in, but so far ''not very much.''
The vandalism of the Great Wall north of Peking occurred during the 1966-1976 Cultural Revolution, when the anarchy created by leftist policies ''made people have no sense of discipline,'' Mr. Zhang said.
 
Offer of Substitute Materials
''For example, some peasants dismantled sections of the Great Wall to repair their houses,'' Mr. Zhang said. 
''One of the points of the present drive is to tell the residents living around the Great Wall to bring back the bricks they took away.''
The authorities in Huairou County, northeast of Peking, have pledged to get the local farmers to turn in the chunks of wall by offering to supply substitute building material to thosewho cannot afford to buy their own.
The drive to restore the Great Wall has focused around Peking, but Su Weiyang, another Peking Daily journalist, said donations and letters had come in from all over China. 
After the Badaling section has been renovated, the work will continue at Mutianyu, another section northeast of Peking that is scheduled to open in late autumn to alleviate the tourist congestion at Badaling.
No other cities in northern China have announced similar drives in their areas. 
The problem has been handled so far by putting the worst parts of the Great Wall off limits to foreign tourists so the extent of damage will not become known.
