
''IVE never tried Chinese food,'' confessed Freda Gibson, poking at a mysterious- looking plate of meat-filled dumplings. 
''It has always seemed so, well, foreign.''
For Mrs. Gibson, a native New Zealander, and more than a dozen other older people, it was a night of many firsts.
Elderly New Yorkers representing a variety of the city's ethnic groups were invited to the Flower Drum Restaurant at Second Avenue and 46th Street Tuesday night for a ceremony ushering in the Chinese New Year, which begins today. 
Attending the traditional event honoring the elderly were blacks and people of Italian, Scottish, Irish, German Jewish, Polish, Puerto Rican and Chinese extraction.
Bryan Miller article on party at Flower Drum Restaurant, New York City, honoring elderly and ushering in Chinese New Year 4682, Year of the Rat; photos (M)
''I've been thinking about doing this for two or three years,'' said Pao Peter Lee, owner of the Flower Drum and the organizer of the event. 
''These people symbolically represent the various communities who live in New York. 
In China, older generations are honored this time of year. 
I hope this causes that tradition to spread in this country.''
Mr. Lee and his family celebrate a traditional Chinese New Year annually at the restaurant. 
However, this was the first time so many outsiders had been invited. 
The evening began with firecrackers popping in front of the restaurant and wishes for the best fortune in 4682, the Year of the Rat.
The guests, chosen from three centers for the aging with the cooperation of the New York City Department for the Aging, dined on a multicourse Chinese feast while watching an hourlong ceremony that began with the Dance of the Mouse. 
Two young girls, one wearing a mouse costume, lilted and swirled around the dining room accompanied, the narrator said, by ''elegant and ethereal music'' that transformed the mouse into a ''graceful, sensitive being.''
Sidney Kilpatrick, a wiry man of Scottish-Irish descent, said this was the first time he had been to Manhattan's East Side in at least seven years, even though he lives on West 10th Street near Fifth Avenue. 
Mr. Kilpatrick has been homebound for years because of poor eyesight and a muscle disorder. 
''This place is most marvelous,'' he said, gazing around the ornately decorated dining room.
After the mouse dance Mr. Lee and his family presented strings of longevity pearls, symbolizing prosperity and harmony, to the artist Dong Kingman, who is of Chinese descent. 
Family members then participated in a ceremony signifying respect for elders in Chinese culture: Three generations kowtowed before their elders.
Later the elderly guests were presented with ''scrolls of wisdom,'' signifying the knowledge and judgment that come with age. 
A special citation was presented to Janet Sainer, Commissioner of the Department for the Aging, who was called a ''compassionate and caring pioneer'' in social services for the elderly.
''I think the Chinese have a good tradition dealing with the elderly,'' Commissioner Sainer said. 
''Respect for the family is frequently lost in our society. 
I hope this event can help bring some of it back.''
For Fred Robinson, a 74-year-old great-grandfather, the party evoked his boyhood in Georgia, where he had playmates who were Chinese. 
Mr. Robinson and the other guests said they admired the cohesiveness and love demonstrated by the Lee family. 
''There is nothing better than a family that can stay together these days, nothing better,'' he said.
Mr. Lee's strong sense of family and reverence for tradition are partly rooted in his escape from China after the Communist revolution. 
It took nearly a decade for him arrange for his wife, Tsen Yee Lee, to leave her homeland and come to America. 
Out of gratitude for his good fortune in the United States, Mr. Lee founded the Chee Yue Community Association, which helps Chinese immigrants learn English and find jobs. 
The association's headquarters are around the corner from his restaurant.
The festivities concluded with a chef demonstrating how to make silk- hair-fine ''longevity noodles'' by hand. 
They were served as part of a ginseng firepot soup.
Mrs. Gibson, still rather new to Chinese cuisine, finished her last dumpling, placed the chopsticks beside her plate and remarked: ''It really is very tasty I think, more so than New Zealand food. 
But it is a bit on the greasy side, don't you think?''
