
At the China Central Television station in Peking, a purple creature with a big pink nose appears on television monitors and says: ''Hello there boys and girls. 
This is your cute furry little pal Grover, and today I am going to demonstrate the difference between up and down.''
Television workers here are busily preparing Grover, Kermit the Frog, Cookie Monster, Big Bird and all the other Muppets of the Children's Television Workshop program ''Sesame Street'' for June debuts on Chinese television.
Children's television program "Sesame Street" is being prepared to be shown on Chinese television
The program has not yet been publicized, but translators have been dubbing ''Sesame Street'' into Chinese for several weeks, and workers at the station say there are plans to broadcast the program as many as four days a week in Chinese as a children's learning tool and in English for adult language training.
Given the popularity of studying English and of two American television series broadcast here, both Chinese and foreigners who have seen ''Sesame Street'' believe it may quickly become China's favorite program.
 
One Show Is Canceled
China introduced American programming two years ago with the series ''Man From Atlantis.''
Although the series was considered something of a dud in the United States, it became enormously popular in China, partly because Chinese programs have until recently been comparatively dull.
Another American series, a World War II commando saga called ''Garrison's Guerrillas,'' was suddenly taken off the air last week. 
The program was so popular that some Chinese believed street crime dropped every Saturday night when it was shown because all the hoodlums were watching it. 
Others, however, think it led local youth to imitate the violence on the screen.
At a recent national conference on broadcasting, a senior official said that the task of television in China was to ''integrate the universal truth of Marxism-Leninism-Mao Zedong thought with the accomplishment of the four modernizations, correctly publicize the party's line, principles and policies, carry out ideological and political education, popularize cultural and scientific knowledge, enrich people's cultural life, enhance socialist awareness and improve the cultural and scientific standards of the whole nation.''
Where Cookie Monster fits into this was not made clear.
