
IT'S back-to-school time for adults as well as children. 
During the summer, many cooking school instructors - and their students - can't stand the heat, so they temporarily get out of the kitchen.
Now they are back, and fall and winter courses are beginning to be signed up for. 
Chinese, French and baking continue to be high on the list of Connecticut's cooking school offerings. 
But there are other appetizing courses available as well. 
New trends seem to be for pasta-making and for hors d'oeuvre courses, as well as elegant dining and dessert.
The following is a partial listing of schools and classes available and is not intended as an endorsement by this reviewer. 
Facilities that have been visited are noted in the description capsules under each specific heading. 
The classes are listed alphabetically by town, and then by class within each town.
Guide to Connecticut's fall cooking classesCOS COB
Cooking With Shiu-min, 8 Loughlin Avenue. 
629-2990 or 869-4448. 
Courses: The different regions of Chinese cooking - Sichuan, Hunan, Cantonese, Peking, Mandarin. 
Instructor: Shiu-min Lin Block. 
Cost: $90 for a three-lesson series. 
Starting date: Third week of September. 
Time: Morning or evening can be arranged. 
Type: Demonstration and participation. 
Maximum in class: 6.
Mrs. Block has an amiable, informal style, and emphasizes that she wants to make her students comfortable enough with various aspects of the Chinese cuisine to adapt it to their own home cooking. 
She keeps her classes small because her kitchen is small, with limited work space. 
Even so, students learn how to chop and arrange food, how to use Oriental spices and ''enjoy the process.''
A self-taught cook, former owner of a Chinese restaurant, and trained artist, Mrs. Block has been teaching Chinese cooking for 14 years.
 
DARIEN
The Complete Kitchen, 865 Boston Post Road. 
655-4055. Courses: Food processor, bread-making, hors d'oeuvres, Chinese, microwave cooking, pasta workshop, introduction to French sauces, Swedish coffee bread-making, autumn wine tasting. 
Also a series of three dinners with wine and cooking demonstrations (Sept. 
25 - Pasta Party; Oct. 
2 - French; Nov. 
13 - Mexican). 
Instructors: Mary Murray (proprietor ), Anne Brown; and special guest instructors : Abby Mandel, Karen Lee, others. 
Cost: $20 to $30 a class, $65 for the three-part Chinese series, $55 a couple fo r the dinner-demonstrations. 
Starting date : Sept. 
22. Time: Tuesday , Wednesday, Thursday, 10 A.M. to 12:30 P.M.; 7:30 to 10 P.M. Type: Demonst ration, but full participation in such classes as breador pastr y-making. 
Maximum in cl ass: 20 in demonstration classes, eight in participati on.
Classes are held in a large, airy, specially constructed kitchen in the rear of a well-equipped kitchenware shop. 
Although we did not see a class in session, we were impressed with the layout and space in the room and the quality of equipment. 
A long, large demonstration table with wide overhead mirror, good lighting and two skylights make observation easy. 
Mary Murray, who studied at La Varenne, has been conducting classes for one year. 
Anne Brown, who teaches bread-making, hors d'oeuvre and food processor cooking, has five years of teaching experience and formerly had a catering business. 
Special instructors teach particular courses from time to time.
 
FARMINGTON
The Ann Howard Cookery Ltd., Brick Walk Lane. 
678-9486. Courses: Seafood, French, breads, food processor, Northern Italian, French pastries, hors d'oeuvres, soups. 
Instructors: Ann Howard (proprietor) and guest lecturers - Guiliano Bugialli, Perla Meyers, Jacques Pepin, Martha Stewart. 
Cost: $18 to $20 for a single three-hour class by Mrs. Howard; $35 for a three-hour class taught by a guest instructor; $55 to $75 for a series of three classes. 
Starting date: Continuing courses, year-round. 
Time: 10 A.M. to 1 P.M.; 7 to 10 P.M. Type: Combination demonstration and participation. 
Maximum in class: 25.
Ann Howard, who studied at Cordon Bleu in Paris and London, at La Varenne and with Simone Beck, has been teaching cooking for five years. 
Informal in style, but informative and knowledgeable, she teaches on the second floor of a building that also houses her baker and gourmet cookware shop. 
An mirror over a long work table is an advantage during observation classes. 
A considerable range of threehour classes are taught throughout the year - useful for people who want to advance their skills or learn aspects of a new cuisine.
 
GREENWICH
Ron Buebendorf Chinese Cooking Classes, 44 West Putnam Avenue. 
869-7139. Courses: Chinese regional cooking - Cantonese, Sichuan, Fukien, Peking; canapes, dinners, desserts. 
Instructor: Ron Buebendorf. 
Cost: $200 for six lessons. 
Starting date: Mid-October. 
Time: Evenings. 
Type: Demonstration with limited participation. 
Maximum in class: 8.
A student of Virginia Lee in New York, Mr. Buebendorf has catered private and corporate dinners, and has been conducting classes for eight years. 
A sample menu at one leson might include instruction in preparing soy sauce chicken, bean curd casserole, Eight Precious Pudding; another menu - Shanghai duck, stir-fry vegetables, pancakes with apricot filling; a third - Sichuan shrimp, cucumber salad, walnut and date soup.
Cook's Corner Inc., 70 East Putnam Avenue. 
869-2653. Courses: French, Chinese, Japanese, Italian, food processor, hors d'oeuvres, Moroccan. 
Instructors: Nancy Mott (proprietor), Joanne Griffin, Elizabeth Andoh, Paula Wolfert. 
Cost: $30 to $125, depending on instructor and whether it is a single session or part of a series. 
Starting Date: Sept. 
27. Time: 10 A.M., 6 P.M. Type: Full particiption in Japanese and French courses, demonstration in others. 
Maximum in class: 8 for participation, 20 for demonstration.
Nancy Mott, who studied at La Varenne and Cordon Bleu (Paris), and with Giuliano Bugialli and John Clancy, has been teaching cooking for 12 years. 
In addition to the wide variety of cooking taught here, there are also walking tours of food-oriented stores in SoHo and Greenwich Village in New York. 
This school has not been visited, but the recipes used in various different classes - dilled cucumber soup, zucchini flan, caponata sesame lemon chicken, almond tart - are clearly presented, easy to follow, and should be of value to an intermediate-level cook.
Polly Fritch' s Cooking Class, 969 North Street. 
661-7742. Courses: Seas onal, do-ahead menus; international selection of recipes usi ng a wide variety of cooking techniques; food processor.Instructor: P olly Stewart Fritch. 
Cost: $25 a c lass. 
Starting date : Two three-part series - the first, Oct. 
20, 27 and Nov. 
3; the second, Oct. 
21, 28 and Nov. 
4. Time: First s eries, Tuesdays, 7 to 9:30 P.M.; second series, Wednesdays, 9:30 A.M. to noon. 
Type: Combina tion demonstration and participation. 
Maximum in cl ass: 8.
Mrs. Fritch, who has been teaching for 13 years, conducts small classes in her own home, in a large, well-equipped and easy-to-workin kitchen. 
Study at La Varenne, Cordon Bleu in Paris, with Marcella Hazan in Bologna and John Clancy in New York, as well as considerable international travel experience, have given Mrs.Fritch a wide repertory of dishes to draw upon. 
Careful and precise typed instructions for her students make the recipes easy for a beginner or intermediate cook to follow later at home. 
Her emphasis is on cooking techniques that are adaptable. 
Her step-by-step instruction is low-keyed and helpful, with much demonstration, but participation in dishes that demand ''knowing the field as they are being prepared'' - such as crepes, custards, omelets and sauces. 
Each class period is devoted to a full menu. 
In addition to conducting classes, Mrs. Fritch plans to conduct a food-oriented tour of Britain in May and September 1982.
Greenwich Board of Education, Continuing Education Program, Havemeyer Building, Greenwich Avenue. 
661-8236. Courses: Cake decorating (10 sessions); making pizza from scratch; nutrition from A to zinc (10 sessions); soup to nuts (six sessions). 
Instructors: Glee Miner (cake decorating), Dorothy McDonald (pizza), Meredith Sampson (nutrition), Mimi Bradley (soup to nuts). 
Cost: Cake decorating - $40; pizza - $10; nutrition - $35; soup - $35; $5 extra for non-Greenwich residents. 
Starting date: Week of Sept. 
21 and on. 
Time: 4 to 6 P.M., Tuesdays or Thursdays.Type: Demonstration and participation. 
Maximum in class: 12 for pizza making, 20 for other classes.
The facility at Greenwich High School, Hillside Road, where classes are held, is a goo d one, with overhead mirror s and ample work space. 
This fall's program represents an expansion i n cooking courses offered by the continuing education program, though all the teachers are known in the Greenwich area for their spe cial interests.
Greenwich Y.W.C.A., 259 East Putnam Avenue. 
869-6501.Courses: Bolognese, bread-making, microwave, vegetarian and classes for young people; also mini-courses - Indian, microwave, holiday cooking. 
Instructors: Debbie Krieger, Liz Guccione, Cathy Strachan, Chitra Ramcharandas, Jo Button, Tony and Helen Moore, Maria Lucia Perugini. 
Cost: From $45 for five-class vegetarian series to $66.50 for sevenclass Bolognese cuisine; $10 to $15 for one-session mini-courses. 
Starting date: Ongoing. 
Time: 9 A.M. to 10 P.M.; young people's classes held in late afternoon. 
Type: Combination demonstration and participation. 
Maximum in class: 14.
Classes vary in length from the numerous mini-courses offered from time to time to courses that might consist of 14 sessions each. 
Microwave courses are taught by Liz Guccione and by Debbie Krieger. 
The Indian courses by Chitra Ramcharandas, breads by Jo Button; vegetarian cooking by the Moores, and mini-courses by Cathy Strachan.
 
MANCHESTER
Margery Gussak, 97 Wyneding Hill Road. 
646-8852. Courses: Chinese cooking. 
Instructor: Margery Gussak. 
Cost: $115 for a four-class series. 
Starting date: Oct. 
12. Time: 10 A.M. or 6 P.M. Type: Full participation. 
Maximum in class: 6 to 8.
Margery Gussak has been teaching four years, specializing in the regional cooking of China: Mandarin, Peking, Cantonese, Sichuan. 
Her teachers include Virginia Lee, Florence Linn, Karen Lee and Sonya Whetston. 
Each class in the four-week series runs four to five hours and involves full class participation in the cooking process. 
There are three series taught, progressing from the simple to the more complex aspects of Chinese cooking. 
In Series I - Clas s II, for instance, the re will be recipes for poultry dishes representing each of four major provinces. 
Recipes include egg drop soup, Shanghai duck, chicken with vegetables, and Kung Pao chicken.
 
NEW CANAAN
Cook Nook, 90 Main Street. 
966-0178. Courses: Microwave, bread-making, food processor, pasta-making, children's classes, Chinese. 
Instructors: Joie Tauber; guest instructors: Ronnie Fein, Dorian Lee, Charles Wisniewski, Kristen Mountain. 
Cost: $20 for one class to $70 for a series of three. 
Starting date: End of October. 
Time: 10 A.M. to noon; 7 to 9 P.M. Type: Demonstration with some participation. 
Maximum in class: 8 to 30, depending on the type of class.
In the rear of one room in a two-room cookware supply store, a section has been turned into a kitchen area. 
There is a long Formicacovered work counter with built-in burners, and an overhead mirror for class observation. 
Classes run from one and a half hours to three hours, depending on the course. 
Children's classes, for ages 6 to 9 and 10 to 14, involve total participation; other classes, partial participation.
New Canaan Y.M.C.A., 564 South Avenue. 
966-4528. Courses: Food processor cooking, introduction to natural foods and nutrition, and holiday buffet. 
Instructors: Sandy Slaughter, Frances Sheridan Goulart, Susan Goodman. 
Cost: $30, $5 extra for non-Y.M.C.A. members, for four-week sessions each. 
Starting date: Sept. 
24 (food processor), Oct. 
5 (nutrition), Oct. 
28 (holiday buffet). 
Time: 10 A.M. to noon (food processor), 9:30 to 11:30 A.M. (nutrition), 9:15 A.M. to 12:30 P.M. (holiday buffet). 
Type: Demonstration, with participation, depending on the course. 
Maximum in class: 10.
Sandy Slaughter, who has taught at other adult education programs in Fairfield County and also conducts classes in her own home, encourages a small class to participate in the various things to be done with a food processor: bread-making, pasta, wok cookery, and ''entertaining with ease and elegance.''
The emphasis is on the technique of the food processor. 
Frances Goulart's teaching on natural foods and nutrition extends back 10 y ears, and she has written cookbooks on the subject. 
The holiday buffet course covers a range of festive party cooking, from menu pla nning to the end result.The class is small to enable full participati on in preparing each dish.
 
NEW FAIRFIELD
Milltown Gourmet, 9 Milltown Road. 
746-5518. Course: Basic French cuisine, with some nouvelle cuisine.Instructor: Jerry Huven. 
Cost: $170 for six-session course, with dinner and wine included. 
Starting date: Sept. 
22. Time: 7 P.M. Type: Full participation. 
Maximum in class: 12.
In a small kitchen in his home, Jerry Huven conducts perhaps the most informal classes we have watched. 
Barefoot, blue-jeaned, with a wine glass in hand, he conducts a chatty, but surprisingly authoritative class, in which students are encouraged to participate in each step of the process. 
Huven is a cooking hobbyist, with a background of lessons at La Varenne and Cordon Bleu in Paris and at the Culinary Institute of America in Hyde Park. 
He has traveled widely in his job and conducts cooking tours to France (the next one is Nov. 
1 and then again at Eastertime). 
He conveys tips and helpful hints to his students, as they all help in the preparation of a full dinner menu, using professionally prepared, typed instruction sheets for each recipe. 
The worktable in the center of the kitchen does not allow room enough for everyone to work at once, however, and the lighting would be improved if track lighting were installed overhead. 
But for a cook who understands the basics, the course can open the door to more complex dishes - and be enjoyable at the same time.
 
NEW MILFORD
The Silo Cooking School, Upland Road. 
354-3500. Courses: New Orleans luncheon, cooking with fresh fall herbs, economy and elegance, the supreme chicken, food Pocessor, junior chefs, others. 
Instructors: Mark McDermott, Barrie Kavasch, Kevin Reid, Sandy Slaughter, Ruedi Hauser, Tony and Gail Diminico, Susan Purdy, Barbara Patrick. 
Cost: From $20 to $35 a workshop, depending on the amount of participation; $18 for junior chef classes. 
Starting Date: Oct. 
7 with individu al or two-part workshops, continuing through Dec. 
13 for the fall season. 
Time: Varies, usually 11 A.M. to 2 P.M., or 7 to 10 P.M. Type: Demonst ration and participation. 
Maximum in cl ass: 16 for participation classes, 30 for demonstrati ons.
Students sit on high stools around an L-shaped butcher block table, behind which a guest instructor demonstrates each step of each recipe. 
Students are then urged to ask questions and participate in the cutting, chopping, mixing process. 
The kitchen is at the end of a large upstairs loft section of a barn, the rest of which contains a handsome culinary supply shop, and art galleries. 
Equipment used in the classes in new and first-rate. 
At the end of each session, students and teachers share the harvest of the dishes prepared, at a pleasantly-set table nearby in the loft. 
Many of the courses are onetime workshops, geared to helping new and experienced cooks deal with specific problems or develop new ideas - i.e., a session on economy and elegance called After The Game Supper, or a course called Understanding Stocks and Sauces. 
The Silo has a number of lively courses designed to make cooking interesting to children from ages 6 to 10 and up.
 
NORWALK
Classic French Cooking with Joan O'Connell, 1 Pine Hill Road. 
866-8951. Course: French-based cooking techniques. 
Instructor: Joan O'Connell. 
Cost: $30 a class, three-class session. 
Starting date: Mid-October. 
Time: 10 A.M., 6 P.M., each session four hours long. 
Type: Demonstration only, with a meal served at the end. 
Maximum in class: 8.
In a country kitchen, with fireplace, in her home, Joan O'Connell teaches ''French-based techniques that can be adapted to basic cooking methods and various combinations and adaptations.''
A student of Madelaine Kamman, Peter Kump, Jacques Pepin and Simone Beck, she also has the practical experience of cooking at Bon Appetit in Westport. 
She also conducts classes one day a week for high school and college students interested in pursuing a restaurant career.
 
OLD GREENWICH
Constance Quan Cooking School, P.O. 
Box 387. 
637-9302. Courses: French, Chinese, dim sum. 
Instructor: Constance Quan. 
Cost: $160 for a series of four classes. 
Starting date: Mid-November. 
Time: 10 A.M. to 12:30 P.M., 7:3 0 to 10 P.M. Type: Demonstration and participation. 
Maximum in class: 6.
Mrs. Quan's French cooking skills were acquired at Cordon Bleu in Paris. 
Her Chinese skills derive from being third-generation in the Chinese food business. 
She has taught both French and Chinese cooking for the past four years. 
In 1980, as a participant in the Culinary Olympics in Frankfurt, she won a bronze medal. 
Her classes, which are taught in the spacious kitchen facilities of the Complete Kitchen in Darien, combine an informal, but well-organized teaching style with a fair amount of class participation. 
The French classes emphasize techniques in meats, fish and pastries. 
The Chinese classes focus on meat, fish, vegetable, soup and salad preparation.
OLD LYME
Kah's Cupboard Inc., Old Bridge Road. 
434-5956. Course: Chinese cooking. 
Instructor: Kah Batts. 
Cost: $55 for a series of five classes. 
Starting date: Sept. 
15. Time: 7 P.M. to 9:30 P.M. Type: Combination demonstration and some participation. 
Maximum in class: 7.
In a tiny kitchen that adjoins a Chinese food and gift shop in her home, Kah Batts demonstrates elementary Chinese cooking techniques and invites class participation. 
Work space for both demonstration and participation is limited, but Mrs. Batts shows how to use Chinese cleavers, how to use the wok in stir-frying, steaming and other techniques. 
Step-by-step recipes help students follow the basic techniques when preparing the dishes by themselves later.
 
RIVERSIDE
The Good Earth, c/o University of Bridgeport, St. Catherine of Siena Church, Riverside Avenue. 
637-4563. Courses: Techniques of Chinese cooking. 
Instructor: Josephine Wong. 
Cost: $60 for a four-class series. 
Starting date: Sept. 
15 for Tuesday evening series, Sept. 
18 for Friday morning series. 
Time: 9:30 to 11:30 A.M., 7:30 to 9:30 P.M. Type: Demonstration and participation. 
Maximum in class: 14.
 
Over the co urse of four classes, students will learn how to preparesoup, dim sum , a seafood dish, vegetable dish, a beef or pork or chicken dish, dessert, a noodle dish, how to cook rice properly, the Chinese way. 
Some dishes Josephine Wong explains and demonstrates areexamples of C hinese family dishes, home cooking; others are more familiar rest aurant standards. 
These beginning series are designed toimpart the ba sics of Chinese cooking. 
Other series of four classes each will fol low throughout the year. 
A student who takes each graduated lev el will be able to progress in learning the more complexdishes of the Chinese cuisine. 
The series is taught in a home kitchen, but registration is handled through the University of Bridgeport in Riverside.
 
STAMFORD
The Ronnie Fein School of Creative Cooking, 438 Hunting Ridge Road. 
322-7114. Courses: Chinese, dim sum, hors d'oeuvres, elegant desserts. 
Instructor: Ronnie Fein. 
Cost: $50 for three-part series, $60 for four-part series, $80 for five-part series. 
Starting date: Oct. 
13 - elegant desserts (four-part series); Oct. 
14 - Chinese (five-part); Nov. 
5 - hors d'oeuvres (three-part); Dec. 
1 - dim sum (three-part). 
Time: 9:30 A.M. to noon, 7:45 to 10 P.M., depending on the series. 
Type: Full participation and full meal included. 
Maximum in class: 12.
Ronnie Fein, who studied with Florence Lin and Dorothy Lee at the China Institute in New York, teaches cooking to small groups in her home kitchen. 
She also gives one-time-only workshops of 4 to 5 hours each by special group arrangement and offers private tutorials to individuals. 
Her Chinese course includes regional dishes from the Canton, Peking, Hunan and Sichuan repertory. 
Her three-session dim sum classes will teach her class to make various dim sum - steamed pork buns, pearly meatballs and others. 
The hors d'oeuvres classes will demonstrate how to use phyllo dough a number of ways, make cold canapes and other appetizers.
Stamford Adult and Community Education, Rippowam High School, High Ridge Road. 
358-4210. Courses: Cake decorating, Chinese cuisine (beginning and advanced), food processor, holiday cookies, Italian, specialty party desserts, wine cookery. 
Instructors: Veronica Hyatt, Alice O'Brien, Maria Marchetti, Annette Cortese. 
Cost: $15 to $42, depending on the number of classes in the series. 
Starting date: Sept. 
14. Time: 7:30 to 9:30 P.M. Type: Combination demonstration with some par ticipation. 
Maximum in class: 15.
Classes are conducted at both Rippowam and West Hills High Schools. 
Veronica Hyatt gives tips and the step-by-step process of decorating fancy cakes, Alice O'Brien teaches the holiday cookies course, Maria Marchetti the Italian course, and Annette Cortese the course in special party desserts. 
Other instructors have not yet been announced.
 
WESTPORT
Cook's Corner in Westport, 11 Sherwood Square. 
227-9554. Courses: Classic and advanced French, regional Chinese, Northern Italian, bread-making, holiday entertaining, food processor, pasta. 
Instructors: Edward Giobbi, Rose Chann, Robert MacKerroll. 
Cost: From $30 a single session to $125 for five-session course. 
Starting date: Approximately Sept. 
22. Time: 10 A.M. and 7:30 P.M. Type: Some demonstration only, some combination of demonstration and participation. 
Maximum in class: 20.
In a well-designed, well-lighted cooking area, with overhead mirror and a full working kitchen, in the rear of an attractive, welloutfitted cooking supply store, cooking classes are held on a variety of special interest subjects. 
Guest instructors conduct classes in their specialties, such as Edward Giobbi in Northern Italian, Rose Chann in regional Chinese. 
This is one of the longestrunning culinary shops that give lessons in the area.Joanne Hush's Kitchen at the Greens Farms Store, 1254 Post Road East. 
227-4151. Courses: foods from Mainland China, Japanese (beginning and advanced), ''three-star French chefs,'' classic desserts, vegetarian cooking, children's cooking, holiday hors d'oeuvres, cocktail buffet, basic techniques, food processor, candy-making. 
Instructors: Joanne Hush, Ayako Jedlicka, Molly Brown, Dale Lamberty, Ruth A. Manners, Bims Kolding. 
Cost: $35 to $95, depending on the course an d number of lessons in a series. 
Starting date : Sept. 
28. Time: 10 A.M. to 1 P.M., 7 P.M. to 10 P.M. Type: Some de monstration courses, others with full participation. 
Maximum in cl ass: 12 in the participation courses, 24 in demonstrati on.
Classes are held in a room at the end of but completely separate from a bookstore. 
The room is sufficiently large to hold three round butcher block tables for students to work at, four to a table, with a large demonstration worktable at one end of the room. 
The worktable has built-in gas burners for wok cooking. 
Overhead lighting is strong but not glaring. 
We observed the Chinese lesson conducted by Joanne Hush. 
The atmosphere is informal but informative. 
On each worktable is a pot of tea and cups for the students. 
An assistant, Ayako Jedlicka, who teaches the Japanese cooking lessons, helps in passing equipment and ingredients to the class. 
As Mrs. Hush demonstrates and explains each recipe, each group of four works on the same recipe at each table. 
There is plenty of room in the kitchen for class members to walk around and gather close to the demonstration table, and the tempo is brisk but easy. 
As she proceeds through each step of the recipe, Mrs. Hush gives helpful asides about Chinese cooking (''The longer you use a wok, the more flavor it acquires''). 
Some of the recipes are Mrs. Hush's own adaptations. 
She has studied at the China Institute and was co-author of a Chinese cookbook. 
The spicy dishes of Hunan and Sichuan are somewhat modified in her class, as she says ''most of my classes don't like these regional specialties as hot as they are supposed to be.''
Westport Y.M.C.A., 59 Post Road East. 
226-8981. Course: Microwave cooking workshop. 
Instructor: Unspecified as of this date. 
Cost: $25 for a Y member, $40 for a nonmember. 
Starting date: To Sept. 
30. Time: 7 to 9 P.M., Wednesday. 
Type: Demonstration with some participation. 
Maximum in class: Unspecified.
The four-session class will demonstrate the advantages and techniques of microwave cooking on a single power or variable oven, utilizing recipes and menu planning especially suitable for microwave oven use.
 
WILTON
The Culinary Arts, Gateway Shopping Center. 
762-7575. Courses: French I, II and III, ''Simply Sensational'' (for newcomers to the kitchen), ''Dazzling Desserts,'' Italian cooking, bread-l making, Christmas baking, ''Gifts from the Kitchen,'' '' A Holiday Feast'' and ''After the Game.''
Instructors: Cecile Rivel (proprietor), guest instructors, such as Perla Meyers, Albert Jorant of La Varenne, others. 
Cost: $30 to $95, depending on the course. 
Starting date: September. 
Time: 10 A.M. to 1 P.M., 7 P.M. to 10 P.M. Type: Both demonstration and full participati on. 
Maximum in class: 12 to 24, depending on the course.
Experienced in classic French and other cuisines, Cecile Rivel conducts many of the one-, two- or three-session courses given in the rear of her gourmet cookware shop in Wilton. 
An overhead mirror, first-rate equipment and a long worktable for easy and well-organized demonstrations make observation simple for the students in the demonstration classes. 
(We did not observe a participation class.) Participants enjoy tasting the many delicious results that come at the end of the three-hour sessions. 
Of special note on the fall schedule: two sessions, Sept. 
22 and 23, A.M. or P.M., in which Perla Meyers will prepare two fall and winter dinners for elegant entertaining. 
Also, Christmas baking sessions, Nov. 
3 and 10, in which Cecile Rivel teaches sweet yeast bread-making, the traditional buche de Noel and other holiday specialties. 
The recipes, provided to all participants at each session, are concise, clear and easy to follow. 
Mrs. Rivel takes a cooking tour of nine students, with some French, for a week at La Varenne in Paris each spring.
Wilton Continuing Education, Wilton High School, Danbury Road. 
762-2008. Courses: Food processor cooking, ''Perfect Pasta,'' cake decorating, natural foods and snacks, and ''Cuisine for Distinctive Dining.''
Instructors: Mark McDermott, Sandy Slaughter, Joanne Quinlan, Charlotte Parra, Marie Vetucci.Cost: $14 to $28 a course, depending on the number of sessions in each (four, five or six). 
It works out to $1.75 an hour. 
Starting date: Week of Sept. 
28. (Other, completely different courses, are scheduled for winter and spring 1982.) Time: 7:30 to 9:30 P.M. Type: Mostly demonstration with limited participation, except for the ''Cuisine for Distinctive Dini ng'' courses, which are ''hands on'' partic ipation.Maximum in cl ass: 12 for the food processor course, 18 to 20 for other cours es.
The Wilton Continuing Education Program continues to offer a lively diversity of cooking courses, serving as a model for similar programs elsewhere. 
All courses are taught at Wilton High School, except the natural foods and snacks course, which is taught at Middlebrook School. 
Food processor lessons are taught by Sandy Slaughter; cake decorating for beginners by Joanne Quinlan; perfect pasta by Marie Vetucci; natural foods by Charlotte Parra. 
Mark McDermott has two cuisine courses, one with full participation and the other a workshop demonstration.
