
IT'S back-to-school time for students of cookery, too, and it is good news that Manhattan does not have a monopoly on the many interesting classes in varied cuisines.
Several schools in New Jersey are offering instruction in multilesson series or one-day workshops. 
Dishes taught range from homemade pasta in Plainfield to arroz con pollo in Teaneck. 
And the facilities are just as diverse, varying from snug home kitchens to sleek kitchen classrooms with visiting chefs.
Not only is there the convenience of not having to venture into the city, but, also, the fees for these schools are usually a good deal lower than those in Manhattan.
List of cooking schools in New Jersey
The three types of teaching methods are dem onstration, wherein the instructor lectures and performs techniques a nd the students merely observe; participation, in which the students prepare the dishes alone or in teams, and limited participation, in which the students do some of the hand tasks but the instructor completes the preparation.
Following is a list of cooking schools in the state that is by no means comprehensive. 
Classes have been visited whenever possible, and schools are listed alphabetically by town.
For more information and exact dates, you should call the school.
 
BAY HEAD
Bay Head Cooking School, 91 Bridge Avenue. 
(201) 892-7585. 
Instructor: H.W. 
Talbot Jr. 
Cost: $80 for four sessions. 
Starting date: October, and then monthly throughout the year. 
Day and evening classes. 
Type: Demonstration.
In the trim kitchen attached to the Bay Head Cheese Shop, Mr. Talbot demonstrates techniques and dishes he has acquired in classes at La Varenne in Paris and Annemarie's and the China Institute in New York. 
A three-course meal with wine is served. 
The informal weekly classes are limited to six students.
 
CINNAMINSON
The Golden Mu shroom Traveling Cooking School, 602 Wellfleet Road. 
(609) 829-5 063. 
Instructor: S hirley Rubinstein. 
Cost: $15 a c lass. 
Starting date s: Already begun. 
Morning and evening classes.Type: Demonst ration or limited participation.
Shirley Rubinstein, who has studied cooking in France and Taiwan as well as in American schools, offers an unusual program as a visiting instructor. 
She suggests that a group of 10 students arrange to meet at someone's house, where she will demonstrate dishes such as appetizers in crusts, dim sum, phyllo pastry, chicken deboning or garniture, followed by tastings. 
(Not visited.)
 
CRESSKILL
The Irene Feigelis Cooking School, 2 Palisade Court. 
(201) 568-6480. 
Courses: Kosher, Chinese. 
Continental. Italian. 
Basic cooking, advanced gourmet. 
Instructor: Irene Feigelis. 
Cost: $50 to $75, depending on the course. 
Course consists of four to six two-hour lessons, which are offered mornings, afternoons and evenings. 
Starting date: Oct. 
19. Type: Limited participation. 
Maximum number in class: 6 to 8.
Irene Feigelis stresses technique, quality of basic ingredients and the correct implements. 
Food is sampled after each lesson. 
(Not visited.)
 
EMERSON
Carole's Capers, 5 Lexington Avenue. 
(201) 967-9545. 
Instructor: Carole Walter. 
Cost: $30 to $35 a class. 
Starting date: Already begun; day and evening classes. 
Type: Demonstration or participation.
Carole Walter, who also teaches at Look & Cook in Teaneck, specializes in baking, from American breads to Danish pastry. 
Other classes offered deal with nouvelle cuisine, food processor and lowcalorie cookery, some reflecting Miss Walter's studies in France and Denmark. 
She will also give classes for private groups. 
(Not visited.)
The Ginger Tree, 183 Kinderkamack Road. 
(201) 262-0591. 
Courses: Complete instruction in beginning and advanced Chinese cooking. 
Instructor: Rita Kaufman.
Cost: $150 for four to five lessons. 
Classes are held 10 A.M. to 1 P.M. and 7:30 to 10 P.M.
Starting date: Already begun.
Type: Full participation. 
Maximum number in class: 8.
Course covers the techniques used in Chinese cooking, proper utensils, planning, etc. 
Complete lunch or dinner is served after each class. 
(Not visited.)
 
ENGLEWOOD
Cooking With Susan Rhoades, 235 Sunset Avenue. 
(201) 568-3281. 
Courses: Basic French, Italian and nouvelle cuisine, bread and puff pastry. 
Instructor: Susan Rhoades. 
Cost: $150 for five lessons. 
Single classes, $35. 
Classes are held from 10 A.M. to 2 P.M. Starting date: Already begun. 
Type: Participation. 
Maximum number in class: 5.
Susan Rhoades is self-taught, having apparently cooked her way through 200 cookbooks. 
She also took two short courses with Maurice Moore-Betty and Julia Child. 
Basic techniques are taught, and a complete meal with the appropriate aperitif and wine is served after each class. 
(Not visited.)
 
FAR HILLS
International Chef, Pennbrook Farm, Lake Road. 
(201) 221-1058. 
Courses: Classical and regional French cooking. 
Nouvelle cuisine. 
Special children's classes. 
Instructor: Deborah Maybank. 
Cost: $30 a lesson; children, $20 a lesson.Starting date: Already begun. 
Mornings, afternoons and evenings. 
Type: Full participation. 
Maximum number in class: 4.
Deborah Maybank's timetable is flexible, and she will arrange classes to suit students. 
Evening classes often include husbands and wives. 
Each lesson ends with a complete meal with wine.
Children are also taught the classic way. 
Lessons might include cheese souffle, fish in pate brisee with lime Hollandaise or chocolate cake with chocolate buttercream. 
Children range in age from 9 to 15 years, and the lessons are taught from 3 to 5:30 P.M. Children taste th e food and take samples home to parents. 
(Not visited.)
 
HILLSDALE
Cooking With Sue Lyon, 43 Saddle Ranch Lane. 
(201) 664-8775. 
Instructor: Sue Lyon. 
Cost: $50 for a 2 1/2-hour private lesson. 
Starting dates: By appointment, beginning in October. 
Type: Participation.
In her home kitchen, Sue Lyon teaches one student at a time the elements of nouvelle cuisine, fresh pasta or the classic French dishes and techniques that she acquired during a two-year stay in France. 
She will tailor the class to the student's needs. 
(Not visited.)
 
MADISON
Mai Leung's Classic Chinese Cooking School, 29 Fairview Avenue. 
(201) 822-2293. 
Instructor: Mai Leung. 
Cost: $180 for four lessons. 
Starting dates: Late September, morning or evening classes. 
Type: Participation.
Having trained with chefs in Hong Kong and written two respected Chinese cookbooks, Canton-born Mai Leung's classes are distinguished by their authenticity. 
In her airy home kitchen, classes consisting of no more than seven students learn basic techniques, along with tidbits of Chinese folklore.
Each student works with a cleaver and helps to prepare dishes such as Lake Tung Ting scallops, Sichuan dry-fried beef shreds and jade green broccoli with ginger. 
More-advanced classes cover dim sum and noodle dishes. 
Students dine in the instructor's traditional Chinese dining room on the three-course meal they have prepared. 
A shopping trip to Chinatown can be arranged. 
Teal and Marien's Cooking School, 79 Main Street. 
(201) 822-3479. 
Courses: French and Northern Italian. 
Specialty classes in bread, fish, etc. 
(three to four lessons) and puff pastry, brioche, etc. 
(one to two lessons). 
Instructors: Teal Salveterra. 
Ronnellie Van der Merwe and Paula Wolfert. 
Cost: $40 to $200, depending on the course. 
Classes are held from 10 A.M. to 1:30 P.M. and from 7 to 10:30 P.M. Starting date: Already begun. 
Type: Combination of demonstration and participation. 
Maximum number in class: 8.
Although many areas are covered, and basic techniques are taught, this is primarily a course for those who wish to entertain. 
Complete meal with wine is served at the end of each class.
 
MAPLEWOOD
Rebecca Caruba, 9 Brookside Road. 
(201) 763-2826. 
Courses: Haute cuisine. 
Wines and spirits used in cooking. 
Wine appreciation. 
Instructor: Rebecca Caruba. 
Cost: There is a minimum fee of $200 for a single lecturedemonstration. 
Group fees for a five-part series are $20 a person per lesson. 
Starting date: To be arranged with the instructor. 
Daytime only. 
Type: Demonstration. 
Maximum number in class: 10.
Classes are held in students' homes, and the curriculum is discussed with Mrs. Caruba beforehand. 
Her field of expertise also covers Colonial cookin g. 
Tasting of wines and food at the conclusion of each demonstration. 
(Not visited.)
Liz Simon's School of Chinese Regional Cooking, P.O. 
Box 224. 
(201) 763-6500. 
Instructor: Liz Simon.
Cost: $125 for four lessons and Chinatown tour; $50 for a two-hour private lesson.
Starting dates: This week and every five weeks thereafter. 
Type: Participation.
A former student at the China Institute in New York, Liz Simon has been teaching for five years. 
Morning and evening classes for a maximum of six students cover dishes such as hot and sour soup, eggplant with garlic sauce and Hunan sea bass. 
Students dine on the dishes they have prepared and a shopping tour of Chinatown is included. 
(Not visited.)
Maxine Horowitz, 17 Colonial Terrace. 
(201) 762-0841. 
Instructors: Maxine Horowitz and Joanne Lindauer. 
Cost: $20 a class.
Starting date: Call the school.
Type: Demonstration. 
Maximum number in class: 14.
Maxine Horowitz, a cookbook author, demonstrates food-processor techniques in the dining room of her home. 
Dishes concoted include cheese puffs, Vichyssoise and carrot cake. 
Joanne Lindauer will teach how to use a microwave oven. 
(Not visited.)
 
MONTCLAIR
Eileen Yin-Fei Lo Cooking School, 33 Lloyd Road. 
(201) 783-9416. 
Instructor: Eileen Yin-Fei Lo. 
Cost: Ranges from $115 for three-session series to $170 for advanced six-session course, including trip to Chinatown. 
Starting dates: Week starting tomorrow, and continuing in six-week cycles through the winter. 
Type: Participation.
Canton-born Miss Lo, who is a staff member of the China Institute, teaches in her home kitchen a series of six sessions for all levels of Chinese cookery. 
Sample dishes are egg-drop soup and shrimp with lobster sauce. 
Included is a shopping trip to Chinatown and an optional banquet.
Miss Lo also offers a three-class series of dim sum and ''super advanced'' dishes. 
Following each class, students dine on their preparations. 
Courses are limited to six students and are usually held in the evening, although mornings can be arranged.
 
ORADELL
The Chinese Gourmet, 991 Phyllis Lane. 
(201) 262-5986. 
Courses: Chinese regional and gourmet cooking, dim sum, cold buffet. 
Instructor: Lila Klein. 
Cost: $140 for five classes. 
Classes meet from 10 A.M. to 1 P.M. Starting date: October. 
Type: Full participation. 
Maximum number in class: 6.
Techniques are emphasized. 
A complete meal is served after each class. 
Fee includes a shopping tour through Chinatown. 
(Not visited.)
 
PARAMUS
Emilie Taylor's Meat School, P.O. 
Box 213. 
(201) 265-4145. 
Instructor: Emilie Taylor. 
Cost: $30 for one-day workshops; $95 for four-part series. 
Starting dates: Already begun. 
Morning and evening classes. 
Type: Participation.
The instructor, a former butcher, teaches students meat-cutting techniques in an effort designed to reduce costs. 
In a four-part series, students learn to buy and trim their own meat and poultry with an eye toward economy.
Morning or evening classes for a maximum of eight students run for three hours. 
One-day workshops cover a variety of meats, poultry deboning and sausage-making. 
No meals are served, but students may purchase the meat they have butchered.
 
PARK RIDGE
East/West Cooking School, 137 Sibbald Drive. 
(201) 391-7068. 
Instructor: Judy Nelson. 
Cost: $100 for five two-hour sessions of beginning French cooking; $125 for five three-hour classes of advanced Chinese cooking. 
Starting dates: Oct. 
6 and Nov. 
17. Type: Demonstration and participation.
The instructor, a former student of Grace Chu and the China Institute, teaches both basic and advanced Chinese cookery, with full participation and a complete meal. 
She also offers an introductory course in French cooking, covering dishes such as omelets, crepes and souffles. 
This is a limited-participation course and tastings are sampled. 
Classes are limited to s ix. 
(Not vis ited.)
 
PLAINFIELD
Annie's Kitchen, Bazaar Bizarre, 204 East Front Street. 
(201) 561-1666. 
Instructors: Anne Casale, John Casale, M.J. 
Zirolli and Pam Lipani. 
Cost: From $25 for a single session to $90 for a series of three classes. 
Starting date: Week of Sept. 
28. Day and evening classes. 
Type: Demonstration, except for the pasta and young adult classes, which are participation.
In the bright kitchen attached to a cookware shop, Anne Casale teaches classes of up to 12 students homey Italian cookery, bread and holiday cake-baking, food processor and seafood preparations. 
M.J. Zirolli teaches one-day classes in German and Proven,cale dishes, and John Casale leads students through the intricacies of cake decorating.
A complete meal, including wine, is served after each three-hour Italian, German and French session.
 
PRINCETON
Curries 'n' Spice, 5 Skyfield Drive. 
(609) 466-1555. 
Courses: All aspects of Indian cuisine. 
Instructor: Tehmina Alphonse. 
Cost: $35 a lesson. 
Classes are held from 11 A.M. to 2:30 P.M. Class times also can be arranged to suit specific groups. 
Starting date: Oct. 
19. Type: Full participation. 
Max imum numbe r in class: 8.
Well-versed in the history of her country, Tehmina Alphonse dispenses historical information on the areas she covers, as well as background on each of the recipes. 
This is essentially a course designed to show how Indian food is prepared in the home, as opposed to Indian restaurant food. 
A complete meal is provided at the end of each class.
 
RIDGEWOOD
Lyn Poole's Cooking School, 279 West End Avenue. 
(201) 447-4067. 
Instructor: Lyn Poole. 
Cost: $30 a single class or $140 for a series of five. 
Starting date: Oct. 
1. Morning classes. 
Type: Participation and demonstration.
''Creative Cuisine'' and ''Pastry Power'' are the themes of two series of five classes offered. 
Each session lasts for four hours and is limited to eight students. 
Dishes include vegetable Napoleons, chicken galantine and apricot galette. 
A complete meal is prepared and eaten by the students. 
Demonstration classes deal with pastry wrap-up and food sculpture. 
(Not visited.)
 
SOMERVILLE
Uneeda Appliance, 190 West Main Street. 
(201) 725-3400. 
Courses: All aspects of microwave cooking. 
Instructor: Carol Olsen. 
Cost: $27.50 for 10 lessons, $3.50 a single lesson. 
Classes are held between 7 and 9 P.M. Starting date: Oct. 
1. Type: Demonstration. 
Maximum number in class: 40.
Carol Olsen is a home economist who has taught in local schools for several years. 
Classes are large and, because they are held in an appliance store, visibility is limited and other customers in the store can be distracting. 
It is not necessary to buy a microwave from the store in order to attend the classes. 
For those who use their microwaves for defrosting and reheating, this course will help them to adapt recipes so that they can be cooked in a microwave oven. 
Most recipes used in the class are from the Litton microwave cookbooks.
 
SUMMIT
Jean Yueh Chinese Cooking, 27 Dale Drive. 
(201) 277-4324. 
Courses: Chinese cooking of all major regions, Chinese cooking with a food processor, dim sum. 
Instructor: Jean Yueh. 
Cost: $40 to $120, depending on the course. 
Morning and evening classes. 
Courses consist of two to four classes. 
Starting date: Late September. 
Type: Combination of limited participation and demonstration. 
Maximum number in class: 10.
Although authenticity is stressed, Jean Yueh also demonstrates how traditional dishes can be adapted to American ways by using the food processor for certain steps. 
She also explains which dishes can be successfully made ahead and frozen.
A complete meal is served after each class. 
A shopping and luncheon trip to Chinatown and a traditional dinner in New York City are optional. 
Printed recipes handed out at each class are easy to understand and to follow.
 
TEANECK
Look and Cook, 433 Cedar Lane. 
(201) 836-0833. 
Instructors: Bunny Dell, Jean Claude Lacaze, Florence Lin, Perla Meyers, Jean Morel, Bruno Schadler and Carole Walter. 
Cost: $15 to $45 for each class. 
Starting dates: Throughout the year, mornings and evenings. 
Type: Participation and demonstration.
Among the interesting classes planned for this sleek classroom kitchen attached to a cookware shop are Chef Lacaze's pate, nouvelle cuisine, Jewish cooking for the holidays, holiday breads and a children's baking class.
Bunny Dell leads a series of technique classes that would be good for beginners. 
Chef and guest is a popular format: Two people enroll, one comes earlier to cook and the other arrives in time to join in the dining. 
Many classes are participation, with a meal and wine at the end.
 
TENAFLY
Cooktique, 9 Railroad Avenue. 
(201) 568-7990. 
Courses: Classic French, Northern Italian, regional Chinese. 
Introduction to fine wines. 
Guest chefs teach Indian, Japanese and Middle Eastern dishes. 
Also, there are special one-day classes in specific areas of cooking and equipment. 
Instructors: Sylvia Lehrer, Jacques Pepin, Giuliano Bugialli, Perla Meyers, John Clancy, Elizabeth Andoh, Julie Sahni and Dee Wang. 
Cost: $25 to $45 for one-day classes, $80 to $300 for a series of three to four special classes. 
Starting date: Already begun. 
Type: Demonst ration and full participation. 
Maximum numbe r in class: 10 for full participation and up to 25 for demonstrati ons.
This is one of the best and most comprehensive schools in the state. 
There are courses in practically every aspect of cooking and many national cuisines, plus classes conducted by many guest chefs who do not usually teach outside New York City. 
Emphasis is on authenticity in all areas. 
A complete meal with wine is served after each full-participation class, and a small but adequate taste and wine are served after demonstrations.
To the best of our knowledge, Sylvia Lehrer is the only cookingschool proprietor in the state who arranges and accompanies group classes to Florence, Italy, where students take full participation lessons with Giuliano Bugialli.
 
WEST ORANGE
The Rita Edelman Cooking School, 127 Old Short Hills Road. 
(201) 731-7189. 
Courses: Chinese, Northern Italian, workshops for chocolate lovers, survival course for single people. 
Instructor: Rita Edelman. 
Cost: $160 to $200, depending on the course. 
Classes are 10 A.M. to 2 P.M. and 6 to 10 P.M. Starting date: Second week in October.Type: Full participation. 
Maximum number in class: 6.
Full-course meal with wine is served after each class. 
(Not visited.)
