
BORODIN Stalin's Man in China. 
By Dan N. Jacobs. Illustrated. 
369 pp. 
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. 
$25.
WHEN Dan N. Jacobs began his several years of research into the career of the famous Comintern emissary to China, the name ''Borodin'' probably called to most people's minds the Russian composer of ''Prince Igor.''
Even the few who do recall the ''other'' Borodin's role in the Chinese Nationalist revolution and the eventual failure of Lenin's and Stalin's attempts (1920-27) to bring China into the Soviet orbit will be intrigued and informed by this first full-length study of Mikhail Markovich Gruzenberg, alias Michael Borodin (1884-1951).
Albert L Weeks reviews Dan N Jacobs's book "Borodin: Stalin's Man in China"
Mr. Jacobs follows Borodin's serpentine trail from Russia to America, where he lived for eleven years in exile (1907-18), on to a dozen other countries, including Mexico and Britain, where he functioned as Lenin's personal envoy, a Comintern agent, an informer, an organizer of Communist apparats abroad, a recruiter of talented revolutionaries (e.g., M.N. 
Roy, the well-known Indian firebrand and later Comintern official and co-worker of Ho Chi Minh), and even as a smuggler of jewels and funds to finance subversion in foreign countries.
Borodin's biography is at once a tale of high personal adventure and an account of Soviet adventurism of ''world-historical'' proportions. 
His is also the story of an erstwhile Bolshevik ''hero of our times'' whose top-level political involvements and achievements ended in failure, martyrdom and premature death. 
But his is a case of Petrushka-like reemergence as well. 
In the early 1960's, Borodin was posthumously rehabilitated, along with General Vasily Blyukher (who helped Chiang Kai-shek plan the 1926 ''Northern Expedition'' to unite China) and other victims of Stalinist repression. 
And with the reburnishing of the Comintern's image under Leonid Brezhnev in the 1970's, Borodin has become a veritable model Soviet Man. 
Mr. Jacobs's book thus could not be better timed.
To Borodin, as to Lenin, Trotsky, Zinoviev and the other leaders in Moscow, China represented an attractive ''Eastern route'' to world revolution. 
With proletarian revolution bogged down in the West during the 1920's, the huge populations and the raw materials of the East, upon which Western capitalist industry depended, became strong inducements for the Bolshevik leadership to redirect the ''fire of revolution'' to the capitalist ''rear'' of Asia and the Moslem Near East. 
''The outcome of the struggle,'' advised Lenin, ''will be determined by the fact that Russia, India, China, etc., constitute the overwhelming majority of the population of the globe.''
The Kremlin's No. 2 man, Trotsky, proffered the famous formula: ''The road to Paris and London lies via the towns of Afghanistan, the Punjab and Bengal'' - and the towns of China.
China may have been the largest ''colony of imperialist exploitation,'' but to the Chinese it resembled, to use Dr. Sun Yatsen's phrase, a ''table of sand.''
After the overthrow of the Ch'ing Dynasty in 1911, post-ManAlbert L. Weeks's most recent books are ''Myths That Rule America'' and ''The Troubled Detente.''
He is working on a book on Soviet military strategy.chu republican China had fallen into traditional interregnum disarray. 
Provincial warlords and rival capitals, north and south, grappled for power. 
From his southern base at Canton, Sun sought to reorganize his political party, the Kuomintang (K.M.T.), into a militant revolutionary force backed by a disciplined, well-trained army - to subdue the warlords and spread his form of socialdemocratic republicanism throughout the mainland.
Spurned in his requests for assistance by the United States, Britain and Japan, Sun turned to the Russian Bolsheviks. 
In them, the Chinese leader sensed a natural ally; they had successfully, if bloodily, brought all of peasant Russia to a new ''socialist'' life. 
For his part, Lenin gladly obliged: He saw, in the ''revolutionarynationalist'' Sun Yat-sen and K.M.T., a golden opportunity to apply Bolshevik ''united-front'' tactics and strategy and to convert the ''patriotic'' struggle into the ''higher'' phase of Soviet-style armed seizure of power by a clique of Communists.
So, on Sun's invitation the first Soviet mission arrived in China in 1920 and by 1923 had set up shop in Canton, the K.M.T. capital. 
Under Borodin's direction, the Bolshevik ''advisers'' (sovetniki) established the Whampoa Military Academy; its commander was Chiang Kai-shek, but the guiding hand on the staff was General Blyukher's.Simultaneously, Borodin's sovetniki planted Chinese Communists (whose party had been founded in 1920) in key positions within the K.M.T. and its ''National-Revolutionary Army.''
They even drafted the K.M.T. party program and statutes while teaching its members the agitprop art of inciting Chinese workers into armed, terrorist programs against Western ''imperialist'' businessmen and property.
In time, the K.M.T. 
Press and Propaganda Department was headed by Mao Zedong; at Whampoa, another Communist, Zhou Enlai, served as deputy political commissar. 
Within a year, Borodin had succeeded in penetrating the whole top echelon of the civilian and military organs of the K.M.T., which had become the Chinese cat's-paw of the Russians. 
It was quite an accomplishment for Borodin: a fifth column operating over 6,000 miles from Comintern headquarters in Moscow. 
He had fashioned a well-tooled weapon for revolutionizing the ''rear'' of imperialism.
But before the weapon could be deployed, the whole enterprise collapsed. 
By 1927, Borodin had become, in K.M.T. eyes, a foreigner who was just as deserving of expulsion and condemnation as any other. 
He watched in horror as the Soviet embassy in Peking was ransacked, and Comintern codes and ciphers and secret documents were seized (including a secret plan for the ''Bolshevization of China'' by means of terror, guerrilla warfare and infiltration). 
Massacres, bloody purges and reprisals against Chinese Communists followed as the question arose, Who was to blame for the collapse?
Clearly not Stalin, who had succeeded Lenin in giving the orders to Borodin; three years after Lenin's death, Stalin was in the midst of the power struggle that was just then reaching a climax in Moscow. 
Thus Borodin was made the scapegoat for the Chinese fiasco. 
The fact that he was the holder of the Soviets' highest honor at the time, the Order of the Red Banner, could not save him. 
Abruptly recalled to Moscow, Borodin fell into near obscurity.
Finally, in the anti-Semitic ''cosmopolitan'' campaigns conducted under Stalin's and Beria's leadership in the early 1950's, Borodin, according to the Soviet Historical Encyclopedia, was ''illegally repressed.''
Informants in Moscow told Mr. Jacobs that Borodin died in a prison camp near Yakutsk in 1951. 
He had once towered ''over the Chinese scene … when 300,000 Chinese passed in review before him,'' Mr. Jacobs concludes. 
Borodin was ''the star that glowed so brightly and briefly over China and whose burned-out embers now lie mixed with the soil outside a labor camp in Siberia.''
