
For Trini Sham, the 15-year-old accused of shooting a police officer in a Manhattan park last week, the path to jail led from the streets of Hong Kong to the alleys of New York's Chinatown, where shadowy gangs absorb many young Asian men.
Interviews with the boy's estranged mother and law-enforcement officials outline a portrait of a youth who, left without parental control, chose a life that promised action and power but instead yielded violence.
The story of Trini, who is now being held without bail on charges of attempted murder of a police officer, also reflects what scholars and authorities describe as a fundamental change in the power structure of Chinatown's community of more than 300,000 people.
The authorities said that traditional youth gangs, which act as the muscle for community organizations known as tongs, are in decline while smaller, independent squads, such as the one to which Trini is said to belong, proliferate.
Shooting Is Called Spontaneous
Investigators agree that the 4:30 A.M. shooting in Columbus Park of Officer James Dora, who was listed in good condition yesterday at Bellevue Hospital Center, was a spontaneous act by a surprised youth, not a planned operation by a gang.
In fact police officials said the shooting directly contradicts the most important rule among those who control Chinatown's underworld: that gang violence be kept strictly within the community, preferably within the gangs themselves.
The gang to which Trini is said to belong - the Fu Qing, meaning ''youth from Fujian,'' a province on the southeast China coast - is described by the police and by prosecutors as an amateurish but nonetheless dangerous group of young men who have tried unsuccessfully to claim territory in Chinatown for illegal activities.
Despite that failure, investigators said, attempts by the Fu Qing and other small groups have led to gun battles in the last two years in which gang members and innocent visitors from outside the community have been wounded or killed.
 
'Serious Crisis'
''The tongs are losing control of gangs like the Fu Qing,'' according to Dr. Peter Kwong, an expert on New York's Chinatown and professor of politics at the State University at Old Westbury. 
''Right now there is a serious crisis with the youth gangs because the tail is wagging the head.''
In contrast to the new groups, members of Chinatown's established gangs, such as the Dong An - ''Eastern Peace'' - or Flying Dragons, exercise control in clearly demarcated zones where they protect gambling operations and pry protection fees from local businesses, law-enforcement officials say.
The last exchange of gunfire between the police and members of such gangs, according to investigators, occurred in 1983 when officers giving chase to Dong An members were shot at in Brooklyn.
''They've never gone and intention-ally targeted a police officer,'' one official said.
Remaining are the questions of what investigators believe a 15-year-old was doing in a park at 4:30 A.M. armed with two powerful pistols and why he shot.
The answers, according to investigators, lie in the apparently explosive mixture of the boy's background and the increasingly anarchic nature of the Chinatown underworld.
 
Grew Up in Hong Kong
Trini grew up in Hong Kong, where he was raised by his father, a musician, after his parents divorced 10 years ago, the boy's mother, Rita Gillard, said in an interview from the Chinese restaurant in Brooklyn where she works.
The boy - one of a growing population of legal Chinese aliens from all over Asia who arrived at a rate of about 1,400 a month last year - settled in Queens, where his father still lives. 
The police declined to name the youth's father, who Mrs. Gillard called ''very upset.''
Attempts to reach him by telephone were unsuccessful.
Speaking only Cantonese, the Southern Chinese dialect prevalent in Hong Kong, the boy was enrolled in a Queens school, where he picked up a little English but stayed for less than a year, according to Mrs. Gillard, who said she speaks to her son about once a week.
Although investigators said Trini had declined to cooperate with them, detectives and his mother said he probably became involved with the Fu Qing gang while still in school and living with his father, whose work frequently took him away from home.
Like other young men who move to New York from Hong Kong or San Francisco's Chinatown, he was most likely recruited at his school or in a Chinatown arcade or other locale frequented by young people, according to law-enforcement officials.
 
Living in 'Crash Pads'
Dr. Kwong said the gangs seek out those who appear to have the desire and aggressiveness demanded by gang life. 
''Once you're in the situation, you can't back down,'' he said. 
''If you want to get out they threaten you.''
He added that families had been forced to leave Chinatown in order to extricate children from the gangs.
Once involved, Trini moved out of his father's home and began to spend nights in what the police describe as various ''crash pads.''
''It's a common practice for gangs to set up apartments in various neighborhoods where the members sleep and keep their contraband,'' one law-enforcement official said.
Working on numerous tips from Chinatown residents, detectives of the Fifth Precinct said they had to check at least six addresses for Trini before arresting the youth and a companion, 18-year-old Lee Lang Chiu, on Friday at a house in South Ozone Park, Queens. 
Mr. Lee was said by the police to have been in a getaway car outside Columbus Park at the time of the shooting. 
He has been arraigned on a charge of possessing a deadly weapon.
This weekend, two Asian youths entering the house, at 104-17 128th Street, declined to speak with a reporter. 
Neighborhood residents said 8 to 10 youths had been staying at the house for about two weeks.
''They were all very young and they were all alone all the time - no mother, no father, no adults ever with them,'' said one neighbor, who declined to give his name.
 
Previous Trouble
Before his arrest, Trini had been in trouble with authorities. 
In 1985, according to officers of the 110th Precinct in Queens and his mother, Trini was taken to Family Court on charges of stealing a bicycle but was later released to the custody of his father. 
And just two days before last Tuesday's shooting, the police said, Trini was arrested and charged with smashing a car window with a sawed-off pool cue after a minor car accident in the 110th Precinct.
On Monday night, according to the police account, Trini and Mr. Lee had gone to Chinatown and entered the territory of the Flying Dragon gang on Pell Street, when they were confronted by gang members, beaten and perhaps briefly detained.
The two youths returned to the Queens house, armed themselves and then drove to Chinatown. 
Shots were exchanged with Flying Dragons members at the intersection of Pell and Mott Streets.
Hearing the shots, Officer Dora ran into the park. 
He identified himself as a police officer and ordered a slim Oriental male to drop his weapon.
It was then that Trini is said to have fired.
