
Simon Keswick dislikes being photographed against the Hong Kong skyline. 
''It's too Clavellian,'' he explained, wincing as he referred to the best-selling novels by James Clavell that loosely chronicle Mr. Keswick's clan and company.
A notion that a photograph of a man and a city would suggest a lord surveying his dominions would be absurd in New York or London - but not in Hong Kong. 
Mr. Keswick's company, Jardine Matheson Holdings Ltd., has towered over the British territory for 145 years, dealing in opium and silk in the last century and everything from ice cream to insurance today.
A few years ago, the international conglomerate nearly collapsed - a result of disastrous investments in real estate, shipping and the oil industry. 
As earnings plunged and debt soared, it seemed that the ''Noble House'' that was founded in China in 1832 might expire with barely a whimper, perhaps with control passing to one of several native Hong Kong entrepreneurs. 
But the typhoon appears to have passed.
A Slimmer Operation
Jardines has had to sell valuable assets to survive, but the slimmer company reported a near-doubling of profit in 1985 and a further 173 percent increase in the first half of 1986. 
Long-term debt has been cut in half. 
''I think the patient is out of the operating theater,'' the 44-year-old Mr. Keswick, who resembles a stouter and younger version of Robert Redford, said in an interview in his office overlooking Hong Kong harbor. 
''Now we have to get him strong and running again.''
Along those lines, Mr. Keswick last week announced a reorganization of the company. 
The changes amount to the dismantling of one of the territory's proudest names: the Hongkong Land Company, the world's largest property concern. 
The changes, which create a complex web of corporations that own each other, with Mr. Keswick controlling all of them, fortify defenses against a takeover, while reducing the group's debt.
But many in Hong Kong remain skeptical about Jardines' prospects. 
They doubt that it will ever again be the titan it was in its swashbuckling days at the peak of British influence in the territory. 
A new breed of Hong Kong Chinese entrepreneurs, such as Sir Y. K. Pao and Li Ka-shing, has proved more astute in recent years than the old British dynasties. 
And many wonder how much of a role can be played by a fundamentally British company after Hong Kong becomes a part of China in 1997.
Beyond that, there are widespread doubts about the company's commitment to Hong Kong, as well as about the Keswick family's commitment to Jardines. 
Two years ago, the holding company moved its formal home to Bermuda, sending Hong Kong stock prices plunging. 
Then, as part of the reorganization last week, a new unit that will be a bulwark in the Jardines group was also moved to Bermuda.
 
A Generation Gap
The Keswick family (pronounced KE-zick) is believed to own about 10 percent of Jardines and has been immersed in the company for more than a century. 
While earlier generations - such as Sir John Keswick, Simon's uncle - spoke several Chinese dialects and relished life in the colony, Simon's generation never learned the local language and seems more comfortable with steak and kidney pie in Britain than with fungus or bird's nest soup in the territory.
Simon Keswick reportedly told friends in 1982, when he arrived in Hong Kong from Britain, that he planned to remain for just five years. 
Today the tai-pan (big boss) insists that he will remain in Hong Kong for some time, and that Jardines will not abandon Hong Kong.
Jardines' return to fiscal health -albeit after five desperate years -belies the reputation Mr. Keswick has acquired as the inheritor of his family's looks, but not its business acumen. 
While he consults often with his older brother, Henry, who oversees Jardines' interests in London, it was Simon who first emphasized insurance broking, which has done extremely well for Jardines recently.
Mr. Keswick's grand strategy, as he describes it, is to maintain Jardines' volume of business in Hong Kong and China, while reducing the region's contribution to its earnings to about 50 percent, from 75 percent. 
He plans to do that by increasing the amount of business done elsewhere in the world. 
As he envisions it, Jardines would control an international network of subsidiaries involved in insurance, securities, food, hotels and real estate.
 
A Disastrous Investment
Mr. Keswick is not a squeamish man. 
He has shown no qualms about dissecting the Hongkong Land Company, of which he is also chairman. 
In 1979 and 1980, Jardines made a disastrous investment in the Land Company, acquiring 40 percent of it and allowing it to acquire the same percentage of Jardines. 
That was near the peak of Hong Kong's land boom, and the subsequent collapse in the property market and soaring interest rates became the single biggest burden on Jardines.
Mr. Keswick picked up the carving knife in October, when the Land Company's residential real estate portfolio was sold to the Australian investor Alan Bond. 
Its Dairy Farm food subsidiary also is being spun off as an independent company. 
And last week Mr. Keswick said the Land Company's Mandarin-Oriental Hotels unit -which owns two hotels that are considered among the best in the world - the Oriental in Bangkok and the Mandarin in Hong Kong -also would be spun off.
The Land Company will be reduced to its property core, and as a further indignity Mr. Keswick will insist on the conversion of an issue of convertible preferred stock into Hongkong Land common shares. 
That will help reduce Jardines' stake in the Land Company to 26 percent, from 35 percent. 
Some analysts expect Jardines to continue to pare its real estate holdings in Hong Kong because of concerns about having China as the territory's landlord after 1997.
''In Shanghai, Jardines lost a heck of a lot of money that was in fixed assets, and they have a phobia about it not happening again,'' said A. William S. Phillips, managing director of Baring Securities in Hong Kong.
The Communists in Beijing may be more gentle when they assume control of Hong Kong than they were when they took over Shanghai in 1949, nationalizing banks and all other corporate interests. 
But Jardines may not be willing to take the risk.
 
Executive Turnover
David J. Davies resigned as managing director of Hongkong Land Company in July, apparently because he disagreed with the Keswick strategy of dismantling it - and he was not the only executive to go. 
Upon arriving, Mr. Keswick evicted the previous chairman, David K. Newbigging, and about 40 other executives.
The upheaval was all the more striking because Jardine Matheson had been noted for its relaxed management style, cultivated by generations of young graduates of Oxford and Cambridge universities. 
In the last few years, Mr. Keswick has dumped several lines of business as well as businessmen. 
The departure from ship-owning was the most important, and the most traumatic, for Jardines, a trading company that had grown up with shipping.
''It's a genuine recovery, in that they've managed to get rid of the rubbish,'' said Christopher Chong, an analyst at James Capel Ltd. in Hong Kong. 
''They're out of shipping and oil, but where do they go from here?''
When the restructuring is complete in a few months, Mr. Keswick said, Jardines will focus on six semi-autonomous areas: engineering and construction; insurance and securities; transport, including ship broking and management; marketing and distribution, including wine, cars and the Pizza Hut restaurants and 7-Eleven stores that it operates under license; hotels, including 10 luxury hotels in the Mandarin-Oriental group soon to be spun off from Hongkong Land, and the real estate interests of Hongkong Land itself.
For all the diversification, most of Jardines' business is in Asia, and the company is trying to become more competitive in the region. 
Jardines is planning to promote more Hong Kong Chinese executives to improve competitiveness. 
And it is requiring all new employees to study one of China's two main dialects: Mandarin and Cantonese.
''I'm sure there'll be lots of ups and downs,'' said Martin C. Barrow, who is in charge of the effort to make the company more competitive in Asia, ''but we're here to stay. 
Come back and see us in 1998.''
