
TEN years ago Shatin was a quiet patch of farmland in Hong Kong's New Territories, with water buffalo pulling plows through geometric acres of rice paddies and fishermen's cottages along the Shing Mun River. 
It was an evocation of rural China, even though it was only 10 miles north of the teeming city of Kowloon, separated from Hong Kong's busiest district by the steep Lion Rock Hills.
Today it is the most energetic of Hong Kong's so-called new towns, a city of more than 300,000 people that is expected to grow to 500,000 within a decade. 
There are forests of 40-story high-rises with highways, viaducts and overpasses crisscrossing about them, a new 17-story hotel, shopping plazas and malls, dozens of restaurants, even a race track. 
What had been virtually vacant countryside has become an urban showcase amply demonstrating the British crown colony's singular energy and its ability to expand and grow swiftly.
Shatin is a place of parks, urban plazas, cinemas and branches of Japanese department stores, a weekend getaway for the people of Kowloon - 10 minutes away by train -and a growing tourist destination.
Perhaps more significant, however, is that Shatin provides what is possibly a view of the Hong Kong of the future, because it sits in the New Territories, the 350 square miles of land between Hong Kong proper and the border of China that are the subject of immediate concern in negotiations on ending the lease on the colony held by Britain. 
The lease expires in June 1997. 
The New Territories are on a 99-year lease that was signed in Peking in 1898. 
Hong Kong Island and Kowloon were leased in perpetuity, but in fact the lease terms have come to include the entire colony. 
Many Hong Kong residents believe that in the years leading to the end of the lease, and immediately thereafter, Hong Kong's future expansion lies in these New Territories.
But there is more to Shatin than cement and polished granite and shopping malls like the New Town Plaza, where the waters of a computerized fountain dip and soar to symphonic music and recall the dancing waters many of us remember from Radio City Music Hall's earlier days. 
It has developed as a city but has managed to preserve some of the atmosphere of old China.
Just beyond the Lion Rock Tunnel, which now cuts through the hills around Shatin, across a small valley from a mountain the people of Shatin call Amah Rock - they say it resembles a nursemaid carrying a child on her back - lies Tsang Tai Uk, a preserved walled village. 
Here 200 people live the rural life of China, much as the inhabitants did when the village was built 140 years ago. 
Tsang Tai Uk is a compound enclosed by long parallel rows of two-story masonry houses. 
Each building contains an elaborate ancestral hall of red- and gold-gilded woods that is used for worship as well as an entry into the enclave, which is dotted with small gardens and chicken coops. 
Tsang Tai Uk translates literally as Mr. Tsang's Big House and to this day virtually all the villagers are named Tsang.
The earliest settlements in the area date to the Ming Dynasty (1368-1644), when it was reported that a village called Tai Wai had been founded four centuries earlier. 
People in Shatin say that the rice from Tai Wai's fields was so fine that it was sent to the Imperial Court in Beijing.
Shatin houses the Che Kung Temple, named for a general of the Sung Dynasty (960-1279). 
The temple, which is close to Shatin's main railroad station, is of stucco-covered stone, dark and exceedingly quiet. 
There are several carved Buddhas, but the feature that distinguishes the temple is the forest of circular incense hoops hanging from its ceiling. 
Che Kung is a favorite place for weekend visits by the Chinese of Kowloon, who come to burn the incense hoops, to pray to their ancestors and to celebrate the coming of the Lunar New Year and other traditional holidays. 
Close by is the Four-Face Budda, a statue with four faces carved in wood in Thailand. 
The shrine is always bedecked with flowers set before it by prayerful Buddhists.
ALSO near the station - 431 steps up from it - is the Temple of Ten Thousand Buddhas, where, if you care to count them, 12,800 small Buddhas of carved wood and sculptured clay, some painted bright scarlet, are set into its walls. 
The hillside temple is marked by a bright red nine-story pagoda. 
By climbing 69 more steps the visitor finds the Temple of Man Fat, dedicated to the monk Yuet Kai, who founded it. 
His preserved body, covered with gold, sits with closed eyes inside.
Though it has developed far more quickly than others, Shatin is typical of the new settlements that have sprung up throughout the New Territories, towns that have grown simply because Kowloon and Hong Kong Island, the core of the colony, cannot hold an ever-expanding population that is well above five million. 
In such New Territories towns as Fo Tan, Tai Po and Fanling, apartment buildings, owned and operated by the Hong Kong Government, continue to be built, along with markets and shopping centers. 
Shatin also has a luxurious racecourse, owned and operated by the Royal Hong Kong Jockey Club, where the diversion is flat racing on a grass track.
Some tour operators, particularly those in Australia, are booking groups into Shatin's new Hotel Riverside Plaza, where there are swimming pools, a health center, several restaurants and a discotheque. 
Guests who ride the hotel's shuttle bus to Kowloon's Tsim Sha Tsui shopping area walk through malls and boutiques selling everything from silks to the latest electronic gadgetry. 
In one of Shatin's mall developments, Shatin Inter-City, visitors strolling among the shops that are lively imitations of those in Kowloon find several restaurants, one of which, named for the complex, serves such Cantonese dishes as guinea hen and deer.
THEY may also discover the Palm Beach Sauna and a huge swimming pool that form part of the huge recreational center built for the residents of Shatin Inter-City. 
Nearby is Shatin New Town Plaza, next to a budding park called Shatin Central Park.
The cynosure of New Town Plaza is its fountain. 
Each afternoon, just before 12:45, hundreds of people, many elderly and children among them, pull up folding chairs and encircle the fountain, which sits in a multistory atrium in the middle of a shopping mall. 
At 12:45 the music begins, occasionally Western symphonic, though more often classical Chinese, and the waters begin to dance. 
People run out of the many bakeries and dim sum parlors, out of the Yaohan department store, out of the boutiques, to watch the free half-hour water show.
New Town Plaza also houses many new restaurants, most of them Cantonese and catering to families, with dim sum, roast duck and all manner of stir-fried dishes. 
One, the North Park, becomes a nightclub after dark. 
A Malaysian restaurant offers beef and chicken satays in hot peanut sauces and hot curried rice noodles; a Korean barbecue has grilled beef and lamb and that spicy cabbage salad called kimchee.
The most recent manifestation of Shatin's explosive growth is the Hotel Riverside Plaza, not yet two years old. 
On its 17 floors are 830 rooms and suites, some facing the Shing Mun River, others the hills and temples of the town. 
The hotel is built around a four-story atrium that contains a 60-foot-long pool with a sunken bar.
Among several restaurants in the Riverside Plaza is the Botania, where the menu selections range from Cantonese fried rice to duck pate with green peppercorns, from oxtail soup to open-faced Scandinavian sandwiches of salmon and cheeses. 
The Regal Seafood Restaurant offers a variety of hot pots, there is a Japanese restaurant and coffee shops like the Boulevard, serving pizza and hamburgers as well as roast pork and Chinese vegetables.
It is a place from which to contemplate Shatin. 
One evening my wife and I took the train from Kowloon to Shatin, walked to the Riverside Plaza, had dinner in the Botania and a late drink near the pool deck. 
I recall looking out at the hills, many of them now covered with lights, and wondering about 1997.
 
GUIDE FOR AN EXCURSION TO AN EXPANDING NEW TOWN
 
Getting There
By car, Shatin is about a half-hour's drive from Kowloon. 
The distance is less than 10 miles but the trip takes so long because traffic through the Lion Rock Tunnel is generally heavy. 
It is more convenient and less arduous to take the train. 
There are several daily trains between Kowloon Station and Shatin. 
A one-way ticket is about 50 cents. 
Buses also go to Shatin, from Causeway Bay on Hong Kong Island. 
The No. 170 leaves from the front of the Daimaru department store, and the fare is 50 cents. 
From Kowloon the No. 70 runs from the Jordan Road Terminal; fare: 45 cents. 
There are no charges at the temples in and around Shatin, although an offering box is placed at entrances and near altars.
 
Bus Tour
For a look at Shatin that is combined with a visit to other parts of Hong Kong's developing New Territories, visitors can take a Hong Kong Tourist Association bus tour entitled ''The Land Between.''
It departs every weekday from the pier opposite City Hall on Hong Kong Island; in front of the Holiday Inn Golden Mile Hotel on Nathan Road, Kowloon, and the Holiday Inn Harbor View Hotel, East Tsim Sha Tsui, Kowloon. 
The six-hour trip, which includes lunch, costs $23 or $18 for children. 
The Hong Kong Tourist Association (5-244191) can supply further details. 
General information is also available from the association's office at 548 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 
10036; 212-869-5008.
 
Meals and Hotel
Meals in the restaurants scattered about the Shatin Inter-City complex and New Town Plaza generally run about $10 to $15 a person. 
Eating such exotica as bird's nest, shark fins or fine pigeon dishes could add $5 to $10 to the bill.
A meal in the Botania in the Hotel Riverside Plaza will be about $20 a person.
Room rates at the hotel range from $70 for a standard room to $200 for a deluxe suite. 
All rooms have color TV and minibars.    F. 
F.
