
A formal judgment of Mao Zedong's achievements and mistakes has been reached, Deputy Prime Minister Huang Hua said today.
After months of delay and debate, Mr. Huang, who is also China's Foreign Minister, said that the Communist Party leadership had reached a consensus that Chairman Mao's triumphs outweighed his debacles, thus clearing the way for a long-delayed party meeting and a subsequent party congress that is expected to formally approve the demotion of the current party chairman, Hua Guofeng.
In a two-hour meeting with A.M. Rosenthal, executive editor of The New York Times, Mr. Huang stressed that reports of a power struggle within the party leadership were ''untrue.''
''We can say that the present central leadership of the party is the most unified, stable, most effective and the most popular since the 1960's,'' Mr. Huang said.
Chinese Communist Party leadership reaches formal judgment of Mao Zedong's achievements and mistakesJudgment of Mao Was Delayed
He said the officially proposed judgment of Mao, which was reportedly delayed for months by objections from party factions because it was either too harsh or too lenient, would be submitted as a resolution to be debated, and perhaps amended, by the party meeting before it was submitted to the party congress, as yet unscheduled, for approval.
Wan Li, another Deputy Prime Minister, said this week that the party meeting would take place in early June, to be concluded in time for the 60th anniversary in July of the founding of the Chinese Communist Party.
Mr. Huang criticized foreign reports that China was abandoning the Maoist line. 
''Some people say there is a de-M@aoification campaign in China,'' he said. 
''This is completely untrue. 
Mao Zedong thought will remain the guiding thought of our party and our state.''
 
Mao's Mistakes Are Cited
Mr. Huang then summarized what he said was the consensus achieved by a wide cross-section of the party leadership on the judgment of Mao. 
While praising him as a ''great Marxist and a great revolutionary who was the first to combine the universal principles of Marxism with the concrete conditions of the Chinese revolution,'' Mr. Huang said that Mao also made mistakes. 
The Deputy Prime Minister called the system of setting up people's communes in the countryside, the so-called Great Leap Forward in 1957 and 1958, among the mistakes.
''But it was not comrade Mao Zedong alone,'' Mr. Huang said. 
''The mood of anxiety to build up our country quickly was quite prevalent at that time. 
Even cadres at the middle level were overanxious to build up our country quickly. 
So we must all be responsible for the mistakes. 
It is not fair to put the blame on Chairman Mao alone.''
Mr. Huang said that in starting the so-called Cultural Revolution, Mao compounded his earlier mistakes with much more serious ones.
''In his later years, he was detached from the real situation in China and from the masses,'' Mr. Huang said. 
''He was no longer good at listening to different opinions. 
Therefore, he made mistakes which caused serious results for our country.''
Mr. Huang said, however, that Mao's role was made up of contributions that were primary and mistakes that were secondary. 
''This is our consensus,'' Mr. Huang said.
 
'Collective Wisdom'
He then went on to describe ''Mao Zedong thought'' as not simply the Chairman's words alone, but the ''collective wisdom'' of his comrades and the ''broad masses'' of party members.
He attributed to Mao, who died in 1976, China's current emphasis in developing agriculture, light industry and heavy industry, in that order. 
He said that the ''four modernizations'' - in industry, agriculture, science and defense - were also put forward originally by Chairman Mao. 
At the moment, they are the goals of Deng Xiaoping, the senior deputy party chairman.
Mr. Huang said that Mao put forward the policy of ''letting 100 schools of thought contend and letting 100 flowers blossom'' in arts, literature, science and technology. 
He said this was a correct policy, even though another of Mao's thoughts, making literature and art serve the goals of the party, was a guideline that is currently being followed in a crackdown on creative free expression.
Mr. Huang said that China's national economy would take longer to readjust than the current two- or three-year period that has been allotted. 
He said it would take two or three five-year plans to complete a basic restructuring of ''economic systems and changing of the product mix.''
