
IN December 1967, Peng Zhen was dragged into a Beijing gymnasium, his clothes torn, his face bloated after a year in prison.
Young Red Guards yelled ''despicable swine'' and cheered as Mr. Peng, a leader of the Communist revolution and former Mayor of Beijing, was pushed and kicked by his captors.
Twelve years later, China's new leader, Deng Xiaoping, brought Mr. Peng, by then 77 years old, back into the ruling Politburo. 
He became one of the most vociferous detractors of Mr. Deng's moves to open up the Chinese economy and is now a chief orchestrator of the return to orthodoxy.
Other party leaders had returned to their posts three years before Mr. Peng and that delay is still often cited as a source of friction between the two men.
Of much greater significance, however, are the deep philosophical differences between them. 
While Mr. Deng looked to Western capitalism for China's economic model, Mr. Peng adamantly defended tight state control over economic, social and political life.
Some Western and Asian diplomats here say that even before this winter's crackdown on dissent, Mr. Peng used his position as chairman of the National People's Congress, the country's legislative body, as a brake on some of the reforms. 
And as the changes swept China, particularly in the countryside, reining in the absolute authority of party bureaucrats and diminishing the role of ideology, his was one of the few voices that railed against replacing Marxist doctrine with Western notions.
 
After the abrupt crackdown in
January that followed a series of student demonstrations, Mr. Peng and other hard-line Chinese leaders are dominating the country's newspapers and television screens with harsh attacks on ''bourgeois liberalization,'' code words for democracy and free expression. 
Diplomats and other experts here believe that Mr. Peng is one of the leaders charting the country's new course.
Last week, Mr. Peng, wearing a traditional high-collared Mao jacket, presided over the opening session of the annual meeting of the People's Congress. 
In a speech to the delegates, Zhao Ziyang, the acting party General Secretary since Hu Yaobang's dismissal in January, told the delegates that the economic initiatives would continue, but that ''pernicious'' Western ideas would not be tolerated. 
Earlier this month, the standing committee of the congress declined to act on a measure that would have given factory managers some freedom from state control and placed other limits on the party's power over the economy.
Mr. Peng has pushed strong central planning since the 1950's. 
In 1960, as Chinese relations with the Soviet Union rapidly deteriorated, Mr. Peng engaged in a shouting match with Nikita S. Khrushchev, who argued that Mao had lost touch with the world. 
Mr. Peng defended both Stalin and Mao, asserting that Mr. Khrushchev was betraying Communist principles.
Mr. Peng's political difficulties began in 1966 when he and other party leaders tried to stifle the Cultural Revolution, Mao's movement to ''cleanse'' the party. 
Like many other leaders, including Deng Xiaoping, Mr. Peng was swept from power and imprisoned, his family disgraced. 
His 86-year-old mother was forced to stand on a dunghill while she was denounced.
With his return to prominence in 1979, Mr. Peng focused his energies on building the power of the National People's Congress and establishing himself as a party ideologist. 
Last November, when many intellectuals and party members were predicting democratic reforms, Mr. Peng challenged the trend in a carefully worded speech that Western diplomats said at the time was at odds with the political climate.
''Some people look to bourgeois democracy as if capitalist society were even brighter than our sun,'' he said.
Now, Mr. Peng's language is more blunt. 
''Some people say that reform means 'de-Marxist-Leninization' and 'de-Maoization' and that upholding Marxism-Leninism means opposition to reform,'' Mr. Peng said in a recent speech. 
''Such an argument is put forward from ignorance or misunderstanding or is aimed at provocation.''
Mr. Deng and Mr. Zhao have insisted that the campaign for political conformity will not affect economic reforms. 
But Mr. Peng, who has groomed many younger party members who share his hard-line views, does not yet seem ready to move into the shadows of retirement.
