
THE Westinghouse Science Talent Search, arguably the most prestigious of all awards open to American high school students, came dramatically close this year to a clean sweep for a single small minority: America's ethnic Asians. 
The five top scholarship awards all went to Asians, some of them native Americans and some of them immigrants. 
Tied for first place were Wendy Kay Chung of Miami and Wei-Jing Zhu of Brooklyn, both of Chinese ancestry and born and educated in the United States. 
But Yoriko Saito moved to Alabama from Japan only three years ago. 
George Jer-Chi Juang came to Bayside, Queens, from Taiwan. 
Anh Tuan Nguyen-Huynh, a Vietnamese whose father was killed in the war, settled in Cleveland.
The last census put the combined Asian and Polynesian population of the United States at 3.7 million - a bare 1.6 percent.
Do the Westinghouse results imply that Asian-American students are getting brighter or that other American children are losing ground?
Do Asians have genetic advantages, or does their apparent edge in scientific skills stem from their special cultural tradition?
Questions like these invariably lead to controversy, but according to a Westinghouse spokesman, at least one thing is certain: the Asian winners of this year's competition all had the strongest possible support and encouragement of their families throughout their school careers. 
Tightly-knit families and high respect for all forms of learning are traditional characteristics of Asian societies, he noted, as they are for Jewish societies; in the past, a very high proportion of the top Westinghouse winners were Jewish.
The odd thing is that until the 20th century, real science scarcely existed in Asia. 
Ancient Chinese astronomers made many observations that are useful even today, and the Chinese are believed to have invented gunpowder, porcelain and a host of other useful things. 
But the Chinese never fitted their discoveries into a predictive system of thought of the kind that propels western science. 
Asians could make skyrockets, but it took the Western inferential approach in the hands of the 18th century French scientist Lavoisier to discern the true chemical nature of oxidation.
Many scholars contend that Chinese science was the victim of a civil service examination system introduced by the Ming emperors in the 15th century. 
While the system was rooted in the Confucianist principle of rule by merit, examiners came to insist on such highly stylized, formal responses (known as ''eight-legged essays'') that creative thought was supposedly stifled for centuries. 
Another view was expressed by an 18th century French Jesuit, who wrote that the main reason for the absence of science in China was the lack of monetary, social or political reward for scientific achievement.
But literary scholarship was a different matter. 
Even an impoverished farming community could pool its resources to send one promising boy to school to master the hated eight-legged essay and thus earn a berth in the ruling mandarinate. 
A peasant boy could aspire to high office, provided he were willing and able to make the academic grade.
Academic drudgery persisted throughout Asia for a long time. 
The Japanese scientist Hideki Yukawa recalled a childhood education in which his grandfather drilled him for an hour each evening in the analects of Confucius. 
But Yukawa also got a taste of Western science, especially the work of Albert Einstein. 
Finally rejecting the Confucian view that man (as opposed to nature) is at the center of the cosmos, Yukawa went on to become one of the great physicists of this century; his 1935 prediction of the existence of the meson particle earned him a Nobel Prize in 1948.
Part of the reason Asian-Americans do so well in science may be the liberating influence of Western scientific thought. 
But creative freedom in science is worth little without an underlying devotion to scholarship - the kind of devotion imprinted on Asian children by a pantheon of ancestors.
Whatever the reason, Asian children seem to be preparing themselves admirably for success in a world where scientific excellence is likely to be a prerequisite to survival. 
All Americans enjoy the intellectual freedom needed for scientific creativity; but maybe the non-Asians among us could do with a disciplinary dose of three-legged essays for a while.
