
WHEN the Manchus toppled China's Ming Dynasty in 1644, supporters of the Ming emperors fled to southern China and the island of Taiwan, vowing that they would soon recover the mainland. 
They never did, of course, although the invading Manchus were gradually assimilated into Chinese society and culture.
When the Communists toppled China's Nationalist Government in 1949, supporters of the Nationalist leaders fled to Taiwan, vowing that they would soon recover the mainland. 
They have not, although some of the vitriol and dogmatism of the Communists seems to have dissipated.
Most analysts give Taiwan only a slightly better chance than the Ming emperors of regaining China. 
As that realization sinks in, tough questions are surfacing that go to the heart of the Republic of China, as Taiwan calls itself: What is to be done vis-a-vis the mainland?
How long can the Government claim to be the legitimate ruler of all China?
How long can it continue to refuse all contact with the mainland?
The contention that the Government here is China's Government may be maintained for the foreseeable future, but cracks have appeared in the facade. 
Last week, the ruling Nationalist party formally approved the lifting of the ban on visits to the mainland for family reunions. 
The Government is allowing publication of some mainland books. 
It is becoming easier to import traditional medicines that originate in China. 
There is talk here of cultural, scientific and sports exchanges, and some officials would even like to see trade and investment links.
Family reunions aside, the ban on visiting the mainland will continue. 
But officials here sometimes seem to suggest that the ban is mostly for show, to withhold legitimacy from the Communists, and will not be rigorously enforced. 
''It's very difficult to verify,'' said John H. Chang, the Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs. 
''If they say they went to see relatives, what can we do?
So the tendency is to be more lenient.''
The increased leniency (people who have made visits to the mainland are no longer jailed) reflects a general mellowing. 
Martial law was lifted in July. 
New political parties have formed. 
The press is increasingly bold, anticipating the lifting of certain press restrictions on Jan. 
1. Government film censors have relaxed, allowing the showing of ''Daughter of the Nile,'' a recent film with an unflattering portrayal of Taipei.
In part, the new attitudes seem to reflect the same pressures for liberalization that have appeared in South Korea and Hong Kong. 
Extremely rapid economic growth - 7 percent a year per capita over the last 20 years, compared to 2 percent in the United States - has fostered a prosperous middle class that increasingly wants to participate in the political process. 
At the same time, the number of students in higher education has surged from 10,000 in 1953 to more than 430,000.
An older generation that accompanied Chiang Kai-shek to Taiwan in 1949 is handing over power to a new generation - too young to remember the mainland, less ideological, and armed not with bazookas but with American Ph.D. degrees. 
Shaw Yuming, the new 49-year-old chief Government spokesman (Ph.D., University of Chicago), has books in his office that at one time could have been read only under the bed covers, including works from China and ''The Soong Dynasty'' by Sterling Seagrave, a harsh portrayal of Chiang Kai-shek. 
It is necessary, Mr. Shaw explains, to know your enemy.
While the younger generation is generally urging greater tolerance, there are concerns that this could also increase the pressure for Taiwan to declare itself independent, separate from China, perhaps after President Chiang Ching-kuo, son of Chiang Kai-shek, leaves the scene. 
The one thing Beijing and Taipei agree on wholeheartedly is that Taiwan is an integral part of China. 
However, the increased tolerance poses the risk that if people are allowed to say what they think, some - perhaps 25 percent, some analysts estimate - will say that Taiwan should be independent.
 
38 Years on the Island
Moreover, the two Chinas are moving farther apart. 
For the vast majority of Taiwanese, the mainland is an ethereal place that they have never seen and never expect to see. 
The Nationalist Government lasted on the mainland from early in 1912 to the fall of 1949, a bit less than 38 years. 
On Oct. 
1 the Communists celebrated 38 years of the People's Republic of China, which means the Nationalists have been on Taiwan longer than they ruled on the mainland.
Jaw Shaokong, a legislator, says visits to the mainland and other contacts will make reunification more likely. 
''If we keep away from mainland China, we'll be moving toward independence,'' he argues. 
But while more people from Taiwan are now expected to make legal and illegal visits across the Taiwan Strait, a Western analyst here warns that they may find the economic and social gulf is too great to be bridged. 
Per capita income on Taiwan is more than 10 times higher than on the mainland. 
In a revealing comment, Hsu Lu, a journalist who made an illegal visit last month, said afterward: ''I will never go back to mainland China as a reporter. 
It's too boring.''
