
China's most prominent dissident intellectual, breaking an imposed silence, today assailed harsh political controls on university students and teachers.
The dissident, Fang Lizhi, also disparaged the Communist Party's recent calls for liberalized intellectual and literary expression as insincere.
In his first interview with a foreign journalist here since he was expelled from the Communist Party last year, Mr. Fang dismissed his promotion last week to ''second-rank professorship,'' from ''fourth rank,'' as ''propaganda.''
It was not clear whether there would be any repercussions for his interview.
Student Demonstrations
Professor Fang, who is one of China's most distinguished astrophysicists, was dismissed as vice president of the University of Science and Technology in Hefei last year after a nationwide tide of pro-democracy student demonstrations that began at his school. 
Communist Party leaders, including the country's senior leader, Deng Xiaoping, accused Mr. Fang of instigating the protests by encouraging students to speak out on a wide array of political and intellectual concerns.
After being stripped of his official position and expelled from the party last year, he went to Beijing, where he pursued his research at the China Academy of Science. 
Party officials prevented him from contacts with virtually all foreigners, especially journalists, until he was permitted to travel to Rome last summer to attend a scientific conference. 
While in Rome he gave an interview to the West German news weekly Der Spiegel in which he suggested that Marxism had reached the end of its useful life in China.
No single name evokes such fervent response on China's campuses and among intellectuals as that of Fang Lizhi. 
He is widely seen as the most articulate and forthright critic of China's Marxist orthodoxy and the country's pre-eminent champion of free speech.
 
Appearances Must Be Approved
He is permitted to appear in public only with the permission of the highest members of the Communist Party. 
In November, an invitation to speak on cosmology at his old university in Hefei, in Anhui Province, had to be personally approved by Li Peng, one of the five members of the Standing Committee of the party's Politburo and now acting Prime Minister.
Professor Fang derided suggestions that conditions for intellectuals in China have been improving since a major party meeting in October at which many elderly orthodox Marxists retired from leadership posts.
''On the surface, there is more tolerance,'' Professor Fang said. 
''but this is not so in reality.''
Professor Fang was particularly critical of many American and European China specialists who have described recent trends in China as increasingly liberal. 
''They're deceived,'' he said simply. 
October Party Congress At the October meeting, a congress of party representatives that gathers every five years, many new, younger faces appeared in the Politburo and on the Central Committee. 
Many Western diplomats and academics have pointed to this as an indication that economic liberalization coupled with a softer ideological line had triumphed.
But Mr. Fang maintained that it is too early to assess whether real change has occurred. 
''The students don't like the new members,'' he said. 
''Almost all the new members come from areas that treated student demonstrators harshly - Li Ruihuan from Tianjin, Jiang Zemin from Shanghai.''
''Power is still held by Deng and the older generation. 
Zhao is No. 1 in principle. 
But when they talk about who will talk with Gorbachev, it is Deng. 
It is clear who is in charge.''
He was referring to proposals by Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, to hold a summit meeting with Mr. Deng, although Zhao Ziyang is now the party leader.
 
Changes Were Celebrated
When older hard-liners were voted off the Central Committee last October, many Beijing intellectuals celebrated. 
But Professor Fang said that these elderly leaders still exercised tremendous power. 
''They may not have a position, but their secretaries and their aides now are in positions of power. 
These old guys just get on the phone and say, 'Do this.'
''
Professor Fang, who is in his early 50's, said that the greatest evidence of the continuing influence of hard-liners was the crackdown on students and teachers on college campuses.
When he was granted permission to visit the University of Science and Technology last November, his schedule was rigidly controlled. 
''They limited me to a two-day visit,'' Professor Fang said. 
''I still have an apartment there and I was kept inside. 
When I was there, some people said I should speak in the big lecture hall, but the party secretary said no.
 
Four Lectures at Old School
So Professor Fang said that he delivered four lectures in a smaller hall.
''There were 80 security men there,'' said Professor Fang, his boyish face erupting in laughter. 
''The authorities are afraid of my having contact with the students.''
''There also is a new policy on study abroad. 
The Government wants to reduce the number of students abroad. 
On the surface they say they want to do this because not many are coming back. 
In fact, they are afraid of the returning students. 
They are afraid of what they have learned, of what they will say.''
Even in the rather abstruse fields of quantum mechanics and cosmology, Professor Fang said, China's ideologues have continued to interfere.
 
Marxism and Astrophysics
''Marxism thinks it has solved all the problems of man,'' he explained. 
''Two years ago, I wrote an introduction to a translated essay on quantum mechanics by Hawking for the magazine 'science.'
Hu Qiaomu said it could not be published, that it wasn't Marxist.''
Mr. Fang referred to Stephen W. Hawking, a theoretical physicist at Cambridge University who has done pioneering work in cosmology. 
Hu Qiaomu is an orthodox ideologue who retired from the Politburo last October.
''Cosmology is still concerned with the problem of whether the universe is finite or infinite. 
That question is not solved for us. 
In Marxism, they already have solved this question. 
In a letter, Engels said that the universe must be infinite. 
So for Marxists, it is.''
Professor Fang disdained suggestions that his academic promotion last week reflected a liberalization in the party's approach to unorthodox intellectuals. 
''It's just propaganda,'' he said. 
''I get 20 yuan more every month,'' a sum equivalent to $5.40.
At the moment, he said, he is waiting for permission to spend next year at Cambridge doing research. 
He said that approval would probably have to be granted by Mr. Zhao himself.
Mr. Fang's wife, Li Shuxian, a physicist who teaches at Beijing University, has been denied permission to do research in Rome and has been restricted in her contacts with students.
''I wanted to meet with some students outside class but they wouldn't let me,'' she explained. 
''I put up a paper sign on the wall saying I would meet the students on the side of the road. 
There were 100 students who showed up. 
There were 10 security officers watching the whole time.''
Professor Li shook her head slightly as she talked. 
''I'm not afraid,'' she said. 
''We're not afraid.''
