
CHINA, Alive in the Bitter Sea. 
By Fox Butterfield. 
Illustrated. 468 pp. 
New York: Times Books. 
$19.95.
IN 1979 Fox Butterfield became the first New York Times correspondent to be based in Peking in 30 years. 
For the next two years, while China cast off the fetters of more than a decade of cultural revolution and wrestled with the legacy of Mao, he was there giving Americans a firsthand view of China. 
Educated in East Asian studies at Harvard, apprenticed in Hong Kong and Taiwan and fluent in Chinese, he traveled to remote areas of the country, visited the people in their homes, climbed sacred mountains, spoke with top leaders by day and met with dissidents at night.
B Michael Frolic reviews book, "China: Alive in the Bitter Sea," by Fox Butterfield
What he had to report was not pleasant, and this book, based on his experiences in China, is not always pleasant. 
After 10 years of Pollyanna-ish accounts by others, Mr. Butterfield and a few fellow American journalists have sent back messages of disappointment and despair. 
China is poor; China is autocratic; China is complicated and beset by massive problems that defy simple solution. 
China does not make it easy for outsiders to penetrate the various layers of her reality. 
China is dazzling in her uniqueness, yet banal in her backwardness. 
China is nearly a superpower, but her per capita income is less than $200 a year. 
China is a nation of survivors whose faith in Communism has been irrevocably shaken: men and women with broken careers and lost families, cynical party members, innocent victims denied justice, disenchanted young people enduring two decades of turmoil, individuals sacrificed to a system that is out of control. 
One's heart goes out to Lihua, a young woman whom Mr. Butterfield befriends. 
She tells him, ''I won't be happy till I die. 
I've never lived a good day in my life. 
My mother was beaten to death, my father was left senseless and I still have to beg for everything. 
… My scars will never heal.''
Mr. Butterfield's view of China is gloomy and reminiscent of standard accounts of life in the Soviet Union. 
He describes an economy in permanent crisis, where per capita grain production has not increased since the mid-1950's, where reforms make no palpable impact, where outmoded management responds poorly to the demands of modernization. 
Within such a system inequities abound and are perpetuated by an alliance of party, army and police that arbitrarily makes decisions and maintains control for the elite. 
Sudden and unorthodox movements are dangerous. 
Everybody is keeping an eye on somebody else. 
It's best to go with the flow and keep quiet - not exactly the stuff of which industrialization is made. 
(A Peking University professor tells Mr. Butterfield: ''If you are not overly ambitious and don't have any political troubles, life in China is pleasant, like living on a slow-moving conveyor belt.'') The system cannot cope with China's massive population, nor, apparently, is it capable of stimulating the rapid economic growth required for a modernization breakthrough.
YET amid the grimness there are rays of hope. 
If the Socialist system has degenerated, there is still the positive legacy of Chinese culture and the strength of those individuals who dare to step forth and tell their stories to foreigners. 
Well-meaning leaders are developing pragmatic policies in an attempt to salvage the Chinese revolution, if not to restore China's greatness. 
Also, significant gains have been made since 1949: a doubling of life expectancy, the attainment of literacy for hundreds of millions of people, a better distribution of resources, elimination of foreign domination. 
Despite his pessimism, Mr. Butterfield occasionally evinces the hope that somehow China can still right herself, not as was wantonly promised during the Cultural Revolution, but through a more cautious form of development. 
No matter how bitter the Chinese sea may be, it is still ''alive'' for Mr. Butterfield.
His book, which is imaginatively organized, conveys his concern for the individual Chinese he meets. 
He divides his book into five sections that cut to the heart of daily life in China: ''Connections,'' ''Pas-sages,'' ''Systems,'' ''Persua-sions'' and ''Messages.''
In ''Connections'' he introduces us to the ways in which Chinese relate to foreigners and to each other, from ''taking the back door'' (getting scarce goods through sheer ingenuity) to ''the giant flight of stairs'' (a principle that acknowledges that ''beneath this facade of the classless society … some people are much more equal than others''). 
In ''Passages'' Mr. Butterfield discusses the various stages of life, from child-rearing practices through love, sex, marriage, abortion, divorce and old age. 
The underlying theme is that, with some exceptions, Chinese ''passages'' are rather like ours. 
Bing, one of Mr. Butterfield's Chinese friends, reads Gail Sheehy's ''Passages'' and then tells him: ''It was a revelation. 
I was really going through a crisis, and it showed me there are turning points in your life. 
I fit right in to what Sheehy called 'Catch 30.'
''
The section on ''Systems,'' Mr. Butterfield's strongest, is reminiscent of some of the best parts of Hedrick Smith's ''The Russians,'' a book that Mr. Butterfield clearly would like to emulate. 
Drawing upon his long experience reporting on Chinese economic development, supplemented by his personal observations and by Western scholarly accounts, Mr. Butterfield provides an excellent analysis of contemporary Chinese agriculture, industry and bureaucratic structure. 
We see how these systems work and also why they respond so poorly to change. 
We meet Chinese officials who say, ''We are having trouble defining what our system is. 
We are trying a number of experiments. 
Those that work we will call Socialism. 
Those that don't we will call Capitalism.''
The last two sections, ''Persuasions'' and ''Messages,'' describe the pervasiveness of the Chinese system of control and the meager ways in which Chinese individuals can resist the persuasions of those in power. 
Comparison with the Soviet Union is unavoidable, and Mr. Butterfield finds himself trying to separate Chinese and Soviet experience, even while referring to a Chinese gulag and to control techniques that, for the most part, resemble those of the Soviet Union. 
Yet he notes that no Chinese Solzhenitsyn or Sakharov has appeared, and that Chinese dissent may be of a somewhat different stripe. 
''I'm a patriot, not a dissident,'' says Tan, a Columbiatrained economist. 
''I can see many faults. 
But I'm not a dissident because the present system is the best we have; there is no viable alternative to Deng. 
It would be traitorous of me to jeopardize our modernization.''
DESTINED for a wide audience, this book will undoubtedly influence American perceptions of China. 
It is informative, disturbing, poignant and absorbing. 
It is based on a range of personal encounters with individual Chinese that are almost unprecedented for any American journalist in recent times. 
It is a testament to Mr. Butterfield's skill in reporting, his training in Chinese studies and his personal commitment to China. 
However, in looking to him for the final word about China, we should proceed with caution. 
As a foreigner and a journalist, his experiences were extremely limited. 
The bulk of his reporting was confined to a few Chinese cities. 
He was basically isolated from the lives of China's 800 million rural dwellers. 
From his arrival until the day he left, his movements were monitored. 
He was an important ''foreign friend,'' an outsider who was constantly followed. 
Those Chinese whom he managed to befriend often were the desperate outsiders, the alienated, ''Westernized'' elements. 
We should stop and ask whether Mr. Butterfield's disaffected Chinese friends do justice to the mainstream of Chinese who may be relatively satisfied with their system and with their present lot in life.
Encounters between Westerners and Chinese have been unusual and painful over the centuries. 
It seems the more the Chinese resisted Westernization , the more exotic and remote China became. 
How many Americans have tried to discover the ''truth'' about China, and how many different truths have they found?
Yesterday's revolutionary simplicity gives way to today's oppressive Chinese totalitarianism as described by Mr. Butterfield. What will tomorrow bring?
Since the cultural revolution China has been rendered less remote, more tangible and vulnerable, somewhat more comprehensible to foreigners. 
Is this the image Chinese leaders want Americans to see and the one Americans prefer to have of China?
One recalls Jerry Rubin's remarks to Mr. Butterfield after Mr. Rubin's visit to China in 1979: ''One day as I was riding on a bus, I said to myself, either everyone is telling the truth or everyone is pulling my leg. 
It came to me that everyone must be telling the truth.''
Given our past encounters with China, how could he have been so sure?
Perhaps there is no one great truth that Westerners can find in China, only that she is big and poor and old, and struggling to reclaim a unique cultural tradition by means of a terribly painful revolution that is still far from complete.
