
TIRED AND DUSTY AFTER A DAY'S driving from the north, three men on a Yangtze River motorcycle pulled into the courtyard of the inn at Guanduping, a village in China's heartland province of Shaanxi. 
They stowed their helmets in the cycle's sidecar and moved toward a group of villagers seated at tables of hand-hewn slate.
An old man paused as he ferried bowls of steaming noodles to the bare-chested villagers. 
Although Tian Binggao, the innkeeper, had not seen a foreigner since Japanese troops passed through the village in 1938, he showed little surprise at finding an American and an Englishman outside his inn on a balmy evening last June, nearly 200 miles from the closest of the country's officially ''open'' cities.
He settled the foreigners and their Chinese companion at a table and listened attentively to the conversations that developed between them and the villagers. 
Later, after dusk settled on Shaanxi's dust-brown hills, he put the visitors to bed on his own k'ang, a traditional sleeping platform of stacked bricks.
The hospitality of that first night on the open road proved a fitting prologue for the experiences that the three travelers - Edward E. McNally, an American lawyer, Zhang Daxing, a Chinese recently returned from studies in the United States, and this writer, then The New York Times's correspondent in Beijing - had as we traveled unescorted across the mountains and plains of Central China, from the industrial city of Taiyuan to the semitropical bamboo forests along the border of Sichuan.
With this article, the story of that unauthorized 1,000-mile journey, and of my subsequent arrest, imprisonment and expulsion from China, is told publicly for the first time. 
As it happens, the six months since I was pulled from a prison cell in central Beijing and deported for having allegedly used the motorcycle journey for ''spying'' on military installations have also seen a dramatic swing in the political mood in China, one that may, in retrospect, help to explain why the authorities reacted to our trip as they did.
More important, if the conservative attack on the reforms in China gathers pace, our journey may serve as a bench mark of how things stood in a brief interlude of the mid-1980's, when the country seemed more relaxed than at any other time in its modern history. 
Just as our experiences provided us with a heady but elusive sense of freedom, so the Chinese people, once more facing a crackdown by Communist Party hardliners, may be in danger of losing their newfound liberty.
Our trip exposed us to a back-roads China that war and revolution have made inaccessible to foreigners since the 1930's, the China that has benefited most from the reforms initiated by the country's 82-year-old paramount leader, Deng Xiaoping.
Moving far beyond the ''open cities'' to which foreigners are normally restricted, we saw how Mr. Deng's reforms have fostered a well-being rural China has not known in generations. 
We saw a country where politics had virtually disappeared from everyday life, rural dwellers were exploiting the climate of broadening tolerance to make money, to laugh, to concentrate on family and personal contentment instead of the millenial social and political goals that were the dominating factors in rural life under Mao Zedong.
At a personal level, the journey was my most rewarding in more than six years of reporting from China, for The Globe and Mail of Toronto in the early 1970's and for The New York Times from 1984 to 1986. 
Until the night at Mr. Tian's inn, my China had been the one seen by the overwhelming majority of foreigners, one of polite but wary officials, of ever-watchful guides, of official guest houses and banquets and ''brief introductions'' at factories and hospitals that compensated in length for what they lacked in candor.
On our journey south, I felt for the first time that I was seeing an unrehearsed China, the one I had read about in the chronicles of earlier 20th-century travelers. 
Away from the planes and trains and buses that channel most visitors from one major center to another, aboard a motorcycle that gave us freedom to travel at will and to talk to whom we pleased. 
I felt an enormous fulfillment, as if all my years in the country had been but a preparation for this one extraordinary ride.
THE DECISION TO travel beyond the open areas without official permission evolved over several months. 
Like many Westerners living in China in recent years, I had become impatient with an official policy that proclaimed an ''openness'' toward foreigners while maintaining many of the constraints familiar from my earlier assignment.
My frustrations may have been greater than those of others seeing the country for the first time. 
On my return to Beijing in 1984, senior officials greeted me with intimate dinners in out-of-the-way restaurants, whispering apologies for our less-pleasant encounters during the Cultural Revolution and pledging that they would do all in their power to help.
The promises went unfulfilled. 
The working environment was more relaxed than a decade earlier, but few of my requests for assistance in obtaining interviews or trips were answered, much less granted. 
There were other unpalatable reminders of the suspicions that attach to Westerners. 
Staff members assigned to us by the Government rifled through our personal papers and reported regularly to their superiors on our private lives as well as on work-related matters.
Meanwhile, I was meeting more and more Western visitors, many of them Americans, who were venturing without permits into remote regions of the country and returning with accounts of a climate in which suspicion seemed absent. 
In every case I heard of, local authorities who stopped the travelers reacted to their presence in restricted areas either by asking them to move on to the closest ''open'' area or, at worst, by imposing a fine equivalent to $31.25.
The sense that it was time for me to test the possibilities was strengthened when a friend who works as a foreign correspondent for the French news magazine L'Express arrived in Beijing and regaled Foreign Ministry officials in my presence with accounts of a monthlong bus trip he had taken across southern China without a permit. 
The senior official present merely laughed and said, ''This is a new style of travel.''
The spirit of adventure was also encouraged by Mr. Deng, who repeatedly told visiting statesmen, investors and others that they should not take his word for the progress the country was making under the ''open door'' reforms. 
''You must go and see for yourselves,'' he said.
Mr. McNally and I had envisaged a journey that would begin in the central China city of Xi'an and traverse Sichuan province to reach the southern city of Kunming. 
But a Chinese friend whose father had worked in southern Sichuan warned us that the area was heavy with sensitive installations, including the rocket base at Xichang. 
Moving our starting point farther north, to the industrial city of Taiyuan, we plotted a course that would sweep southwestward across Shanxi province to the Yellow River boundary with Shaanxi, thence to the Communists' wartime sanctuary at Yanan, southward again to Xi'an, and from there up through the Qin Ling Mountains to Sichuan, where our last call was to have been at Mr. Deng's birthplace in Guangan county.
Our departure from Taiyuan coincided almost exactly with the 50th anniversary of the journey made by Edgar Snow, the Missouri-born journalist who left Beijing on his way to the encounters with Mao and Zhou Enlai that resulted in his classic account of the Communists' beginnings, ''Red Star Over China.''
For several hundred miles, we would be re-tracing Snow's footsteps. 
There was comfort in the thought that he, too, had set off without the Government's blessing.
FROM THE MOMENT we left the built-up area of Taiyuan, a steel city that sits in the lee of the Great Wall, we began experiencing the unscripted pleasures other unlicensed travelers had reported.
For one week, we spoke to whom we pleased. 
We slept in smoky inns, in truck-drivers' rest houses, in a mountain cave. 
We bathed in mountain rivers, ate in peasant restaurants and hauled our motorbike onto the flatbed of a truck to drive for hours through a summer storm. 
Time and again, we laughed with curious villagers who gathered about us as we repaired the bike's fragile spokes.
Whether it was a bed for the night, fuel for the motorbike, or an escorted journey into the hills to see an ancient Buddhist temple, no effort seemed too much for the villagers we met along the way.
The remoteness of many of the mountain villages we passed through was brought home to me when we stopped late one evening in a village in southern Shaanxi. 
As I crouched by the rear wheel of our cycle to repair some broken spokes, a hand from the crowd began running through my curly hair. 
''Excuse me,'' said the owner of the hand, ''with regard to your hair, did you suffer an electric shock?''
Elsewhere, peasants kneeled to measure my feet, marveling like Lilliputians at my size 11 shoes.
In the town of Zhenba, about 20 miles from the Sichuan border, the county party secretary dispatched the local historian to meet with us. 
He told us we were only the second foreign visitors in the town's 2,000-year history, the first being an American fighter pilot shot down by the Japanese in 1943. 
With no road out of the mountains at the time, the pilot was carried from the region in a sedan chair.
Among the ordinary people with whom Mr. Zhang and I conversed in Chinese, there was a widespread curiosity about the outside world. 
A truck driver encountered in a village south of Xi'an told us that he had seen an American film about trucking, ''Convoy,'' and wanted to know if American truckers really tangled so frequently with the police.
''Quite a bit, I suppose,'' I said.
''It's no different here,'' he replied.
Politics were not mentioned unless we raised the subject. 
More than once, we found villagers who could not name the local party boss. 
Outside the inn in Guanduping, I asked a group of young men who was in charge of matters in Beijing. 
''Who cares?'' one of them said, laughing. 
Mr. Tian told us that the decline in the power of the local party secretary, a petty tyrant under Mao, was the most important of all the changes under Mr. Deng. ''Nobody's looking over our shoulders now,'' he said.
A thriving spirit of enterprise greeted us wherever we went. 
Wheat fields and rice paddies were dotted with families working their private plots. 
From early morning to past dusk it was hard to find anybody of working age who was not busy, a contrast with the lethargy characteristic of the state-owned economy of the cities.
We traveled down an unbroken chain of entrepreneurship. 
From private inns to private restaurants, in private motorcycle shops and private coal mines, we saw how people indoctrinated against the evils of capitalism had turned their skills and energies to profit. 
What we observed in two provinces made nonsense of official figures that claim only 20 million people are self-employed, out of a population of 1.1 billion.
Mr. Tian, the innkeeper, had tilled the rocky hillsides near his home for more than half a century before the reforms spurred him to start gathering wild apples and pears to sell in a nearby town. 
It took him five years to amass the equivalent of $300, the first cash his family had ever had. 
With another $600 borrowed from relatives and friends, he built his three-room inn beside the main road to Yanan. 
With a general store selling grain, bicycle seats and shoelaces built onto the inn, his first year generated $750 in profit, more than he had earned in a lifetime of farming.
''We do not ask for much,'' he told us as his wife stir-fried noodles for our breakfast. 
''But if we can make a small profit, my children can do better. 
One day, they can each have a house of their own.''
Outside Yanan, blackened tunnel entrances began appearing in the hills. 
Turning down a side road, we came on a granite-lined shaft sunk 50 feet into the ground. 
This was our first look at the new industry of private coal-mining, which was to produce about 20 million of the output of 870 million tons China produced in 1986. 
An aging watchman told us that groups of men, sometimes 1 or 2, in the bigger mines 10 or 12, pool their labor and capital. 
After the local utilities bureau approves a site, they work 16 hours a day with hand shovels sinking shafts and digging tunnels. 
The coal is dug by hand, loaded onto tractors and hauled to neighboring power stations.
In a province in which millions of people were outside the cash economy until a few years ago, the miners are earning an average of $750 a year, three times the income of prosperous local peasants. 
Looking at a charcoal-stained flue through which deadly coal gas is burned off, we wondered how many men died in the process. 
''There are risks,'' the watchman said. 
''But this way a man can build a new life.''
Those forsaking the ''iron rice bowl'' of guaranteed employment run the risks of entrepreneurs everywhere. 
In Yanan, we befriended Zhang Yuanxin, a factory worker who had borrowed $2,250 to buy a battered, 20-year-old Liberation truck. 
Twice a week, he drives the 230 miles to Xi'an, ferrying freight. 
The journey, normally 12 hours, has been taking up to two days, because of breakdowns.
Over dinner at the Shanghai Restaurant in Yanan, other drivers laughed at his travails. 
''You're having a hard time now, admit it,'' the driver of a factory truck said. 
He drew an imaginary roof over his head and added: ''I like to keep things nice and safe. 
Why risk my head?''
Many of the simple joys and traditions of country life have been revived. 
In Fenyang, a market town in Shanxi, we saw a funeral procession of a kind proscribed by Mao, who condemned all ''superstition.''
A musical ensemble playing a dirge preceded a procession bearing a portrait of the deceased, an elderly lady. 
Behind, came trays of steamed dumplings, an offering for the afterlife. 
At the rear, a dozen young people were cloaked head to toe in the traditional funereal white, inscriptions of filial piety pinned to their backs.
Driving into the night in the Bashan Mountains near Sichuan, we passed lovers leaning against haystacks, youths using a remote stretch of road for motorcycle races, and three men who seemed to be busy stealing bags of road builders' concrete.
On our last night, in the Qin Ling Mountains, we came across a cave above a churning alpine river. 
Needing firewood, blankets and straw, we drove half a mile to a peasant's house, borrowed what we needed, then set up in the cave for the night. 
It was the eve of the Fourth of July, and Mr. McNally produced glasses for a toast. 
Mr. Zhang reached into his pack for a harmonica, then treated us to an impromptu concert of American ballads, including a rousing version of ''Oh!
Susanna.''
In the morning, the young peasant who had lent us the blankets, Yang Chaojin, took us on a hike into the mountains, to a village with a recently-restored Buddhist temple. 
The villagers' pride, and their religious commitment, were affecting. 
As we walked, Mr. Yang spoke of his sadness in having completed only a year of primary school. 
''When I dream at night,'' he said, ''it is of being in a classroom. 
I am an illiterate man. 
I have no skill.''
The incident made a strong impression on Mr. Zhang, only recently returned from four years of study at Middlebury College in Vermont. 
Disillusioned with his prospects when we left Beijing, he appeared to have found a new faith. 
''I wasn't sure there was a place for me in China,'' he said. 
''People have been telling me that I've been away too long, that I've picked up too many 'American' ways. 
Out here, I feel as though I belong.''
OUR ADVENTURE ENDED a few hours later, outside a guest house in Zhenba, in the small hours of the morning. 
Unaware that we were next door to the county police headquarters, we sounded the motorcycle horn in an attempt to rouse a napping desk clerk. 
Awakened by the noise, a policeman came out to admonish us, then asked for our travel permit.
Mr. McNally carried a letter from Beijing University, endorsing our journey. 
He had spent the 1985-86 academic year there, on leave from the United States Justice Department, teaching American constitutional law. 
But neither of us carried an official voucher for travel outside ''open'' areas - the 244 cities and towns that then constituted the tourists' China. 
After two days of back and forth with authorities in Beijing, the local police commander said that he had been instructed to have us write a ''self-criticism'' acknowledging our breach of the travel regulations, which we supplied, and to send us back to the capital by train. 
Back in Beijing, I had a brief session at the Foreign Ministry that concluded with officials assuring me that the matter had been resolved.
Ten days after our departure from Zhenba, on July 17, I drove to the Beijing airport with my wife, Jane, and two small children, en route to a vacation in the United States. 
In the customs hall, we were surrounded by uniformed officers from the Security Ministry, who led us into a small room off the departures hall, where a police videocamera crew awaited us. 
With my 5-year-old son clinging to my waist, the initial interrogation, which would last for 15 hours, began. 
Past midnight, long after the children had returned to the city with their nanny, Gen. Xilian Zhang, the officer in charge, returned to the terminal from a meeting in the city and told me that I was to be taken to my apartment for a search and from there to a prison. 
''You should prepare for the worst, and hope for the best,'' he said.
The first sight of Pao Ju jail was depressing. 
Situated off a busy residential lane about two miles from Beijing's Tian An Men Square, it is a maze of grimy red-brick buildings, windows gaping with broken glass, rusting bars and shades of rotting rattan. 
I was led to a cell in a section that appeared to be reserved for privileged prisoners. 
Downstairs, Chinese prisoners clustered 14 to a cell, with no furniture and a privy beneath a trapdoor. 
Upstairs, I had the same space - 8 feet by 14 - to myself, with a low cot. 
Heavy padding covered the walls. 
Ceiling lights burned 24 hours a day, a precaution against suicides.
The only book I was allowed to keep from the collection I had brought from home, a volume of Mr. Deng's collected works, gave me food for thought. 
Reading with an eye to my own situation, I found frequent reference to an old Chinese idiom, ''patting the tiger's backside,'' a reference to those who misjudge the tolerance of the powerful. 
It seemed well-tailored to my case.
After awhile, General Zhang relaxed the detention rules. 
My wife and I were allowed to exchange letters, and meetings were arranged with United States and British diplomats, with my wife, and with A. M. Rosenthal and Warren Hoge, the Times editors who had flown to Beijing. 
After I had eaten virtually nothing for the first two days, the prison cook was dispatched to ask me what I would like. 
Soon fresh vegetables were showing up in the tin bowls the guards brought to me three times a day.
General Zhang, an oval-faced man in his 50's with the manner of a country schoolmaster, told me that he had been an espionage investigator ''for many years,'' but there were anomalies in his technique. 
Facing me across a rough-hewn table in a dingy, cramped room at the rear of the jail complex, he took few notes and seemed to forget, or ignore, much that I told him. 
He was generally pleasant, even apologetic. 
''It is a legacy of the Cultural Revolution,'' he said when I complained of the bullying manner of one of his juniors. 
''The younger generation does not have any manners.''
When I rejected his offer of a peach during one post-midnight session, saying it seemed inappropriate for us to be friendly when I was being held on a capital charge, he flashed a smile. 
''No, no, not so serious, not so serious,'' he said. 
''We have many penalties for spying. 
For example, 20 years in prison. 
Do not fear to be shot.''
Under China's travel law, the three of us could have been punished with a warning or a fine. 
But because the State Security Bureau insisted throughout that the issue was not unauthorized travel, but espionage, we had to wonder whether we had inadvertently approached a sensitive military installation. 
If so, it was in innocence.
I challenged General Zhang to tell me what he meant by the ''classified military objects'' we were supposed to have photographed. 
''Think hard,'' he said. 
''did you not photograph a bridge?''
I remembered that we had - a 1,000-year-old marble structure in a village in southern Shaanxi. 
I had snapped Mr. McNally on the bridge, seated on the motorcycle and surrounded by local children. 
''Ah ha,'' the general said. 
''So you admit photographing strategic installations.''
In Beijing, some weeks later, Foreign Ministry officials told colleagues of mine privately that they opposed my arrest and subsequent expulsion but had been overruled by the security apparatus. 
The officials hinted that the affair was linked in some way to other problems that have dogged the Ministry of State Security in the last year, including the spying conviction of one of its agents, Larry Wu-Tai Chin, in a United States court, and the defection of a senior official of the ministry, Yu Zhenshan, to the United States.
Among United States and British diplomats involved in securing my release, there was a feeling that internal politics had played at least some part in the affair. 
One theory was that the State Security Ministry, institutionally wary of foreigners, had seized an opportunity to show how dangerous the broadening contacts with outsiders can be - and in so doing, to strike a blow against the policy of the ''open door.''
Whatever the motive, Mr. Zhang, our Chinese companion, who had been arrested 16 hours before me, briefly released, then re-arrested, was kept in jail for two months. 
When he was finally released, it was on the face-saving basis that his four years as a student in the United States had ''disoriented him'' and made him susceptible to the wiles of foreigners. 
Mr. McNally, who was in Hong Kong at the time of the arrests, canceled plans to return to Beijing.
At breakfast time on the sixth day of my imprisonment, one of General Zhang's aides came bounding up the stairs with a bag containing my clothes. 
I was given five minutes to dress and was then taken to the prison reception room. 
Inside, another officer awaited me with a written statement and a videocamera crew. 
The officer told me to stand at attention. 
I refused.
''John Fisher Burns, correspondent of The New York Times, born 1944, citizen of Great Britain, male, resident in Beijing, the State Security Bureau has investigated your activities. 
You have broken into restricted military areas and committed espionage. 
The facts are clear and proven. 
You have endangered the security of the People's Republic of China. 
You are ordered deported.''
I was marched outside to a security wagon. 
It passed slowly out of the steel gates, threaded its way through the early morning crush of bicyclists and onto the airport road. 
I gazed through the tinted windows at roadside vegetable sellers, horse-drawn carts and mud-walled homes, the commonplaces of everyday Chinese life that I might never see again. 
The wagon parked on the airport tarmac, beside a Chinese airliner.
A uniformed officer asked me to sign for my passport, handed me a ticket and a boarding card, and ordered me up the service stairs onto the covered ramp leading to the aircraft's forward door. 
The officer turned on his heel and descended the way he had come. 
I glanced at the ticket. 
The destination was Hong Kong.
