
While the modern world has adopted a modified Gregorian calendar, introduced in 1582 by Pope Gregory XIII, many cultures retain ancient religious calendars. 
In the beginning, these were based on phases of the moon or other astronomical aspects. 
Life itself depended on the shifting sky, which told you when to plant and when to harvest, and so calendars took on spiritual significance.
''Calendars are arbitrary, and there are a wide variety,'' says William Gutsch, chairman of the American Museum-Hayden Planetarium in New York. 
''Lunar calendars can run from full moon to full moon or new moon to new moon. 
Since you get one each lunar month, you can start the year anywhere you want.''
Some solar calendars, too, begin when the sun is in a particular position, such as at the vernal or autumnal equinox, when it is directly over the equator. 
Through history, Mr. Gutsch says, calendars have became ''more and more out of whack versus the real calendar, which is the motions of objects through the heavens.''
Whatever its derivations or date, visitors can herald the New Year in a number of places. 
Following is a sampling.
 
JAPAN
Date Jan. 
1
 
Services The ancient New Year, in February, was pegged to spring (in early Japan, toshi, the word for year, was synonymous with the word for rice). 
Today Jan. 
1 is the national holiday and most significant in Japan. 
Many businesses close Dec. 
28 to Jan. 
4. Shops and restaurants usually reopen Jan. 
2, known as Hatsu-Ni, the first delivery day. 
Decorations come down Jan. 
7. During the holidays, transportation and hotels are tightly booked due to the mass exodus first from the city to the country and then in the opposite direction. 
Because of the Emperor's illness, some celebrations may be canceled.
 
Highlights At midnight New Year's Eve, Hatsu-Mode, the year's first visit to the shrine, begins. 
The best place to see traditional kimonos is the first three days of the year at the Meiji Shrine in Tokyo, the Daishi Temple in Kawasaki and at Shinshoji, a Buddhist temple in Narita. 
For the Gion Okera Festival, at the Yasaka-jinja Shrine in Kyoto, a sacred fire of the herb okera is lighted. 
Through the early hours of Jan. 
1, visitors take home a flame kindled on a short rope. 
Used to cook the first meal of the year, the fire is believed to prevent illness.
On Jan. 
2 the Emperor and Crown Prince usually make five appearances between 10 A.M. and 1 P.M. on the balcony of the Imperial Palace in Tokyo. 
Inner grounds are open to the public only on this day and the Emperor's birthday. 
The appearance may not take place this year.
At 1 P.M. Jan. 3, at the Yasaka-jinja Shrine in Kyoto, visitors can watch a traditional New Year's card game, karuta-hajime, played in costumes of ancient nobility. 
Kemari, a soccerlike sport favored by 10th-century aristocrats, is played 2 P.M. Jan. 4 at the Shimogamo-jinja Shrine in Kyoto.
On Jan. 
6, for the New Year's Parade of Firemen, Tokyo's firefighters perform acrobatics on bamboo ladder tops along Chuo-dori in Harumi.
 
CHINA
Date Feb. 
6
 
The New Year, a weeklong family festival of feasting and rituals, is the most important event of the Chinese lunar calendar. 
Sixty-year spans are divided into five 12-year cycles based on wild, domestic and mythical beasts; this year (the 4,687th of the Chinese calendar) hails out the dragon and in the snake.
The Lantern Festival, which falls on the 15th day of the first lunar month, ends the holiday. 
In ancient times, Chinese bore torches by which to see celestial spirits flying by the light of the first moon. 
Today the holiday is marked by colorful lantern processions and displays.
 
Services Public facilities, such as restaurants, remain open.
 
Highlights The daylong New Year's fair at Ditan Park, off Andingmen Road in northeast Beijing, features traditional acrobats, stiltwalkers and martial artists, with handicrafts and sweet dumplings for sale. 
To the south, in Dragon Lake Park, activities include stiltwalking, lion and dragon dancers, acrobats dressed in paper or cloth boats and dancing monkeys and horses. 
Lanterns light up the People's Cultural Palace near Tian An Men Square.
 
TAIWAN
Date Feb. 
6
 
Services Most businesses are closed until the third day, after which many shops reopen with a firecracker lighted to mark the occasion. 
Some, however, may be shuttered until Feb. 
11. Yuan Shiao, rice-flour dumplings symbolizing the first full moon of the lunar year, are available throughout the country.
 
Highlights The holiday's religious traditions can be viewed on New Year's Day at the Lungshan Temple on Kwang-Chou Street. 
Dragon and lion dances are held throughout the holiday in front of the Presidential Palace and the Chiang Kai-shek and Sun Yat-sen memorial halls.
The evening of the Lantern Festival, Feb. 
20, a procession is held at the Lungshan Temple. 
Major lantern displays can also be seen at the Cheng Huang Temple at Hsinchu on the northwest coast and at the Chao Tien Temple at Peikang in west-central Taiwan.
In Yen-Sheui, between Tainan and Peikang in southern Taiwan, about 200,000 people converge for the Lantern Festival. 
From 6 P.M. to 3 A.M. up to 20,000 rockets are ignited in enclosures in the shape of animals of the Chinese Zodiac and spew out indiscriminately. 
Goggles and helmets are recommended.
 
HONG KONG
Date Feb. 
6
 
Services Some businesses close for three days (the national holiday runs until Feb. 
8 this year), though tourist facilities remain open.
Since styled hair is expected for the holiday, salon and barber shop prices in Hong Kong and Taiwan double. 
Some shops refuse orders for custom-made clothes up to a week before the holiday. 
Firecrackers are illegal.
 
Highlights Shopping areas are decorated with banners and lights. 
Lion and dragon dances usually begin at 11:30 A.M. New Year's Day in Kowloon, at the Star Ferry Concourse, and proceed to the Ocean Terminal shopping center. 
Fireworks light up the harbor, usually on the second day of the New Year.
Winter flower markets, with peach and plum blossoms and chrysanthemums, crop up in city parks, the most popular being Victoria Park in Causeway Bay on Hong Kong Island, which begins Feb. 
4. The park is at its busiest midnight to 3 A.M. New Year's Eve.
The Lantern Festival, in Hong Kong called Chinese Valentine's Day, is Feb. 
20, with carnivals and lantern displays in Victoria Park and Tiger Balm Garden, both in Causeway Bay.
Traditional lanterns appear on market stalls and decorate homes, restaurants and temples.
 
SINGAPORE
Date Feb. 
6
 
Services The first two days are official holidays, with banks and businesses closed. 
Firecrackers are banned. 
Highlights Chinatown is the first area to be decorated and lit up; lights stay on from Jan. 
21 to Feb. 
20. The Hong Bao Special (Hong Bao refers to the red packets containing lucky money) is tentatively set for Jan. 
30, with floats and lighted boats on the Singapore River and a night market on the river bank. 
Cultural shows are planned for Feb. 
5 or 6 at Hong Kim Park in Chinatown.
Beginning at 9 A.M. Feb. 12, the Chingay procession proceeds from Scotts and Orchard Road to the Dhoby Ghaut Mass Rapid Transit station. 
The parade features decorated floats with acrobats, martial artists and stiltwalkers.
 
BALI
Date March 9
 
Services The Hindu solar calendar begins with Nyepi (quiet) New Year (there is also a 210-day Balinese calendar). 
Transportation to and from Ngurah Rai Airport and other essential services in Denpasar operate, and luxury resorts accommodate guests. 
Otherwise, everything is closed on New Year's Day.
 
Highlights The Melis ceremony, in which temple implements are cleansed, begins three days before the New Year, peaking on New Year's Eve. 
Informal processions can be seen headed for the beach or holy springs. 
In Ubud, processions lead to the Gunung Lebah Temple, at the Campuhan River. 
Ogoh-ogoh (demon) parades are at nightfall New Year's Eve in most communities, the largest in Denpasar. 
The parade is followed by 24 hours of quiet.
 
THAILAND
Date April 13
 
Services April 13 is the fixed date for Songkran, which is also marked in Laos, Kampuchea and Burma. 
As a national holiday, businesses are closed. 
Hotel reservations are necessary in the city of Chiang Mai.
 
Highlights When the plains were flooded during the rainy season in Siam, fish were trapped in ebbing pools. 
Farmers kept the fish until Songkran, when they were released into canals to gain spiritual merit, an essential element of a Thai festival. 
Today, birds and fish are bought in markets, then released.
The biggest festivals are in Phra Pradaeng, at the mouth of the Chao Phraya River, an hour's drive south of Bangkok, and in Chiang Mai. 
In Phra Pradaeng, also known as Paklat, young women of Mon origin parade with fishbowls to the river, where the fish are released. 
In Chiang Mai, Thais wade into the city's river, scooping up water in a free-for-all. 
Chiang Mai's festival runs April 12 to 14; for Songkran, the roads are alive with dancers, bands and floats, at the center of which is the city's favorite celebrity, a beauty-contest winner. 
This one is Nang Songkran (Queen of the Water).
As part of the celebration pedestrians are often showered with water by teen-agers passing in open trucks. 
It's meant in the spirit of fun, and Western tourists are not excluded.
 
NEPAL
Date April 13
 
Services Calendars, published in spring at the beginning of the Nepalese solar year, contain three different dates - solar, Gregorian and lunar (an extra month is added to the lunar calendar every three or four years, making 13 months for that year). 
There are many New Years in Nepal, including ones for the Newar calendar in the fall and Tibetan in February. 
The solar New Year (Nawabarsa) is a national holiday, with businesses closed. 
Festivals begin when the priest determines the most auspicious moment. 
Bhaktapur, nine miles east of Katmandu, can be reached by local bus, which run continuously after festivities end.
 
Highlights Bisket Jatra, the most important New Year festival in the Katmandu Valley, is held only in Bhaktapur, also known as Bhadgaon. 
Chariots of the gods are pulled through town four days before Nawabarsa and on Nawabarsa itself. 
Nights in between, dancers costumed to represent divinities perform by torchlight. 
A ceremonial pole is raised Nawabarsa eve and drops on Nawabarsa. 
Four days later, the pottery-making caste of Bhaktapur raises a smaller lingum.
Two miles west of Bhaktapur, the village of Thimi gathers all the deities, with the honored guest Bal Kumari, a consort of Lord Bhairab. 
Throughout the day and night of Nawabarsa, her pagoda temple is thronged with musicians and worshipers, holding aloft oil torches. 
At dawn on the second day of the new year, this year April 14, men from each village division shoulder canopied palanquins, with the idols within. 
A long-fringed umbrella whirls over each of the 32 khats, which converge at Bal Kumari's temple. 
Men throw red powder over everyone (blood is the favored color of mother goddesses). 
A parade is then held for the god Ganesh, with hundreds of men covered in red powder wielding torches.
