
Advocates of change in China won a solid victory at its 13th Congress of the Communist Party, but the balance between them and more cautious leaders has been carefully preserved, according to a number of academic specialists on China.
The experts held a four-day meeting here to assess Beijing's efforts at change.
Of the five members of the new Standing Committee of the Politburo, the highest decision-making body, the experts noted, two are clearly reformers, including Zhao Ziyang, the new Party General Secretary. 
But two others, including Li Peng, who is believed likely to be named Prime Minister, favor a more moderate approach, and the fifth member, Qiao Shi, is thought to be a swing vote capable of siding with either group.
''It's clear the reformers will be the dominant group, but the more cautious people still have a significant position,'' said Roderick MacFarquhar, a professor of government at Harvard University. 
''This reproduces the old balance so there will continue to be arguments.''
 
Judging Economic Changes
The experts, meeting at a conference sponsored by Brown University's Institute for International Studies, raised a number of questions about the success of Beijing's economic changes.
They agreed that the economic changes, notably in agriculture, had been far more effective than those in any other Communist nation in producing high growth rates. 
Since the reforms began in 1979, in fact, China's gross national product has grown at eight percent a year, more than six times the recent average growth rate in Eastern Europe.
But the participants, from the United States, China, Japan and the Soviet Union, stressed that Beijing had not reaped any gain in industrial productivity, and they suggested that the big jump in farm output in the early 1980's may have been a one-time increase, which has now stalled.
Indeed, some experts argued, the Communists have not gone nearly as far in reforming industry as they have talked about, especially in freeing prices and making factory managers responsible for profits.
 
Recent Spurt of Inflation
''They may have missed their best opportunity to do these things,'' said Nicholas R. Lardy, a professor of economics at the University of Washigton.
In part, Dr. Lardy contended, this is true because of a recent spurt of inflation, which has made all Beijing's leaders more nervous about experimenting with freeing prices previously fixed by the state. 
But it is also because the ''urban population is against further reform,'' he said. 
Many urban residents feel only the peasants have benefited from the changes so far.
The specialists were impressed that Deng Xiaoping, China's paramount leader and the champion of the reformers, was able to force the retirement from the Politburo of virtually all the senior conservative officials who have opposed him, including Peng Zhen, 85, the chairman of China's legislature. 
Mr. Deng himself stepped down from his Politburo seat in exchange.
But they expressed surprise that Hu Yaobang, who had been forced out as General Secretary by pressure from conservatives last January after a series of student demonstrations, was retained on the Politburo. 
Mr. Hu is Mr. Deng's closest disciple and the most outspoken advocate of political as well as economic change.
 
'Potential for Conflict'
Merle Goldman, a professor of history at Boston University, said Mr. Hu's continued membership on the Politburo raised ''the potential for conflict between him and Zhao,'' the new General Secretary. 
She pointed out that two of the five members of the new Politburo Standing Committee, Mr. Qiao and Hu Qili, both had served under Mr. Hu in the China Youth League, and that many of the provincial party leaders as well as heads of China's prestigious reserach institutes were loyal to Mr. Hu.
''Hu still has a mass base and Zhao doesn't,'' Dr. Goldman said, alluding to Mr. Zhao's background as a technocrat rather than as a party or military bureaucrat. 
On the other side of the ledger, Mr. Zhao has emerged as a smooth operator, more concilatory to old-line conservatives than Mr. Hu was, and less interested in the sensitive subject of changing the political structure through greater freedom of speech and more open elections, Dr. Goldman said.
Mr. Zhao's future, and that of the economic reforms, may rest on two factors, the participants agreed: how long Mr. Deng lives and how well the changes actually work.
Dr. Lardy argued that too much attention is paid simply to the names of the members of the new Politburo. 
''The people called conservatives are not opposed to reform when they find out how well it works,'' he said, pointing to the many rural officials who have now happily given up much of their former power to go into business under the new rules approving private enterprise.
Dr. Lardy also pointed to evidence that the changes in industry have not done as well as many foreigners believe. 
The best measure, he argued, should be increased profitability of factories, since China is trying to make the transition from a centrally planned economy, where the Government provides raw materials and labor and automatically takes all output, to a more market-oriented appproach.
