
The fifth annual Asian American International Film Festival opens today at New York University's Schimmel Auditorium with the premiere of a tragic love story made in China, Shui Hua's ''Regret for the Past.''
The festival, which will be held on two successive Friday and Saturday evenings, this weekend and next, is a showcase of works by Asian and Asian-American film makers.
This year the festival, which is sponsored by Asian Cine-Vision in cooperation with N.Y.U.'s School of Cinema Studies, will include two significant vintage works in Asian-American film history: Cecil B. De Mille's 1916 ''The Cheat,'' in which the Japanese-born Sessue Hayakawa established himself as Hollywood's first Asian star, and ''The Dragon Painter,'' a 1924 Hayakawa film.
Also scheduled is the highly acclaimed ''Chan Is Missing,'' directed, produced and in part written by Wayne Wang. 
The film, which concerns itself with Asian identity in the United States, will be shown next Friday.
The fifth annual Asian American International Film Festival opens today at New York University's Schimmel Auditorium with the premiere of a tragic love story made in China, Shui Hua's ''Regret for the Past.''
''We are trying to increase exposure and understanding of Asian and Asian-American films,'' said Michael Chu, the festival coordinator for Asian Cine-Vision, ''and we want to increase the exposure of the film makers.''
 
Resettling Refugees
In addition to the 1980 ''Regret for the Past,'' tonight's program includes ''Bittersweet Survival,'' a documentary by Christine Choy and J.T. 
Takagi about the resettlement of Southeast Asian refugees in fishing communities along the Texas Gulf Coast and California's Monterey Bay. 
Also to be shown this evening is ''Chiang Ching: A Dance Journey,'' Lana Pih Jokel's biography of a dancer who went from Hong Kong movies to New York's dance world and, triumphantly, back to China. 
The film was made in New York with added footage from Asia.
Tomorrow night's program is made up of films from India and China. 
''Akriet'' (''Misbegotten''), directed by and starring Amol Palekar, is a film dealing with an actual police investigation of village ritual murders. 
The work was banned in India. 
The other film is ''Return From Silence: China's Revolutionary Writers,'' which was made after the Cultural Revolution. 
Using historical footage and interviews, Chung-wen Shih produced this movie about the Chinese literary figures Cao Yu, Ding Ling and Mao Dun.
Mr. Chu said in an interview that many of the film makers would attend the festival to discuss their work. 
''A prime reason Asians are making films in this country,'' he explained, ''is to destroy stereotypes.''
He cited ''Chan Is Missing,'' now playing commercially at the Cinema Studio 1, as an example of a film that belies the image many non-Asians have of Chinese. 
''That film is the truth of what Chinatown is and what its people are all about,'' he said.
 
Experimental Shorts on the Bill
Two short experimental films will accompany ''Chan Is Missing'' next Friday: ''Commercial Eruption'' and ''School of Hard Knocks,'' both by Yoshiko Chuma, a Japanese woman who lives in New York. 
The first is a parody of television commercials. 
The second is described as an exploration of spatial and visual relationships. 
''Taiko: The Music of the Japanese Drums,'' by David Kimura, completes the evening's program.
Two early Hayakawa films will be shown on the festival's final night, Saturday, June 26. 
Hayakawa, who died at the age of 83 in Tokyo nine years ago, made more than 130 films and was nominated for an Academy Award for his role as the Japanese prison camp commander in ''Bridge on the River Kwai'' in 1958.
The festival sponsor, Asian Cine-Vision, with headquarters at 32 East Broadway, produces a nightly show in Chinese on Manhattan Cable television from 8 to 9, runs a workshop to instruct Chinatown residents in video-production techniques and publishes Bridge, a magazine primarily devoted to the arts.
The festival site, Schimmel Auditorium, is in Tisch Hall, 40 West Fourth Street. 
Programs begin at 7 P.M, with admission by a $3 donation.
