
More so today than at any time since the early part of this century, when boatloads of Irish, Italians and Eastern Europeans spilled onto the city's shores, New York is a city of immigrants. 
Beginning 17 years ago with a loosening in the Federal immigration law, the latest surge of foreigners from virtually every nation has reached dimensions not seen since the last great wave of immigration ended in the 1920's as the heyday of Ellis Island came to a close, Federal immigration records show. 
More than a million immigrants now live in New York City. 
According to the Immigration and Naturalization Service, there are more than 650,000 legal immigrants here, and the city estimates that there are 750,000 illegal aliens as well.
The heaviest influxes are from Central and South America, the Caribbean, Italy, the Soviet Union, India, China and Korea, a complex mix that includes wealthy newcomers whose high visibility around the city often obscures the traditional immigrant force - those who come here with only a dream and a willingness to struggle.
This new surge is altering the city's ethnic texture, revitalizing many of its neighborhoods and reaffirming something about the city that many may have thought long lost - that despite the fiscal crisis, crime statistics and other drawbacks, the rags-to-riches promise of New York that attracted generations of immigrants is still very much alive.
First of a series of articles appearing periodically on immigrants in New York City
''The word has leaked out,'' said Frank Vardy, who analyzes immigration for the city's Planning Commission. 
''You can make a living in this city, and you might even make it big.''
All over New York, immigrants are making their mark. 
And nowhere is this presence more apparent than in the new ethnic outposts that have sprouted in recent years, taking over where Little Italy, Chinatown, the Lower East Side and other immigrant nurturing grounds of the past left off.
Of these, perhaps none is more an epitome of the whole city's new ethnic landscape than Elmhurst, Queens. 
It is the city's most ethnically diverse neighborhood, a true melting pot where 20,000 immigrants from more than 110 countries live in the shadow of the elevated No. 7 Flushing subway line, and where every day a trip to the cleaners, a stop at the post office or a wait for the bus becomes an important step in that complicated osmosis involved in becoming an American.
Elmhurst is the kind of place where the local grocer is Korean, the butcher comes from Argentina and the baker is Colombian - where it is harder to find a decent hamburger than Pakistani lemon pickle. 
There are blocks where the fashion is saris, and others where it is mandarin collars, and still others with garments that look plucked from the streets of Guatemala.
Ethnic surprises abound in this community of modest row houses and low-rise apartment buildings that has been transformed over the past decade from an Archie Bunker-style working class haven to an international metropolis in miniature. 
Indian, Greek, Korean, Thai, Chinese, Argentine, Colombian, Italian, Ecuadorean restaurants dot the commercial terrain. 
An Indian ashram sits across from the local high school. 
The Dutch Reformed Church now conducts services in Taiwanese.
Unlike many other sectors of the city where people have flocked in distinct ethnic groups, Elmhurst is a place where Bengalis live alongside Ecuadoreans - where lending a cup of sugar becomes as much an exercise in double translation as in neighborliness.
Elmhurst has an Italian-style pizzeria operated by a newcomer from Greece who is unable to talk to his customers because most are from India. 
The most faithful patrons at the local doughnut shop are Chinese, although most have yet to master the word for cruller.
It is a place, in fact, where the pale-skinned look out of place and unaccented English sounds odd.
 
In Search of English
''I came to New York so that I could learn English,'' said Jumoke Rhodes, a Nigerian whose native language is Yoruba and who complains that neither she nor her two children can find anyone in Elmhurst to speak English with. 
''Here is an English-speaking country. 
What I got in my life is something else. 
I don't know where I am. 
Spain?
China?''
In many ways, Elmhurst furnishes an overview of today's immigrant experience - reflecting many of the contributions and burdens this foreign population has brought to the city as a whole.
There are 34 different languages spoken by pupils in the local public school, P.S. 
89. Citywide, the Board of Education has hired 2,500 teachers at a yearly cost of $27 million to work with youngsters unable to speak English.
Elmhurst General Hospital employs its own interpreters, and deals daily with such situations as having an Indian man refuse an emergency gynecological examination for his wife because the only doctors on call are men.
There are sweatshops in Elmhurst where workers are paid by the piece - and below the minimum wage. 
There are places, too, where forged Social Security cards are reported to go for $180.
''The city is changing, there's no question about that,'' said Charles B. Keely, a senior associate at the Population Council, which studies international population movement and trends. 
''Not since the turn of the century have there been so many foreigners here, and they are as diverse a group as ever.''
''It's amazing,'' said Detective Jerry Campbell of the 110th Precinct, which includes Elmhurst. 
''Anything God put on this earth, we've got at least two of them here in this precinct.''
 
Attraction Is Not Apparent
No one quite knows why so many different foreigners flock to Elmhurst, which is about an 18-minute subway ride from Times Square. 
Housing is cheaper than it is in Manhattan, but no more so than in many other neighborhoods. 
There is nothing about the community's layout or services that would naturally attract the foreign born. 
Still, immigrants arrive every day - having been given the green light by relatives and friends or by friends of friends -often oblivious to how international a center it really is.
''Please, change, quarters,'' Lev Mines said in uncertain English the other day, handing over a dollar bill to a woman in a coffee shop in Elmhurst.
''Not enough,'' Maria Fernanda replied with equal linguistic difficulty, attempting to explain she only had dimes.
There the two of them were. 
He, who moved to this country two years ago from Leningrad, and she, who arrived here two years ago from Colombia, reaching out to one another in a foreign tongue, ultimately arriving at some understanding, with neither of them quite aware how.
 
A Shared Deficiency
''No English, no English,'' Mr. Mines exclaimed, as if to apologize to the rest of the customers in the shop. 
Unbeknown to him, the shop caters primarily to Colombians, and few of the customers spoke English either.
Elmhurst - named years ago for its abundance of elm trees - sits in the heart of Queens, adjoining such other increasings oolong.
 
Economic Contrasts
Few foreigners find life easy here in Elmhurst. 
It is a place where families are often crowded five to a room and work as many as 14 hours a day, seven days a week. 
Many in this community hold two or three jobs.
It is a place of extremes: A Yugoslavian handyman and his wife, who cleans office buildings at night in Manhattan, saved up $90,000 to buy a new home, but a young Colombian busboy who came to this country last year to seek his fortune paces the floor at night, torn between subsisting here or swallowing his pride and going home.
In Elmhurst lives Isabel Aguirre from Argentina, who operates the shish kebob stand on Vanderbilt Avenue at 43d Street, across from Grand Central Station, and Nu Trieu Pheu, who escaped by boat from Vietnam. 
It is home for 25-year-old Cesar Sierra, an immigrant from Colombia now studying to become a doctor, and 28-year-old Cheng-I Chang, who hopes someday to open his own Chinese restaurant. 
And it is now home for Yvonne Chang, a 3-year-old immigrant from Taiwan, who has been here three months and is already listening to records about the life of Curious George.
Sophie Chapman was on a float in a Hispanic Day parade when she met the man she hopes to marry. 
Tina Wong decided to marry Jimmy, and did, after bumping into him on a street corner in Brooklyn after not having seen him for years since their school days in Hong Kong.
 
An Immigrant Romance
As for Sarita Ocampo, romance was a bit more involved. 
Mrs. Ocampo, who now works in Elmhurst, first came to the United States from Colombia as a maid. 
She had never been a maid before, and disliked the job from the start. 
She continued, however, because - given her inability to speak the language - there was nothing else for her to do.
One day Mrs. Ocampo went looking for an apartment and consulted a real estate agent. 
This particular agent had more than simply real estate to offer. 
He asked whether Mrs. Ocampo was interested in making some extra money. 
She said she was. 
He opened his wallet, and took out a photograph of his brother.
He said his brother, who had no legal way to remain in this country, would pay her $800 if she would agree to marry him. 
Mrs. Ocampo recalls that she was intrigued by the photograph. 
She agreed to the deal, and a week later was married. 
That, she says, was 10 years ago. 
They are still married. 
They are still in love. 
He has never paid her the $800.
These days, the Ocampos, who have recently bought a home on Long Island, are both in the real estate business. 
They are looking for a maid.
