
FOR the rest of New York, winter, with snowy white trimmings, is still the order of the day, but in Chinatown, resplendent in rich reds and golds, it is the first weekend of the Spring Festival. 
Yesterday, the festival - which is the name for this celebratory season of the Chinese New Year - reached a climax with the customary frenzied Chinatown greeting of the first day of the year, but that is not the end of this joyous event.
Chinatown will continue to be a festival enclave for the remaining two weeks in which this most impressive of the 30 holidays on the Chinese calendar is observed. 
The welcome to the Year of the Rabbit still colors the streets of this ever-expanding and booming Lower East Side area of Chinese settlement. 
A walk along the crowded sidewalks, through Canal Street, down Mott Street, up the Bowery and East Broadway, brings to the discerning eye symbols of the celebration. 
In the buildings along the way, in those that house Chinatown institutions, there are music and dance programs this weekend that will make the assiduous stroller witness to even more of the New Year spirit.
Chinatown, holiday or not, is always an exciting walk-through, and it is even more so during these several weeks. 
As with most Where to eat in Chinatown, page C17. named areas in New York, Chinatown represents not so much geography as a texture of neighborhood, and nowadays East Side Chinatown extends north from Worth Street to Grand Street. 
One may approach Chinatown from any direction and become enmeshed in the spirit of the season, although it may be difficult at times to say whether the involvement is with the festival or the normally frantic swirl of everyday Chinatown. 
Chinese New Year is a time for home celebration, feasting and visiting, but the tradition of public performance has the holiday spilling over into streets and stores.
Canal Street, at the longitude of Centre Street, is a titillating point from which to start a walk eastward. 
The sidewalks are brimming with goods for sale, on building-side and on curbside. 
Live fish are a sidewalk-stall staple at all times, more so at New Year's. 
The Chinese word for fish, yu, is punningly akin to the word for abundance, and it is therefore lucky to have on the table when a year's outlook is in the programming stage; those without money to buy a real fish often have a symbolic wooden one at their hope-laden tables. 
Oranges are in profusion, a golden-hued fruit that hints of golden good fortune. 
Peanuts, pyramided in pretty gift-wrap packages, are the symbol of fertility. 
Dates and lotus seeds and special cakes are in demand, each of them sought for reasons of happy happenstance in nomenclature rather than for nutritional attraction. 
As the chef Kin Jing Mark, who teaches cuisine at the uptown China Institute in America, puts it: ''At New Year's, you don't eat the taste, you eat the meaning.''
Not everything on Canal Street is for the holiday. 
Much that meets the eye on these days meets the eye every day, from the splash of oddly shaped vegetables to the sidewalk Senegalese who was selling knives in what appeared to be a hopeless confusion of French and Cantonese. 
But at the southeast corner of Canal and Mulberry Streets, the florid front of a small store presents a vivid tableau to the passer-by. 
The wares on display are almost entirely for the New Year trade. 
Gold-colored objects, birds, pagodas and such are suspended from small red streamers, embodying two primary holiday colors. 
Some are little bells, others are merely eye-catchers, designed to do so from a friendly wall.
In an earthern dish, there are what appear to be bulbs, of the tulip type familiar to most of us. 
A knowledgeable onlooker allowed that they were sui xien, roots popular to take home at New Year's because they symbolize growth and ultimately sprout into angel-like yellow flowers. 
As with any folklore, interpretations are infinite, and one may make a choice of what is pure fact or charming fiction.
 
Joining in the Customs
A right turn onto Mott Street leads into what is Chinatown's main stem. 
Perhaps the bitter battlefield aroma of yesterday's firecracker orgy, which accompanied the fabled lion dance, still hovers over the pavement. 
The Year of the Rabbit is very much in evidence on this narrow, singularly Chinese New York thoroughfare that caters to visitor and inhabitant alike. 
At No. 74A Mott, the window of the Good Field Trading Company is ablaze with red-decor felicitations. 
Two of them, in Chinese, wish prosperity in business - whether on the four seas or, alternatively, on the three rivers. 
Chinese is a culture that bunches things, whether vices or virtues, advantages or disadvantages, in numbered slogans.
Inside, customers are buying hung bao, the little red envelopes, sold in packets, into which gift money, or perhaps certificates, are inserted before being passed on to children. 
There are hundreds of Chinese New Year's cards on sale and, if you want to take up the custom next year, this might be a choice time for a good buy. 
The man behind the counter said that New Year's greetings and general customs remain the same, although there are more regional variations noted these days with the influx of other Chinese into the basically Cantonese ingredient of Chinatown, whose largest element hails from the Taishan district.
Several doors south, at 62 Mott Street, is the home of the Chinese Consolidated Benevolent Association, Chinatown's most venerable community institution and operator of a school that trains American-born generations in the ways of the forefathers.
''Every year the celebration is about the same,'' observed Joseph P. C. Mei, president of the association, which sponsors some of the holiday's most public events. 
''This is a time, a cultural thing, for the benefit of all Chinese people, no matter what religion - I'm Christian, myself -they all come to celebrate.''
This weekend, the association's premises will be working overtime on celebrating with a schedule of events free and open to the public, almost all in the auditorium. 
The programs should more than slake a thirst for the music, song and dance of Old China. 
Today at 2:30 P.M., the New York Chinese School is to perform Chinese folk dance and modern songs and offer other entertainment. 
At 7 P.M., Project Open Door of the Chinatown Planning Council and the Chinese Music Club fill the house with Chinese melody.
Tomorrow at 2:30 P.M., that very specialized form of music, Chinese opera, is to take the platform under the ministrations of the Chinese Cultural and Recreation Association of New York. 
From 7 to 9 P.M., the Hsing Yin Chorus of New York raises its voice in song for the season. 
On Sunday at noon, the New York Chinese School's drum and bugle corps is parade on Mott, to be followed at 2 P.M. by the New York Institute of Cantonese program of Chinese music, southern style - southern Chinese, that is. 
At 7 P.M., the Kou-Lien Musical Association tops off the weekend with a final round of Chinese music.
 
The Felicitous Homonym
The eye of the visitor threading his way through Chinatown's network of restaurants, groceries, bakeries and gift shops, on Mott Street or any other, may spot pastries of various composition, such as the niangao, a rice cake whose name could also be confused with a phrase meaning ''exalted year.''
For sale, and going like hot cakes, are dumplings that also are filled with felicitous homonym significance.
Continuing on Mott Street, one can make a left U-turn onto the Bowery, where it widens into Chatham Square, with its statue of Confucius and monument to Chinatown's veterans of American wars. 
At 26 Bowery, in an undistinguished walk-up building opposite the southern end of the Confucius Plaza complex, is the Asian Arts Institute and the home of the Asian-American Dance Theater. 
Its quarters, up two steep flights, are dedicated to promoting dance and visual arts, contemporary often linked to traditional.
Tomorrow at 8 P.M. and again on Sunday at 3 P.M., the dance group enters the third season of a series that bears the distinctly un-Chinese double-entendre title of ''D'Asia Vu.''
The program of New Year's celebration will fill the small hall with a sword dance and a contemporary work performed by Kuang-yu Fong, schooled in Peking Opera. 
There is also to be Bell Yung playing Chinese classical music on the gugin, a seven-stringed zither, and the Chinese Music and Arts Hai Yuen Choir performing folk songs. 
All this against a backdrop of an art installation by an artist named Kwok. 
Admission: $7. 
Reservations: 233-2154, 233-8660.
 
Where Cultures Meet
If legs and spirit are willing, the pedestrian can cross Chatham Square and continue north along East Broadway, past the Chinatown branch of the New York Public Library, which is just beyond Catherine Street, and under the Manhattan Bridge, which hovers over the venerable Sin Sun movie house. 
East Broadway leads to Seward Park, where the old Jewish influence is still evident even as the tide of Chinatown flows around it. 
East of the park is the old Jewish Daily Forward building, now home to a Chinese organization. 
At Grand Street, turn left, for a walk of several blocks to the Henry Street Settlement Arts for Living Center, at 466 Grand, near Clinton Street, an institution that encapsulates the many cultures, including Hispanic, black, Chinese and Jewish, that flourish in these parts. 
Sunday afternoon belongs, appropriately, to the Chinese. 
At 1 and 3:30 P.M., two groups, Music from China and the Young People's Chinese Cultural Center, join in concert, traditional style.
In the center's modern hall, Music From China's 10 musicians are to join the other organization's 30 dancers, featuring community artists and visiting professionals from China representing regional companies and academies in Beijing, Shanghai and Tianjin. 
Among the highlights: excerpts from the modern Chinese ballet of the classic tale ''Dream of the Red Chamber'' and an eight-woman saber-sword dance choreographed by Pei-pei Gu of the Shanghai Dance Drama Company, as well as pipa solos by Tang Liang-xing, a virtuoso of this Chinese lute.
Admission at the door: $7; in advance, $5; over-65's and students, $3. 
Information: 962-5698.
 
An Island of Quiet
To complete the grand tour in an ambiance of quiet contemplation that contrasts with all of the celebratory turmoil, one might look in at one of Chinatown's traditional Buddhist sanctuaries. 
It is customary for Chinese who grew up in the Buddhist tradition to pray at temples during this holiday. 
Chinatown has several temple-like institutions, some geared for visits by other than believers, such as the one on Mott Street north of the Community Center and others squirreled away on side-street second floors. 
There is a particular sense of peace that pervades the ground-floor American Society of Buddhist Studies at 214 Centre Street, two blocks north of Canal Street, which can be reached from the northern boundary of Grand by walking west, past the Bowery, through Little Italy, and then turning south at Centre.
This is not a temple, a full temple, a shaven-headed monk explained through a translator, but for the visitor it might well be. 
It is a high-ceilinged spacious room dominated by a large golden Buddha. 
Worshipers, who come and go during the day, kneel on cushions in a milieu of red hangings, of walls lined with religious statues, of flowers, of incense and, above all, of a profound hush that contrasts with the pushy world at the door.
''It is not a religious day,'' the monk said, ''but people come to pray, for good luck and for peace. 
Some people don't eat meat for the whole month of the New Year celebration, some eat vegetables only maybe for a day or two. 
If you eat vegetables, it means that you didn't kill life, and that is good.''
 
An Uptown Briefing
Actually, the ideal briefing to brace oneself for the sights and sounds of Chinese New Year is to be found far uptown from Chinatown in an exhibition in the tasteful and small gallery of the China Institute in America, in a town house at 125 East 65th Street (744-8181). 
The show, sponsored by the institute's Women's Association, takes note of the usual effigy of the kitchen god who has watched the family's conduct all year and will have its godly lips smeared with honey before being sent off in a blaze of fire to the Jade Emperor. 
Hours are 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. Mondays to Fridays; 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. Saturdays and 2 to 5 P.M. Sundays; admission is $1. 
The exhibition runs through Feb. 
15.
There are carvings of food and feasting, examples of red gift envelopes (with Hong Kong coins), sets of games and informative displays, among them one that describes each of the 12 animals of the lunar calendar. 
Those born in the Year of the Rabbit are considered singularly lucky in money matters, are said to make good companions and are caring and sensitive and most compatible with people who entered the world in the Years of the Snake, the Monkey and the Horse. 
Year of the Rabbit people include Confucius, Martin Luther, Albert Einstein, Queen Victoria and Bob Hope. 
Rabbit people are also lively, full of movement and keep escape routes open, according to one Chinese lawyer who cited an old Chinese saying, ''Every rabbit has three dens.''
As you can see, there is more to a Chinese New Year than meets the eye or the mouth.
