
Chi Zhongguo, the manager of the Yaxin Silk Weaving Factory, proudly showed off a copy of ''a very famous oil painting'' that his plant had started mass-producing for the American market.
There, in luminous hues more vivid than Leonardo da Vinci's original, was ''The Last Supper,'' being recreated on mechanized looms on 100,000 synthetic velveteen tapestries in a choice of large or small sizes.
The order, from an American importer, is a different one for the Yaxin factory: Eighty percent of its production consists of disposable artificial silk prayer rugs for Moslems, mostly in the Middle East. 
The plant turns out 3 million prayer rugs a year now, Mr. Chi said, virtually all for export.
Profile of Yaxin Silk Weaving Factory in China, which is currently producing tapestry of Leonardo da Vinci's "The Last Supper" for US marketFormer Elegance
When the factory opened as a workshop in 1954, it specialized in elegant yun jin, or cloud-fabric silk brocade, of a quality for which this eastern Chinese city was long renowned. 
It still makes a bit of the gold-threaded fabric for ethnic markets in Mongolia, Tibet and Xinjiang.
But in a kind of Gresham's Law of weaving, synthetic, machine-woven fabrics have been replacing the silk brocades that were painstakingly hand-loomed. 
As Mr. Chi explained, ''All the old-fashioned looms are now in the countryside because they are not used for production anymore.''
Certainly, no one who has seen the graceful ceramics and delicately patterned material of traditional Chinese design could accuse the Chinese of a lack of taste. 
Even Chinese toys can be found in stores today of a sturdy tin construction that went out in the West with World War II.
 
Competing With Hong Kong
But as Chinese industry develops export markets, it finds that its low labor costs let it compete in areas that Hong Kong and Taiwan have dominated with cheaply produced goods.
For example, having found that Westerners find pandas cuddly, Chinese manufacturers have been using the furry black-and-white animal as bait for everything from bamboo screens and bathroom rugs to Christmas tree lights. 
On a more traditional note, a procession of jolly plastic Santa Clauses has been making its way out of the industrial depths of China in time for the Christmas season, which the Chinese do not celebrate.
The Yaxin factory, having moved almost entirely to synthetics, still makes traditional Chinese tapestry scenes such as the pine trees and cranes that symbolize longevity. 
These go mostly to the Japanese market, but in modest quantity.
 
Shift to Prayer Rugs
The plant, which exports almost everything it makes, got into the prayer rug business in 1966. 
As output increased, the labor force grew to 1,700, compared with only 60 when it was making brocade in 1954.
By working around the clock on three shifts, the plant now nets 4 million yuan, or nearly $2.4 million, in annual profits, which is impressive by Chinese standards. 
The prayer rugs earned an award as an outstanding product from the Chinese Ministry of Light Industry two years ago.
Mr. Chi said that no Moslems advised the factory on the rugs, which were copied from a pattern supplied by a customer. 
Nor do any appear to go to the estimated 10 million Moslems that live in China; they are only for export.
 
Market of 400 Million
''We don't have a clear idea of the population of Moslems,'' Mr. Chi said of his export market. 
''Some say about 400 million. 
But there is a big demand for rugs like this. 
All Moslem people over 16 should have at least one of these.''
Other estimates put the number of Moslems worldwide somewhat higher. 
As part of the Five Pillars of Islam, devout Moslems are enjoined to pray five times a day.
Mr. Chi is a good enough businessman to recognize a market when he sees one. 
''When the rugs get dirty, they throw it away and get another one, like Chinese used to do with towels,'' he explained.
Though China competes with a dozen or so other countries, some Moslem, in making prayer rugs, Mr. Chi insisted that his were better because they had a high-quality cotton backing and an attractive glossy, silk-like pile.
The factory would manufacture more but the chemical fiber thread must be imported, generally from Japan. 
''We're facing a shortage of artificial silk because some people abroad say its production causes pollution,'' Mr. Chi said.
 
Exports Through Government
The products themselves are actually ordered and sold through China's foreign trade corporations. 
The prayer rugs, Mr. Chi said, cost about $4.20 apiece to make and are sold to the Government for about $5.40. 
The Government sells them to the importer at a higher wholesale price.
While ''The Last Supper'' is more expensive because of its size and many colors - the large model costs about $15 to make - Mr. Chi said that he would welcome more such Western orders.
''The prayer rug sells only in Moslem areas,'' Mr. Chi said. 
But there is a wider market in the United States and Canada and European countries for other designs, since everyone enjoys a piece of art.''
