
PAUL TIPPETT was holding forth on the newly scrutable East, talking about the deal that American Motors has made to produce as many as 40,000 Jeeps a year in Peking. 
''This thing took four years to put together,'' he said, ''and it was interesting to see the changes in China during that time. 
They are really serious about coming into the 20th century. 
They say it won't go as fast as we would like, maybe, but they are very serious about doing it.''
Mr. Tippett, who signed the agreement in May as chairman and chief executive officer of A.M.C., said one of the changes he has noted is China's new interest in making things work.
''For instance,'' he said, ''it used to be that the water in the hotels didn't work most of the time. 
The first thing you'd do when you checked in was to put the stopper in the tub and turn on the tap. 
That way, if the water went on in the middle of the night, you'd get some.''
Now, he said, there is a tremendous amount of new construction, and the Chinese are openly critical of their own shortcomings. 
''One time, I was having dinner with the Mayor of Peking,'' he said, ''and I complimented him on the city's new airport. 
It is beautiful, and he thanked me. 
Then he shook his head and said, 'But it's not good enough. 
They are always losing luggage.'
I assured him the problem was not uniquely Chinese.''
Because of the complexity - and not least because of cultural differences - there was concern about the solidity of the Chinese commitment to American Motors right up to the last moment, Mr. Tippett said.
''But,'' he added, ''there's one nice thing about doing business in their system, where one guy makes the decision. 
He'll say, 'This is what we're going to do,' and that's what gets done. 
We asked about prices and profits and whether they had factored in inflation, and that puzzled them a lot. 
Inflation?
They don't have inflation.''
The joint venture with Peking Auto Works is just one of the moves being made to strengthen A.M.C., which, along with its French partner, Renault, has thus far posted sales figures for 1983 that are more than double those of last year.
Much of the success is founded on the Alliance, A.M.C.'s domestically built version of the Renault 9 sedan, and the line has been expanded for 1984 with a hatchback version called the Encore. 
The company's new line was, in fact, what brought Mr. Tippett to New York, and he pointed out that it represents the largest single-year investment in A.M.C.'s history.
''We invested more than a quarter-billion dollars on Cherokee and Wagoneer alone,'' Mr. Tippett said - and the new, little Jeeps are indeed A.M.C.'s biggest news.
Jeep, as everyone concedes, wrote the book on four-wheel drive. 
But the last major revision came 20 years ago, and an edited- down version was needed to face off against Chevrolet's mini- Blazer and Ford's Bronco II in the hotly contested market for sport/ utility compacts.
As a result, the new Cherokees and Wagoneers are 21 inches shorter than their predecessors. 
They are six inches narrower, four inches lower, and they weigh nearly 1,000 pounds less. 
The amazing thing is that interior space remains almost the same.
For those who need or want the big Wagoneer, A.M.C. has retained one full-dress version, which, with its leather upholstery now is called the Gran Wagoneer. 
But the big Cherokee is gone, as are six other models. 
The Spirit has been dropped, along with the Concord, Le Car, Eagle SX-4, Jeep CJ-5 and Renault 18i sedan.
Two engines are available in the down-sized Jeeps. 
There is a new 2.5-liter 4-cylinder and a 2.8- liter V-6, supplied to A.M.C. by General Motors and used head-to- head in the small Blazer. 
Three transmissions also are offered, with four- and five-speed manuals and a three-speed automatic. 
The standard all-wheel drivetrain is called Command-Trac, and it can be shifted from two- to four-wheel drive as the vehicle is moving. 
Selec-Trac, Jeep's fulltime system, is optional.
With a weight of only 2,900 pounds - about 250 pounds less than the offerings from Ford and Chevrolet - the Cherokee feels fairly snappy, even though its acceleration would be less than satisfactory in most other sorts of vehicles.
Inside, there is a nicely done-up dash and low-back bucket seats. 
Instrumentation is relatively complete, although a standard tachometer is missing, a surprising lack in a vehicle that often will be used for trailer towing and low- gear/high-rev off-roading.
The body is more rounded than in the past, with the sheet metal helping aerodynamics and lending its support to a fuel-economy estimate of 24, city, and 33, highway. 
Jeep's rugged good looks have been preserved, though, and the new baby is going to be a strong contender in a segment that is expected to claim a quarter of the four-wheel-drive market by 1985.
