
DIM SUM, the inviting teahouse canapes of China, have inspired two recent cookbooks by New Jersey residents well versed on the subject. 
Jean Yueh of Summit, a skillful writer and a teacher of Chinese cuisine, has written ''Dim Sum & Chinese One-Dish Meals'' (Irena Chalmers Cookbooks, P.O. 
Box 988, Denton, N.C., $6.95, plus $1 postage).
''The feeling of sensuous well-being and deep satisfaction that dim sum bring'' is cited by Mrs. Yueh as another reason for trying to make these ''dainty morsels stuffed with savory ingredients in a matchless variety of tastes and textures.''
''The majority of the Chinese people still use charcoal for cooking,'' writes Mrs. Yueh, referring to a recent trip to China. 
She then points out how much easier Chinese cooking is ''in a modern American kitchen.''
DIM SUM, the inviting teahouse canapes of China, have inspired two recent cookbooks by New Jersey residents well-versed on the subject.
Her creative and thorough recipes - for use with or without the food processor - persuade us to begin learning. 
(Mrs. Yueh's ''The Great Tastes Of Chinese Cooking'' (Times Books, New York, $14.95; paper title: ''Great Chinese Cooking,'' $7.95) received the R.T. 
French Tastemaker Award. 
Perhaps because, as Mrs. Yueh writes, her cooking philosophy ''combines Western technology with classical Chinese recipes,'' this impressive cookbook should earn the gratitude of cooks of every inclination for its multitude of helpful tips.)
In ''The Dim Sum Book: Classic Recipes From the Chinese Teahouse'' by Eileen Yin-Fei Lo of Montclair (Crown Publishers, New York, $12.95), the author remembers her ''earliest memory of dim sum.''
When she was 4, she writes, her 18-year-old brother, joyful over winning a mah-jongg game, treated her to a visit to a Cantonese teahouse, where they both feasted on ''dim sum, the different and delicious small tea-house foods that we loved so much.''
No wonder, as Miss Lo tells us, that ''the misty rosiness that surrounds the history of tea'' has imbued the term dim sum with implications of romance.
Her exquisite account of the ''wondrous parade'' of filled miniature dumplings, scallion pancakes and half-moons of pastry - the leisurely served fare still offered in many corners of the world - makes dim sum's general definition (''A delight of the heart'') seem especially apt and enticing.
Look for the debut of more delicious foods from other lands to enrich the American menu - like adobo, a spicy stew, and pancit, a noodle dish - says Reynaldo Alejandro, author of ''The Philippine Cookbook'' (Coward-McCann, New York, $17.95).
''Because the Filipino people are in part Malay, Chinese and Spanish,'' explained Mr. Alejandro, a caterer and culinary lecturer, ''our cuisine combines the best elements of their cookery and displays a rich heritage.''
The cookbook's 12 chapters - from appetizer to dessert - include varied and tempting dishes that Mr. Alejandro learned, he writes, in his grandmother's kitchen in the Philippines.
''I was encouraged to write 'The Philippine Cookbook' by the Filipiniana Society of Jersey City, a group of Filipinos and Filipino-Americans active in promoting the Filipino culture in New Jersey,'' the author said.
With this opening challenge - ''I promise you will save between 30 percent and 50 percent off your family's meat bills'' - in ''Emilie Taylor's Inflation Fighter Meat Book'' (Warner Books, New York, $9.95), Mrs. Taylor, who lives in Paramus, instantly gets our attention.
The secret, she writes, is not in purchasing ''overwhelmingly large hunks,'' but in following the meat-buying and cutting guidelines (poultry included) that the ''Inflation Fighter'' clearly and fully illustrates.
If Mrs. Taylor's lessons on avoiding fraud seem especially credible, it's because she is a butcher herself and the daughter of one (her late father owned a public market on Washington Avenue, Bergenfield, for 32 years). 
She also operates Emilie Taylor's Meat School in Paramus.
Starting today, Mrs. Taylor added, a telephone call to the ''meat tip hotline,'' (201) 265-1024, between 9 A.M. and 5 P.M., will yield her tip of the week.
''Who cares whether you take the time to prepare yourself an appetizing meal?
I do,'' writes June Roth in the beginning of ''The On-Your-Own Cookbook'' (Dial, New York, $8.95). 
Mrs. Roth, of Teaneck, is a syndicated columnist and the author of 32 books on food and health.
The book's subtitle, ''Cooking for Yourself by Yourself,'' further explains its message, which makes the work an ideal gift for newcomers to the kitchen. 
Its information includes budgetwise shopping, easy but imaginative recipes and even advice on cleaning up.
Such appetizing dishes are found in ''Living Better With a Special Diet'' (Arco, New York, $12.95; paper, $7.95), also by Mrs. Roth, that it is hard to believe it was written, as the author intended, for people on restricted diets.
''People with digestive problems,'' she says, ''need not despair that they will never eat delicious foods again,'' and her descriptions of individually recommended diets and menu plans, along with lists of foods to omit or permit, include many recipes appealing to the entire family.
A distinguished book, ''Complete Fish and Game Cookery of North America'' (Winchester Press, 220 Old New Brunswick Road, Piscataway, N.J. 
08854, $29.95) by Frances MacIlquham, is especially appropriate for New Jersey readers, according to Charles R. Walther, president of the press and a resident of the Hunterdon County community of Pattenburg.
''Our excellent fishing, especially for shad at this time of year,'' said Mr. Walther, himself a fisherman, ''merits splendid recipes to match the quality of the catch.''
Besides offering instructions for dressing and storing fish and game and putting to use traditional skills like woodfire cooking and smoking, ''Complete Fish and Game Cookery,'' by including accounts of ancient cooking methods, unfolds a fascinating story of how the food preparation affected the social history of North America.
Find your images of homemade meals fashioned out of local produce, or haute cuisine served amid sparkling appointments, springing into reality in the pages of ''Country Inns of America Cookbook,'' (Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New York, $24.95), edited by Robert T. Reid.
This is a collection of ''recipes from America's leading inns,'' and for country inn cooking, New Jersey is represented by: Cheese strata (a souffle), strawberry crepes, deviled crabs and other dishes from the Mainstay Inn in Cape May; eggplant casserole and spoon bread from the Chalfonte Hotel, also in Cape May, and a luncheon buffet and hors d'oeuvres from the Old Mill Inn in Bernardsville.
After a glimpse at the scrumptious illustrations of delectable recipes in ''Country Inns,'' there's good excuse to opt for a visit to such an inn and leave the cooking for another day.
