
It's been quite a season at the Bronx Zoo. 
New York City's two most distinguished - and cuddly - visitors downed 6,800 pounds of bamboo, 736 eggs and 2,208 apples and carrots.
Ling Ling, the male panda, celebrated his second birthday with a dash of whipped cream on his panda bread, which is a soggy soybean and cornmeal mixture. 
More important, the youngster learned to eat bamboo here.
Yong Yong, the female, tore down a mulberry tree or two, fought off an illness last summer and ended up gaining 20 pounds -bringing the 7-year-old's weight to a zaftig 207.
Along the way, the two pandas watched more than 1 million visitors file past, exhibiting themselves in the sort of funny hats, Bermuda shorts and skimpy halter tops you don't get to see a lot of in the mist-shrouded mountains of southwest China.
 
But Sunday was the last day of the pandas' six-month visit and the ''pandamonium'' was supposed to be over. 
Over the weekend, people crowded in for one last look. 
Newspapers printed farewell photos. 
Television announcers said goodbye.
The last $83.95 stuffed panda had days earlier been grabbed up. 
So had the hats with the panda faces, the panda salt and pepper shakers and the $5.95 (but not the $9) panda earrings.
All that remained was for Busch Gardens in Tampa, Fla., the next stop for the pandas, to pick up the animals. 
But for reasons unknown to Bronx Zoo officials, that did not happen.
Their current expectation is that the pandas will be claimed tomorrow or Friday. 
But the delightful upshot of the confusion has been to give this week's zoo-goers a nice surprise - pandas without crowding or consternation.
''We're so, so lucky,'' said Lisa Dautrich, who Monday journeyed from Oneonta in upstate New York on the off chance she might have one last chance to pursue her passion for pandas.
A typical day, she happily confided, might find her clad in panda sweater, panda slippers and a panda hat. 
Her house is crammed with stuffed pandas, panda cookie jars and panda pictures. 
She and her husband, Ken, have seen pandas several times at the Washington zoo.
''We have a whole room decorated panda,'' Ken said grimly. 
But not everything about the pandas is warm and cozy. 
For one thing. they don't like each other, and the zoo has chosen to display them in shifts.
Another characteristic of pandas was abundantly clear yesterday morning: They sleep almost incessantly. 
Yong Yong - the only one on display - was cuddled in a ball on top of a pile of branches. 
Each time she scratched, the crowd applauded wildly.
''They remind me of me,'' Ray Mejias, a ticket taker, said. 
''All they do is sleep and eat.''
 
Giant pandas have fascinated Americans at least since Theodore Jr. and Kermit, sons of Teddy Roosevelt, became the first Westerners to shoot and kill one in 1929.
Less than a decade later, live pandas had become a national fascination, as Chicago's Brookfield Zoo, and then the Bronx Zoo acquired specimens. 
Panda bathing suits, panda nursery furniture and even a panda cocktail (equal parts plum brandy, apple brandy, gin and orange juice) swept the nation.
But China turned Communist in 1949, and imperialist running dogs saw their panda supply halted. 
Pan-dah, the Bronx Zoo's last panda, died in 1951, and there seemed no hope for a replacement.
Then, in the early 1970's, China began giving pairs of pandas to such foreign capitals as Washington and London - but still none to New York. 
In recent years, an alarmingly shrinking panda population has spurred the Chinese Government to limit panda exports to visits of just a few months.
But even a few months seemed worth the effort to Mayor Koch, who so bedeviled authorities in Beijing, a sister city of New York, that he has said he became known as ''the guy who wants the pandas.''
The pandas arrived in April to be exhibited in the same spot as Pan-dah. 
''The night they arrived was like all Christmases, birthdays and holidays rolled into one,'' James G. Doherty, the zoo's curator, said.
Now, they are leaving what Mr. Doherty calls a void - the same feeling zoo officials in Los Angeles, San Francisco and Toronto had after their panda visits ended.
''It's the kind of feeling you get when a good friend comes to visit and then leaves,'' said an official of the San Francisco Zoo. 
''Very sad,'' said the Los Angeles man. 
Dr. Edgar E. Coons, a behavioral neuroscientist at New York University who has studied humans' affection for pandas, likened their departure to the ''empty feeling you get when the young ones leave the nest.''
Nobody seems to feel emptier than Pam Manning, the pandas' No. 3 keeper. 
''I'm upset,'' she said, holding one of the last pans of apples, carrots and panda bread that she may ever prepare. 
''Ling Ling is really just starting to learn to eat bamboo.''
