
Periodically one has to answer a summons from Hwa-Min Hsu, whose good offices are in Canal Street. 
Mr. Hsu knows practically all there is worth knowing about Chinatown, and so any day he is prepared to hold an inspection is a day of enlightenment, a gift. 
This one turned out to be the afternoon of the Chinese massage.
But first, some lunch and a ruminative discussion of various affairs. 
Mr. Hsu is building a hotel in Chatham Square, the first hotel in Chinatown - but it is too early to go into that, he said. 
Some tea and noodles showed up on the table, then some steamed asparagus, followed by a duck.
The Chinese movie theaters are slowly going under as a result of the popularity of video cassettes - but that is a subject for another time. 
Mr. Hsu slept only three hours the night before, a frequent occurrence for a businessman who deals by telephone with Asia. 
This produces stress and tension, and what reduces stress and tension?
Massage. We have arrived!
Mr. Hsu said that a few years back, change visited the barbershops of his native soil, Taiwan, as well as the mainland. 
Women infiltrated. 
What was more, the women offered massages. 
A man - or a woman, for that matter -could be shorn and kneaded into a stress-free puddle all in one stop. 
''We're not talking about porno massage parlors,'' Mr. Hsu cautioned. 
''No sex. 
This is for pressure, for tension. 
That's the job of the barbershop in China.''
One of these emporiums opened in Chinatown two years ago, and another came along soon after. 
Mr. Hsu is but one of many who are nuts about them. 
Even at $25 an hour, he said, it is a great service for the restaurant workers who stand all day, as well as the garment workers who sew for hours, getting themselves down in the back. 
He himself visits twice a week, sometimes forgetting he ought to get a haircut, too. 
As for the old style, all-male, lightless, basement barbershop-mah-jongg parlor of Chinatown days gone by, well, there are still a dozen around, Mr. Hsu pointed out on his after-lunch walk to modernity but they are mostly frequented by older men.
Up one flight of stairs, practically at the foot of the Brooklyn Bridge, Mr. Hsu entered the Ming Kai Barbershop, all chrome and high tech. 
''The male barbershop looks very sloppy,'' he pointed out. 
''This is decorated.''
He was greeted by several women who seemed to know him well. 
There was piped-in music and for a moment it sounded as if Patti Page had lost her mind, but soon it became clear it was the work of a Shanghai stylist.
''Women are better with massage,'' Mr. Hsu continued. 
''The female always does better than the male, always.''
Mr. Hsu then motioned to a darkened room off the well-lighted barbering room. 
In here were six well-padded reclining chairs and five of them were occupied by Chinese men who lay on their stomachs smoking cigarettes while five women in blue skirts and white blouses walked on their backs in their stocking feet, the women keeping their balance by holding on to chrome bars tracked across the ceiling.
It was just past noon, and Mr. Hsu was going to sit for a shampoo, haircut and a little massage tinkering about the head and shoulders. 
''You go in there,'' he said, insisting that ''you'' have the full treatment, soup to nuts, stem to stern. 
In a bit, a woman who would later become known as No. Seven came over and removed jacket, sweater and shoes and loosened the collar wide enough to let in a Shriner. 
Then she went to work.
This was Chinese acupressure, the fingers working down defined highways on the body. 
The trick is to release chi, or trapped energy. 
They begin at the head and don't miss a spot, down to the toe and fingertips.
Some time later, Mr. Hsu stuck his head in the door and said: ''I have to go. 
You stay. 
It's all taken care of. 
Just tip the girl.''
A good while later, from deep in slumber, there came the sound of unenthusiastic applause, thin clapping, that grew in stages so loud that it took ''you's'' breath away, until he put his hand to his lungs and realized someone was trying to beat the daylights out of his chest. 
A voice, ''Uh, the manager, she want to know how long you want the girl to massage?''
The next image that hove into view would have killed a heart patient. 
The vista was a dozen Chinese women, all leaning in close, only one of whom spoke English. 
No. 7 was wringing her sore hands. 
''You'' got up and scattered every greenback he possessed, like birdseed, gave effusive thanks and wobbled down the stairs to greet the night, shirttails flapping, a necktie so curlicued ''you'' could use it to uncork a new Beaujolais. 
''You'' was embarrassed but incredibly relaxed.
