
Official accounts today of the visit to China by a senior Soviet official offered new indications of the limited expectations both Governments appear to have for the occasion.
The official, Ivan V. Arkhipov, a First Deputy Prime Minister, is the most senior Soviet official to come here in 15 years. 
His visit is being closely watched for signs of any thaw in the chilly political relations that have prevailed for nearly a quarter of a century between Moscow and Peking.
Official accounts of visit to China by Ivan V Arkhipov, Soviet First Deputy Prime Minister, offer new indications of limited expectations both Governments appear to have for occasion; Arkhipov is most senior Soviet official to come to country in 15 years (S)
But so far, after two days, both sides have taken care to emphasize the differences that have prevented an improvement in their relations. 
At the same time, they have stressed their readiness to expand trade, economic and scientific exchanges, and to continue their search for better overall ties.
For both sides, the most important fact about the the visit is probably that it is taking place at all, after a last- minute postponement in May when Moscow evidently wished to show its displeasure over Chinese troop clashes with Vietnam and over the warmth displayed when President Reagan came to Peking in April.
 
Won't Return for Funeral
The symbolic importance of the Arkhipov visit was underscored today when the Russian remained here rather than return to Moscow for the funeral of Defense Minister Dmitri F. Ustinov, as unofficial reports from the Soviet capital Friday had suggested he might.
The Chinese wariness toward the visit was suggested by the coverage given in today's editions of People's Daily, the Communist Party paper, which put accounts of Mr. Arkhipov's arrival here and the banquet given for him Friday night on the bottom of its back page. 
Important official visitors from friendly countries are generally accorded front-page display.
At the banquet, Mr. Arkhipov and his host, Deputy Prime Minister Yao Yilin, struck a cordial personal note in their speeches that reflected an acquaintance dating back to the Russian's years here heading the Soviet aid program in the 1950's.
The two officials also spoke of their nations' common interest in better ties, Mr. Yao saying China ''sincerely hoped'' for improved relations and Mr. Arkhipov responding that it was in the fundamental interests of both nations ''to put these relations into the orbit of friendship and good-neighborliness.''
But the account given by the official New China News Agency said both men had also referred to the ''differences'' that had impeded normalization. 
The agency said Mr. Arkhipov had ''mentioned'' those involving ''major international issues and relations with certain other countries.''
Since political consultations between the two capitals were resumed in 1982, five sessions here and in Moscow have failed to bridge differences over the Soviet military intervention in Afghanistan, Moscow's backing for the Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia and the high troop levels each side maintains on their common frontier.
