
The United States, China and the Soviet Union last week seemed to be playing another round in an international strategy game, with each side trying to avoid being isolated by the others. 
The stakes were high - if any two joined forces, they might endanger the country left out. 
Playing the game vigorously in Peking, Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger met with Chinese leaders and announced that Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang would come to Washington in January and that President Reagan would be going to Peking in April.
Mr. Reagan's advisers saw the planned trip as a chance to play up his role as a world leader, an obvious asset if he seeks re-election seven months later. 
(The China visit may also provide a convenient reason for rearranging his Asian itinerary, delaying a visit next month to the Philippines, where anti-regime turmoil threatens security and political hazards.)
Subtle shifts in triangular relationships between US, USSR and China in recent years reviewed, with China now perceived as leading in obtaining US concessions without much concrete commitment; Sec Caspar Weinberger and Zhang Aiping illustrated (S)
After Washington reclassified China as a ''friendly power'' and thus eligible for more high technology exports, and the United States agreed to import $800 million of Chinese textiles, Peking seemed ready to reciprocate, at least on the protocol level. 
Washington had urged Mr. Zhao to come so Mr. Reagan could return the visit.
In China, Mr. Weinberger talked up the Soviet threat and the value of closer strategic ties between Washington and Peking. 
He dangled a list of possible ''defensive'' arms China could buy, notably antiaircraft weapons and antitank guns. 
But the Chinese seemed uninterested in pursuing an open military alliance (which could also be difficult for Mr. Reagan, after his repeated pledges of support for Taiwan). 
As a reminder that they were not tying themselves to Washington, the Chinese announced talks on normalizing relations with the Russians would resume on Thursday. 
As to Soviet-American relations, they remained in a frozen state. 
Mr. Reagan last week took a different tack with a ''high road'' speech at the United Nations, stressing the need for arms control accords. 
But he also continued his verbal assault on Moscow for shooting down the South Korean airliner and he accused the Russians of violating previous accords. 
Yuri V. Andropov, the Soviet leader, obviously concerned about the propaganda effects of the plane incident and angered by Mr. Reagan's insults, condemned the Administration on all fronts.
As a result of the poor state of relations with the Russians, Washington's ability to reap benefits from the triangular game is no longer what it was in the early 1970's when the Nixon-Kissinger Administration finessed both Communist countries while avoiding the appearance of ganging up against either. 
This was easier when the Soviet Union and China were in a state of mutual military alert. 
The ability to play the Chinese against the Russians ended in 1980, after the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan. 
President Jimmy Carter cut back relations with Moscow and put off seeking Senate ratification of a strategic arms limitation treaty.
Mr. Carter also sought a strategic relationship with China against the Russians. 
But although Peking had once sought better relations, Washington found it unreceptive when the Carter Administration got around to talking of a virtual alliance. 
The Chinese seemed to decide to stand aloof, although they, even more than Americans, had reason to be concerned about Soviet military actions in Afghanistan and Southeast Asia.
Testing the Waters
China's doubts about cooperating with the United States were fortified when Mr. Reagan, a long-time supporter of Taiwan, became President. 
Prolonged debate ensued about Taiwan and issues such as textile limits, handling of defectors, and whether Pan American World Airways should be allowed to fly to Taipeh.
By last year, the Kremlin sensed it could break out of its isolation in the triangle and try to turn the tables on Washington. 
The Russians began to court the new Chinese leadership, while Peking, seeking to depict itself as a leader of the nonaligned bloc - where being seen as an American ally is a liability - seemed more than willing to test the waters with Moscow. 
In so doing, China put pressure on Washington to yield on Taiwan.
Peking, which has extracted economic and technological assistance in return for normalization with Washington, now is insisting on security concessions from Moscow. 
China wants the Soviet Union to reduce its heavy troop concentration along the Chinese border, pull its forces out of Afghanistan and end its backing for the Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia.
If the United States was the major beneficiary from the triangular relationships of the 1970's, the Chinese seem to have learned the lesson well and emerged as the leading player now. 
Foreign Minister Wu Xueqian, in New York for the United Nations General Assembly, made that clear in a speech to the National Committee on United States-Chinese Relations. 
''China,'' he said, ''always adheres to an independent foreign policy, never attaches itself to any big power or group of powers and never yields to pressure from any big power. 
China has always adhered to principles, neither playing the Soviet card to put pressure on the United States, nor playing the American card to put pressure on the Soviet Union.''
Despite Mr. Wu's protestations, however, American officials were watching to see if Mr. Andropov, having virtually frozen relations with Washington, would now meet Chinese demands at least halfway. 
He could do so by agreeing to reduce Soviet troops in Afghanistan or to a troop pullback from the Chinese border area. 
With Mr. Reagan due to visit China in seven months, there is time for Moscow to act to stay in the game.
