
A dozen Angolan soldiers, AK-47 assault rifles at the ready, dogged every step taken last week by a group of reporters looking at a refugee camp in Angola's east central province of Moxico. 
The soldiers' presence belied an official myth.
According to Angola's Marxist regime, there is no organized internal opposition. 
Jonas Savimbi and his National Union for the Total Independence of Angola, known as Unita, are ''phantoms.''
Bernard Nossiter discusses present conditions in Angola and Sudan
The only real threats come from South African troops or ''reactionaries,'' an official from the Ministry of Culture explained at great and vehement length recently when this reporter stopped in Angola during a swing through Africa.
In fact Moxico and neighboring provinces are frequently raided by Savimbi guerrillas. 
The military escort joined the group in case the Savimbi ''phantoms'' decided to stage a demonstration for the correspondents. 
They did not, but the gap between the official line and prudent practice was evident.
The Sudan's conservative Moslem society has been strained by female refugees from Ethiopia. 
Fleeing the wars of secession there, the women continue to cling to their form-fitting dresses and their relaxed and easy manner with men. 
They contrast strikingly with the Sudanese women, swathed in concealing robes and rarely present in mixed company.
The Sudan's Commissioner for Refugees, Abdul Rahman el-Beshir, acknowledges as much with a bureaucratic gloss. 
''We welcome strangers in this country,'' he said, ''but there are cultural problems of incompatibility. 
Moslems resent the liberal ways the Ethiopian females are having.''
On city streets, the Ethiopian women are often subjected to obscene taunts and gestures. 
Respectable Sudanese families avoid cafes that the refugee women frequent. 
Some of the Ethiopians are forced or induced into concubinage or prostitution. 
Mr. Rahman speaks with sympathy of ''these wretched people, compelled to leave their country.''
At the airport in Addis Ababa, about 60 Chinese men and one woman sit patiently, most of them dressed in neat Western suits. 
This is no package tour but a purposeful exhibition of Peking's attempt to win friends and influence distant people.
One member of the group looks up from Le Monde to explain that they are doctors, agronomists, engineers, and road and dam builders. 
They are fanning out to Tanzania, Mozambique, Mauritania and the Sudan to show Africans how things are done in China. 
Peking cannot afford much foreign aid in cash but it is rich in technical assistance, an effective way of making its weight felt.
Commissar Marques Wassowowa occupies the palace in Luena from which the Portuguese once governed the Angolan province of Moxico. 
The palace is still splendid with its flagstone courtyard, tiled roof, sweeping paneled dining room facing a curved marble veranda, plush chairs, delicate tiled bath and hospitable jug of Scotch for guests.
But the splendor is fading. 
The carpets are torn, the woodwork cracked. 
The window panes are broken and the plaster molding is chipped. 
The commissar evidently has other priorities.
Whether he should is a question raised by some students of Africa. 
A leading expert, Jean-Claude Concollato, on leave from the Sorbonne to work in the Sudan for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, contends that much of Africa's instability flows from the lack of strong central government. 
Too many states, he says, are marked by a plethora of regulations whose writ does not run much beyond the ministries.
Even a revolutionary Government like Angola's might find some use in tangible symbols of authority, in keeping up Luena's palace. 
At the very least it would serve as a reminder that scarce capital equipment requires careful maintenance.
The 125-mile road from Khartoum, the Sudan's capital, southward to Wad Medani, runs through a bleak parched landscape almost denuded of trees, peppered with dusty shrubs. 
Walled villages of mud brick bake in the strong sun. 
Scrawny herds of goats and cattle search for fodder. 
The occasional incongruous textile or cement factory breaks the empty horizon.
The Blue Nile runs invitingly alongside, but there is neither capital nor manpower to tap its life-giving waters and irrigate the semi-desert.
When the road bends east to Gedaref, the scene suddenly changes. 
Gum arabic trees, green and promising, fill the skyline. 
Patches of soft green cotton emerge. 
The ground is covered with brown stalks from the sorghum crop. 
Conical thatched-roof houses show that nature is more abundant here.
This region gets three times the rain, and for twice as long, as the country below Khartoum. 
Gedaref is a rich town whose farmers and merchants hire Ethiopian refugees as laborers and servants. 
Failure and success in the Sudan depends not on man but on nature, on the presence or absence of rain.
