
As brass bands played, three United States Navy warships, each flying China's flag, tied up here today and became the first American vessels to visit China since the Communists took power.
A gray early-morning haze shrouded the harbor as guns from the arriving American ships fired a 21-gun salute in honor of the Chinese Navy. 
Then, nudged gently by large white tugboats, the guided-missile frigate Rentz loomed through the mist with sailors in blue pea jackets and white caps standing at attention along her entire length.
Three elderly Chinese ships, a destroyer, a frigate and a submarine, were moored nearby with dozens of colorful signal flags flapping from their rigging. 
Chinese sailors stood at attention on deck while a United States Navy band aboard the guided-missile cruiser Reeves struck up ''Happy Days Are Here Again.''
Joining the Reeves and the Rentz on the seven-day port call is the American destroyer Oldendorf.
The visit, announced by Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger last month on a trip to China, is being portrayed by American military and diplomatic officials as a major step in the increasingly close military ties between the two countries.
The visit also comes as details of a $550 million sale of equipment to the Chinese Air Force, announced in April, are being made public.
The commander of the United States Pacific Fleet, Adm. James A. Lyons Jr., was aboard the Reeves and spoke of the importance of the visit to the strategic interests of both countries.
''We recognize this as a historic port visit, a further step in developing and enhancing the relationship between our two countries,'' Admiral Lyons told American and Chinese journalists. 
''A key element in furthering stabilityI in this region is fostering the U.S.-China relationship. 
We also share a common concern that no one country should dominate Asia or the world.''
 
Some Advice for Newcomers
Despite the assertions of American officials that the 1,000 sailors had been given no special instructions on how to behave while in China, many of the sailors could be seen clutching a 32-page pamphlet titled ''A Sailor's Liberty Guide to China,'' a document filled with admonitions on proper behavior.
''China does not have bar girls,'' read one warning. 
''Drink in moderation,'' cautioned another passage, while the fiery Chinese liquor mao-tai was introduced with a blunt, ''Watch out.''
The first glitch of the visit did not involve onshore comportment, but naval etiquette. 
Although the Chinese ships across the pier were flying signal flags from their rigging in what the Navy calls ''full dress,'' the American vessels were not similarly bedecked.
Several Navy officers said the Chinese had protested the failure of the American ships to go to ''full dress'' and refused to proceed with the welcoming ceremony until a precise and formal equality had been established.
Hastily, sailors aboard the three American ships began clambering up masts. 
Piles of bright signal flags were produced from lockers, and after nearly two hours they were in place on the American ships.
Adm. Ma Xinchun, the commander of China's northern fleet, which is based here, then strode to the gangplank of the Reeves to officially welcome Admiral Lyons to China.
The last American naval visit to these waters ended on May 24, 1949, as Communist armies pressed south and east. 
The U.S.S. 
Dixie, a repair ship built to service destroyers, took aboard the last Americans in Qingdao and steamed toward Hong Kong.
Qingdao owes its genesis as a major city to 19th-century German colonial designs. 
The Germans held Qingdao for 16 years before losing it in World War I, and the broad avenues carved by German planners are still lined with heavy stone and brick villas.
While it has been more than 37 years since American sailors trudged up Jungshan Road, the main commercial street here, the memory of the Americans has lingered.
''The Jungshan was the world of the Americans,'' said a 79-year-old man who gave his name only as Lao Liang, or ''old Liang.''
''That's where all the action was,'' he said. 
''They paid with American dollars and we took in American dollars.''
 
'A Great Event'
Even younger Chinese possess a sort of collective memory of the Americans, a recollection that is usually less than kind. 
''The Americans, they grabbed women and didn't follow traffic signs,'' said Tang Tingxing, a 39-year-old shipyard worker.
Still, as he stood at the gate to the navy yard waiting for a glimpse of the American sailors, Mr. Tang said he was excited about the visit. 
''I think this is a great event,'' he said.
Along Jungshan Road today, the Americans soon found the tall, green bottles of Tsingtao beer that have made this city famous.
At a park dedicated to the 20th-century writer Lu Xun, Patrick M. Stevens, 22, lowered his camera for a moment. 
''I think this is great,'' said the sailor from Amityville, L.I. 
''This is the first ship here in 37 years. 
This is history. 
We're little ambassadors.''
