
A senior Vietnamese official interviewed in a Polish newspaper has depicted his country with unusual candor as one troubled by grave military, economic and political problems.
The official, Hoang Tung, a secretary of the Vietnamese Communist Party's Central Committee, told a correspondent of the Communist daily, Trybuna Ludu, in an interview published here on Monday that Vietnam was threatened directly by China, which he said is supported by the United States. 
The external threat, Mr. Tung said, is matched inside the country by supporters of the South Vietnamese regime that was defeated seven years ago.
Mr. Tung said ''classes'' connected with the former Saigon Government, though overthrown, had not yet been completely destroyed. 
He also said the existence of ''more than a million people formerly closely connected'' with the old regime ''complicates the social situation.''
WARSAW, May 25 - A senior Vietnamese official interviewed in a Polish newspaper has depicted his country with unusual candor as one troubled by grave military, economic and political problems.
''To a large extent we have liquidated the burgeoisie as a class, but former property owners continue to live among us and even now still have a sense of their own strength,'' the party official said.
 
Ethnic Chinese Attacked
He added that many of the former entrepreneurs were members of the ethnic Chinese minority and charged that they were linked to a global ''network'' that was conducting economic war against Vietnam. 
He referred to alleged smuggling of goods into Vietnam from Bangkok, Hong Kong and Singapore.
Foreign residents and visitors tend to believe that the goods sent into Vietnam from abroad and traded largely on the black market have provided the people of Vietnam's cities with the margin of survival while the official, Government-run sector is unable to meet basic needs.
Mr. Tung accused China and other enemies of Vietnam of conducting what he characterized as ''small war'' against his country. 
He described this as consisting of ''continuous tension'' created by Chinese military strength on Vietnam's northern border and the fomenting of partisan movements in Cambodia and Laos.
Vietnamese troops are stationed in both of those neighboring countries, whose weak regimes are considered dependent on Hanoi. 
Mr. Tung's assertion that partisan movements in Laos and Cambodia are part of a war against Vietnam appeared to be an admission of his country's predominance over the two countries.
Economically, the Vietnamese official said, ''small war'' consists of the creating of ''economic confusion and disorganization'' of the Vietnamese market by the overseas Chinese.
 
'Economic Blockade' Charged
Furthermore, Mr. Tung charged, an ''economic blockade'' is being carried out against Vietnam. 
Presumably, he meant the suspension of various Western and Japanese economic aid programs in retaliation for Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia in 1979 and its continuing occupation of that country.
The Vietnamese official said the three principal tasks facing the Hanoi Government were defense, feeding the population and laying the foundations of a socialist system. 
While southern Vietnam has been Communist for only seven years, the northern half of the country has been Communist since 1954 and governed by a socialist system that even Eastern European Communists consider of excessively doctrinaire rigor.
Referring to Vietnam's serious food shortages, Mr. Tung said that balancing defense requirements against food needs ''has influenced the standard of living.''
But he added, ''When even the United States has the dilemma of cannons versus butter, why shouldn't we have a dilemma, arms versus rice?''
Acknowledging ''serious difficulties in everyday life,'' Mr. Tung asserted that the Vietnamese were not meat eaters and accepted an annual consumption level of 22 pounds a person. 
The assertion, which is not supported by knowledge of Vietnamese eating habits, caused a Pole to remark that the only purpose of publishing the interview was to persuade Poles that some countries were even worse off than Poland.
