
TWO scientific rivals, each playing a central role in finding the virus that causes AIDS and then becoming involved in an international legal dispute over the research, were among those named yesterday as winners of the Albert Lasker Medical Research Awards, an honor that has often gone to people who later won the Nobel Prize.
The two are Dr. Robert C. Gallo of the National Cancer Institute and Dr. Luc Montagnier of the Pasteur Institute in Paris. 
Their research teams each discovered a virus that is now known to cause the deadly acquired immune deficiency syndrome. 
Research at many centers has demonstrated that the two viruses are the same.
In addition to Dr. Gallo and Dr. Montagnier, there were four other awards. 
The winners were Dr. Myron Essex, chairman of the department of cancer biology at the Harvard School of Public Health, who has also made important contributions to AIDS virus research; Dr. Rita Levi-Montalcini, of the Institute of Cell Biology in Rome, and Dr. Stanley Cohen, of Vanderbilt University, experts on cellular growth factors; and Dr. Ma Haide, senior adviser to the Ministry of Health of the People's Republic of China. 
Dr. Ma, an American doctor whose original name was George Hatem, was a physician to Mao ZeDong and made important contributions to public health in China over many years.
The Albert and Mary Lasker Foundation has been making its annual awards for important contributions to medical research and public health since 1944. 
Over the years, 42 Lasker Award winners have later been awarded the Nobel Prize, the most prestigious of all honors for research in medicine, physiology and chemistry.
Three of the six Lasker winners this year are among the world's leaders in AIDS research. 
The disease is caused by a retrovirus that attacks certain vital white blood cells called T lymphocytes and cripples the immune defense system. 
Retroviruses were first linked to human cancer by Dr. Gallo's group in the 1970's with the discovery of a virus that is believed to cause some cases of leukemia. 
This group of retroviruses is now called ''human T-cell lymphotrophic viruses'' because they attack T-cells.
Retroviruses are named for the fact that they reverse the normal genetic message sequence of DNA to RNA for manufacture of protein. 
They have special enzymes, reverse transcriptases, that force an infected cell to translate the genetic message encoded in the virus's RNA into the form of DNA so that the cell is forced to reproduce the virus.
In 1983, Dr. Montagnier reported discovery, in an AIDS patient, of a retrovirus that attacked T-cells. 
His team also developed an antibody test to detect the virus infection in humans. 
The following year, Dr. Gallo published studies of an AIDS-related retrovirus and an antibody test to detect evidence of the virus infection. 
Although their status was unclear at first, the viruses are now generally accepted as being the same and being the cause of AIDS.
In May 1985, a patent was awarded to the United States Government for the antibody test developed by Dr. Gallo's group. 
An earlier application for an American patent by the Pasteur Institute is still to be acted upon. 
Last December, the Pasteur Institute sued the United States Government, contending that Dr. Montagnier's group was the first to isolate the virus and to ''recognize the significance thereof in the development of methods of detection of AIDS and pre-AIDS conditions.''
In July a Federal judge dismissed the suit. 
The Pasteur Institute is appealing the dismissal, and the related dispute over patent rights concerning the antibody tests is still unresolved.
In announcing the 1986 winners yesterday, the foundation made no mention of the dispute. 
Nevertheless, the announcement was revised repeatedly to avoid becoming, itself, a factor in the controversy. 
In the award citations both scientists were credited with ''unique contributions to understanding the cause of AIDS.''
Dr. Montagnier was cited for ''discovery of the retrovirus later shown to be responsible for this major new threat to world health.''
Dr. Gallo's citation honored him for ''his brilliant investigations of human T-cell lymphotrophic viruses, and for his intellectual and scientific leadership in AIDS research.''
Dr. Gallo was also awarded a Lasker prize in 1982 for his research on retroviruses. 
Multiple awards from the foundation have been extremely rare.
In telephone interviews both scientists expressed pleasure over the awards.
Dr. Essex was cited for studies of the effect of retroviral infections in the human immune system and for contributions to the understanding of AIDS as a disease. 
Since the 1970's he has been a frequent collaborator with Dr. Gallo's group at the cancer institute.
Dr. Levi-Montalcini discovered the first known substance that regulates the growth of cells. 
Today it is known as the nerve growth factor. 
The foundation cited her for ''her profoundly original concept that the growth of specific cells is regulated by soluble substances, and for her discovery of Nerve Growth Factor.''
Today several such growth factors are known although their natural roles in living tissues are not altogether clear.
Dr. Cohen, who collaborated with Dr. Montalcini for several years, discovered another of the growth factors, epidermal growth factor, and an enzyme called tyrosine kinase, which today is known to be vital to the metabolism of cells. 
Study of such growth factors is considered important to understanding how humans and animals develop from single fertilized eggs to complete individuals comprising many billions of cells. 
Study of aberrent functioning of such growth factors or their receptors is also a big issue in contemporary cancer research.
In Chinese, Dr. Ma Haide's name means ''virtue from overseas.''
He was born in Buffalo in 1910 and went to China as a young physician in 1933 to study tropical medicine. 
From 1936 to 1949 he served under Mao ZeDong as medical adviser to the Chinese Red Army and thereafter has served the Chinese Government in major public health campaigns against venereal disease and leprosy. 
The citation for his Lasker Award said he made ''legendary contributions to the conquest of venereal disease and the eradication of leprosy in China'' and said his accomplishments ''made medical history and improved the health and well-being of 800 million people.''
The award winners will deliver lectures on their work at a symposium Nov. 
19 at the Rockefeller University. 
Each winner will receive $15,000 and a statuette of the Winged Victory of Samothrace, symbolizing victory over disease, at presentation ceremonies on Nov. 
21.
