
From the number of working elevators to the kinds of movies being sold, the sixth annual American Film Market has an air of quality that it lacked during its first five years.
This yearly bazaar in which distributors of independently made American films peddle their movies to buyers from such places as Japan and Italy, Argentina and Guatemala is, according to Roger Corman, a longtime independent producer, for us ''the most important market in the world.''
Mr. Corman, who has pointed six of his movies, including ''Killbots'' and ''Cocaine Wars,'' to the market being held in Los Angeles this week, added, ''The margin by which the American Film Market exceeds Cannes will increase this year.''
Because 2,500 members of the world press descend on Cannes each May for the film festival, the adjoining market is still the place to introduce a movie. 
However, the 82 members of the American Film Marketing Association report they make more sales at the American market, which is being held this week at the Beverly Hills Hilton in a move from a considerably less elegant hotel in West Hollywood.
Working Elevators
More than 250 movies will be screened, and the weakness of the dollar means that the buyers will have more money with which to purchase theatrical and video rights to the films than they had in 1984 and 1985. 
The strong dollar made those rough years for many of the smaller companies.
Nevertheless, the first thing most sellers mention is the fact that the elevators work.
''And they've set up room service on every floor,'' said Paul Baccus of Filmation. 
''When you're stuck in a hotel room for nine days waiting for people to come by, little things make a difference.''
Actually, the American Film Market approached the Hilton twice before, but the hotel was definitely not interested, according to Tim Kittleson, director of the market. 
Nor were the major studios. 
This year several major studios are selling their smaller, less mainstream movies through the market. 
Norman Katz, chairman of the marketing association, is handling ''Joshua Then and Now'' and ''Key Exchange'' for 20th Century-Fox.
Mr. Katz said the increased status of the market, exemplified by the move to Beverly Hills, ''has attracted groups of people we haven't had here before.''
They include Hollywood producers curious enough to roam the halls, video divisions of the major studios looking to buy cassette rights and representatives of half a dozen banks, including Bankers Trust, Credit Lyonnais and Chemical Bank. 
There are also such new affiliates as Eastman Kodak, every major film laboratory, Bavaria Studios in Munich and three completion bond companies.
''I've attended all the markets to meet people, but we decided to join this year because the market is expanding,'' said Michelle Marshall, president of International Film Completion Company.
In addition, several film organizations have scheduled their seminars and international marketing meetings to coincide with the market. 
They include the Walt Disney Company, Unifrance and the Motion Picture Export Association, the foreign sales trade organization for the major studios.
 
Video Rights a Hot Item
The number of buyers interested in video rights continues to rise, with 22 percent exclusively interested in video and another 40 percent buying video and other rights. 
As to the movies for sale, ''There's less poke-in-the-eye horror,'' said Mr. Kittleson.
The market is not devoid of such staples as ''Nightmare on Elm Street 2,'' ''Hollywood Vice Squad'' and ''I Eat Cannibals.''
But also being sold are ''The Trip to Bountiful,'' ''Twice in a Lifetime,'' the new Federico Fellini movie ''Ginger and Fred,'' Roman Polanski's ''Pirates,'' ''Smooth Talk'' and Woody Allen's ''Hannah and Her Sisters.''
For the first time, the Russians have come to observe. 
Two representatives of Sovexportfilm wandered wraithlike through the halls for a few days. 
They left with a pile of forms and said they would return next year as sellers, according to market officials.
Chinafilm, the import-export movie agency in China, came last year as a buyer and is back again this year. 
In January, Chinafilm was transferred out of the Ministry of Culture and into a newly named Ministry of Radio, Film and Television.
Garrie Roman, an American who lives in Hong Kong and has joint ventures in China, including a videocassette duplicating plant, said it appeared to him that to increase movie and television trade with the West, China had decided to get its film and video industry under control and to enforce copyrights. 
Mr. Roman was shepherding an official from the Ministry of Radio, Film and Television at this year's market. 
The official, who asked not be quoted by name, verified that China is working on a copyright law. 
And a document promising a crackdown on video piracy inside China was leaked to market executives.
The official also agreed with Mr. Roman's assertion that China was using videocassettes to bring information about the West to people in the Chinese interior. 
The official said that programming that told how to do things would be particularly welcome, and the only unwanted programs would be those that were pornographic, overly violent, negative about China or those the audience didn't like because the cultural background was too different.
''There are people in the interior who have never seen a foreigner before, and the Government wants to expose them to foreign cultures,'' said Mr. Roman. But with certain reservations. 
Mr. Roman said EMI's ''The Awakening'' passed the censor but, nevertheless, will not be shown. 
''The Awakening,'' which stars Charlton Heston, is a horror movie about an evil Egyptian goddess brought back to life.
''For the last 40 years movies have been a propaganda tool and the only movies released were based on truth,'' Mr. Roman said. 
''They told me 'The Awakening' had to be deferred because the new policy is to eradicate superstition and the people in the country would believe the movie was true.''
