
The Tsoung Shing Coffee Shop - a little bit of China in the center of Queens - is a place of many beginnings. 
It officially opened three years ago, but its roots date back far longer - to the streets of Hong Kong and a man named Ming You, who left his home and pregnant wife to make a fortune in New York.
Mr. You never did make that fortune. 
In fact, it took 19 years before he earned enough money to send for his wife and the daughter he had never seen.
But it is that daughter, 35-year-old Tina Wong, who stands behind the counter these days at the Tsoung Shing - a combination coffee shop and Chinese restaurant where the cornflakes sit alongside the ginger hot sauce and scrambled eggs share plates with the pork fried rice. 
It is the kind of place that will never make a fortune for anyone, but that an entire family calls home.
Article in occasional series "A New Melting Pot" discusses experience of Chinese family in New YorkMore Work, Less Money
Family-run ethnic restaurants like the Tsoung Shing dot the streets of Elmhurst, a section of Queens that is among the city's newest ethnic outposts and where, according to immigration officials, 20,000 immigrants from 110 countries live. 
The restaurant is the kind of establishment where immigrants have struggled for generations.
''Work, work and more work,'' said Tina Wong, who begins her day at 8 A.M. and stays at the shop until well past midnight. 
''Less and less money.''
There are five tables and a counter in the Tsoung Shing Coffee Shop. 
There is never a line. 
But every morning Tina Wong is there, scrubbing the floor, polishing the counter, mixing the tea. 
Jimmy Wong, her 39-year-old husband, is there, too, washing the tables, chopping the onions, dicing the carrots. 
So is Linda Yim, 33, who also does many of these tasks and whose husband has known Mr. Wong since they were children.
Altogether, two sets of grandparents, two daughters, two husbands, one sister, one brother and one 10-year-old grandaughter work, eat and spend most of their time in this small restaurant with its white plastic counter tops and overhanging prints of Shanghai. 
It is an arduous existence that neither Mr. You nor anyone else in this extended family ever thought they would lead in America, a place where they expected life to be easy and wealth to abound.
''I thought America would be a good country, maybe it would be easy to make a living here,'' said Jimmy Wong, who now spends 12 hours a day over three smoldering woks. 
''But it's not so easy. 
Nobody gives you something.''
But so it is. 
The Tsoung Shing is neither gold mine nor stepping stone for this extended family. 
It is nothing more than a means to pay the rent, clothe the children, run the car. 
Although they live four blocks away, their homes are only places to sleep. 
The families eat all their meals at the restaurant. 
The grandchildren play there. 
The parents balance their checkbooks there. 
They have even conducted Thanksgiving Day dinners there under the smiling faces of the painted porcelain Buddhas.
 
Try at Free Enterprise
The beginning of the Tsoung Shing in some ways was the day Mr. Wong strung up the red, white and blue flags on the restaurant's outside facade -May 23, 1979 - a day that marked the family's first stab at free enterprise in this country. 
Since that time no one has taken a vacation. 
Those flags, now slightly frayed, still hang.
''We knew we could make it work,'' says Mr. Wong. ''And it has.''
Spend the day at the Tsoung Shing, which loosely translated means fortune and happiness, and the life of the extended immigrant family comes alive: Their responsibilities are shared, but their roles are sharply defined.
First there is Tina Wong, who limits her cooking to cheese omelets and sandwiches. 
All day she stands at the grill behind the counter, ladling the tea, filling the cooler with soda, trying to decipher the English that some other members of the family do not comprehend.
''Is there any salt in here?'' a customer asked the other day, digging into a plate of chop suey. 
''Yes,'' Mrs. Wong replied. 
''Lots of sauce. 
Lots.''
''I didn't want any salt. 
''Next time order the chow mein,'' she said pleasantly. 
''Not so much sauce.''
Linda Yim and Jimmy Wong are the cooks at the Tsoung Shing. 
Their days are spent in the hot, cramped kitchen where Shanghai specialties like orange-flavor beef, crispy fried bass and cold noodles are turned out with remarkable speed. 
She does all the chopping, mixing, dicing, stuffing, blending and scrambling, and he does the frying, basting, steaming, stirring and roasting. 
Mr. Wong also washes the pots.
Mrs. Yim and Mr. Wong are the owners of the Tsoung Shing, and because of this they are the only ones who are paid and allowed to give orders. 
Mrs. Wong, for example, is rarely welcome in the kitchen. 
It is already crowded - something that patrons can see for themselves since it contains the restaurant's only bathroom. 
But, she concedes, she is also not welcome in the kitchen because she does not know how to cook.
The other day, Mrs. Wong walked into the kitchen to help her husband at the height of lunch hour. 
Even when business is slow, things are hectic in this tiny kitchen. 
But when tables are filled, the scene could be plucked from a Charlie Chaplin movie.
This was one of those days. 
Mr. Wong was busy whipping up a portion of hot and sour soup in one wok, steamed dumplings in another and sweet and sour bean curd in a third. 
A plate of cold sesame noodles waited on the counter. 
There were several back orders for eggplant in garlic sauce, shrimp in chili sauce, Shanghai won-ton soup.
Mrs. Wong rushed in and announced that she was going to prepare an order of fried dumplings to go. 
She threw eight dumplings into a skillet and turned up the flames, but before she realized that she had not used enough oil, the dumplings burned. 
Mrs. Wong spent the rest of the afternoon out front, peeling potatoes at one of the restaurant's rear tables.
''I'm tired,'' she said, jumping up to serve tea to a customer.
 
Differing Recollections
How Tina Wong met her husband, Jimmy, is another of the Tsoung Shing's many beginnings. 
She says she met him years ago while he was a sailor on a cargo ship in Hong Kong. 
He says he first saw her on a street corner in Brooklyn.
Be that as it may, they were married 11 years ago and now have two children. 
After school, their oldest child, Jeannie, 10, washes dishes, peels the onions, fries the bacon and fills patrons' cups with tea. 
William, 5, stays at home with Mrs. Wong's parents, except when activity at the restaurant becomes so hectic that they are all called in to help.
''I hope business is slow,'' said Jeannie, who was born in the United States and is sometimes taunted by her friends because she cannot stay home to watch television.
When Mrs. Wong is not at the restaurant, she can probably be found somewhere in Chinatown shopping for food, scouring for bargains. 
She makes the trip there from Elmhurst, she says, because the prices are lower.
The other day, Mrs. Wong went to a fish store on Canal Street in Chinatown, where she walked past a tank of live turtles and picked out a collection of live crabs. 
One crab escaped and Mrs. Wong had to chase it across the store. 
She did all this quickly, confidently and with good humor, stopping to haggle over the price of shrimp, then racing three blocks away to pick up 10 pounds of pork.
Over the years Tina Wong has perfected her shopping. 
She knows where to buy the freshest noodles, how to squeeze the tripe, where to get the meatiest, least expensive spareribs. 
But what might particularly inspire awe among even the most exacting bargain hunter is that, when it comes to cucumbers, she makes a special trip to Essex Street on the Lower East Side and Gus's pickles.
''It's cheaper,'' she explains with authority. 
How Linda Yim decided to go into business with Jimmy Wong is yet another of the Tsoung Shing's many beginnings. 
Mr. Wong's godmother is Mrs. Yim's mother-in-law, a complicated connection that began in Shanghai, continued years ago in Hong Kong and ultimately resulted in their cooking together four years ago in a Chinatown restaurant. 
Neither really knew how to cook before that.
Mr. Wong and Mrs. Yim worked in the Chinatown restaurant for about a year. 
One day, Mrs. Yim's husband, David, who works in another restaurant in Queens, spotted an empty storefront at 86-32 Broadway in Elmhurst with all the fixtures needed for a coffee shop. 
The rent was $800 a month and it was near the subway. 
Several weeks later they moved in, leaving virtually everything intact, not even replacing the white plastic chicken that still sits incongruously in the front window.
If the Tsoung Shing were in Chinatown or SoHo, it might become chic. 
The service is friendly and attentive, the food inspired and prices unbelievably low. 
But in Elmhurst - a place that is often a contradictory fusion between a small town and an international metropolis - the Tsoung Ching Coffee Shop gets lost.
Those in the neighborhood who want a real coffee shop usually head to the Greek diner around the corner. 
Those who crave Chinese cuisine prefer places with dragon wallpaper and duck sauce.
No matter. 
The family works hard just the same - the kind of routine that Mr. You established years before when he got his first job as a short-order cook in Brooklyn. 
But unlike Linda Yim and Jimmy Wong, he never needed to master the art or the tedious preparation of Chinese cooking.
''His specialty was steak and hamburgers,'' Mrs. Wong explained. 
''That's better,'' said Jeannie, who prefers everything that is American. 
She said she would take a steak over orange-flavor beef any day.
