
SU ZHI and Qu Yongchun usually spend their days teaching advanced classes at the Academy of Chinese Opera in Peking, the central training school in China for performers of the Peking Opera. 
But for the last six weeks, their students have been Americans, in classes and lecture demonstrations held at the Eugene O'Neill Theater Center in Waterford, Conn., and throughout the area.
The two are in the United States in an arrangement worked out by George C. White, president of the O'Neill Center, with the Chinese Theater Association during his trip to Peking last year to direct a Chinese-language production of O'Neill's ''Anna Christie.''
If the notion of a Chinese ''Anna Christie'' is a novel one - and Mr. White may return to Peking next year to direct a Broadway musical in Chinese - the idea of imparting an ancient and complex Eastern theater technique to young Western actors is almost as unusual.
But Miss Su and Mr. Qu are more than master teachers with long experience as Peking Opera acrobats. 
It quickly became apparent in a recent conversation that they were possessed of a vivid sense of humor, practicality and warmth likely to bridge the largest of cultural differences.
 
Lecture at Brooklyn Theater
Speaking through an interpreter, Miss Su and Mr. Qu talked last week of their work and their impressions of their American students. 
They were preparing for a lecture-demonstration at the New Theater of Brooklyn, a center for new American theater founded in 1982 and directed by Deborah J. Pope and her associate, Stephen Stettler, who also teaches acting at the O'Neill Center's National Theater Institute.
''The American students have been very clever and very adorable,'' Mr. Qu said. 
''They make us feel very young.''
Miss Su nodded. 
''Perhaps we will cry when we leave,'' she added.
Like Mr. Qu, Miss Su began training in the Peking Opera technique at the age of 10. 
Now 46, she retired from performing in 1964 to begin a career as a teacher of stage-fighting at the Academy. 
Mr. Qu, 52, left the stage last year. 
''I have a 91-year-old mother and there was no one to take care of her,'' he said. 
His wife is an actress who is often on tour. 
''This way, I can go home at lunchtime,'' Mr. Qu explained. 
He grinned. 
''Frankly speaking, I would prefer to be acting. 
But China is still a filial country.''
 
Performers Must Specialize
Training for the Peking Opera is rigorous, for in addition to mastering a highly developed, stylized and intricate technique, the performer must specialize in one of many types of characters. 
And within the Peking Opera's specific acting styles there are differences, for example, in the way characters hold out their hands, depending on what age they are.
''The manner of speaking and tone of voice change depending on who the character is and who is addressed,'' Mr. Qu said. 
He imitated a child greeting a father, a father greeting a child, and that same father greeting ''someone he must respect.''
From the young applicants for the first level of training, about 40 or 50 students are chosen annually out of 1,000, a ratio that hasn't changed since Mr. Qu began his studies. 
''It is very competitive,'' he said. 
''You are tested on physique, facial characteristics, voice and acting ability. 
You must study for six years before graduating, and then prepare with advanced training for three years. 
After that, you may call yourself a performer. 
It's difficult. 
George White said that to study Peking Opera requires strength of steel.''
 
System of Selection
''It is different from the American system,'' Mr. Qu continued. 
''In China, the student wants to have to do it, but the teachers have to select the students. 
If you are too tall, too thin, too short, too fat, you're out. 
Here, the discipline seems to depend on the student's desire to study.''
To indicate the kind of talent the Academy seeks, Mr. Qu described several final exercises given the youngest applicants. 
''We give them something to act,'' he said. 
He mimed children pretending to grasp a cup of tea. 
The first takes hold of it carefully, the second grabs it clumsily. 
The first child, told to swat an imaginary fly, searches for the insect and hits at it. 
The second lunges immediately. 
''Then if that is O.K., the teacher will do gestures and see how well they follow,'' he said. 
He moved his arms in windmill turns, then imitated arms being thrown stiffly into space. 
The examination concludes with a crucial test on academic subjects.
Applicants for the second, or oldest, level of training must act a scene from the Peking Opera repertory. 
They also are tested on academics and ''politics,'' which Mr. Qu described as ''general social structure and social knowledge.''
The advanced-level exams are as competitive. 
''There are no back doors into the Peking Opera,'' Mr. Qu said.
 
'Character Teachers'
Teachers specialize in acrobatics, basic movements such as kicking and bending, floor work, the use of knives and swords, full body movement and ''character teaching,'' which is the most important. 
''It is like a bicycle,'' Mr. Qu said, adding that he and Miss Su are character teachers. 
''Some people make the wheels, some the bars, some the handles. 
But there must be someone to put the whole together.''
Given this high degree of specialization, what were the two able to teach to American acting students with no experience in the Peking Opera style?
''We taught the basic skills,'' Mr. Qu said. 
Method was stressed over theory. 
''Because it was the first time Chinese had come to teach, arrangements were very tight and the students were physically tired,'' Miss Su said.
''In the beginning,'' Mr. Qu said, ''there were some students at the O'Neill Center who thought studying Eastern art didn't make sense in the context of Western theater.''
To make those connections clearer, he said, he would tell his Brooklyn listeners a story. 
''George White took us to Washington, where we met Senator Dodd,'' he said, referring to Christopher J. Dodd, the Connecticut Democrat. 
'' 'Why is your performing different from a movie?'
Senator Dodd asked us. 
'Both are art,' we said. 
'But the techniques are different. 
Movies are closer to daily life. 
The Peking Opera shows ancient life in China. 
It is best compared with Western ballet. 
Does anyone walk on point, spinning around rapidly, in real life?
This is art. 
But film is also real life with art added.'
'' Mr. Qu said that Senator Dodd agreed, and even extended the analogy to politics. 
''His manner of speaking was very artistic,'' Mr. Qu observed. 
''He can also perform.''
And so Mr. Qu and Miss Su taught their American students, whom they will leave early next month, ways to open a door and call someone, to use swords and daggers, and to ride a horse. 
''Now, when they perform things from the past,'' Mr. Qu said, ''they can also use the Peking Opera style.''
