
Fourteen foreign journalists from six countries left Tibet today after being ordered out of the region by the Chinese authorities.
The expulsions came after 20 days of protests, led by monks and other Tibetans, against Chinese rule. 
Another journalist covered by the expulsion order left Lhasa, the capital, on Thursday.
A Chinese official declared that the journalists, including this correspondent, were in Tibet illegally and that any effort to report anti-Chinese protests was prohibited.
Lhasa and at least one other Tibetan city have been the sites of marches led by monks to demand that the Chinese leave Tibet, which was invaded by Chinese troops and finally annexed in 1951. 
In one demonstration on Oct. 
1, it now appears that at least 9 Tibetans and 4 policemen were killed.
 
Reporting Severely Limited
After permitting sporadic reports of the protests from Tibet for several days, the Chinese authorities here severed contact with Lhasa, preventing foreign journalists there from reporting directly on events. 
Some accounts were carried to Chengdu, a city 750 miles east of Lhasa, but most reporting has been severely limited.
According to a foreign manager of Lhasa's main tourist hotel, Chinese officials have ordered all foreigners to leave Tibet unless they are on official business or on official tours. 
The Chinese have denied issuing such an order.
On Tuesday, an anti-Chinese march by as many as 100 monks from Drepung Monastery, just outside Lhasa, turned violent when heavily armed Chinese policemen attacked the protesters, beating them with clubs, rifle butts and belts. 
Ninety monks were arrested as they tried to march on the provincial government offices.
Since Tuesday, Lhasa has been very tense. 
Although most shops and market stalls had reopened by Thursday, they closed much earlier than usual, and streets were empty by early evening.
A Chinese restaurant owner in Lhasa said many of the Chinese who had been sent there as government officials had gone home early because they feared being attacked by Tibetans.
 
Monasteries Sealed Off
On Wednesday, all of Lhasa's monasteries, the religious heart of Tibetan Buddhism, were sealed off by blockades of policemen brandishing automatic weapons and pistols. 
All local cars and trucks were stopped and their drivers questioned.
The Chinese police have plastered the walls of monasteries with posters denouncing the Dalai Lama, the leader of Tibetan Buddhism, whom they accused of encouraging separatist activity from his exile in Dharmsala, India.
Other Chinese officials have been seen lecturing young monks on China's version of Tibetan history and have interrogated all senior abbots at the monasteries. 
At the Jokhang Cathedral, the most sacred of Buddhism's shrines in Tibet, the Chinese police have occupied the upper floors, using the temple as an observation post.
At least 600 heavily armed policemen arrived in Lhasa during the week. 
On Wednesday, the 37th anniversary of China's invasion, they staged a major show of force by driving a convoy of 20 trucks, including 13 packed with policemen armed with AK-47 assault rifles, through the old Tibetan quarter.
The police have patrolled rooftops of the Tibetan quarter and have set up roadblocks in various parts of Lhasa.
 
A Meeting in Lhasa
Efforts by journalists in Tibet to send out reports on the events of the last few days proved almost impossible and were in fact ruled illegal at a meeting in Lhasa shortly after midnight Thursday between a senior Chinese official and 15 foreign reporters.
Yu Wuzhen, the director of Tibet's foreign affairs office, read a statement ordering the 15 foreign reporters out of Tibet. 
Mr. Yu charged the journalists with failing to provide the provincial authorities with what he said was a required 10-day advance notification of their intention to work in Tibet.
The meeting was also attended by two American diplomats who were in Lhasa, Raymond F. Burghardt, the political counselor at the United States Embassy in Beijing, and Scott D. Bellard, a consular officer from Chengdu.
