
There, on page 3 of People's Daily, organ of the Communist Party, was a postcard-sized photograph of three men in China's Parliament sitting with their hands in their laps while around them hands fluttered aloft. 
It was an extraordinary display of official discord.
The occasion was a vote during the current session of the Parliament in a country where the appearance of public unanimity by Government is hallowed ground.
A good deal of sacred turf has been trampled this week as more than 2,900 delegates to the National People's Congress gather in annual session to hear reports on the Government's performance and to ratify new laws and constitutional amendments. 
But the lockstep behavior of past congresses has dissolved in instances of genuine debate, negative votes and - even more remarkably - substantial coverage of events by China's press.
China's news organization have been awash with reports on the congress, interviewing delegates, publishing accounts of debates in working sessions and explaining contentious issues, like the intransigent and politically volatile problem of inflation. 
Even foreign reporters were invited for the first time to sit in on delegate discussions.
As soon as the congress opened it was clear that this year was going to be different. 
Liu Yiu-chu, a Hong Kong lawyer and delegate from Guangdong Province, abstained on a vote for the members of various committees.
A gasp went through the auditorium. 
The chamber exploded in the flashes of photographers' strobe lights. 
And then she did it again. 
Delegates joined in.
''I do not know how the lists of candidates were formulated, nor do I know the criteria for choosing them,'' Miss Liu told reporters afterward. 
''As a deputy I think I should have such information and clearly know what the procedure is.''
Miss Liu's behavior proved contagious, and at one point 69 delegates voted against the composition of a congress working committee.
Huang Shunxing, who once served in Taiwan's legislature but who now works in China as a scientist and is a delegate to the congress, urged the defeat of 89-year-old Zhou Gucheng as chairman of a committee.
 
Some Blunt Language
''He is too old and should be given more time for a rest,'' Mr. Huang said, in the bluntest language heard in public so far. 
After a moment's hesitation, applause surged across the auditorium in the Great Hall of the People.
For the first time in the People's Republic, not a single committee of the congress was elected unanimously.
Not all the delegates were impressed by the collapse of orchestrated tradition, however.
''If we all cast dissenting votes or abstained from voting for our own personal reasons, wouldn't this be extremely disruptive?'' the influential Economic Daily, an economic newspaper, quoted an unnamed delegate as saying.
But another saw that China was looking at something new and more recognizably democratic. 
''Those delegates who abstained or who voted negatively have brought up a new problem in how to conduct elections properly in the future,'' the delegate said. 
''Much attention should be paid to this.''
