
ORVILLE SCHELL is the author of ''Watch Out for the Foreign Guests!''
(Pantheon).
Each evening a middle-aged woman in a simple print dress sits down at a large grand piano set to one side of the hotel lobby and begins to play Mozart, Beethoven and Chopin from sheet music that is so aged that small pieces of yellowed paper break from the edges and drift down onto the keyboard every time she turns a page.
Hotel guests sit at surrounding tables, the murmur of their voices mixing with the sound of music and ice cubes clinking in glasses.
As dusk begins to fall, the chandeliers come on, and some of the guests begin to move toward the hotel's main restaurant, where they sit down at tables set with crisply ironed cloths and choose between such delicacies as salade de magret de canard au vinaigre framboise ($7), cr eme d'artichauts au caviar et filaments de betterave ($2.50), paillard de veau aux chanterelles ($19.50), paupiettes de sole Montrose sauce Nantua ($15), and a list of wines from Italy and Germany as well as France.
Out in front, where chauffeured limousines await their charges just beyond a large fountain, stands a silent phalanx of common people, staring transfixed through the plate- glass windows at the activity inside the brightly lit hotel lobby.
Orville Schell article on opulent Jianguo Hotel, Peking, China; photos (M)
''At night . . . where in hidden springs of electricity flooded the great dining room with light, it became as it were an immense and wonderful aquarium against whose wall of glass the working population of Balbec, the fishermen and also the tradesmen's families, clustering invisibly in the outer darkness, pressed their faces to watch, gently floating upon the golden eddies within, the luxurious life of its occupants, a thing as extraordinary to the poor as the life to strange fishes and mollusks,'' so wrote Marcel Proust at the turn of the century of the Grand Hotel in Normandy, where he used to summer on the coast with his grandmother.
But the scene unfolding around me here is not Balbec or even France before the Great War. 
It is Peking, the Peoples' Republic of China in 1983, a curious place to find the ghost of Marcel Proust, or even a mutation thereof. 
The hotel is the Jianguo (Build the Nation), the first Western-run inn to open in China in 35 years.
Instead of vacationing French aristocrats taking the sea air, the Jianguo is filled with businessmen, tourists and diplomats. 
And instead of Norman ''fishermen'' and ''tradesmen's families,'' it is Chinese workers and peasants who stare into the Jianguo's aquarium-like interior from outside.
The building itself, a sprawling four-story cream-colored structure, is actually an architectural replica of the Palo Alto Holiday Inn in California. 
It is situated on Jianguo- menwai Boulevard outside what used to be the old city wall before the Communists tore it down to build a highway. 
Its neon signs, eternally energetic fountains, extravagant lighting and California styling make it as noticeable among the frieze of gloomy buildings which flank it as one gleaming gold tooth in a mouth of otherwise neglected dentures.
Standing as it does in front of row upon row of dormitory-like housing for the families of Chinese Foreign Ministry employees (where there are usually not even any operable lights in the hallways), the Jianguo fairly sparkles with seductiveness. 
It is a living advertisement for the outside capitalist world with which the denizens of Peking have just begun to become reacquainted after three decades of socialist isolation.
Compared to the crowded, inefficient and noisy world of urban China, where there is literally no place for family members, lovers or friends to sit in quiet comfort and share a meal or conversation, life in the Jianguo Hotel appears like a fantasy incarnate. 
When one steps through these doors, China ends and another world begins. 
The rooms have wall-to-wall carpeting. 
The matching drapes and bedspreads are made of bright floral print fabric that seems as remote to China as tropical foliage in Greenland. 
The private bathrooms are finished with black and white Chinese marble, one of the few interior effects of local origin. 
The king-size beds are all imported from the United States. 
Every room has a color television set, its own air conditioner, a push-button phone and an American-style lamp hanging down from the ceiling on the end of a gold chain. 
Sliding doors open out onto little balconies which overlook an interior court where more fountains bubble away in reflecting pools.
Downstairs, one can dine on quite good Continental cuisine in a candle-lit restaurant staffed with a headwaiter in a dinner jacket, swim in an indoor pool, dance until 2 A.M. in a fully outfitted disco, imbibe a drink at a Western-style bar, knowing that a German and five Swiss hotel managers from the Peninsula Group (of the Peninsula Hotel fame in Hong Kong, which has contracted to run the Jianguo for 10 ears) hold a steady helm. 
No wonder the occupancy rate of the hotel has recently been 99 to 100 percent. 
Even though rooms cost two and three times more ($60 to $70) than Chinese-run hotels, and must be paid for with hard currency, foreign visitors are more than glad to incur the cost.
How did such an aberration ever come into being in a country once so dedicated to eradicating class distinctions and foreign privilege?
It is the brainchild of the Shanghai-born architect and hotel owner Clement Chen Jr., whose offices are in San Francisco, and who owns the Buffalo Hilton Hotel and Holiday Inns in San Francisco and Palo Alto.
Wanting to do something for his native land, and aware of Chinese interest in earning foreign exchange through an expanded tourist industry, he proposed constructing a first-class inn under foreign management in Peking. 
The Chinese, having embarked on their new ''open door policy'' to the West, accepted his plans to build a 480-room hotel, costing $22.6 million, which would be jointly owned, 51 percent by the China International Travel Service and 40 percent by Mr. Chen himself. 
After 20 months of construction, involving the shipment of 200 containers of building supplies from the United States, this curious hostel, which seems to defy the momentum of the whole Chinese Revolution, opened in 1982.
''Let's face it, we live in the 20th century,'' Mr. Chen told me when I called him at his San Francisco office to ask about his conception of the Jianguo. 
''People may enjoy visiting a country with an unfamiliar culture like China, but when they get back to their hotel from a tour in the afternoon, basically they want to be able to relax in a first-class place. 
What I mean to say is, that after the Peking duck, they may still feel a need for some bacon and eggs, a club sandwich or maybe a steak. 
I purposely designed my hotel with these needs in mind, so that once a guest gets inside, he will be able to forget where he is and feel as if he were back home.''
One obvious hurdle to Mr. Chen's notion of opening a hotel in China in which Westerners can ''forget'' where they are, is the ubiquity of the Chinese people themselves. 
No foreign guest would ever be able to imagine that he or she was ''back home'' if the hotel in Peking was open to the Chinese masses as well as foreign guests.
''This was a real problem,'' Mr. Chen acknowledged. 
''But let me tell you a little story. 
One time while we were building the hotel, I decided to go out to a public restaurant here in Peking to eat some jiaozi (steamed dumplings). 
Well, when I got to the restaurant, the first thing I discovered was that I had to get in line with everyone pushing and shoving. 
When I finally worked up to the head of the line, I found that everything was not just noisy and dirty, but that the restaurant didn't even provide bowls or chopsticks for their customers. 
I ended up eating my jiaozi on a piece of newspaper. 
Can you imagine that?
''So, I started thinking,'' Mr. Chen continued. 
''I asked myself whether I wanted to have the restaurants in my hotel look like this. 
And I decided that I didn't, that if I let all these people come in, I would have thousands of them arriving for a cup of tea, and then spending the rest of the day sitting around enjoying the air-conditioning. 
I knew that it would be impossible to run a first class hotel that way.''
As a result, all local Chinese, except the staff of 655, Chinese accompanied by foreigners or high ranking cadres attending official functions are excluded from the Jianguo. 
Security guards hover around the lobby and elevator just to make sure that no trespassers get through.
A hotel like the Jianguo serves its purpose well by providing the foreign community in Peking with an oasis of service and efficiency where there previously was none - the hotel will, for instance, take phone messages for guests, provides stenographic services, and will even accept reservations from independent travelers made abroad through the Peninsula Group (call 213-670-9450 or 312-263- 6069), unlike any other Chinese-run hotel. 
But its presence raises a number of questions about how official Chinese attitudes toward foreigners are evolving.
While understanding China's urgent need to earn foreign exchange and to open up to the outside in order to develop technologically, one still cannot help but wonder what has happened to that extreme sensitivity to flagrant displays of wealth and foreign privilege that so animated China only a few years ago.
Have Chinese Communism and the Chinese people now reconciled themselves to such social contradictions?
Or as more such hotels as the Jianguo open, will they evoke, at least for older people, an earlier and humiliating time when another generation of foreigners lived inside China, but protected by privilege in enclaves of splendid isolation?
Party officials, still sensitive to this humiliating past, are quick to point out the differences. 
The Chinese Government owns a controlling share of the hotel and will fully acquire it for one dollar in 1992. 
Foreigners no longer enjoy such privileges as extra- territoriality, which once made them inviolable to Chinese law, nor are they now allowed to indulge in the kinds of essentially unregulated commercial and evangelical activity which they once were. 
And it is also true, these officials point out, that most other developing countries provide luxury hotels as well as other facilities for those foreign visitors who can afford them.
While it is true that China has changed much over the past few years, and now even espouses such amazing slogans as ''To Get Rich is Glorious,'' somehow the Jianguo still occurs as an anomaly in downtown Peking. 
China is searching for a new identity. 
Just what that new identity will be, and how foreign-run luxury hotels for foreigners will fit into it, is not certain.
