
TO a casual observer the three students sitting around a table in government class at Phillips Academy, a private secondary school in Andover, Mass., look like typical Asian-American teen-agers. 
Wearing jeans and jogging shoes, their books stowed in backpacks on the floor, they listen as Ronald Speirs, the teacher, discusses the checks-and- balances system of the United States Constitution.
But all three of the students are Chinese, who arrived only six weeks previously from the Harbin Institute of Technology in Manchuria. 
They are the fifth group of three students each from the People's Republic of China that have enrolled in the last five years in senior classes at Andover.
Three students from Harbin Institute of Technology study at Phillips Academy in Andover, Mass, in exchange program started in 1980; school is committed to developing intensive four-year Chinese studies program and is one of 36 public and private US high schools to receive Dodge Foundation funding for language and other courses (Education: Winter Survey) (S)
Like their predecessors, who are already enrolled in American colleges and universities, the three Chinese students - Jia Yantao, a man, and Ma Tianyi and Chu Xiaoming, all 19 years old - are spending this year at Andover polishing their spoken English. 
In Harbin foreigners are a curiosity, and they find everything, not only the language, confusing. 
At Andover, however, the three will make new friends and will gradually need each other less and less. 
Surrogate families in the community have already welcomed them into their homes during school holidays.
''It's a tradition at Andover to recruit students from China,'' said Joshua L. Miner, dean of admissions. 
''And it's consistent with the diversity we seek in the student body - we have students from 19 foreign countries this year. 
But having representatives from the world's most populous nation wasn't enough. 
We had to develop a full curriculum for non-Asian students that would include a four-year Chinese language program as well as the courses we already offered in East Asian history, religions and art.''
Established in 1980 through private contacts, the exchange quickly gained approval from the Ministry of Education in Peking. 
There are still problems, however; five years after the first Harbin students arrived on the Andover campus, and three years after instruction in Chinese was first offered, ''The Chinese studies program has not yet begun to grow,'' according to Hale Sturges, chairman of the foreign language department.
Last year at Andover only nine students signed up for beginning Chinese, and this year there are 14. 
The immediate goal is to add a more advanced level of instruction each year, so that taking Chinese will eventually satisfy a student's language requirement. 
Other long-term goals include increasing the number of students of Chinese to 50. 
Many of these advanced students could then continue their studies in Harbin, making the program a real exchange.
This year, for the first time, Harbin sent a visiting scholar, Ni Xiaomin, to perfect her English and to help with Chinese instruction. 
Each Harbin student tutors a few first-year Chinese students. 
Last summer, for the first time, five Andover students visited China for six weeks.
Expenses for the three Harbin students - room, board, tuition, travel and vacations - run about $50,000 a year. 
But Andover's commitment to developing a four-year Chinese studies program is estimated at an additional $100,000 a year. 
These costs are now covered by initial funding from the Geraldine R. Dodge Foundation's $1.3 million China Initiative program, Andover's Kemper Fund for foreign students, general scholarship funds and individual contributors. 
But in the future, according to Dean Miner, Andover must begin a large fund-raising effort to endow the program.
SCHOOLS like Andover face a number of obstacles in setting up strong Chinese programs. 
As of 1980, the year of the most recent study, there were only 1,980 high school students nationwide taking Chinese. 
Geography, inertia, parental bias toward the traditional Romance languages and obsolete teaching materials work against a curriculum balanced between Western and non-Western languages. 
This year, for example, 43 percent of all Andover students take French, 24 percent Spanish, 16 percent Latin, 8 percent Russian, and only 1 percent Chinese.
According to Mr. Sturges, Chinese pedagogy is far behind America's. 
The five available texts, with no graphics, he described as boring. 
''We make do,'' he says, but new texts, correctly paced, with audio-visual aids are needed for students of the 1980's.
Things are improving, however. 
This year Andover was one of 36 public and private high schools, 22 more than in 1983, to receive Dodge Foundation funding. 
Schools willing to make a long-term commitment to teach Chinese language can participate in annual forums such as one held at Ohio State University last summer, in which teachers of Chinese met to share their concerns and explore new ways to help students.
And at the college level, the 13,178 enrollment in Chinese language classes in 1983-84 represents a 16 percent increase over 1980. 
''It's important to get a head start on Chinese,'' said Richard Brod, director of foreign language programs at the Modern Language Association. 
''Unlike the Western languages, without the base of pre-collegiate Chinese, it's not easy to gain functional proficiency in Chinese at the college level.''
The three students at Andover are the youngest of the 10,000 mainland Chinese now studying in the United States, which is only about 3 percent of all foreign students in the country. 
Of the total number of Chinese here, China pays for 5,400. 
The balance are sponsored either by relatives and friends in the United States or through private scholarships. 
Except for a student exchange in the planning stage between the Sidwell Friends School in Washington, D.C., and Peking Middle School No. 2, there is nothing comparable to the Andover-Harbin program at the high school level in the United States; the Chinese students at Andover are the only ones from that country attending American secondary-level schools.
China's population is four times that of the United States but its 800 colleges and universities are barely a quarter of this country's. 
China sends less than 1 percent of its college students here, most at graduate and postgraduate levels in subjects like engineering, computer science or management, which Chinese universities cannot yet offer. 
Most are also trained as teachers.
Those who do come are a highly select group, and the three now at Andover are no exception. 
To gain entrance to Harbin Institute, one of 14 institutions in China that are considered to have special status, they received the highest scores on college-entrance examinations given to 50,000 qualified high school seniors. 
This year at Andover they are taking advanced physics and math, economics, and English and American history for foreign students. 
Eventually, after five or more years of study in America, they will return to the Harbin Institute to teach.
Terry Hoyt is a freelance writer based in New York City.
