
Formidable collections of Chinese art have, in recent years, enriched the auction market with stunning offerings in a variety of categories - from snuff bottles to Sung and Ming porcelains. 
Two years ago, Edward T. Chow's spectacular Ming porcelains sold in three sessions of an auction at Sotheby Parke Bernet in Hong Kong and London that totaled $20.1 million, the most important public sale held in recent years of such material and the fourth highest total ever gaveled for a single owner sale of art at auction.
In that same season, the auction house sold Elva and Eugene Bernat's Sung and Tang pottery, a memorable assemblage that established a record price at auction in America for Chinese art and for Sung porcelains with the sale for $500,000 of a brown and white floral-decorated 11th-century vase. 
And Sotheby's three-session sale last season of the late Bob C. Stevens's 800 Chinese snuff bottles and related wares totaled $1.4 million, exceeding all other auctions of such material.
Formidable collections of Chinese art have, in recent years, enriched the auction market with stunning offerings in a variety of categories - from snuff bottles to Sung and Ming porcelains.
This season's prizes in Chinese art from a private collector include rare Shang and Chou bronzes, Tang tomb sculpture and Han Dynasty pottery figures. 
These art works were collected in China in the mid-1940's by Capt. Sergius N. Ferris Luboshez, a retired officer in the United States Navy who, at the close of World War II, was sent by the State Department to the Far East to serve as General Counsel to the Foreign Liquidation Commission and, later, as Central Field Commissioner.
During the four years he was stationed in China, staying primarily in Shanghai, Captain Luboshez acquired the 110 offerings that will be up for bidding Thursday at Sotheby Parke Bernet galleries. 
He was extremely fortunate, he recalled in a recent telephone interview, to be given opportunities by Chinese government officials to meet knowledgeable owners of Oriental art.
''They made a point of introducing me to the great Mandarin collectors and connoisseurs,'' he said. 
''I was the only Westerner invited to their gatherings. 
Their courtesy and gentleness were astounding. 
At that time, our people very often looked down their noses at the Chinese. 
These people welcomed me because I never assumed any airs with them. 
I trusted them and they trusted me.''
The finest ceramic offering in the Luboshez collection is a Tang tomb figure of a serene and graceful court lady, shown seated on an hourglass-shaped bamboo stool, holding a blossoming stalk in her right hand. 
Despite repairs to the neck and coiffure, and a replacement of a piece of the plant stalk, this extraordinary 6th-to 9th-century three-color glazed figure may rewrite the $250,000 record for a tomb figure, the price paid for a Tang horse at Sotheby's in London in 1978. 
According to Robert D. Mowry, curator of the Mr. and Mrs. John D. Rockefeller 3rd Collection at Asia Society, such repairs to damages of the kind this piece has suffered are not unusual. 
''In quality it compares favorably with a similar piece in the Idemitsu Museum, Tokyo, and with the superb piece in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, currently on display in their newly renovated Asiatic galleries,'' Mr. Mowry said.
Even more remarkable for its expressive energy, is the Han Dynasty watchdog, a brown-glazed tomb figure modeled 1,900 years ago in a seated position, its ears taut, its teeth bared, its whiskers bristling and its eyes bulging. 
Expectations are that it may sell for up to $90,000.
Other pottery wares of interest in the sale are a Tang owl-shaped pottery flask splashed with amber and green glazes (up to $75,000), an an early Tang straw-glazed torso of a fierce-faced warrier in armor (up to $6,000) and an impressive gray pottery storage jar, wide shouldered and ovoid in form (up to $50,000).
The Shang and Chou bronzes in the sale include several of interest: a covered Chou cauldron called a ding, dating to about 500 B.C. (up to $120,000); a covered Shang wine vessel or fanglei from the 11th or 12th century B.C., the cover of which may not be original to the work (up to $60,000) and an animal-shaped Shang wine vessel called a Guang (up to $70,000). 
Captain Luboshez said that the Guang - its spout in the shape of a tiger's head - was one of the most difficult pieces to find. 
''I was told over and over again that there aren't any, there are none in China,'' he said. 
''But, after three years of asking and looking, finally one appeared.''
Whatever damage the bronzes have suffered has more to do with age and what happened to these works in tombs than to anything else, Mr. Mowry points out, explaining that bronze vessels were not used for everyday use but were made as ritual works for use in burial ceremonies. 
Afterward they were put into the tomb.
In acquiring these wares, Captain Luboshez said that his meetings with collectors occurred over tea or dinner at which an art object - the court lady, for example - would be exhibited and then removed. 
''If you expressed admiration for the piece, that meant you were able and willing to buy it,'' he explained, adding that it would be impolite to ask to see an art work again. 
Two or three years after he had seen the court lady, he reported, he was told it might be available and an intermediary informed him of the price. 
''I was more or less committed to pay whatever they asked,'' he said. 
''It was high - but not by today's prices.''
The pottery dog came to him in a different way - in the middle of the night in a laundry basket, borne by a collector who was ''drenched to the skin'' and who needed the money.
Captain Luboshez spoke philosophically of his collection. 
The attraction of Chinese art lay in its view of man not as the Lord of nature, as in Western art, but as ''part of nature.''
He is selling, he added, because over the years ''an art object can become part of you.''
And once that happens, he noted, owning the object seems unnecessary.
James J. Lally, Sotheby's specialist in this material, will give a lecture on the Luboshez collection this afternoon at 2 at the auction house, York Avenue at 72d Street. 
The lecture is open to the public without charge.
