
TIMED TO COINCIDE with the impressive presentation of art works from the Shanghai Museum on view in ''The Chinese Scholar's Studio: Artistic Life in the Late Ming Period,'' at the Asia Society, is a dealer's exhibition organized by James J. Lally that expresses in a generous assortment of art and objects the traditional taste of the educated elite in China over a thousand years.
In ''Chinese Works of Art for the Scholar's Studio,'' at the J. J.Lally gallery, 42 East 57th Street, the material - 106 art works dating from the 11th-century B.C. Shang dynasty through the mid-19th century - covers the full spectrum of what today's Western collectors most admire in period Oriental art. 
There are Shang bronze vessels from the 11th century B.C.; Han animal figures and seals from the first century A.D.; Sung ceramics from the 13th century; Ming jades of the 16th century and Ching porcelains and wood boxes of the 19th century.
Mr. Lally's selection includes many objects associated with the scholar's studio that were made much later than the late Ming dynasty - the focus of the Asia Society exhibition. 
He has included these post-Ming works to show how objects admired by the educated class were produced until quite recently. 
From the 18th century come a turquoise porcelain rock, a fussily carved jade water pot and a molded stemmed gourd object. 
Notable objects from the 19th century include a small, shapely wood bud vase and a superb, austerely crafted pair of melon-shaped lidded wood boxes for game pieces.
Outstanding among earlier works are an Imperial blue and white cylindrical porcelain brush pot of the Ching period that is decorated with calligraphy; Han seals in the form of snarling chimeras and a Ming document box with brass mounts. 
The realistic and mythical Han and Sung animals seen throughout this show engage the mind with a sense of wonder at the importance of symbolism to the Chinese. 
Notable examples include a bronze tortoise water dropper, a stone water pot in the shape of a ram, a lacquered bronze deer-unicorn figure and a bull-shaped - or is it a tapir?
- silvered and gilded bronze water dropper.
''A scholar always had a sense of participation in the past,'' Mr. Lally said, adding that the scholars demonstrated this in a variety of ways that included collecting ancient works and altering works of an earlier period to a practical use centuries later, an honored tradition in China. 
One of the most memorable objects in the show, a regal first- or second-century Han duck of gilded bronze, standing less than four inches tall, was transformed into a seal in the Sung or Ming period.
''The tradition of art collecting has a longer history in China than anywhere else in the world,'' Mr. Lally said. 
''Collecting and connoisseurship were already essential attributes of an accomplished gentleman by the time of Confucius, in the fifth century B.C.''
The prices of the objects, furnishings, paintings and calligraphies shown by Mr. Lally range from $1,200 for a bamboo wristrest to $35,000 for a pair of Ming chairs. 
These selections cover so many periods and art styles that they show the broad range of works from which scholars were able to select pieces for their studios, thereby retaining a strong sense of individuality in the highly personal environments where they worked, studied and spent long hours in meditation. 
Virtually every work in the show seems chosen as an object worthy of extended inspection - be it the tripod Shang bronze vessel with flattened scrolls decorating the entire surface or the shapely, gold-washed, 18th-century bronze censer.
A fuller understanding of the reason these art works were made and collected in China over the centuries can be gained by visiting the Asia Society exhibition, which remains through Jan. 
3, and by consulting its generously illustrated catalogue (clothbound, $45; paperback, $35).
The physical re-creation of a scholar's studio in the Asia Society show, although smaller and less sumptuous than it would have been in the late Ming period, which ended in 1644, gives collectors for the first time in memory an opportunity to see the elements of a scholar's studio as it might have been. 
The materials in this setting are on loan from the Metropolitan Museum of Art, private collectors and Robert H. Ellsworth, a New York dealer. 
Dr. James C. Y. Watt, senior consultant for Chinese antiquities and decorative arts at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, said that the scholar's studio which existed from the 11th century on ''was never so formalized that the individual could not express his own personality in the art works and objects selected.''
Dr. Watt, one of the four curators from the United States who worked with the curatorial staff of the Shanghai museum on the show, explained that although there were some general rules governing what an educated gentleman should choose for his study, ''the rules applied more to those who were not sure of themselves than to the true scholar, who was an arbiter of taste and did not go by the rules.''
His one disappointment, he said, was the limited space accorded the re-creation of the scholar's studio, which was all that was possible in the society's exhibition space. 
''It should have been spread into an area five times the size,'' he said. 
''The window would have been much larger and the chair would have been covered with very colorful brocades and velvets.''
Even so, the setting is rich in exquisite detail, reflecting the delight that an educated gentleman of the Ming period must have experienced in collecting objects alive with shimmer, painted detail or carving. 
Most of the items placed on or near the mother-of-pearl inlaid and lacquered desktop - stone seals, a fluted wood scroll pot, jasper rocks, a jade brush rest, five bamboo brushes, carved boxes, a bronze vessel, albums of paper and the inevitable qin, or zither - are wonderful to touch and study.
However difficult the symbolism and traditions of the literati may be for 20th-century viewers, the objects that represent them are not, because most of them - including the fly whisk hung over the back of the aristocratic yoke-back armchair - bear a resemblance to the tools and artifacts common in our libraries and offices today.
