
IT is only within the last 15 or 20 years that collectors have rediscovered Chinese Export silver, says Robert Egleston, curator of the New Haven Historical Society Museum, adding, ''It's important to understanding our own late 18th- and 19th-century society.''
An exhibition of Chinese Export silver is now on display at the New Haven Museum, with pieces on loan from the Yale University Art Gallery, the Proctor Institute in Utica, N.Y., and private collections in Connecticut, Massachusetts, New York and Pennsylvania. 
The exhibit will continue through Dec. 
1.
Because of the way it often was marked, most Chinese Export silver is not easy for the average collector to identify. 
This is especially true for those who have inherited silver. 
Unless there is a family record that describes the pieces as having been made in China, many may believe they own silver made in England or early 19th-century America.
When Western examples were shown to Chinese silversmiths for them to copy, that is exactly what they did, down to the hallmark, changing, sometimes, only the letter that indicated the year it was made. 
This was done by substituting the Chinese maker's own initial. 
Some Chinese silversmiths stamped their own initials in English on pieces made for export. 
This has led dealers and buyers to believe they have discovered a piece that had been made by a heretofore unidentified American smith. 
As a result, there are probably more pieces of Chinese Export silver on dining room sideboards, displayed in corner cupboards or tucked away in silver drawers than their owners may realize.
There were silver mines throughout China and all of Asia, but much of the silver used to make Chinese Export pieces was transported from America and England to Canton, trunk after trunk full of silver coins. 
There they were melted down and, as one earlier traveler wrote, soon ''converted into articles of luxury or convenience.''
Between 1784, when American merchants first began to trade with China, to 1854 more than $1 million in coins was shipped to China to be transformed into goblets and mugs, tea services, flatware, cream pots, sugar dishes and other holloware.
In the 18th century and early 19th century, pieces of silverware - cups, tankards and plates - were used as money. 
These also were exported to China not only to be made into ''new-fashioned'' silver but to pay for cargoes of exotic silks and teas. 
In 1789, a ship out of Salem, Mass., took to Canton $30,000 in coins, as well as 23 pieces of silver that had been fashioned by colonial silversmiths.
Whether American or English coins, old silver pieces or Chinese silver was used, apparently little attention was given to the amount of silver in each new piece made by the Chinese. 
Silver that has been assayed shows a variance from 78 to as much as 97 parts of silver to copper, the alloy used.
Chinese silversmiths were paid so much less than their Western counterparts that in spite of the cost of transporting the silver and the payment of export and customs duties, the finished pieces brought back to the United States were much less expensive than if they had been made here.
Without a knowledge of English hallmarks or of American touchmarks, the only way most Americans can recognize old Chinese silver made, as the Chinese said, ''in the English manner,'' is to take it to a museum such as the New Haven Colony Historical Society and ask for help.
One indication of Canton workmanship is that in many instances, Chinese-made examples differ only in weight. 
Many are somewhat heavier than American and English pieces.
It was not until 1842, when Western merchants were permitted to take their wives and families to China, that more silver pieces were brought back to the United States. 
One reason was that rather than take all of their own silver flatware and serving pieces with them, merchants' wives packed ''samples'' to take with them and ordered new silver made for them in China. 
Sometimes these pieces were kept separate from their American prototypes. 
More often, they eventually ended up in the same silver drawer as the originals.
Chinese silver has been found in Ireland, Canada and Australia, as well. 
In this country, most examples have been discovered in Connecticut, Massachusetts and Rhode Island, due to the fact that so many merchant traders were from this area. 
More pieces have been found in New Haven and in the Boston area than in any other principal early trading center, including Philadelphia.
But discoveries are made where there is interest and knowledge. 
One principal reason for New Haven's eminence in this particular field may be the influence of a local collector and authority on American and English silver, John D. Kernan. His curiosity was aroused when he found a pair of sugar tongs in a New York antiques shop with the puzzling mark, CUT. 
A year later, in 1959, he discovered a snuff box with a similar mark in another shop. 
Two snuff boxes, purchased in Connecticut, one marked W and one KHC plus an unidentified Chinese character, confirmed his guess that all of the oddly marked pieces were Chinese.
His curiosity and research led to correspondence with museums and silver experts. 
In 1975, under the imprint of the Museum of the American China Trade, an excellent explanation of Chinese Export silver and its makers was published, written by Mr. Kernan, H. A. Crosby Forbes and Ruth S. Wilkins.
The New Haven Colony Historical Society Museum at 114 Whitney Avenue is open without charge Tuesday through Friday from 10 A.M. to 4:45 P.M. and on Saturday and Sunday from 1 to 4:45 P.M.
