
Bug-eyed dragons emblazoned on the Chinese ceramics exhibited at the Yale University Art Gallery are bound to spark more fantasy than fear in viewers. 
For the winged, horned reptiles whipping energetically around beach-ball-sized jars, breathing fire as they stretch clawed paws on basins and raging, fangs bared, on the center of great platters, are propitious symbols - not docile, but seemingly well disposed to all.
These mythical beasts dominate the images seen on the Yuan and Ming porcelains in this exhibition of works from the Idemitsu Museum of Arts in Tokyo, a privately owned institution of a Japanese petrochemical company. 
The show, ''In Pursuit of the Dragon: Traditions and Transitions in Ming Ceramics,'' includes 90 porcelains, of which 31 are decorated with the bewhiskered monsters. 
They are but a small part of the Idemitsu's holdings, which also include Japanese and Middle Eastern ceramics, as well as European and American 20th-century art. 
Organized by the Seattle Art Museum, which produced the excellent catalogue ($19.95), the show will remain at Yale through Jan. 
15.
What could be more appropriate in this the Chinese year of the dragon than an exhibition of some of the world's most spectacular crockery on which these beasts play a starring role?
Ming blue-and-white wares are embellished with blue dragons or white ones. 
Polychromed vessels are splashed with green, red, orange, yellow or brown beasts. 
Dragons crown the lids of boxes, slither around the necks of ewers, rim basins and dramatize otherwise understated dishes. 
The animals are depicted in the traditional Chinese manner with a camel's head, deer's horns, cow's ears, snake's neck, hawk's claws and tiger's paws.
The show's most majestic Ming monster is a marvelous blue dragon with bulging eyes and a scaly body wrapped around a massive blue-and-white jar about 20 inches in diameter. 
The vessel, made between 1425 and 1436, is a rarity, one of only two known. 
The other one was donated in 1937 to the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
The Idemitsu's porcelains, decorated with dragons, flowers, leaves, butterflies, landscapes or glorious washes of color, trace the evolution of ceramics in the Yuan and Ming periods, from 1260 to 1644. 
Porcelains flowered in China during a period of great artistic ferment more than 200 years before this technology reached the West. 
Among the earliest major achievements are monochrome porcelains that include elegantly shaped stem cups - a white one with straight sides, and a red one with a flared mouth - and a sturdy meiping jar dipped in a rich cobalt glaze that accentuates the boldy rounded form.
Seeing the development of color and decoration on these vessels, one suspects that ceramists experimented with colored glazes - cobalt blue, celadon, blood red, turquoise and egg-yolk yellow - the way bakers learn to ice cakes. 
First they frosted the surfaces without a whisper of decoration. 
Then, after glassy coatings were mastered, they moved on to more complex techniques, such as carving images in the surface.
Two outsized 15th-century celadon platters, larger than Hula-Hoops, illustrate these developments. 
On one of these vessels, 27 inches in diameter, the surface is a glowing lime-green glaze. 
On the other, the shimmering green coating is carved with fruits and flowers.
Painterly ceramics abound in this exhibition, and three shallow dishes show how images were modified over a century in the hands of different artists. 
These plates - one blue and white, the others blue and yellow - are decorated at the center with a flowering branch and on the rim with sprays of peaches, litchis, cherries, persimmons and pomegranates. 
The blue-and-white version, made between 1426 and 1435, is the freest and most realistic botanical rendering. 
A yellow-and-blue dish decorated a half century later in the same tradition is strongly expressionistic. 
Although beautifully drawn, the motifs on the third dish, which dates from 1506 to 1521, are predictable.
Chinese ceramics have commanded an increasingly enthusiastic international following since the early 1970's. 
Many of the finest porcelains in the collection of the Idemitsu, which was founded in 1966, were acquired over the last 16 years. 
In this period, prices for great rarities rose from well under $100,000 to $1 million or more.
James J. Lally, a New York Oriental art dealer, was a Chinese art specialist at Sotheby's and its president in New York during the period when the Idemitsu bought many treasures from Sotheby's and Christie's in London. 
''The Idemitsu's ceramics collection far outdistances anything done earlier in this century by the Morgans or Rockefellers,'' he said. 
''They choose masterpieces of each form - there are no compromises.''
Among many of the works in the exhibition found at Sotheby's auctions in London was the massive dragon jar, which was bought in 1981 for $1.5 million, then a record at auction for Chinese art. 
In 1983, the museum bought a large 14th-century blue-and-white foliate dish, awash with lacy flowers, for $117,986. 
In 1976 a bowl with a molded and incised dragon-and-cloud design, glazed blue on the outside and red on the interior, was bought there for $102,960. 
The Idemitsu also shopped at Christie's in London, where in 1982 it paid $618,624 for the 15th-century blue-and-white dish decorated with a pomegranate branch bordered by fruit sprays.
Money for the exhibition is from the National Endowment for the Arts, Kyoto's Metropolitan Center for Far Eastern Art Studies, the Asian Cultural Council and the Federal Council on the Arts and the Humanities. 
The exhibition is to travel through January 1990, visiting the Detroit Institute of the Arts, Pittsburgh's Carnegie Museum of Art, the Birmingham Museum of Art, the Los Angeles County Museum of Art and the Honolulu Academy of the Arts.
