
The bang that Kenneth Legunn and hundreds of other collectors get out of firecrackers lasts long past the Fourth of July.
''The best day to find and swap firecracker labels is the fifth of July,'' Dr. Legunn, a periodontist from Pleasantville, N.Y., said. 
''That's the real collecting day. 
But it goes on throughout the year.''
When Dr. Legunn began his search for these offbeat graphics 21 years ago, he recalled, he was 9 years old and never dreamed he would still be pursuing these labels two decades later. 
He also had no idea that there were 19th- and early 20th-century examples extant and that his quest would one day take him to Hong Kong, Macao and China.
What he and other enthusiasts realized when he was a boy in Bellerose, Queens, was that the debris left by Independence Day celebrants represented a gold mine of colorful ephemera. 
They left no paper scrap unturned in their search through rubbish piles in which occasionally one label lurked. 
The boldly lettered labels on the red, white and blue paper wrappings showed such images as a ferocious-looking black cat, a snarling tiger, soldiers advancing or the Stars and Stripes.
But today, Dr. Legunn explained, firecracker labels are far less imaginative, so collectors no longer poke around in the trash on the day after the Fourth. 
Instead, he said, they mark that day with a post-holiday ritual - meeting fellow collectors to swap or sell vintage labels.
For centuries, firecrackers have been a staple in Chinese New Year's celebrations. 
''The first firecrackers were used to frighten away the evil spirits during festive occasions,'' Dr. Legunn said, adding that the Chinese, who probably invented these noisemakers, believed that lots of confetti chased demons away. 
This explains, he noted, why the Chinese did not remove the labels from the packages before they lighted them.
Firecracker labels have been made throughout China, Hong Kong and Macao for the American market since the turn of the century. 
It is these designs, Dr. Legunn said, that he and about 300 other Americans collect. 
Like Dr. Legunn, many of these enthusiasts are members of the Pyrotechnics Guild International, an organization whose members make or collect fireworks, related artifacts and firecracker labels.
Period firecracker wrappers look like anything but what they are, which is one reason people collect them, he said. 
The pictures on the packaging of 19th- and early 20th-century Chinese firecrackers depict such images as a Boy Scout, an Indian chief, United States Marines or characters from the ''Wizard of Oz.''
The brand names are often puzzling, too, especially those such as Home Run, Touch Down, Bo-Peep, Captain Kid and Alligator, which seemingly have nothing to do with the product.
''The old ones are very deceiving, and that's an attraction,'' Dr. Legunn explained, as he flipped through a huge scrapbook that contained some of his 800 labels. 
What originally interested him about these graphics was the sense of adventure they sparked.
''Firecrackers were forbidden, but kids always got a hold of them,'' he said. 
''Parents never liked them because they are dangerous. 
There was something else that made them special - I thought I had found something no one else collected.''
Now Dr. Legunn is happy that he is not alone in this pursuit because acquiring labels from other collectors and thus meeting people who share his interest is part of the fun. 
''There are collectors who have been at it since the 1920's,'' he said. 
He has already acquired many of the most important examples of these graphics, the finest of which date back to the 1920's and 30's, when typography and graphic design reached perhaps their highest level.
Dr. Legunn stopped collecting once - when he went to college - but resumed again in 1983 after he had completed his post-doctoral studies. 
He can be found on the telephone several nights a week talking with other collectors throughout the United States and Canada. 
He also trades with a collector in Hong Kong and one in India.
There are finds to be made at paper shows and in bookstores. 
Dr. Legunn recalled fingering through a 1920's diary written by a boy from the Middle West in which he discovered three 1920's firecracker labels, stuck in the pages. 
What did they cost?
''A dollar,'' he said.
But most of what he has tracked down involved greater effort and expense. 
One way he seeks out labels is by advertising in many paper collectible and suburban newspapers. 
One ad brought a response from a woman in Newburgh, N.Y., who had 50 excellent examples that her son had collected a half century ago. 
The price of $125 was worth it, he said.
His most exciting experience took place on a trip to the Far East last September, where he met a retired firecracker manufacturer. 
''In Macao I hired a guide and spent hours going to the old addresses of firecracker factories - they are all jeans factories now,'' he said. 
He located one of the owners of the Kwong Hing Tai company, who had kept samples of all the old labels, and sold him 75.
The prices for labels range from about $10 to hundreds of dollars, he said, adding that collectors have offered him $500 to $600 for some of his best pieces, which are not for sale. 
The most he has paid, he added, was $250, for a rare Golliwog label dating to 1908.
Spelling mistakes on labels are another category sought by collectors, Dr. Legunn said, adding that two of the favorites in his collection are Yan Kee Boy and Atta Boy. 
The latter was supposed to say That-a-Boy, and it was corrected later. 
It is the incorrect one that collectors seek, he said.
