
Chinese bamboo craftsmen, from the 16th century on, enriched scholars' desks with sculptures, writing tools, brush holders, wrist rests and other objects. 
Some excellent examples survive, as can be seen in ''Bamboo Carving of China,'' an exhibition of 85 selections at China House Gallery, 125 East 65th Street, on view through May 29. 
The show is believed to be the first in this country devoted to the craft.
Undeniably esoteric, these whittled figures and objects may seem unfamiliar to most Western viewers. 
Indeed, only a limited number are found in public and private collections in this country, and what does exist is rarely shown.
Chinese bamboo craftsmen, from the 16th century on, enriched scholars' desks with sculptures, writing tools, brush holders, wrist rests and other objects.
There are, on close examination, many similarities between these meticulously carved bamboo objects and those rendered in ivory, jade, rhinoceros horn, coral, amber and wood. 
Subjects that recur include gods and goddesses, legends and history. 
In many the emphasis is on nature, be it real or imagined. 
Dragons, frogs, crabs and phoenixes, squirrels climbing trees, birds in flight and insects resting on bamboo leaves enliven a score of selections.
The distinctive characteristics of bamboo - its tough texture, burnished coloring, cylindrical shape and root-like embellishments - contribute a great deal to the finished objects. 
Many carvers capitalized on the natural form of the plant or its imperfections, allowing them to dominate in the execution of a subject. 
Other artisans did the opposite - incising calligraphy on the sides of a vessel or cutting deeper into the bamboo surface to detail an exquisite landscape, effects that might appear on virtually any material.
Carved bamboo spearheads and flutes date to prehistoric times, according to Wan-go Weng, curator and designer of the show and author of its catalogue. 
It was not until the 16th century, however, that craftsmen turned their attention to carving desk accessories. 
Mr. Weng, who is the president of the China Institute in America, which is the China House Gallery's parent institution, explains the symbolic value of bamboo in his intelligently written text. 
''It is upright and sturdy, bending but never broken,'' he writes. 
''Its hollow cane reminds the scholar of humbleness, for there is room inside to receive knowledge and advice.''
Whatever their symbolic meaning, scholars must have also found these objects a pleasant distraction. 
Brush holders are the largest and usually the most intricately carved accessories of the scholar's desk. 
One in the shape of a pine stump is enhanced with cranes and pine branches. 
Another in the same shape dramatizes a fungus growth carved in high relief on the bark.
Life situations are captured in carved vignettes on several of these vessels. 
One shows a woman and an artisan polishing her mirror. 
Others depict lovers parting, a literary gathering in the garden, a prime minister playing a board game while he loses a war and an old man greeting a flying goose.
Far more amusing are some of the sculptures intended as decoration for the scholar's desk. 
There are, for example, imaginatively carved Ming toads - one, the size of a baseball, is a quizzical creature with bulging eyes and rough skin, and another, with two young ones on its back, stares blankly with its mouth wide open. 
An equally charming Lilliputian sculpture is a Ching crab with a shaft of grain. 
There are realisitic water chestnuts, a tangerine and a bunch of grapes. 
There is also a winning study of a water hyacinth and an arresting depiction of a mythological beast looking as if he is about to spit fire. 
The more elaborate works - an old man on a raft, a log boat on which eight gods are traveling - are of traditional tales but are fussily carved and less impressive.
Most, but not all of the wrist rests are half cylinders, the surfaces embellished with calligraphy or landscapes or both. 
An exception is an exuberantly carved work - a free-standing sculpture - depicting a scholar at the base of a gnarled pine tree with realistically rendered branches.
Bamboo carvings are seriously collected in the East, but less so in the West where collectors of Chinese art usually acquire only a few examples. 
Most auctions of Chinese art offer some bamboo carvings, which bring low to moderate prices. 
Brush pots of the 19th and 20th centuries are among the more common offerings in sales at Sotheby Parke Bernet, selling at from $200 to $600. 
Brush rests sell for as little as $300, and other carvings are usually less than $1,000. 
The highest price registered at auction was $6,800, the sum paid in Nov. 
1979 at Sotheby's in Hong Kong for a 19th-century bamboo scepter. 
The most expensive bamboo carving auctioned in New York was an 18thcentury bamboo vase, which sold in May 1981 at Sotheby's for $2,400.
This explains why most of the works on view in the China House show are from Hong Kong collections, including 36 from Dr. Ip Yee, a Hong Kong physician. 
In addition, there are 31 from the Julia Y. Cheng collection on loan at the Nelson-Atkins Museum of Art in Kansas City, which also sent some selections of its own. 
The other museums represented are the Cleveland Museum of Art, Boston's Museum of Fine Arts, the Denver Art Museum, the Seattle Art Museum and the Asian Art Museum of San Francisco.
Exhibitions mounted by the China Institute in its tiny gallery have always been admired for their consummate sophistication both in subject matter and presentation. 
This exhibition of well-crafted, if less than exciting objects is pleasantly arranged and lighted in showcases framed by calligraphic cutouts, an obvious reference to the scholar's lettering skills. 
The show is funded in part by the New York State Council on the Arts. 
A generously illustrated 144-page catalogue is $12.50.
