
Dealers in Asian art are increasing in number and becoming more visible in New York - opening new galleries and presenting specialty exhibitions. 
Last week, for example, a major gallery opened on 57th Street, a Madison Avenue dealer moved to larger quarters, two private dealers presented their first combined exhibition and several others initiated specialty shows.
All these activities were timed to occur while scores of collectors and dealers were in town from the Far East, Europe and throughout the United States, attending the sales of Oriental art at Sotheby's and Christie's. 
The increased momentum in this market comes in a season of booming art auctions that included last month's record-breaking dispersal by Sotheby's in Hong Kong of the first half of the Chinese ceramics and jade collection of Tsao Yee Chao, a Hong Kong ship owner.
At that sale, Seijiro Matsuoka, a 92-year-old Japanese industrialist and real-estate enterpreneur, purchased a 14th-century Ming porcelain dish, awash with flowers on a red ground. 
He paid $1.3 million, a record at auction for Oriental art.
The newest and most impressive addition to the Asian-art scene in New York is J. J. Lally & Company at 42 East 57th Street. 
James J. Lally, the 41-year-old former president of Sotheby's in New York, who headed its Chinese art department from 1974 to 1982, has assembled in this sensitively lighted, understated setting a splendid selection of works of ceramic, bronze, jade, lacquer, wood, silver and gold dating from the neolithic period to the 18th century. 
Ceramics dominate, and the choice works of early pottery, jade and bronze, from neolithic through Sung, reveal this dealer's preference for bold forms and highly expressive art. 
In size, these works range from monumental to miniature and include an arresting pair of 40-inch-tall ceramic Tang dignitaries from the eighth century and a postage-stamp sized third-century B.C. Han seal - a block of carved gold, topped by a tortoise, with neatly chiseled characters in the base.
Outstanding is a large red pottery Han horse, a powerful figure almost two feet tall from about 200 B.C., boasting admirable musculature, flaring nostrils and fully formed legs. 
The mottled red surface on this recently excavated sculpture still shows traces of encrusted earth. 
''He's quite rare,'' Mr. Lally said. 
''So many of the Han-period horses are without legs.''
Limbless ceramic horses, he said, were originally fitted with wood legs that have since disintegrated.
Among the more provocative of the archaic jade disks is a serenely simple icy white donut, almost six inches in diameter. 
Prices here range from $3,000 for a bronze Han seal to $180,000 for the pair of Tang dignitaries.
Later works are memorable for other reasons. 
There is, for example, an exquisitely detailed silver box of the 14th century with flowers in high relief decorating the lid. 
From the 16th century comes an aristocratic pair of yoke-back Ming chairs, and from the 18th century a large Imperial yellow dish, a ravishing example of the enameler's skill from the Chien Lung period.
''We are going back to a golden era,'' Mr. Lally said, observing that the works being offered collectors of Chinese art today are comparable to those available at the turn of the century. 
Then, as now, excavations uncovered a wealth of tomb material.
Susan B. Levinson and Donald J. Wineman, private dealers, are currently presenting their first exhibition of Oriental art works in her apartment, at 12 East 86th Street. 
The number of paintings, textiles, ceramics, lacquer wares and ivory works on view is somewhat limited, but the range is wide in both age and materials. 
The oldest of the Chinese, Japanese and Indian works in the stock on view is a bronze garment hook inlaid with gold, silver and turquoise, that dates from the Warring States period of the third century B.C. The most recent is a Bamboo brushpot carved in relief that dates to about 1800. 
It is also the least expensive work in the selection at $1,800. 
The most expensive is a Han court lady, standing more than 28 inches tall, at $35,000. 
The dealers may be visited by appointment.
At Ralph M. Chait Galleries, 12 East 56th Street, a collection of armorial porcelains made in China for export to the West is on view through Saturday. 
All of the 80 offerings are 18th-century selections and most of these teapots, dishes, cups, saucers and great rimmed platters called chargers were made for British clients. 
They range from about $1,500 for a dish to $20,000 for a set of 12 plates.
Michael B. Weisbrod, a Toronto dealer who relocated in New York 10 years ago, opened Monday in new quarters at the Carlyle Hotel, at 987 Madison Avenue. 
On view are highlights from his stock of neolithic through 19th-century Ch'ing ceramics, sculpture, bronzes, and paintings that range from about $5,000 to $250,000.
