
Chinese puppets date back more than 2,000 years and are probably rooted in ancient religious rituals.
Western knowledge of these hand, string and rod dolls is, however, relatively recent, according to Roberta Helmer Stalberg, guest curator of ''Puppetry of China,'' at the China House Gallery, 125 East 65th Street, through June 29.
The exhibition of about 50 examples is described by the gallery as the first comprehensive presentation of the subject in this country. 
The puppets shown are on loan from public and private collections in the United States and from two professional puppet troupes in China. 
They constitute more than 30 period examples, dating from the late 19th century to about 1940, and a number of performance-quality contemporary puppets, some of which are as skillfully carved and seem as aged through wear as the period specimens. 
An additional group of six lavishly dressed hand puppets adorn an elaborately carved miniature stage that dates, as do the hand figures, to the turn of the century.
Many of these figures are superbly crafted and the variety of characters and styles of costumes represented is impressive. 
Most of the three-dimensional puppets are glorious theatrical conceptions - fierce-faced or elaborately mustached and wearing embroidered robes, crowned by feathered helmets and winged hats. 
The rod-operated shadow puppets are exquisitely delicate two-dimensional creatures, fashioned of leather, that appear to waltz on stilts. 
The characters represented are legendary rulers, warriors, gods, demons and heroines that were devised to bring alive on miniature stages the same dramas that are depicted in plays and operas by human actors.
Unfortunately, this magical material is displayed unimaginatively in showcases and behind or against lighted panels that convey little of the wonder and charm of puppet shows. 
It is a pedantic presentation following, more or less, the equally uninspired groupings that appear in the catalogue of this traveling show.
Dr. Stalberg recalled in an interview that she was surprised to discover at the outset of her research how little had been written in English on Chinese puppets. 
She became interested in the subject, she said, after she was introduced to the puppeteers of the Longxi Hand Puppet Troupe of China during its 1980 tour of this country. 
Later, she learned that in China, as here, most puppets are seldom exhibited, and that very little has been written about their origins and history.
''I went to China four times to do research,'' she reported. 
Her findings have been recorded in an informative book, ''China's Puppets,'' published in 1984 by China Books of San Francisco ($29.95), and in the less detailed catalogue of the show ($7), both of which are available at China House gallery.
Dr. Stalberg notes in the catalogue that written records of puppets are rare before the 12th century A.D., and the few that exist, she writes, are tantalizingly vague. 
''One popular legend ascribes the invention of puppetry to a craftsman named Master Yan, said to have lived about 1000 B.C.,'' she continues, adding that the articulated figures he constructed were supposedly so perfect, they could dance and sing realistically. 
However, no details survive about how early craftsmen accomplished these feats.
Puppets probably originated in religious ceremonies, according to Dr. Stalberg. She says that early written accounts survive describing lifelike funerary figures, images of deities animated by shamans for spiritual guidance, protection or to bring good fortune. 
A recent discovery appears to support this thesis. 
In 1979, a man-sized jointed figure, measuring 6 feet 2 inches tall, was unearthed in a tomb dating to 107 B.C., in Liaxi County, Shandong Province. 
The solemn-faced puppet, constructed of wood strips to permit the figure to sit, kneel or stand, has many holes drilled in the abdomen and legs used, no doubt, either to attach costumes or the strings used to move the marionette.
Dr. Stalberg relates that the first shadow puppets may well be explained by a legend from the second century B.C. in which the heartbroken widower Emperor Wu of the Han Dynasty sought ways to bring his wife back to life. 
To please him, one of his subjects devised an image of the Emperor's wife and, lighting it by a lantern, showed it behind a gauze curtain.
The puppets that Dr. Stalberg and others have purchased or inherited, she said, were acquired for the most part in China, some in the early decades of this century. 
Scarce though these dolls may be, they are not necessarily costly and probably never were. 
Missionaries and travelers to China between 1900 and World War II are responsible for the few that one finds changing hands today or in museum collections in the West.
Berthold Laufer, an ethnologist, went to China for the American Museum of Natural History in 1901 and bought the entire holdings of a shadow puppet troupe that was disbanding, a group he thought incorrectly was the last in Peking. 
That acquisition, which included musical instruments, stage curtains, dramatic texts and more than 500 shadow figures, cost $600.
This traveling exhibition was originated in 1984 by Atlanta's Center for Puppetry Arts, and has visited cities in the United States and Canada on the tour. 
Dr. Stalberg found many of the examples shown in the Lutz Collection of the University of Richmond, which was assembled in the 1920's, and in private collections of those who have lived in China or traveled there in recent years.
The exhibition is aided by the National Endowment for the Humanities through the Georgia Endowment for the Humanities, the National Endowment for the Arts and the New York State Council on the Arts.
