
Arab diplomats say that some Arab countries are turning to China for weapons at a time when the Soviet Union appears reluctant to provide arms.
The Soviets have been building bridges with the Arab world for three and a half decades. 
But in the Arab diplomats' view, a crisis of confidence appears to be developing over what many Arabs see as a shift in Moscow's policy in favor of Israel and toward closer cooperation with the United States, Israel's main backer.
Criticism in the Arab press of Soviet moves on this issue has prompted an official retort from Moscow and set in motion a publicity campaign to reassure Arabs that there has been no basic change in Soviet attitudes.
 
Chinese Missiles Sought
The diplomats say Syria and Libya, Moscow's closest Arab allies, have been negotiating with Beijing to buy a sophisticated shorter-range missile known as the M-9, which is still under development.
Syria and Libya are armed with Soviet-built Frog-7, SS-21 and SS-1 surface-to-surface missiles, which have ranges of 37 miles, 62 miles and 150 miles, respectively. 
The Chinese M-9 is estimated to have a range of 375 miles.
On Wednesday, As Safir, a daily newspaper in West Beirut, carried reports that Moscow has refused to supply Syria with the SS-23 missile, which has a range of about 300 miles.
Arab-Chinese economic ties have also increased. 
Libya has announced that it was investing in a Chinese silk factory, while Kuwait and Tunisia have set up a joint venture with Beijing to produce fertilizers.
 
Assad to Visit Moscow
Diplomats said President Hafez al-Assad of Syria plans to visit Moscow soon for talks with Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader.
Mr. Assad's last trip to the Soviet Union was a year ago. 
A joint communique at the end of that visit said the two countries, joined in a treaty of friendship and cooperation, were to upgrade their military cooperation.
But sales of Soviet military equipment to Syria are reported to have fallen off over the last year, partly over Moscow's insistence on being paid in cash.
Another reason, diplomats say, is unease over recent Soviet-Israeli contacts and the perception of what has been described in Arab publications as ''Soviet complicity with the United States'' against the Palestinian cause and in favor of Israel.
Gennadi I. Gerasimov, spokesman for the Soviet Foreign Ministry, issued a statement Tuesday rejecting the charges. 
Tass, the Soviet press agency, quoted Mr. Gerasimov as emphasizing that Moscow and Washington were in fact discussing measures to stop an intensification of the arms race in the Middle East.
On Tuesday the Soviet Embassy in Beirut released to the press an Arabic translation of an article by the Soviet press service Novosti, explaining recent Soviet overtures toward Israel but emphasizing that they did not constitute a lessening of Moscow's support for the Arab and Palestinian causes.
The article denied that Moscow had concluded a deal with Israel to allow more Jews to leave the Soviet Union. 
A planned visit to Moscow by an Israeli consular delegation is only a ''technical matter,'' it said.
Novosti asserted that a meeting at the United Nations in New York this month between the Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, and the Israeli Prime Minister, Yitzhak Shamir, was intended merely to exchange views and did not constitute a first step toward resuming diplomatic relations.
