
Warnings by American officials that the United States might sell weapons to China if the Soviet Union invades Poland raise questions whether such a threat has any serious validity. 
The dominant view among intelligence officials of the United
States and other Atlantic alliance countries is that it does not, and that the hardheaded professionals of the Soviet military and security forces are aware it does not. 
Some analysts with a wide knowledge of China's military situation deplore what one called a ''knee-jerk reaction'' on the part of American politicians whenever the Soviet Union invades a neighboring country, as in the case of Afghanistan, or appears to be on the verge of doing so, as in the case of Poland.
This reacton, they say, takes the shape of public assertions that Soviet action will be followed by American arms aid to China. 
They cite as examples statements by Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger and Senator Charles H. Percy, the Illinois Republican.
Military Analysis questions warning by U S to provide weapons to China if Soviet Union invades Poland
Most politicians, the analysts assert, do not understand the difficulties involved in an attempt to modernize China's obsolete or obsolescent forces.
 
Chinese Forces Lag Years Behind
The first, and possibly the most important, of these difficulties would be the absorption of modern arms by the Chinese forces. 
A Defense Department study completed under the Carter Administration estimated that the Chinese forces lag 15 years behind the United States in technological training.
''Even the maintenance of low-technology equipment would be problematical in the hands of China's relatively unsophisticated common soldiers,'' the report said.
A study by a subcommittee of the Congressional Joint Economic Committee concluded that even if China got a huge infusion of foreign defense technology and other arms aid, the impact on China's combat abilities would not become apparent until late in this decade.
Without such aid, the Chinese economy is unlikely to be able to provide the modern weapons required to put an army of 3,600,000, an air force of 490,000 and a navy of 360,000 on a basis of equality with the Soviet Union.
Lieut. Gen. Eugene F. Tighe Jr., director of the Defense Intelligence Agency, told the committee that the prospects for China's becoming a powerful military state by the end of this century are very slim - ''as a matter of fact almost nonexistent in terms of counter-United States or counter-Soviet Union.''
Analysts emphasize that to become even a marginal threat to the Russians, China would have to reverse present economic trends in addition to receiving foreign - meaning American - arms aid.
 
China Shifts Industry to Peace
As an Atlantic alliance source pointed out, while the Chinese public is warned continually about the imminence of Soviet attack, planners give priority to agriculture, light industry and some segments of heavy industry. 
The NATO report declared that ''a sizable proportion of Chinese military manufacturing capacity'' has been converted to civilian production. 
The Xingtan tank plant, which has started to produce sewing machines, electric fans, bulldozers and tower cranes, was cited as an example.
This shift in priorities is risky, analysts agree. 
The Soviet Union has 46 divisions - six armored and 40 motor rifle - deployed along the frontier with China. 
This force, supported by an air force of about 3,500 planes and a large number of surface-to-air and surfaceto-surface missiles, is regarded by analysts as far better equipped and more modern in its military doctrine than the lumbering Chinese forces south of the frontier.
Any American or other foreign aid would also have to take into account the primitive internal communications system and other aspects of the military infrastructure. 
China's ability to deter Soviet attacks along a frontier that, including Mongolia, extends 5,813 miles is regarded as severely limited.
''Let us suppose that the Russians do invade Poland and that the Administration decides to rearm China in retaliation,'' one analyst said. 
''Does anyone really understand the costs of doing this or the strain that it would put on the present American military-industrial complex?''
 
Aid Would Cost Up to $63 Billion
As evidence he cited a 1979 Pentagon study estimating that procurement of sufficient military goods and services from the United States to give China ''a confident capability'' to defend itself against Soviet attack by conventional forces would cost $41 billion to $63 billion.
Projected programs for the modernization of China's forces would include, among other items, 3,000 to 8,600 improved medium tanks. 
8,000 to 10,000 armored personnel carriers, 16,000 to 24,800 heavyduty trucks, 6,000 air-to-air missiles, 720 mobile surface-to-air missile launchers, 200 air-superiority fighters and 240 fighterbombers.
Under present industrial conditions, analysts said, the production of weapons in such volume is out of the question. 
They expect an expansion of the United States arms industry to meet the Reagan Administration's military expansion plans. 
But they do not expect that expansion to be large enough to accommodate both American needs and a modernization of China's weaponry.
If by a miracle of industrial mobilization the United States was able to provide even half of China's needs the question of absorption would remain.
Threatening statements by American leaders do not alter China's vulnerability, one NATO analyst said. 
No promises of military assistance, he added, can change the fact that the three Manchurian provinces - vulnerable to the nearby Soviet Union - are of the greatest strategic importance to China. 
They supply 35 percent of China's coal, 70 percent of its crude oil, 40 percent of its steel, 68 percent of its trucks and railroad rolling stock and most of its civilian and combat planes.
