
A high-ranking United States naval delegation has resumed talks here on the sale of sophisticated technology to the Chinese Navy.
Naval experts accompanying Adm. James D. Watkins, Chief of Naval Operations, spent the weekend reviewing proposals for a sale that would include turbine engines similar to those that power many United States Navy vessels, as well as anti-submarine equipment that would include torpedoes, sonar and possibly helicopters.
The package could run into hundreds of millions of dollars, placing it on a par with a $550 million sale to China of military aviation electronics that was announced last week.
At a news conference at which he disclosed the resumption of talks on the naval deal, Admiral Watkins gave no indication when the negotiations might be concluded. 
Cuban Exiles in Paris Tell of Prison Torture PARIS, April 13 - A group of anti-Government Cubans, now living in exile, testified at a conference here over the weekend that they were tortured and otherwise abused during long terms of imprisonment in Cuba.
Eight men and three women appeared at a conference that its organizers said was intended to show that there was systematic abuse of political prisoners in Cuban jails.
The session was organized by Armando Villadares, an exiled Cuban poet who spent 22 years in jail.
The witnesses read testimony in which they described brutal and frequent beatings, long periods of solitary confinement, food and water deprivation, and unsanitary and overcrowded conditions.
One witness, Ana Lazara Rodriguez, told the panel she spent 18 years in various prisons after being arrested in 1961 for taking part in anti-Government protests while she was a 19-year-old medical student. 
Syrian-Backed Force To Patrol South Beirut BEIRUT, Lebanon, April 14 - A Syrian-sponsored force of 200 militiamen was formed today to take up positions around two Palestinian refugee districts in southern Beirut where Palestinians and Shiite Moslems have fought two weeks of gun battles.
A communique issued by leaders of the force said it would be deployed on Tuesday in key posts around the Sabra and Shatila districts.
The measure is part of an effort to stem lawlessness in West Beirut, the largely Moslem part of the capital, and to stop the harassment of foreign teachers and educational institutions.
The force is made up of militiamen from four leftist factions - the Progressive Socialist Party, a largely Druse group; the Baath Party, supported by Syria; the Communist Party, which is Soviet-oriented, and the National Syrian Social Party. 
It will be supervised by a 12-member Syrian military contingent.
