
--------------------------------------------------------------------
Audrey Topping is the author of ''The Splendors of Tibet.''
 
BY AUDREY TOPPING
Visitors to the Metropolitan Museum beginning April 3 will have an opportunity to walk through a simulated Buddhist cave temple and see original fragments from ancient wall frescoes, painted temple hangings and exquisite clay sculptures that were excavated from the desert sands of Central Asia after being buried for almost a thousand years. 
This loan exhibition will continue through June 20.
These rare religious treasures will be shown for the first time in the United States. 
The exhibition, called ''Along the Ancient Silk Routes: Central Asian Art From the West Berlin State Museums,'' will offer the viewer a unique insight into the exotic art of a virtually unknown chapter of Central Asian history.
Visitors to the Metropolitan Museum beginning April 3 will have an opportunity to walk through a simulated Buddhist cave temple and see original fragments from ancient wall frescoes, painted temple hangings and exquisite clay sculptures that were excavated from the desert sands of Central Asia after being buried for almost a thousand years.
The exhibition, made possible by a grant from I.B.M., displays 152 works of art that once adorned the Buddhist caves, temples and palaces that graced the oasis centers in the Taklamakan and Gobi Deserts, where camel caravans laden with silk and spices stopped to rest during their journey across the fabled old silk routes that joined Imperial China to the Holy Roman Empire.
All the art dates from the fifth to 10th century A.D., when Buddhism was at its height in Central Asia. 
After flourishing for over 500 years as both a religion and a culture, Buddhism in this area came to an inglorious end after the Uighur ruler of Kashgar converted to Mohammadism. 
It was not long before Arab Muslim armies swept through Central Asia on a holy mission, destroying and desecrating all Buddhist temples and edifices they could find. 
Whole cities were flattened. 
Remote temple caves that escaped destruction were soon blocked with sand drifts. 
The people became Muslims and have remained so to this day. 
So complete was the devastation that all traces of the rich Buddhist culture were lost to civilization.
Over the next 10 centuries stories about hundreds of fabled cities swallowed by the sands of the Gobi and legends of buried treasures abounded. 
But no serious interest was taken until 1873 when the Englishman Sir Douglas Forsyth returned with two Buddhist figures, some gold jewelry and coins, from a sand-entombed city near Khotan that had disppeared some 800 years before. 
The European nations were soon competing in an archeological gold rush to retrieve the precious antiquities and carry them off. 
China was so involved in interior turmoil that it made no effort to stop the foreign expeditions, which it later criticized.
The lost and found art works coming to the Met were all recovered by German archeologists in a dramatic series of four scientific expeditions that took place in the first few decades of this century, led by Orientalists Albert Grunwedel and Albert Van Coq, both scholars of Indo-Tibetan Buddhism. 
The art was discovered in sites along the northern silk route in Chinese Turkestan. 
Today it is known as the Sinkiang-Uighur Autonomous Region and includes the province of Gansu in China.
Most of the pieces were found around Turfan, the temple caves of Bezeklik and the ancient city of Karakhoja in the eastern part of the silk route. 
Others were discovered at Kizil near the city of Kucha in the West.
The first expedition, which lasted from December 1902 to April 1903 yielded 44 crates of clay and wooden figures, painted frescoes and manuscripts in many languages and scripts, including Mongolian, Sanskrit, Chinese, Tibetan, Uighurian and ancient Turkish. 
They were retrieved from ruined temples at Karakhoja, also known as Khocho. 
The rarest finds, however, were not Buddhist but some manuscript pages from the original writings of the Manicheans, a now lost religion which originated in Persia around the third century A.D. and later spread to Central Asia. 
The archeologists also found some sacred texts and a faded wall painting from the remains of a Nestorian Christian temple, thus confirming reports that the Christian missionaries as well as Buddhists had brought their religions along the old silk road. 
Examples of these texts are on display.
When the relics of these vanished ancient cultures were excavated, they were packed for the long trip by camel caravan and then boat to St. Petersburgh in Russia and then to Germany where they were finally displayed at the Museum of Indian Art in Berlin. 
All of the art on exhibit at the Metropolitan was lent on an exchange agreement with this museum.
Published in connection with the exhibit is a catalogue with an introduction by Professor Herbert Hartel, director of the Museum of Indian Art in Berlin, who tells the exciting story of the recovery of this lost art. 
A poignant passage is a quote from one of Gruenwedel's letters after he had first seen the ruins of Khocho: ''The city serves as a quarry for materials to build the modern houses, as a gold mine for those who dig treasure, as a place of amusement where one can smash frescoes and statutes of Buddha to the glory of Allah - not to mention the practical benefit of being able to use the fragments (of frescoes) to fertilize the sugar cane, cotton and sorghum fields.''
That these fragile works were found at all is a wonder, but that they could survive the desert, Muslim armies, local pillagers, foreign treasure hunters, excavators and finally the trek across the world's deadliest deserts to Germany, where they were almost blown up by Allied bombs, is nothing short of miraculous.
However, when one walks through the cavelike exhibit at the Met, the violent past is soon forgotten and one is filled with a peaceful tranquility that seems to emanate from the painted scenes of the legendary events in the life of Buddha and his various incarnations that line the dark crimson walls of the simulated cave.
Jeffrey Daly, chief designer of the Metropolitan, has sought to create a cave atmosphere by lighting. 
Frescoes are lit at eye level while the ceiling is shrouded in darkness.
The man responsible for the concept of bringing the lost Central Asian art to the Metropolitan is Martin Lerner, curator of the Indian and Southeast Asian art, who came to the museum in 1972 after working for six years with Sherman Lee at the Cleveland Museum of Art. 
He is a tall, bearded man whose intense gray eyes betray his fascination for the art he personally selected to be shown.
''What we have done,'' he explained during a walk through the exhibition, ''is to arrange the material both chronologically and geographically so you are really starting on a pilgrimage going from West to East. 
You see, we are working our way to China.''
The earliest works of art date from about 500 to 700 A.D. and are known as the Western School. 
They show a definite Indian and Persian influence.
''The early material comes from the temple cave sites at Kizil,'' explained Mr. Lerner, ''the style is called Indian-Iranian. 
It does not show any Chinese style yet.''
The later artifacts, dating from 650 to 950 A.D., come from the Turfan Oasis area and are known as the Eastern School. 
In color and style, the frescoes show a strong Chinese influence, with some ancient Turkish elements.
Mr. Lerner, a scholar of Chinese Buddhist art, is also familiar with all the stories behind the paintings and sculptures. 
He pointed out a particularly well preserved fragment of a fresco from the Cave of Statues in Kizil which typifies the Indian-Iranian style. 
It depicts the cowherd Nanda, listening to the preaching of Buddha. 
''The cowherd is so wrapped up in what he is hearing that he doesn't realize that he is resting his gnarled stick on the back of this frog. 
But the frog does not want to disturb Nanda's attention by running away. 
According to the legend, the frog will be rewarded in a future life by being reborn as a god, and the cowherd will become a Buddhist monk.''
Not all the artwork is so optimistic. 
One painting from the Cave of Devils is a chilling freize showing scenes from the 10 hells of Mahayana Buddhism. 
''This explains exactly what you are going to suffer if you have not lived a proper existence,'' said Mr. Lerner with an enigmatic smile.
In the first hell the damned are hanging upside-down while being hacked to pieces with axes. 
Those that escape fall into other hells where they are beaten incessantly, flayed alive, devoured by vultures, burned in pools of acid, dismembered, crushed between walls, forced to eat molten iron and boiled before being transformed into pillars of fire.
The ancient artists were extraordinarily creative in the painting of monsters (infernal watchmen of King Yama) who inflicted the tortures. 
Some resemble modern depictions of creatures from outer space.
About halfway through the exhibit the wall color effectively turns to dark green. 
The murals that begin this section reveal the origins of the inhabitants of Central Asia. 
These are portraits of wealthy patrons and aristocrats who donated art to the temples to gain religious merits. 
They show the striking difference between the people from Western and Eastern areas of the northern silk route.
One large fragment (number 107), found in the cave of 16 swordbearers at Kizil in the western section, dated 600-650 A.D., shows four Tocharian knights of obvious Indo-European descent dressed in Persian-style apparel. 
They have light-colored eyes and reddishbrown hair. 
In contrast, a ninth-century grouping of Uighurian princes from Bezeklik Temple in the eastern part show definite East Asian characteristics with black hair and Oriental eyes.
Both types of people can be seen in Sinkiang today. 
It is still a melting pot of cultures and inhabited by 12 national minorities as well as Han Chinese. 
On a trip to this area in 1979 I was surprised to meet a fair, blue-eyed man, a leader of the East Wind commune near Urumchi, who said he was Chinese. 
The people of the Turfan Oasis are still known as Uighurs and are still Muslins but they have retained the features of their Buddhist ancestors that were depicted in the frescoes. 
They have now planted millions of Lombardy poplar trees to protect their towns from the desert sandstorms, but until recently they paid little heed to their cultural heritage lost in the cave temples and buried cities.
Although the Chinese stopped all foreign expeditions in the 1930's, the Buddhist sites were left in a state of neglect until the 1970's, when the Peking Government, in an effort to preserve its ancient monuments, began to restore the temple caves and guard the ruins of the old cities.
A few of these caves are now open. 
To reach the cave temples one must pass along the foot of the legendary Mountain of Flames where the first Buddhist pilgrim Xuan Zhuang journeyed west in 630 A.D. to bring the teaching of Buddha from India. 
Legend says that he was accompanied by a white monkey who cooled the flaming mountain with a palm-leaf fan so they could pass. 
The red tertiary sandstone of the naked mountain still scintillates like fire in the blazing sun.
The only part of the original Old Silk Route which can still be seen is a gray brick path that leads to the ancient city of Khocho - where libraries of old manuscripts, frescoes and sculptures were found and shipped to Europe. 
Today it is a haunted city, with crumbling city walls and misshapen temple ruins revealing empty vestibules still showing faint outlines of the Buddha.
Restoration of the Bezeklik Temple caves is proceeding slowly. 
The sand has been shoveled out but the caves stand empty and desolate. 
The keeper was more interested in showing us the pelts of the foxes he had trapped in the caves than in the remains of the Buddhist art. 
The few frescoes that remained on the walls had been defaced. 
The eyes of Buddha's disciples had been scratched out by local Muslims who believed the figures would come alive at night. 
The pedestals where gods once resided stood vacant. 
And most of the walls were blank except for the deep scars of crowbars where the paintings had been hacked off and taken away by Europeans. 
No wonder, as the writer Eric Teichman wrote in ''Journey to Turkistan,'' it made the Chinese ''boil with indignation.''
