
ANKOKU DOJI was an aide to the kings of Hell, and Mr. Nice Guy he wasn't. 
Sporting a tiny hat with propellerlike projections, holding a brush and a plank to take notes, his face screwed up in a knowing scowl, he served as a clerk of the court where the kings tried each sinner for his misdeeds on earth. 
A dramatic, larger-than-life-size image of this most uncelestial deity, carved of Japanese cypress in the 13th century, is one of the many stunning surprises in ''Japanese Buddhist Sculpture: A.D. 600-1300,'' a marvelous exhibition at the Japan Society Gallery, 333 East 47th Street (through Jan. 
16).
Grace Glueck reviews exhibit at Japan Society Gallery on Japanese Buddist Sculpture
The show, organized by the Japan Society and the Kimbell Art Museum in Fort Worth, is the first exhibition of classic Japanese sculpture to tour the United States. 
Its 52 key objects, all borrowed from active temples and important museum collections, track the Buddhist era in Japan. 
Seven of the sculptures are classified as national treasures, no less, and 37 more, including the Ankoku Doji, are considered important cultural properties. 
They were chosen to cover the full range of Buddhist expression, from the enlightened serenity of Amida, the Buddha who reigns over the heavenly pure land of a previous existence, to the fierceness of the Myoo divinities, who symbolize Buddha's wrath against evil. 
The idea is also to show how - from an initial reliance on the forms and techniques of Chinese art -Japanese sculpture developed along more native lines.
Born in India, Buddhism arrived in Japan from China and Korea in the sixth century, and by the seventh had firmly settled in, with a full-blown religious hierarchy. 
It flourished for more than 600 years, changing with the Chinese theological winds, and in the process making rich contributions to Japanese architecture, sculpture and painting. 
As might be expected, the first images in the show are naive and stiff, small seventh-century representations in gilt bronze of two bodhisattvas, deities who have refused Buddhahood in order to help others find salvation.
By the next century, things had livened up. 
The Japanese got more deeply into Buddhism, and the sculpture, taking cues from the art of Tang China, became more sophisticated, as we see in life-size images of Komokuten and Tamonten, two of the four guardian kings who in Indian legend ruled over the North, South, East and West. 
Both, dressed in armor and taking very assertive stances, are of carved wood, a material for which the Japanese had a special sensibility. 
In the ninth century, as Emily J. Sano, curator of Asian art at the Kimbell, points out in her catalogue introduction, wood replaced everything else as the sculptural medium, and its working by skilled carvers had a great effect on style. 
A small but powerful ninthcentury ''Miroku,'' or Buddha of the Future, a corpulent figure carved from a single block of wood, exemplifies in its ''wave'' pattern of deeply incised drapery folds the influential way in which early Heian sculptors explored the wood-block surface.
Also in the ninth century, a more esoteric, intense Buddhism appeared, producing all manner of exotic divinities, such as Fudo, one of the Five Great Myoo who ruled the world of wisdom. 
A 10thcentury, life-size image of Fudo depicts this dour deity, bug-eyed and fang-toothed, seated in the lotus position and holding a lariat with which to catch offenders. 
Farther along, in the late Heian period, calmer imagery reflects a change in the emotional pressure of the religion. 
Eleventh-century examples include three delicate ''Bodhisattvas on Clouds,'' so Baroque in feeling they could almost have come from a 16th-century German church; and a sybaritic-looking Nyoirin Kannon, the six-armed bodhisattva who grants desires, reclining in a drowsy posture of royal ease.
The coming of realism to Japanese sculpture in the late 12th and 13th centuries - credited by Miss Sano to a revival of eighth-century classical styles and the influence of Sung Dynasty China - is exemplified here by, among other images, two powerful, life-size 13th-century portraits of priests. 
One in bronze-finished wood, with inserted crystal eyes and thought to depict Enji Benen, the first abbot of the Zen temple Tofuku-ji, is so startlingly modern it might be a 20th-century work.
Unfortunately, the Kimbell installation has been shoehorned into the small Japan House Gallery, and the lighting of individual works leaves something to be desired. 
But at that, it's the most fascinating show in town. 
It's accompanied by a beautiful, full-color catalogue - $26 and well worth it - written by Dr. Sano and Dr. Kyotaro Nishikawa of the Fine Arts Bureau of Japan's Agency for Cultural Affairs. 
The show has been made possible in part by grants from the Tandy Foundation and the Tandy Corporation-Radio Shack of Fort Worth, and the Friends of Japan House Gallery.
Other shows of interest this week: Miriam Schapiro (Barbara Gladstone Gallery, 41 West 57th Street): Two big paintings are the set pieces of this show, in which Miriam Schapiro combines fabric collage and paint in dense, decorative surfaces that also incorporate reworkings of her past imagery. 
In ''Invitation,'' she celebrates the American quilt, laying down on a rich painted ground a schematic pattern of such motifs as stenciled, painted and cut-out fabric teapots, cups, simplified houses, blossoms, crocheted potholders, doilies and a tiny apron. 
In and out of a large central rectangle snakes a broad band of patchwork fabrics, actually made by cutting up, unraveling and reforming a ''Friendship Ring'' quilt.
In ''Presentation,'' the other large work, a central proscenium structure, whose border of painted diagonal stripes is inflected by gold fabric roses, contains a ''scene'' of multicolor painted and collaged abstract forms in a kind of tumultuous ballet. 
To make a wild, contrasting border for the proscenium, Miss Schapiro raided her previous ''fan'' paintings, dissecting them for zig-zag motifs that she layered on a motley painted ground. 
The play back and forth between painting and collage, defying the viewer's ability to differentiate, strengthens the interest of these lively paintings, which, however, lack the elegance of Miss Schapiro's best work. 
(Through Dec. 
4.)
John Willenbecher (Hamilton Gallery, 20 West 57th Street): Marble graining has appeared in John Willenbecher's work for the last two years or so, and in this show, titled ''Scenes From Ovid,'' it burgeons. 
Against plywood panels skillfully grained to simulate various marble species, he places found objects of abstract form covered with gold leaf, each work as a whole evoking a mythological theme. 
In ''Olympus,'' for example, two vertical panels in a rich green grain bear on their surface a gold template, pierced with round holes and a rectangular slit that has a startlingly anthropomorphic appearance; in ''Zeus,'' one of the show's stars, a gilded iron reinforcement bar, bent like a branch, inflects a sumptuous black ''marble'' surface, veined in light blue.
The stagiest metaphor is ''Echo,'' two skulls, cast in bronze and then marble-painted, resting on velvet cushions on a white table. 
There are also a number of arched-window devices, a familiar form to those who follow Mr. Willenbecher's art, which encase found objects on shelves, such as ''Olenus and Lethea,'' a comradely pair of - male and female?
- gilded rocks. 
This is risky work. 
At its most restrained, as in ''Zeus'' and ''Olympus,'' there's poetry to it, but certain combinations of gold leaf and flashy graining look - well, tacky. 
(Through Dec. 
11.)
Ralph Mayer (Sid Deutsch Gallery, 20 West 57th Street): The late Ralph Mayer (1896-1979), a leading authority on paint technology and author of the classic ''Artists' Handbook of Materials and Techniques,'' was a painter himself, but he was rarely exhibited during his lifetime. 
The small body of work that he left, ranging over some 50 years, has a kind of naive Precisionist approach, depicting factory buildings, urban streetscapes and industrial waterways in spare, quasigeometric compositions that have a good deal of charm. 
They are light on people and heavy on architectural structures, such as ''The Bridge'' (1927), in which the looming understructure of a bridge frames a group of pink brick buildings and an empty street. 
Nevertheless, it succeeds in capturing the mood of a city place.
A flaw in these works is the irresolution of certain compositions, such as ''Brooklyn Bridge, Red City,'' in which the East River doesn't too readily separate itself from the roof of a frontally placed building. 
Oddly enough, that only adds to their appeal. 
(Through Dec. 
4.)
