
The exhibition of Japanese art opening today at the National Gallery of Art in Washington is unprecedented in the scope, quality and numbers of treasures (close to 500 works of art) gathered from more than 100 collections all over Japan. 
''Japan: The Shaping of Daimyo Culture 1185-1868'' represents the outcome of years of collaborative effort among Japanese and American officials and scholars following a meeting of the minds at the Tokyo Summit in 1983.
Conceived by guest curator Yoshiaki Shimizu, a professor of art history at Princeton University, the theme is that of the art and values of the powerful warrior elite known as daimyo who ruled Japan for seven centuries, from the late 12th to the mid-19th century. 
A group of anywhere from 50 to 250 regional feudal lords commanding armies of samurai and owing allegiance to the shogun, daimyo had the wealth, status and power to commission the finest artists and the best craftsmen.
In short, while the arts of the courtier and the commoner, at opposing ends of the spectrum, may not be emphasized in this exhibition, it is safe to say that the essence of Japanese culture is presented here by many of its greatest masterpieces, including sculpture, painting, calligraphy, textiles, lacquer, ceramics, and arms and armor, an extraordinary gesture of good will on the part of the people and Government of Japan. 
Screen paintings that have not left the homes of their owners in generations, even to travel from Tokyo to Kyoto, have been made available to the National Gallery.
The key to this exhibition is the warrior ideal of the fusion of the arts of war and the arts of peace. 
Suspicious, brutal, ruthless men who often spent their entire adult lives in battle, intrigue and the pursuit of power, the daimyo were also deeply religious students of Zen Buddhism, as well as poets, painters and voracious collectors. 
These complex, contradictory personalities are at the heart of the exhibition; they are brought to life through a stunning and somewhat eerie array of portraiture and by subtle juxtapositions of the lethal weapons of their trade - glistening steel blades, for example - together with elegant scrolls of calligraphy.
Where else but in Japan would poetry be a matter of utmost concern in the heat of battle?
When the castle of the daimyo Hosokawa Yusai was besieged in the Battle of Sekigahara in 1600, the emperor, fearing the worst, sent a messenger begging him to hand over knowledge that only he possessed, interpretations of poems in a venerated 10th-century poetry anthology, transmitted secretly from generation to generation. 
Yusai survived the battle, but his ''document of transmission,'' still preserved in the Hosokawa family collection, is on display in Washington.
Throughout the 9th to the 12th centuries in Japan the ruling class was a hereditary court aristocracy centered in Kyoto, the ancient capital. 
Loath to relinquish the luxuries and civilities of palace life, a halcyon world of poetry and romance, courtiers delegated responsibility for managing and policing their distant estates to local warlords, who gradually became rich landowners in their own right. 
An efficient and tightly knit system of lord-vassal relationships had evolved with small military bands in the provinces. 
Warrior leaders established a power base and mode of organization that gave them a significant advantage over the increasingly ineffectual courtier.
Needless to say, these military officials were despised and ridiculed as a crude and unsophisticated lot by the snobbish elite in the capital. 
And yet, because of a universal respect for the cultural attainments of the nobility, the supposedly uncouth military men were deeply aware of their esthetic shortcomings and were committed to the conservative, courtly tradition of the men and women whom they were displacing.
This is at once apparent in the dazzling suits of multicolored armor worn by mounted daimyo chieftains. 
Beautiful armor laced with colorful silk threads enhanced the warrior's self-esteem - it was his weapon of culture - even though it may have been oppressively heavy and evil-smelling when soaked with water and teeming with lice during long campaigns in the rainy season. 
The courtly arts infected the warrior class and it is not unusual to read in medieval battle epics that a flute wrapped in a brocade bag was tucked into the sash around a young soldier's waist.
It is an indication of Japanese concern for social status that more often than not the portraits of military rulers show them wearing the tall lacquered hats and starched silk pantaloons generally reserved for titled nobility. 
Hideyoshi, a small, homely man notorious for his ''monkey face,'' started life in the late 16th century as the son of a peasant farmer and rose through the ranks to become the despot who not only unified the country after decades of civil war but also dared to attempt imperialist expansion onto the mainland. 
He nonetheless found it necessary to legitimize his role as ruler of Japan by fabricating an aristocratic lineage and acquiring a high court office, and his portraits in the exhibition show him in the robes of a courtier.
It may be for similar reasons of self-esteem and innate reticence that imagery of violence, bloodshed, decapitation and the like are scarce in Japanese art. 
The occasional pictorialization of man's inhumanity to man issued primarily from Buddhist temples. 
Warriors preferred to focus on the positive virtues of loyalty, courage and martial skills.
Of course, the daimyo and their samurai vassals were enterprising, self-made men with great confidence in their own abilities. 
They patronized new art forms - ink painting foremost among them - imbued with a pragmatism, realism and ascetic sensitivity that owed a great deal to Zen, the new religion introduced to Japan from the continent in the 13th century. 
There were many warrior-artists over the centuries; some were inspired amateurs in the style of Winston Churchill at his easel, others, the famed Musashi among them, were accomplished painters who wielded their brushes with the skill of samurai swordsmen.
To compete with the esoteric skills of the courtiers (poetry competitions and the sniffing of incense, for example), and to acquire cultural prestige of their own, daimyo took up the tea ceremony and sponsored troupes of No actors. 
Increased trade with China gave the military elite an alternative cultural model. 
They sponsored Chinese priests who came to Japan, helped found Zen monasteries and mimicked Chinese customs such as tea drinking. 
Medieval daimyo assembled large collections of Chinese art works to be displayed at tea events for important visitors. 
These expensive imports symbolized, through their link with an advanced culture, intellectual superiority and, ultimately, the political power of their owner. 
High-quality utensils were essential for entertaining superiors.
Among the most unprepossessing tea utensils in this exhibition is a fat little 13th-century Chinese ceramic tea caddy with an outer glaze like a thin coating of molasses. 
It was owned by Hideyoshi's tea master, Rikyu. 
The daimyo Hosokawa Sansai is said to have so coveted this caddy that he declared he would trade one entire province for it. 
After Rikyu's death (Hideyoshi had forced him to commit suicide) the caddy passed into the collection of the first Tokugawa shogun, Ieyasu. 
After the important Battle of Sekigahara in 1600, Ieyasu invited Sansai to a banquet and presented the treasured caddy to his vassal as a reward for his loyal support. 
(The ivory lid of the caddy is lined with gold foil that served as a device to signal any obvious tampering with the tea: the foil would change color if poison were present. 
In the world of the warrior, even a tea gathering could be dangerous.) Daimyo culture was chiefly a man's world. 
Woman's role was that of obedient wife and mother. 
Both Budddhism and Confucianism relegated her to an inferior status. 
Wives put up with infidelity but were themselves executed for adultery. 
Samurai daughters became hostages in daimyo warrior contracts, and were often forced to commit suicide at a young age as an expression of loyalty to their husbands when their castles were under siege. 
The organizers of the exhibition have nonetheless gone out of their way to include arts associated with the women of the samurai and daimyo aristocracy - their robes and sumptuous bridal trousseaus, for example. 
Most telling is the suit of red armor complete with fierce face mask for the daughter of the daimyo Ii Naosuke.
Conflicting values are a conspicuous feature of Japan's feudal age. 
The feminine sensibility and good taste of the old imperial court - the preciousness of a beauty soon faded, the unspoken overtones of a casual remark, the melancholy of a rainy evening - became the heritage not only of a handful of Kyoto aristocrats but of the entire Japanese people.
The importance of the transition from courtly to military ethos in the 13th century, however, may be that contemporary Japan is much closer in spirit to the esthetics of the warrior class, who ruled Japan with great success for 700 years, than it is to the world of Prince Genji and Lady Murasaki. 
Even after their special privileges of swords and stipends were abolished after the Meiji Restoration in 1868, former daimyo and samurai were recognized as the intellectuals and men of action who helped lead Japan into the modern age.
The primary sponsors to whom we are indebted for this exhibition are the R.J. 
Reynolds Tobacco Company and the Yomiuri Shimbun, Japan's largest newspaper. 
(More than just a newspaper, the Yomiuri is an active sponsor of art exhibitions, a major symphony orchestra and a professional baseball team, the Yomiuri Giants.) The Asahi Shimbun, the Yabunouchi School of Tea, the Nomura Securities Company and All Nippon Airways made possible the tea demonstrations and subsidiary exhibition on the ground floor of an additional 70 objects associated with the tea ceremony.
The authoritative full-color catalogue edited by Professor Shimizu is a product of joint Japanese and American scholarship and should be read cover to cover. 
''Japan: The Shaping of Daimyo Culture 1185-1868'' will be shown exclusively at the National Gallery in Washington until Jan. 
23, l989. 
Owing to their fragile nature, works on paper, textiles, and lacquer objects will be displayed in three rotations of four weeks each. 
Armor will be rotated twice.
 
TEA PARTY
In recognition of the importance of ''Japan: The Shaping of Daimyo Culture,'' J. Carter Brown, director of the National Gallery, has virtually transformed the East Building - with a Japanese rock garden, tea house and tea garden on the ground floor, and a traditional Noh stage on the mezzanine, at the show's entrance. 
Within the soaring space of the vast lobby of the East Building, a thatched-roof replica of the diminutive 16th-century Ennan tea house in Kyoto and the severe, clean lines of the Noh stage can be appreciated almost as abstract sculptural forms, but both will be the focus of performances designed to enhance the understanding of daimyo culture.
On Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday of this week a troupe of distinguished Japanese Noh actors and musicians will present Noh plays on the stage, and throughout the exhibition visitors can view or participate in tea ceremonies conducted in a special tea room in a ground-floor gallery.
