
IN New Jersey, Franc Palaia has
been blessed with the gift of
ubiquity. His photographs seem
to have appeared everywhere in the last 10 years, including:
Mercer County Community College, the Princeton University Art Museum, Jersey City State College, the Jersey City Museum, the Morris Museum of Arts and Sciences, Monmouth Museum, Glassboro State College, Fairleigh Dickinson University, Kean College and Brookdale Community College.
Mr. Palaia, who lives in Elizabeth, is also well on his way to establishing his omnipresence in New York City. 
After a spate of shows there, he is currently having not one, but two, exhibitions in Manhattan.
Works by photographer Franc Palaia are on display at Metropolitan Museum of Art and at Trompe L'Oeil Gallery in Manhattan; photo (M)
One is at the Trompe L'Oeil Gallery, 24 East 81st Street, through Saturday, and the other is part of a group show at the Metropolitan Museum of Art through Nov. 
30. Both are results of a trip Mr. Palaia made to China in 1981.
Most people go to China and try to see, among other things, the Great Wall. 
Mr. Palaia seems to have seen every wall there that he possibly could. 
At least that's the impression one gets at the Trompe L'Oeil, where 11 works celebrate the wall art of signs, billboards, broadsides, manifestos, graffiti and murals.
Mr. Palaia not only paints images that he saw on walls (these are done from photographs he took), but also constructs his own versions of walls. 
Almost life size, they appear to have been rescued from demolished or bombed buildings, and both they and their overpainted images look authentic.
Although the synthetic polystyrene used to make the walls has the surface and material consistency of an actual wall, the tempera on plaster superimposed on them has the faded appearance of something that has weathered and deteriorated with time.
There are political icons of Mao and Mao's wife, Jiang Quing, after she was sentenced for her participation in the Cultural Revolution.
There also are messages and advertisements on Mr. Palaia's walls, and they are quite amusing for their seeming incongruity: argyle socks, Marlboro cigarettes, a warning about safe bicycling, a buoyant portrait of a young woman selling flowers, a '' Democracy Wall'' (a busy collage of notices and announcements) and a fresco in which we see an automobile parked at what appears to be a gasoline station.
One must not look at these works as only fascinating paintings for their imagery and for the accuracy of the imagery, but also as constructions or sculptures. 
As a combination of the two art forms, they are strikingly persuasive.
The figures and all of the pictorial activities, including the calligraphy, which has been executed with impressive precision, are assertive in their broad boldness and simple poster-like monumentality. 
The painting, with its simulated blemishes and chips and its flat modeling in stark, tonal modulation and color, has a beguiling directness.
The images are made all the more effective - maybe in the same romantic way that the Parthenon and other buildings of the past are - by their partial destruction.
One of Mao's eyes is missing, as well as part of his ear, and his face is pock-marked with white spots caused by missing plaster. 
The young woman in the safe-bicycling message has barely survived, and the girl selling flowers is a phantom of her former self.
They make us feel as if we must preserve the vanishing image of a disappearing civilization.
The rough configurations of the fragmented pieces, which must be seen as sculptural slabs, contrast with and complement nicely the imagery.
While they seem to be of different eras, as if the painting were a relatively recent superimposition on an older building, they both seem to be doomed to disappearance, two disparate elements that have been united by different cultures and linked into a similar destiny.
They have the same haunting quality that Italian frescos might have were they disembodied from the context of their walls.
Mr. Palaia's work in gold illumination is discussed in the crafts column.
