
FOR the second time this year, the Metropolitan Museum of Art has inaugurated galleries, and for the second time, the museum cannot adequately fill them. 
The Sackler Galleries for Asian Art that open to the public tomorrow are much smaller and more modest than the Lila Acheson Wallace Wing for 20th-century art, and the art in them, being from one country, is more of a piece. 
But, here, too, there is not enough first-rate art. 
The Met continues to reinforce its reputation as an encyclopedic institution, at the expense of its reputation as a defender of the highest artistic standards.
This is not to say that the new galleries are not important. 
Barbara B. Ford, an associate curator of Asian art and, with Wen Fong, Yasuko Betchaku and Kakichi Suzuki, a prime mover in the installation, said the ''assignment was to write a book on Japanese art.''
The installation may not be a book, but it outlines many key chapters. 
It begins with prehistory and essentially ends with the 19th century, moving from ceramic figurines with squat bodies and embryonic eyes, to the inventive and irreverent narratives of Utamaro, Hiroshige and Hokusai, which helped trigger the explosion of interest in Japanese art in the West.
Perhaps most important, there is now a place in New York where the public can begin to orient itself to Japanese art. 
The installation provides several points of reference. 
One is that there is little or no distinction between the fine and decorative arts. 
All arts in Japan are interrelated, and it was common for artists to work in several media. 
Another is that the Japanese have a very particular sense of appropriateness and place. 
Objects, even suits of armor, were made for a specific occasion. 
Presentation has always been crucial.
There are fine and instructive works. 
In the 17th-century screen ''Su Tung-po's Visit to the Wind and Water Cave,'' precisely delineated figures share a gold background with foliage that rises and falls and follows its own laws. 
The painting helps define the tension between formality and freedom, human beings and nature, that plays a decisive role in Japanese art. 
In a work like this, the gold background seems like an alternative space in which the conventions of human life and unconventional nature have a chance to coexist.
Ogata Korin's celebrated early-18th-century screen painting ''Rough Waves'' is just as revealing. 
A hissing wave in the foreground struggles to ward off other hissing waves that seem to be baring their teeth and rearing up like marauding cats. 
There is humor in the painting. 
There is also something of the awe before a wild sea. 
The painting is so stylized that it becomes decorative, but decorative in a way that gives the word a good name. 
As the imagery becomes ornate, it becomes unknown.
The one contemporary work in the installation - the work intended to bridge Japan and the United States - is Isamu Noguchi's ''Water Stone.''
It consists of a block of deep red and black basalt resting on a bed of stones taken from the Ise River, the site of one of Japan's most sacred Shinto shrines. 
Water rises from within the stone and forms a sheet on top before spilling down the sides; after this work, the glass tops of Mr. Noguchi's tables will not be seen in the same way. 
The work suggests not only the hard, earthy aspects of Japanese rock gardens, but a symbolic dimension as well.
If all the arts in Japan are interrelated, however, not all are of equal interest. 
The precious objects, such as teaware, lacquerware, writing boxes, incense boxes and porcelain, may be superbly crafted, but there are too many of them, and they break the spell of paintings that have the power to involve us in a more imaginative and total way. 
The effect of this blend of ''high'' and ''low'' art is an unresolved tension between objects to which we are expected to respond in terms of spiritual aspiration and objects that appeal largely to luxury taste. 
If the installation cannot begin to clarify this tension, which seems so essential to Japanese art, it is no wonder. 
The unresolved tension between high purpose and high luxury is now part of the fabric of the Metropolitan Museum.
Although the installation is filled with information, it is intellectually flat. 
There is no sense of a passion for ideas - of an urgent engagement with issues raised by the art. 
We can recognize but not participate in the artistic dialogue between nature and style, otherworldly spirituality and courtly refinement. 
What does ''decorative'' mean in Japanese art?
Or nature?
The constant struggle both to respect its otherness and tame it suggests an ambivalence toward nature that is not present in Chinese art.
It is hard to understand from the installation why Japanese art has become such a key player on the stage of world art that the Met has now given it its own pocket of the museum. 
It is just as difficult to understand from the installation why contemporary American artists as different as Sonia Gechtoff, Yvonne Jacquette, Robert Kushner and Judy Pfaff have been drawn to Japanese art and culture. 
And can an installation that does more than enough justice to the refinement of Japanese art while avoiding its erotic dimension give an appropriate sense of Japanese culture?
There are 10 galleries in all, together providing 11,000 square feet of space. 
Of the 15,000 Japanese objects in the museum collection, 280 are now on display. 
The museum hopes eventually to be able to change the installation four times a year. 
The galleries mark the second major step in the development of the Met's department of Asian Art: the Astor Court and the Douglas Dillon Galleries for Chinese paintings, which are adjacent to the Japanese galleries, opened in 1981. 
The next step will be galleries for ancient Chinese art, which are expected to open next year.
The absence of more first-rate works is not entirely the fault of the museum, which formed its department of Asian art in 1915. 
Tradition is being rapidly destroyed in Japan, but there are many Japanese who are determined to preserve it. 
Japan is very strict about allowing its art to leave the country. 
In addition, there is currently a museum boom there that appears to be the equal of the boom in Europe and the United States. 
Although acquisitions are still possible - one of the screens featured in the installation was bought only a couple of weeks ago - it will be hard for any American institution to make a dramatic improvement over the Japanese collection it now has.
The installation is roughly chronological. 
The first gallery, with its pre-Buddhist material, is one of the best. 
The six pots in one display case have an easy perfection and understated feeling for shape and pattern that are characteristic of Japanese ceramics. 
There is a steatite bracelet that seems as elastic as a Japanese lamp. 
A ceremonial bell is shaped like a tower, and the decorative patterns make this heavy object, like the bracelet, seem light. 
In this gallery, refinement, expressiveness and toughness exist together.
Given that Japanese art was made for particular occasions, it is logical that the museum would try to place objects in some kind of architectural context. 
There is a replica of a 12th-century altar and a replica of a shoin, or study. 
But placing different kinds of architecture close together, as well as covering thousands of years with relatively few objects, makes the installation schematic. 
We can recognize the religious authority of the altar and the delicate proportions of the study, but we can not participate in either.
One of the centerpieces of the installation is the 12th-century sculpture of a Buddha seated on a lotus pedestal on the altar. 
Its privileged position makes a point about the importance of Buddhism to Japanese culture. 
Everything in this serenely proportioned sculpture, from the hairdo, to the position of the fingers and knees, to the expression of the face, has a particular meaning. 
In the gallery around this Buddha, there are informative but less compelling sculptures representing different aspects of Buddhism.
The installation moves through the development of narrative painting. 
There are several works on the four seasons, a recurring Japanese theme. 
We get some sense of the development and importance of screens. 
The installation suggests ways in which Japan alternately opened itself up to and closed itself off from the outside world, particularly China. 
Some Japanese painting, particularly during the Muromachi period, is very Chinese. 
In Kano Sansetsu's early-17th-century ''Ancient Plum,'' installed in the shoin, the artist takes a Chinese theme, the flowering plum, paints it on gold leaf and weaves it into a grand decorative pattern that is not Chinese at all.
In another large screen painting, ''Bamboo in the Four Seasons,'' the absence of linearity and the way bamboo shoots seem to be standing on, not rooted in the ground, seem particularly Japanese. 
So does Ogata Korin's famous ''Irises and Bridge,'' the focus of the gallery of the Edo period (1615-1868) and almost the keystone of the installation, with its pure colors and blend of gestural sweep and architectural stylization.
There is one section on Japanese porcelain and another on ''Samurai Splendor,'' which includes a suit of armor that is described in the caption as the ''most important example of Japanese armor in the West.''
Japanese armor can be stylish and seemingly impractical. 
The way soldiers looked and presented themselves mattered profoundly. 
''When you read accounts of battles,'' Ms. Ford said, ''one-quarter may be about the battle, one-half about the pedigree of those who fought in it, and one-quarter a loving account of what people wore.''
The installation essentially ends with 18th- and 19th-century scrolls and wood-block prints. 
In Hokusai's ''Poet Li Po Viewing a Waterfall,'' the drunken poet is being held up by two aides as he tries to contemplate the water he is in danger of toppling into. 
The waterfall is reduced to blue and white vertical streaks that resemble strips in a Morris Louis painting.
There are a few 20th-century objects in the collection, mostly crafts. 
Collecting contemporary Japanese art is difficult, Ms. Ford said. 
It is in considerable demand in Japan. 
Furthermore, many contemporary Japanese artists are searching for an international style.
The galleries were designed by a team made up of Cleo Nichols of Cleo Nichols Inc.; the architectural firm of Kevin Roche, John Dinkeloo & Associates, and Kyotaro Nishikawa, the deputy director of the Tokyo National Museum. 
Most of the roughly $4 million cost was raised in Japan, starting with $1 million given by the Japanese Government in 1979. 
All the Japanese grants were received through the Japan Foundation.
