
A SHOW of works on paper by 22 Americans went to Beijing under the title ''New York/Beijing'' in 1987. 
Now enlarged by similar contributions from 15 Chinese artists, it has settled in as ''Beijing/New York'' at the Snug Harbor Cultural Center in Staten Island.
After closing there on Dec. 
31, the entire spectacle will travel to the Nielsen Gallery in Boston. 
It may then go back across the Pacific so that Chinese audiences, too, can observe both sides of the visual dialogue at the same time. 
If this happens, a logical title might be ''New York/Beijing, Beijing/New York, New York/Beijing.''
Books of poems from both sides have been toing and froing with the art - a project masterminded by Ginny Mackenzie, who teaches writing at the School of Visual Arts and the City University of New York, and one that aroused much enthusiasm in China, where the verbal and visual are still regarded as opposite sides of the same coin. 
The idea for the production came from its curator, Stephen Lane, who was inspired by the experience of lecturing to Chinese students on modern American art and by the ensuing social contacts.
Though Mr. Lane received material and spiritual support from various organizations, including Worldwide Shipping/Crown Pacific, the China Fund, Marke Communications and the Sister City Program of the City of New York, he makes clear in his catalogue introduction that the enterprise would never have taken off without the non-esthetic labors of the exhibitors themselves. 
This was especially true in China, where there are artists enough, but nothing that could be called an art scene, and where curiosity about the West is intense.
The experience seems to have been an epiphany for both parties - as well it might be, for while reciprocal exhibitions are commonplace, a joint effort of this kind is rare. 
It remains only to point out the appropriateness of Snug Harbor as a setting. 
After all, many of the old, decrepit and worn-out sailors for whom the place was designed must have plied the China trade routes.
Displayed in the Main Hall, also known as the Newhouse Center for Contemporary Art, the work gives a superficial impression of homogeneity. 
This is partly because all the contributions are on paper and partly because abstraction, a concept once alien to Far East cultures, has made considerable inroads in China. 
There is also the matter of the native ''touch'' being less evident than it would be in a comparable selection of Japanese art - presumably because of the Social Realism that was originally imposed by the Marxist administration.
Though realism, social or otherwise, is conspicuous by its absence from the show, most of the Chinese participants are figural in one way or another. 
A particularly interesting example is Gu De Xin, who has an affinity with Jim Nutt, the Chicago imagist. 
The more remarkable of Gu De Xin's colored-ink fantasies features bright pink humanoids engaged in a bacchanal on leaves floating like lily pads on a cerulean sea.
These Chinese artists range in age from 30 to 50, and a few have received the conventional instruction imparted by the state academies. 
But on the whole, there's no connecting style with background or experience. 
Thus, the eldest of the group, Qiu Bing, seems not to have studied at a school, and he lives remote from the action - such as it is - in the province of Shandong. 
Yet he produces geological-looking abstractions in a medium that could be acrylic or oil. 
On the other hand, Mi Qiu, who is in his early 20's and is apparently also untrained, works in the traditional medium of ink, producing items like the rectangle brushed in with three or four strokes to each side.
An artist in his 30's with a conventional background, You Si does black-and-white landscapes with an automatist look, but traditionally mounts them on long black scrolls. 
Then there is the etching of red cherries scattered on a white ground: the work of Ma Gang, a printmaker whom Mr. Lane likens to Robert Blackburn, the American printmaker, for his knowledge and experience. 
The image with its snatches of woven texture has neither age nor nationality.
Flatness, which first reached the West by way of Japanese woodcuts, is present in much of the American work, but the associations that it arouses are generally with Abstract Expressionism. 
For example, Susan D'Angelo's gestures in black ink bring those of Robert Motherwell to mind, while Craig Mannister's all-over images impastoed in black acrylic streaked with white and red are ecole de Milton Resnick. 
Mr. Resnick himself, by the way, is represented by recent Expressionist gouaches of solitary nudes in shallow space that are very similar to those offered by Pat Passlof.
Ronald Bladen, Susan Crile, Bill Jensen, Joan Snyder and William Tucker are among the more prominent names, and collectively their messages must have seemed ambiguous to the Chinese audience. 
Take the difference between Paul Resika's limpid oils of harbor scenes in pinks and grays and the felt-tip pen drawing for a sculpture by Mark di Suvero: Are they strictly the product of different personalities or does their diversity come at least in part from a competitiveness based on an awareness of other artists, living and dead - an awareness kept alive by a vast art industry?
The center, in the Snug Harbor complex at 1000 Richmond Terrace, is open from noon to 5 P.M., Wednesday through Sunday.
