
THE Chinese do not see stone the way Westerners do. 
Rocks for them are concentrations of energy and life, objects of contemplation and worship, models for human character, microcosms of heaven and earth. 
In his foreword to the catalogue of ''Kernels of Energy, Bones of Earth: The Rock in Chinese Art,'' at the China House Gallery, 125 East 65th Street, through Jan. 
26, Wan-go H. C. Weng, the gallery president, writes that ''if, according to William Blake, a world could be seen in a grain of sand, then the Chinese universe can also be comprehended in a piece of rock.''
Despite the show's modest size - it contains 50 works, many of them small - it seems big. 
Through his selection of sculptures and paintings and his invaluable catalogue, John Hay of New York University's Institute of Fine Arts sets out to survey the rock in Chinese culture. 
Since for the Chinese everything in the natural world was interrelated and filled with religious and philosophical meaning, a serious handling of the rock throws open the doors to just about everything.
A rock could be from a few inches to 50 feet high. 
The Chinese had a clear sense where to look for it, what to do with it and what made a rock desirable. 
In a 19th-century text by Liang Jiutu, who called himself the ''man of the 12-rock studio,'' the quality of a rock was determined by ''leanness, surface texture and a pierced interior.''
The preferred identified with vapor, which the Chinese saw as released energy, and clouds.
Rocks were also seen as the root of precious metals, including gold and therefore indispensable to alchemists, who were trying to bring cosmic forces under control. 
They were equally indispensable to scholars and monks, for whom they could be objects of inspiration and meditation. 
Scholars saw inkstones and brush rests as anything but indifferent resting places for their pens and brushes. 
When they put pen and brush down, it was to enable them to re-establish contact with basic sources of energy and knowledge.
Rocks could be talismanic. 
At different times, they were thought to cure illness and even drunkenness. 
They could also be friends. 
One of the key figures in Chinese ''stone lore'' is the eccentric 11th-century magistrate and rock connoisseur Mi Fu. 
When ''he entered the official precinct for the first time,'' Mr. Hay writes, ''he saw a large and bizarre rock set up there. 
At once he called for his robe and tablet of office, and bowed deeply to the stone. 
Subsequently he always addressed it as ''Shixiong,'' ''Elder Brother Stone.''
From all this, it is also easy to see why there may have been rock cults in Chinese culture; why the sixth-century Indian monk Bodhidharma, later considered the first patriarch of Chan Buddhism, apparently spent nine years meditating upon a rock; why caves and cliffs had such sacred meaning, and why some reknowned Chinese scholars, from the Middle Ages on, have been known as petrophiles. 
Because of his obsession with rocks, the Emperor Huizong was called a ''petromaniac.''
The place of rocks in Chinese culture can probably be most strongly felt in Chinese gardens, where, in Mr. Hay's words, rocks were ''both the frame'' and the ''foci of visual attention.''
In Wu Zhen's 14th-century scroll, ''Poetic Feeling in a Thatched Pavilion,'' a literati's retreat seems to have been organized around a huge, upright rock that seems like a distant ancestor of the stone heads from Easter Island.
In Yuan Jiang's 18th-century handscroll ''The Gazing Garden,'' the massive rock garden seems enchanted. 
The stones resemble coral and skulls and bones, and they seem to crawl, rumble and howl through and around the landscape and architecture, which appears totally reassured by their otherworldly presence. 
The stone is by far the most powerful force there.
Visitors to this exhibition who still have trouble understanding what the fuss is all about should look for the ''Penjing'' in another room. 
To the Chinese, ''penjing'' means a ''a thousand-mile vista, on a single tray.''
This miniature distillation of mountains consists of three stones, the largest about a foot high, resting in a shallow basin. 
The stone is cavernous, striated and worn. 
It seems open and closed, both in the process of regenerating itself and frozen. 
The largest stone suggests a mesa, but also the sea. 
The work brings to mind groups of figures by many modern sculptors, including Medardo Rosso, Henry Moore and Alberto Giacometti. 
It is possible to pull up a chair and watch it, as if it were a living theater. 
Also of interest this week: Michael Steiner (Andre Emmerich Gallery, 41 East 57th Street): Michael Steiner's recent bronze sculptures are transitional, provocative and intelligent. 
These free-flowing sculptural compositions are crammed with references to Classical culture, landscapes and sculptural history. 
The challenge Steiner seems to have set himself is to create substantial sculptural and thematic complexity while at the same time draining his works of any physical and emotional weight.
The material helps. 
The strips of wax from which the bronze is cast are light. 
Along with the blue-black patina, they make it hard to distinguish the sculpture's actual supports. 
The works depend on a play between forms that have thematic meaning and others that don't, between forms that have a clear sense of sculptural necessity and others that do not, between forms that are essential to the structure and others that seem to be but aren't. 
It is an odd game, not always played with the same amount of interest, but filled with surprises.
There are a lot of sculptors who move in and out of these works - not just David Smith and Anthony Caro, but also Henri Laurens, Mark di Suvero and Giacometti. 
In ''Babel'' we also run into Umberto Boccioni, Vladimir Tatlin and Picasso. 
Steiner tries both to make everybody welcome and to clear everybody out so that all that remains is the language of sculpture and a feeling of fresh possibility. 
The tension generates energy and gives these works consistent visual interest. 
(Through tomorrow.) Henry Finkelstein (Prince Street Gallery, 121 Wooster Street): Henry Finkelstein is a young, essentially expressionist painter recently out of art school who is having his first one-man show in New York. 
His subject matter is traditional - still lifes and landscapes of Maine, New Jersey and Umbria. 
What is engaging is the artist's willingness to jump in with both feet. 
When a mood, instinct or compositional idea hits him, he goes with it.
Paint is the artist's means of fixing contact with the world around him. 
In most of these paintings, we never lose sight either of him or his subject. 
The Umbrian hills may have the colors of Bonnard, but we still roll right through the familiar, undulating land. 
We recognize the Maine coast immediately, but the colors can be hot and the rocks and land seem barely able to restrain the wild sea. 
In the painting of a New Jersey farm, everything is predictably quiet, except for the vegetable garden, which seems to be erupting with paint and light. 
(Through Jan. 
15.) Joseph Szilva (Eastman-Wahmendorf Gallery, 216 East 10th Street): Joseph Szilva was born in Hungary, raised in Canada and now lives in New York. 
His paintings and copper wall sculptures have the sweetness, small-scale and calculated awkwardness that are characteristic of a large body of East Village work. 
As his prints indicate, however, there is a visionary ambition behind Szilva's style. 
He seems to have gone back to mosaics, medieval miniatures and Romanesque and Gothic painting in order to find a language that can express both his feeling about New York City and his almost religious feeling for the natural world.
The sculptures, installed high up on the gallery walls, consist of sheets of copper, cut and then hammered. 
With titles like ''Mantis'' and ''Cobra,'' they suggest essential gestures and movements reduced to a quirky essence. 
Some paintings contain patterns of glass pellets laid on with cement. 
In others, one form, with three leaves that suggest both a plant and a human with outstretched arms, seems almost autobiographical. 
We watch it in different landscape situations and in the midst of a seascape in which sea and sky run together. 
These works have a distinct, warmth, integrity and sense of place. 
(Through Sunday.)
