
FOR anyone who wants to know why Chinese painting has been important to so many Western artists, ''The Mountain Retreat: Landscape in Modern Chinese Painting'' is the show to see. 
There are numerous links between its 43 paintings and modern Western art. 
Indeed after seeing this excellent show - in the library of Hofstra University in Hempstead, L.I., through Aug. 
22 - the recent claim of the Chinese painter Wang Jiqian that ''modern art is a branch of Chinese painting'' may not seem quite so farfetched.
Most of the works relate to some aspect of 20th-century Western art. 
For example, Mr. Wang, who has lived in the United States since 1949, begins his paintings with ink blots shaped by crumpled paper and then imagines landscapes in which not only black ink but also white paper can seem charred. 
Wu Hufan's 1933 ''Landscape in the Style of the Four Yuan Masters'' reminds us that the postmodern interest in juxtaposing different artistic styles has been part of Chinese painting for centuries.
The success of the show is largely due to its organizers. 
One is Arnold Chang, the vice president and director of Chinese painting at Sotheby's. 
The other is Brad Davis, a 44-year-old painter and student of Chinese painting whose Colorado landscapes call attention to Chinese art. 
The catalogue consists of informative dialogues between Mr. Chang and Mr. Davis on almost all the artists and works they selected. 
Their main interest is esthetic. 
The next step after this show would be defining what the pictorial elements that seem so close to Modernism mean in China.
The show's point of view is unmistakably modernist. 
Although one of its aims is to demonstrate the continuing vitality of tradition in China, despite its violent upheavals, the 43 paintings are not the kind of Chinese landscapes that encourage us to lose ourselves immediately in the subject. 
Rather they make us aware of the pictorial process and intelligence behind them. 
What is clear from the exhibition is the modern Chinese artist's sophistication and willingness to take risks. 
What is also clear is that Chinese painting from the middle of the 19th century to the present deserves a lot more attention than it has received.
There are paintings by several of the eccentric, often moving figures that help make Chinese art so rich. 
One of the most innovative is Su Renshan, who lived in the southern provincial city of Guangdong. 
''Through a series of personal tragedies he became mentally disturbed and socially isolated,'' Mr. Davis says in the catalogue. 
''He found refuge in painting and poetry, writing bizarre and obscene essays on Confucian philosophy and creating absolutely original and compelling images of figures and landscapes which often blend the two in odd and whimsical fashion.''
In his 1849 ''Landscape With Figures,'' Su Renshan seems to have paid little attention to pictorial conventions. 
While dark outlines fix rocks, trees and grass to the pictorial surface, some of the same forms are also touching or superimposed upon elements of the landscape that seem miles away. 
The painting is both finicky and gestural, constricted and spacious, welcoming and bristling. 
It includes people and animals, but they are so small as to be almost invisible. 
Human life has no more substance than butterfly wings in a natural world with the power and irrationality of dream.
Two of the other picturesque figures are the celebrated Qi Baishi and the almost unknown Yu Chengyao. 
Both are in some sense ''primitives.''
Qi Baishi, a painter of peasant origin whose artistic career began as a craftsman, blurs the line between directness and brashness. 
Yu Chengyao was a general who taught himself to paint late in life. 
With a meticulously detailed, obsessive approach that has few, if any precedents in Chinese art, he reaches out for what Mr. Chang refers to as ''fantastic grandeur.''
Mr. Yu's 1971 ''Landscape'' is the largest work in the exhibition. 
The artist places us well in front of and above a vast, disorderly, quiltlike procession of hills that are packed so close together that they seem physically uncrossable. 
The hills are conical and curved. 
They tilt toward and away from one another like an army of bulbous fairy tale creatures responding in a language we will never understand.
Mr. Qi is one of several artists in the show who set up and then thwart expectations. 
In his ''Cave of the Immortals,'' a road rises steeply but conventionally into the distance. 
Suddenly we encounter a red house that pushes the background forward and helps flatten the space. 
In ''The Daimiao Temple,'' tombstone-shaped daubs of blue and orange looming behind traditionally rendered trees and architecture seal off the space and make the painting seem as if it has been started by an adult and finished by a child.
These works suggest the pictorial freedom available to Chinese artists. 
Although there were conventions for rendering space, there was never a spatial system in Chinese art as there was in the West. 
Once the authority of tradition began to break down, the expressive, intuitive approach to space opened up pictorial possibilities that seem inexhaustible. 
The range of ideas spread across this show is dazzling.
Ren Xiong's mid-19th century ''Landscape'' is like a collage. 
A huge cliff that seems to be sailing from left to right across the rippling sea also seems stuck onto and therefore imposed upon it. 
In Li Kui's ''Landscape in the Style of Wu Zhen,'' also from the middle of the 19th century, the waterfall - which looks like a piece of fruit in a Terry Winters painting -does not seem to flow over a cliff but rather to be stuck on it in such a way that we could peel it off.
If the flatness and collage effect suggest Modernism, so does the all-over approach to space. 
In a tradition in which gesture is fundamental, it is not surprising to find suggestions of Abstract Expressionism everywhere. 
The most inspired gestural painting is Peng Ximing's 1984 ''Autumn Waterfall Beneath Stone Bridge.''
It is a tapestry of strokes slashed across the paper in every conceivable direction. 
The artist seems to have left the work at the point where everything just became descriptive. 
There is a sense that blowing on any line would cause the painting to crumble. 
As fascinating as this work is pictorially, it also plunges us into the transience and fury of mountains in fall.
It is important to keep in mind that the ''Western'' elements in these paintings are tied to content. 
They are ways of enabling us to journey through actual or imagined landscapes easily and deeply. 
The natural world remains the artist's muse and model. 
There is none of the modernist's belief that painting is the primary subject of painting. 
If the artists in this show never lose sight of the natural world, it is because they believe that their force and energy depend upon and reflect natural energies and processes.
The traditional link between the power of the artist and the power of nature helps explain the sexual aspect of some paintings - a sexuality that seems far closer to Indian art and ''vitalist'' strains of 20th-century Western art than to anything generally identified with China. 
There are paintings that build upon the difference between horizontal earth and vertical mountains. 
In Shi Lu's 1971 ''Huashan,'' a huge barbed peak seems to be both solidly rooted in the earth and ripping out of it, driving irresistibly toward the sky. 
There is a great deal going on in these paintings, and in modern Chinese art, that we have barely begun to understand.
The exhibition is presented by Hofstra's museum, the Emily Lowe Gallery, and sponsored in part by the Aspen Foundation and the Aspen Art Museum in Colorado. 
Also of interest this week: Figure Drawings (National Academy of Design, 89th Street and Fifth Avenue): This exhibition brings together 22 drawings from the National Academy of Design's collection of student drawings. 
They date from 1905 to 1941. 
They were private studies, which means they were not intended for exhibition. 
Every artist whose drawing can be identified is likely to be unknown.
The show is noteworthy for several reasons. 
Some drawings are highly skilled. 
They also call attention to artists who have had little or no place in the sun, but who clearly cared passionately about what they were doing and approached art as a calling. 
As a result, the show is a reminder of the vitality the academic tradition once had.
This vitality had a lot to do with a system of meaning. 
For example, there is a keen sense of the pencil as movement, of the page as place, and of artist and model being engaged in a shared drama. 
Although nude models were the means by which artists attempted to master problems of pose, foreshortening, anatomy, movement and expression, it did not automatically follow that artists approached models as objects. 
Together these drawings seem to be less about academic mastery, as it is now generally understood, than about possibilities for human understanding. 
(Through Sept. 
14.)
