
CHINA today is still an enigma, but the key to the mystery can be summed up in two words: China Reconstructs.
To get an overall feeling of life in China, pick up a copy of China Reconstructs, a magazine founded by Soong Ching Hung, wife of Sun Yat-sen, the leader of the Chinese Revolution of 1911. 
The magazine covers the country's growth in every field and provides the perfect picture of China today.
In addition to adhering to ancient ways and traditions, the country brims with excitement and experimentation, its people exploring new things and new ways to bring China into the modern world. 
Chinese newspapers, news reports and television programs also reveal this sense of energy and desire for rebirth.
But nothing can capture the fevered search for progress better than walking in the cities and countryside and talking to the people.
I was fortunate to visit China recently as part of a delegation of artists, craftsmen and arts administrators invited to exchange ideas and expertise with the Chinese. 
The tour, sponsored by the Citizens Ambassador Program of People to People International of Spokane, Wash., involved traveling in China for almost three weeks.
We met some of the country's foremost artists and artisans, and visited arts academies and institutes, as well as jade, textile and porcelain factories. 
We also met with the administrators of the Palace Museum in the Forbidden City, the archeologists at the terra-cotta warriors dig in Xian and local artists and craftsmen, architects, designers and factory workers.
It was immediately obvious that art is integral to the fabric of the life of the Chinese.
The lasting impression I have of the country is of the dramatic contrast of new and old.
Beijing, formerly Peking, the capital, was our first stop. 
We arrived late at night, going directly to our hotel, the Beijing-Toronto, a new Western-style hotel with two double beds to a room, refrigerator, clock, television, telephones at the bed and in the bathroom and laundry service.
As dawn broke the next day, a new light was shed on the city - a light diffused by the dust of new construction and the factory smog that always hangs over the city and, indeed, over much of northern China.
Our bus weaved through throngs of literally thousands - and what seemed like millions - of Chinese bicycling to work or packed into ''flexible'' buses.
Modern buildings, the Forbidden City, temples and pagodas stood side by side with one- or two-story brick cubicles seemingly in use since ancient times and usually hidden behind brick walls.
Walls are an integral part of Chinese life and culture. 
The Great Wall, being restored in many places along its 1,000-mile length, is truly unimaginable until seen; then it becomes just unbelievable.
In architecture, the Chinese continue to build walls. 
Brick was everywhere, carted into the city by tractor, truck, horse and cart andpulled or pushed by hand on flatbeds. 
They were not dumped, but stacked in wonderful patterns as barriers to construction sites and as walls separating living quarters, housing, parks and temples.
The Chinese, it seems, build twice: Once to erect the decorative stacked brick walls that separate areas and define boundaries, and then to build their homes.
Although the older houses might be considered shanties by some standards, living conditions appeared wholesome and clean. 
We saw no trash and little garbage.
Modern housing is under construction and, although the buildings stand considerably taller than the usual and older two-story structures, they are built on a human scale.
We saw modern derricks and bulldozers at the construction sites of buildings 10 to 20 stories high and of houses of four to eight stories. 
All the scaffolding and retaining units were of bamboo, story after story lashed together, supporting safety nets in case a workman fell. 
The rule of thumb, we were told, is: If the bamboo begins to bend or sag too much, just add more to reinforce it.
As envoys or citizen ambassadors of American culture in the arts and crafts, we spent a great deal of time in seminars with our Chinese counterparts, discussing the arts in general, their cultural institutions and academies, financing for the arts and more.
At one seminar, four presentations were made by Chinese representatives, covering arts education, the Chinese Artist Association, the Cultural Institute of Arts and Crafts and the preservation of national monuments.
The talks revealed that the dichotomies present in the physical aspects of Chinese life also appear in their cultural life.
In China, the arts represent a nexus of Chinese culture, history and politics. 
They arbitrate between ancient traditions and modern thought, provide a vehicle through which hundreds of nationalities - mostly minorities - may retain their identities and help further China's drive for modernization.
Artists are encouraged to make the past serve the present. 
Contemporary modern art, as we know it, was hard to find.
The academies and institutions teach and train in the traditional methods, but there is a growing interest in exploring new trends. 
It is only since the Cultural Revolution that the arts have re-emerged as significant to the national interest.
It was often admitted by Chinese officials that the years of the Cultural Revolution literally produced a lost generation in every sector of life.
The sanctioned arts communities in China - at least those officially financed - are organized in a hierarchy responding to three distinct formats.
At the national and provincial levels, there are cultural associations of arts and central institutes and academies; at the local levels, there are societies founded by visual artists.
If officially recognized, each entity receives a governmental budget for operations and programs. 
If another group should be formed, the cost of running the operations must be absorbed by the artists themselves -often a difficult, if not impossible, task.
As cultural ambassadors, we were wined and dined in grand fashion.
Lunch and dinner became almost-daily banquets held in someone's honor, with meals of 10 to 15 courses. 
Learning to pace ourselves took time, patience and practice, and during each long meal we continued our exchange of information and ideas with the local arts leaders.
Our delegation was the first cultural group to have as host the Chinese Association for the Advancement of International Friendship.
We found our movements, our syposiums and meetings recorded in the newspapers and broadcast on television and radio. 
Although the pace seemed slow, we were on the go constantly from 7 A.M to 10 or 11 P.M. each day.
The slow rhythm and tempo of our meals characterized the rhythm and tempo in the movement of the Chinese people we saw. 
The pace is slow, but more importantly, it is uniform.
The Chinese tend to move in a tempo relative to everyone else, whether on the 6-lane super boulevards or the 1 1/2-lane inner-city streets.
In the hustle and bustle of American cities, where some people walk fast, others walk faster and still others seem to be off and running, dodging traffic, we Americans find it is difficult to drive on the roads and sometimes even harder to walk on the sidewalks, let alone cross the street.
In China, with its regulated tempo and internal timing, getting about was not a problem. 
We found it easy to judge distance, speed and timing and could walk between rush-hour groups of people or bicycles without harm or injury. 
But to do it successfully, we had to do keep in tempo with the Chinese.
Much of Chinese life is like that, an art form perfected over many, many years.
As I recall all the special moments, the sights and sounds of the cities and the faces of the farmers, workers and artists, I yearn to make a second trip - this time as a tourist - to explore areas we missed and to return to the places we saw so briefly.
