
A staff member at the new five-star Hilton International Hotel was officially detained and made to apologize publicly after slapping a guest. 
Sanitation inspectors imposed fines on the hotel for dirt in its kitchen. 
And the hotel got into a battle over butter with the Shanghai Tourism Bureau.
The conflicts are notable because the Hilton, a gleaming 40-story addition to the Shanghai skyline, is the only entirely foreign-owned hotel in China. 
Its experience tells of the frustrations, the surprises, the subtleties and the unexpected problems of running a business here.
Various irritants have marred the relationship between the hotel and local authorities ever since construction began in 1985. 
The Hilton thinks one reason for the problems is that its main rival, the Hua Ting Sheraton, is owned entirely by the Shanghai Tourism Bureau and managed by the Sheraton Corporation.
Food Poisoning Cited
The Tourism Bureau regards the butter incident as a simple case of food poisoning; the hotel scoffs that the civil servants had never before encountered herbal butter.
Heinz J. Schwander, the hotel's general manager, was hesitant at first to criticize the Tourism Bureau in an interview but then warmed up to the task. 
''This I can assure you,'' he said. 
''We would not have had these problems if we had had a local partner.''
As for the butter episode and the questions of hygiene, Mr. Schwander said, ''It was a setup, very nicely done. 
There are definitely some anti-Hilton rings in the city government.''
Even if the Tourism Bureau were not worried about financial competition from the Hilton, it may have been peeved by the hotel's breezy assumption in its publicity and in interviews that the Hilton is so terrific that it has no competition in Shanghai. 
In fact, the Tourism Bureau seems more offended by the Hilton's corporate attitude - which it apparently perceives as arrogance laced with contempt -than by any infractions.
 
Feathers Were Ruffled
''The Hilton general manager's attitude was very bad,'' said Ren Shunhua, an official at the Tourism Bureau. 
He conceded that if the hotel had been more cooperative and apologetic, some problems could have been resolved more easily.
The Hilton has not hesitated to do things its own way, and in the process it has ruffled feathers. 
In a society where dismissals are extremely rare, for example, it has discharged more than 200 locally hired employees. 
It prohibits taxis from waiting for riders in front of the hotel, and it does not allow chauffeurs to wait in the lobby while officials or business executives are dining.
Some 100 expatriates, mostly Hong Kong Chinese who are frequently resented by mainland Chinese, have been brought in to fill top positions; the highest-ranking local staff member is the assistant personnel manager. 
The principal owners of the hotel - a group of Hong Kong business executives - publicly complained about problems during construction of the hotel. 
''I think they envy us because we are free to manage in our own style,'' said Rosa Lau, a Hong Kong Chinese who is public relations manager of the Hilton.
 
Good Connections
Other American companies, like 3M and W. R. Grace, have operated wholly foreign-owned ventures in Shanghai without difficulties. 
Several Chinese and Western residents of Shanghai with long experience in business blame both sides for the butter battle. 
The Tourism Bureau resented the Hilton's attitude, found ''mistakes'' and picked on it much more than on other hotels, they say. 
But they add that the Hilton made some slips that left it vulnerable, and neglected the importance of good connections, known in Chinese as guanxi.
''This place runs on guanxi,'' a Westerner living in Shanghai said. 
''With guanxi, a big problem becomes a little problem, and a little problem becomes no problem.''
But the Hilton had no guanxi.
The hotel's biggest headaches with officialdom began after city sanitation inspections in July and August resulted in fines, the equivalent of $27, for poor hygiene in the kitchens. 
Then came the butter episode. 
And on Sept. 
7 sanitation inspectors found mud on carrots and onions on a cutting board, 20 rotten melons and numerous other violations.
 
Strange-Smelling Butter
The butter battle got under way in August, after three people had dinner in the Hilton's Teppan grill. 
As the Tourism Bureau tells it, one diner wrote a letter complaining that the butter smelled strangely and that afterward the person had fallen ill. 
Mr. Schwander said he was skeptical that the incident happened, but two of the three people involved generally confirmed the Tourism Bureau account in telephone interviews.
''There was really something wrong with the butter that night,'' said Ewe Danjus, a West German businessman who lives in Shanghai. 
''It wasn't herbal butter.''
Zhou Guoqing, manager of the Shanghai Union Trading Company, who was also at dinner, said he and another Chinese guest became severely ill soon after eating dinner. 
The other man is out of the country and could not be reached for comment.
The findings were well publicized in the newspapers - although criticism of other Shanghai hotel kitchens had not been reported. 
For example, the Sanitation Bureau in February criticized the Sheraton kitchens, saying that the person making ice cream had eczema on his hands and that dirt was found in the ice cubes. 
But those violations were not made public.
Arthur Krieger, general manager of the Sheraton, said any problems in the Sheraton's kitchens had been corrected, and the Sanitation Department has not criticized the hotel in the last six months.
 
Quarrel With a Guest
The Hilton's greatest embarrassment came on Oct. 
17, when Louis Tam, a Hong Kong Chinese who is assistant front-office manager, slapped a guest from Taiwan during a quarrel. 
Mr. Schwander said that it should never have happened, but added that the guest was physically intimidating and that Mr. Tam felt he was acting in self-defense.
The Tourism Bureau demanded a written report on the incident, and the Bureau of Public Security sentenced Mr. Tam to five days in detention, although he was released the same day after writing a self-criticism. 
He was obliged to insert letters of apology in the newspapers, and under pressure from the city the Hilton agreed to announce publicly that it had docked Mr. Tam two weeks' pay.
The incident also led the Tourism Bureau to issue a formal summons to Mr. Schwander to discuss the hotel's problems with city officials. 
He did so, and the matter was solved for the moment.
The disputes seem almost trifling, but in China it is often the trifles that overwhelm foreign investors. 
And at the Hilton, the trifles may not be over.
 
Call for Labor Union
Mr. Ren of the Tourism Bureau said in an interview that the Hilton should form a labor union among its staff; the Hilton says that a union is unnecessary and that the staff does not want one. 
And Ye Longfei, Deputy Secretary General of the city government, said that although some city agencies favor greater regulation of the Hilton's fleet of 49 limousines, used to convey its guests around the city, he opposes further restrictions on the cars.
Meanwhile, the Hilton shows little sign of adopting a more deferential approach.
''We are different, and I would like to be different,'' Mr. Schwander said. 
''You cannot run a world-class hotel in China without being different.''
