
When the 14th foreign tourist group in five days arrived at the Suan Feng Tea Production Brigade shortly after lunch today, San Mei Juen put on her winning smile, served tea and began reciting production statistics. 
But she had xuexi in her eyes.
Xuexi means rest, and it is guaranteed to workers by Article 39 of China's Constitution. 
But workers in China's fledgling though burgeoning tourist industry have had precious little of it this summer.
Large increase in tourism to China discussed; Chinese citizens also beginning to tour their own country
From the yurt motels of Inner Mongolia to the Yangtze Gorge riverboats, tourists are swarming over China in numbers that set records monthly and strain slowly expanding facilities. 
A visit to the Great Wall on weekends is an experience in multinational pedestrian gridlock. 
Traffic lights have been erected and crowdcontrol police officers have armed themselves with walkie-talkies.
What is especially new in tourism here is something many foreign visitors forget to expect: Chinese tourists. 
For the past two years, the Government has encouraged local residents to get out and see their own country, whether on a weekend outing to the western hills from Peking or a slow boat ride up the coast from Shanghai to Qingdao. 
Rather suddenly this summer, Chinese who had been trapped for years in their own city neighborhoods or rural communes are shooing foreigners and each other out of their camera viewfinders.
 
Japanese Tourists Held at Bay
Although foreign tourists and overseas Chinese are still treated to privileged and much more expensive accommodations and services than local tourists, some people view as progress the fact that Chinese are now crowding panoramic vistas in their own country from which they were excluded in the past.
At the Dragon Well, a hillside spring near Hangzhou that dates from the Tang Dynasty, 1,000 years ago, a group of Shanghai weekenders held a group of Japanese tourists at bay today while they posed for photos, in turn holding a cup of Dragon Well tea with the well itself in the background.
Not since the early stages of the Cultural Revolution in the late 1960's, when youthful Red Guards took free train rides en route to terrorizing the intelligensia, have so many Chinese been on the road. 
Factories, communes and other work units organize ''bonus trips'' as rewards for productive work, rather than paying them with cash.
Vacations and leave to visit relatives are being gradually encouraged, and in cities such as Peking and Shanghai, unemployed young people have founded travel agencies to organize vacations and even honeymoons. 
Tourism for local Chinese is a natural extension of the Government's commitment to foreign tourism and the earning of foreign exchange - it helps soak up an oversupply of domestic currency that is fueling inflation.
 
Big Yearly Increases Expected
Hangzhou, with its West Lake boat rides, gardens and scenic hillsides, is a prime example of the mesh of local and foreign tourists. 
According to city officials, it hosted several million visitors last year of whom only 120,000 were from Hong Kong and Macao and about 30,000 from abroad. 
They expect a 50 percent increase this year.
About five million overseas Chinese, mostly from Hong Kong, and 530,000 foreigners visited China last year, earning the tourist industry $617 million in foreign exchange. 
Han Kehua, China's tourism and travel director, estimated recently that the number of visitors would increase 30 percent a year through at least 1985.
A young and eager corps of local tourist workers has been trained to cater to them in Hangzhou. 
In hotels, antique shops, and that recent Chinese invention, cafe-bars, they dispense English, Coca-Cola, Kodak film, disco music and such degenerate foreign libations as ''vodka mist, screwdriver, friendship cocktail and around the world.''
Last night, as a 15-piece brass band made up of post office workers played distinctly martial polka music at a dance in the Hangzhou Hotel cafe, a young waiter was asked the ingredients of an ''around the world.''
''Everything,'' he responded.
