
As tension along China's easternmost border with India continues, China is pouring tremendous numbers of soldiers and weapons into the sparsely populated mountainous area along the two countries' disputed border.
In the last two weeks, convoys of troops, artillery, rockets and supplies have been winding over the dusty gravel road leading to the border.
One day last week, Chinese Army trucks covered with thick olive-green camouflage netting trundled through the southern town of Zedang toward the border 75 miles away at a rate of one a minute over a period of six hours. 
In one convoy, 14 four-wheel-drive trucks were seen hauling camouflaged artillery pieces that one Westerner said were probably 88-millimeter field guns.
Unusually High Visibility
Both Indian and Chinese officials emphatically deny that there have been any conflicts between the two armies. 
Nonetheless, both Tibetans and Westerners with long experience in Tibet said the level of military activity exceeded even the usual highly visible presence of the Chinese Army here in Tibet, which was annexed by China in 1950 and made into an autonomous region.
Since 1960, China and India have contested their boundaries, drawn vaguely by Britain in 1913 and 1914. 
After the Communist takeover in China in 1949, the new Government rejected that demarcation. 
In 1962, the two countries fought a brief and indecisive war along sections of the 700 miles of mountain ridges running from Bhutan and Burma, which the British Government had declared the official border.
Concern among Western countries over the possibility of armed conflict between the world's two most populous nations is acute, and diplomats and military attaches from various countries have visited Lhasa and nearby towns in recent weeks. 
Two army liaison officers from the United States Consulate in Hong Kong were in Lhasa, as were diplomats from several other countries. 
#2 Journalists Caught Two Western journalists, a reporter for the Finnish newspaper Helsingin Sanomat and a freelance photographer from Canada, were caught last week by Chinese military officials barely five miles from the Indian border, in an area closed to foreigners. 
This week, officials in Lhasa were to question the journalists about their activities in the closed military zone.
In addition to the continuous flow of arms and soldiers south and east toward the border, there are other signs that Chinese military officials are preparing for the possibility of clashes.
In Lhasa, the army hospital near the ancient monastery of Sera was cleared of ill tourists. 
One such tourist said that the hospital, which is considered the best in Lhasa, was empty of patients when he left but that the staff appeared to be preparing for large numbers of new patients.
For two weeks, from May 6 to 20, Tibet's only civilian airport, in Gonggar, 70 miles from Lhasa, was closed to commercial flights on even-numbered days. 
This has not occurred since Tibet was opened to foreign tourists seven years ago, according to Tibetans and Westerners. 
On even-numbered days, large military transports were seen at the airport unloading equipment. 
A Western diplomat said he saw rockets being loaded onto trucks.
 
'That's the War'
In the last two weeks, helicopters and jet fighters have frequently roared over this city of 150,000. 
A resident of Lhasa said when a fighter plane streaked overhead, ''Oh, that's the war.''
Lhasa residents say neither helicopters nor jet fighters have ever flown over Lhasa with such regularity.
Around Lhasa, soldiers and armed policemen brandishing AK-47 rifles and submachine guns have set up numerous roadblocks where all vehicles are checked. 
Soldiers carrying automatic weapons and marching in small groups have occasionally appeared on the streets as well.
Chinese and Indian officials have met seven times since 1981 to discuss the demarcation of their border, but both sides say there has been no progress. 
The contested area, about 34,000 square miles of largely inaccessible mountains and valleys, was declared a state, called Arunchal Pradesh, by India last year. 
That enraged the Chinese, who also claim the land.
When first drawn, the boundary, then called the McMahon Line, was to cut across the ridges of the highest peaks between Bhutan and Burma. 
At the time the boundary was drawn, however, there was no certainty about which were the highest mountains.
China and India also dispute more than 14,000 square miles of their westernmost border. 
New Delhi contends the land belongs to Kashmir; Beijing maintains it is Chinese territory.
