
A Tang Dynasty court lady, a richly glazed pottery study of a serene aristocrat seated on a bamboo stool, may rewrite the $660,000 record at auction for Tang art when it comes up for sale next week at Sotheby's. 
The gracefully modeled eighth-century tomb figure, owned in recent years by three major collectors of Chinese art, is one of several major Oriental works to be offered at Sotheby's and Christie's next week. 
The presale exhibitions this weekend were timed by the two houses to coincide with the long-awaited opening tomorrow of the Charlotte C. and John C. Weber Galleries of ancient Chinese art at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
The sale at Sotheby's at 2 P.M. Wednesday is to present the Tang court lady for the second time in six years at a Sotheby's auction. 
The sculpture was acquired in the mid-1940's in China by Capt. Sergius N. Ferris Luboshez, a retired United States Navy officer who was sent to the Far East by the State Department at the close of World War II to serve as general counsel to the Foreign Liquidation Commission; the work remained in his collection until it was auctioned for $198,000 at Sotheby's in 1982. 
The buyer, Giuseppe Eskenazi, a London dealer, sold it to C. C. Wang, a Chinese artist living in the United States. 
Last year the court lady changed hands again when Earl Morse, a retired food executive and a major collector of tomb sculpture, acquired it as a present to himself for his 80th birthday. 
The work is being sold from Mr. Morse's estate; he died in February.
''The market is very strong and for something of this rarity, prices are very high,'' said Carol Conover, Sotheby's specialist in Chinese art. 
She said the figure may even exceed her estimate of $450,000 to $650,000, despite repairs to the neck and coiffure, and a replacement of a piece of the blossoming plant stalk in the figure's right hand. 
Ms. Conover said she was optimistic because the prices paid for several major Chinese ceramics at Sotheby's in Hong Kong last week were double the house estimates and most pieces sold for more than Sotheby's expected.
An uncommon 19th-century set of 12 Japanese lacquered zodiac carrying cases, called inro, is one of the highlights of Sotheby's auction of Japanese art at 2 P.M. Wednesday and 10:15 A.M. and 2 P.M. Thursday. Happy Rockefeller is the consignor of these three and four-section small gilded and lacquered silver boxes, the Japanese solution to no pockets in a man's robe.
The set comes in a handsome black lacquer box that has silver mounts, gilded edges, an illustration on the front and four drawers inside for storing the inro, each of which is decorated with one of the 12 signs of the Oriental zodiac - the rat, ox, tiger, hare, dragon, snake, horse, goat, monkey, rooster, dog and boar. 
Although each case is signed by Koma Kansai 2d, a major Edo artist who retired in 1824, its black lacquer box is not signed. 
Peter J. Bufton, Sotheby's specialist in Japanese works of art, said only four zodiac inro have been offered at auction in the West in the last decade. 
The zodiac inro, auctioned in 1965 at Sotheby's in London for $8,400, is estimated to bring $40,000 to $60,000.
Christie's will auction a wide ranging selection of Chinese ceramics and works of art from various owners and from a private collector who acquired his Tang holdings in China in the 1940's, in a sale to be held next Friday at 10 A.M. and 2 P.M.
The most important work in Christie's auction is a rare Tang tomb figure of a lion, the largest of about 10 known to have been auctioned in recent years. 
The lion, shown seated on its haunches with one paw just about to scratch its face, is a lively study depicting the beast as a mythical winged lion as cuddly as a Peking dog.
''In tomb works, you get horses, camels, grooms and court ladies -rarely lions,'' Theow-Huang Tow, one of Christie's Chinese art specialists, said, adding that he knew of fewer than 10. 
He said that lions, which are not indigenous to China, were sometimes sent as gifts to Chinese rulers, which explained, he said, the naturalistic modeling on this work, which is more than 11 inches tall. 
''This lion is particularly interesting because it happens to be larger than most others I have found,'' he said. 
The presale estimate is $300,000 to $400,000.
A private collection of 53 pieces of Chinese ceramic sculpture - acquired by Aurelius Parenti between 1946 and 1948 in China - is to be sold in Christie's afternoon session. 
Mr. Parenti recalled this week that he was working after World War II as a displaced-persons officer with the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Agency in China. 
''A great deal of digging had been going on after the war and most of these things were discovered in that period,'' he said. 
His collection, a well-kept secret until now, contains Han, Wei, Sui and Tang works, of which 25 are horses or horses and riders.
These early works which are offered in a separate catalogue, include ceramics ranging from a Han pottery figure that is expected to sell for $200 to $300, to a Tang horse more than 20 inches tall, that is estimated to bring $40,000 to $50,000.
 
Jadeite Vessels
Eighteenth-century Chinese ceramics and jadeite vessels brought astounding prices on May 18 at William Doyle Galleries. 
A pair of K'ang Hsi 18th-century white waterpots, patterned with red flowers and green leaves, estimated to sell for, at most, $16,000, brought $104,500. 
A plain white K'ang Hsi waterpot brought more than 10 times the presale estimate and was sold for $82,500. 
The bidding on a tall white Yung Cheng vase, embellished with red and blue geometric motifs, soared past its top estimate of $5,000 and was sold for $85,250. 
A Chien Lung jadeite vessel that was expected to sell for up to $6,000 brought $55,000. 
The buyers were a New York dealer and a London dealer who were not identified.
''These works were fresh on the market and scarce,'' William Doyle said this week. 
''Works of this quality are not often seen on the market these days - and these were in a collection for decades.''
 
SOTHEBY'S, York Avenue at 72d Street (606-7245). 
Viewing hours for Chinese art: 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. today, tomorrow and Monday; 10 A.M. to 3 P.M. Tuesday; for Japanese art, as above through Monday. 
10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; 10 A.M. to 3 P.M. Wednesday.
 
CHRISTIE'S, Park Avenue at 59th Street (546-1010). 
Viewing hours for Chinese art sales: 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. tomorrow, 1 to 5 P.M. Sunday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday and 10 A.M. to 2 P.M. Thursday.
