
Commerce Secretary Malcolm Baldrige said today that China and America ''have great potential together'' and promised to help accelerate Western screening procedures for United States high-technology equipment destined for China.
He made the pledge in a toast at a welcoming banquet given by Zheng Tuobin, minister of foreign economic relations and trade.
The two men will be co-chairmen of the third conference of the China-United States Joint Commission on Commerce and Trade that will be held Monday and Tuesday. 
The Chinese are expected to complain about high-technology barriers.
United States Commerce Secretary Malcolm Baldrige, in China as co-chairman of third conference of China-United States Joint Commission on Commerce and Trade, says China and United States have great potential together; promises to help accelerate Western screening procedures for United States high-technology equipment destined for China (M)
Mr. Baldrige, who arrived Saturday, noted that at the first commission meeting in Peking two years ago China's main concern was United States red tape blocking exports of computers and other sophisticated equipment.
''We said then that we had decided to speed it up - it would be good for both of us - and I think the results have shown very clearly in the last two years that we've been able to make tremendous progress on that score,'' he said.
''Now those problems on technology transfer center more outside the United States than they do inside.
''But I will promise you that we will devote the same effort to solving those problems and getting them behind us as we did to the problems we had originally, and I think we will succeed just as well on that score also.''
The problems Mr. Baldrige acknowledged now come from Cocom, which stands for Coordinating Committee, a Paris-based body run by 15 Western allies that screens high-technology exports to Communist countries to protect military security.
Some orders are delayed for months while Cocom member governments review each application.
China, which seeks most-favored-nation treatment from the United States, is expected to request exemption from Cocom procedures. 
On his May 1983 visit, Mr. Baldrige lifted export restrictions against China on ''dual-use'' technology with military potential.
Mr. Zheng said China's economic development would continue to give impetus to United States trade, which reached a high of $6.07 billion last year.
