
Lieut. Gen. Hussain Mohammed Ershad, this nation's new military ruler, said in an interview today that he believed the Soviet Union was ''very dangerous.''
He also said that Bangladesh felt nothing but friendship toward the United States and that he thought President Reagan was a strong leader.
General Ershad also confirmed reports that two Soviet Embassy attaches were arrested a week ago while trying, for thus far unexplained reasons, to set fire to nearly 600 reels of movie film.
 
Firm on Rooting Out Corruption
In the 75-minute interview, the soft-spoken general, who on March 24 suspended constitutional government, also made the following points:
- Not even family ties with army officers will save the lives of former Cabinet ministers if they are found guilty by military tribunals of corruption. 
''We can hang them,'' General Ershad said.
Lieut Gen Hussain Mohammed Erhsad, new military ruler of Bangladesh, asserts Soviet Union is "very dangerous"
- Democracy will be restored ''without a doubt'' within two years, and unspecified rights of expression and political activity may be restored sooner.
- Western and Chinese diplomats were sounded out for their possible reaction in advance of the coup. 
These diplomats have since said that the aid on which Bangladesh depends will continue. 
All the major nations except the Soviet Union were informed the evening before the coup happened, and India was told some days earlier.
- The Bangladeshi Army includes some ''hot heads,'' in General Ershad's words, who may press for moredrastic changes than the current arrest of half a dozen ministers on charges of corruption and the promise to feed the poor, develop the economy and improve government administration.
 
Visited in Unpretentious Office
As General Ershad spoke in fluent English about these points and also handed over written answers to questions submitted in advance, he sat in his comfortable but unpretentious office in Dacca's military cantonment.
The general wore neat camouflage fatigues and black combat boots. 
He smiled easily, sat with practiced composure, and did not smoke. 
He conceded that his offer to accept the surrender of illegal weapons before their possession becomes a capital crime had not been ''a big success.''
The general said he intended to revitalize industry, dismiss unproductive bureaucrats, improve the performance of governmentowned enterprises, ''go all out'' for agriculture, encourage free enterprise, continue the program of the late President Ziaur Rahman of voluntary public works, and improve birth control, saying the country's recent record was so bad that he was ''ashamed'' to talk about it.
General Ershad said that his Government planned some form of land redistribution, but he did not elaborate. 
More than three-quarters of the rural work force is now landless, compared with 50 percent a dozen years ago.
 
Details on the Soviet Incident
The Soviet attaches who were arrested March 31 about 20 miles northwest of here while trying to burn the films were charged, an official said in a separate interview, with ''vicious movements,'' endangering the forest and creating a health hazard.
After being held overnight in jail, they were released into the custody of the Soviet Embassy pending an investigation of the 588 reels of movie film that the Government seized.
General Ershad said, ''We're just waiting to find out'' what the films contain and why the two men were trying to burn them. 
The incident is at least the second confrontation with the Soviet Embassy in the past year. 
In June, the embassy attempted to import what appeared to be electronic monitoring equipment. 
It was barred from doing so.
In other remarks on the Soviet Union, General Ershad said: ''We cannot trust them so much. 
They are very crude. 
They have such a mighty military machine.''
 
U.S. Responses Called Inadequate
''And it is your fault,'' he added politely, referring to what he called inadequate American responses to past Soviet moves. 
''We are really scared about what they may do next,'' he said about the Russians.
Bangladesh, the former East Pakistan, which became independent in 1971 with India's help, was once considered to lean moderately in the direction of the Soviet Union, which had supported India's policy in the struggle for the independence of Bangladesh while the United States quietly favored Pakistan.
Soviet prestige in Bangladesh gradually declined. 
It fell rapidly after the 1975 assassination of President Sheik Mujibur Rahman, the first Bangladesh leader, who was strongly pro-Indian.
Some diplomats believe that the accession of General Ershad to power reflects a gradual shift in Bangladesh toward China, the Western nations and the Arab oil producers of the Persian Gulf. 
The influence of the Persian Gulf states in this Moslem nation is said to have grown in recent years.
 
On Good Terms With Chinese
Concerning China, General Ershad said: ''Peking I can go to any time. 
I have a standing invitation. 
We are on very good military terms.''
Bangladeshi politics have been decidedly secular. 
When asked what world leaders he had admired, General Ershad mentioned only Kemal Ataturk, who transformed the Moslem Turks' Ottoman Empire into a secular democracy after World War I.However, General Ershad said he believed in ''the perfect socialism of Islam.''
In outlining his economic and administrative plans, he said he hoped to foster prosperity by attacking corruption and rationalizing operations.
He complained several times of the nation's inefficiency. 
As he spoke, the lights and air-conditioner in his office went off for several minutes. 
Dacca has several power failures every day.
 
Businessmen Assailed on Loans
He attacked businessmen who had taken government loans and never repaid them. 
''You cannot get the money back,'' he said. 
''Some of these people have become very rich. 
Some of them have $10 million out of the country.''
As for industry, he said, ''We have all assembly plants'' - using foreign parts - ''not real industry.''
He lamented the need for importing fuel, food, machinery and consumer goods. 
''In all these,'' he said, ''middlemen take a cut.''
Bangladeshi exports, consisting mainly of jute in addition to hides, skins, leather and tea, are less than half of the value of imports.
Concerning civil service workers, the general said ''decentralization'' would become the basic policy. 
''They have created so many boards, so many offices,'' he said, ''and most of them have no work to do.''
This complaint is shared by foreign agricultural experts, who say that the typically mixed subsistence farms of Bangladesh have been served, if at all, by dozens of competing ministries and agencies.
 
Son of a Provincial Lawyer
General Ershad, who is the son of a provincial lawyer and briefly studied law himself before turning to outdoor sports and the army, said he sympathized with the poor.
''They are really suffering,'' he said. 
''They need so little.''
He added. that he would consider it a victory ''if we can create a system where these people can get justice, can get two square meals a day, can have some clothing, can sleep free of lawlessness and threats.'
The general said the number of landless had increased in recent years because some peasants had lost land to unscrupulous neighbors. 
But he added, drawing his eyebrows together in a worried frown, ''We have to motivate the people.''
''Justice and fair play will be made to reign supreme,'' he said in one of the written answers. 
''We will set examples of discipline, austerity and accountability in all walks of life.''
The written responses also mentioned ''a dynamic New Economic Order.''
 
'Doesn't Know Where to Begin'
General Ershad sounded some notes of doubt. 
On the great economic problems of this nation of 90 million people, one of the world's poorest, with a gross national product of $100 per capita, he said: ''One does not actually know where to begin. 
But we are trying to tackle them one by one.''
Similarly, when questioned about potential disruption within the army, he replied, ''If some young adventurers take over the country, the consequences will be terrible. 
So we cannot fail.''
Reminded that both of Bangladesh's two most notable rulers were assassinated, he said his ''life style'' had not changed. 
''I cannot sit in a room all the time,'' he said. 
''I have to go out and be among the people. 
Life and death are controlled by God. 
We actually believe this.''
