
In 1947, Daisy Wang walked away with Shanghai's last beauty crown.
Then came Communism, proletarian morality and the conviction that in the workers' and peasants' paradise, beauty was bourgeois. 
Mao suits, in a choice of blue or gray, became the fashion. 
For women, lipstick and nail polish were decadent extravagances.
Perfume, makeup and coiffures have been back for a while, and this year, it appeared, so were beauty pageants. 
But the beast ideological purity, that treacherous ground of uncertainty in Chinese life, has resurfaced and beauty is on the run.
Last month, a local television station announced a contest to crown a Shanghai Maiden. 
A Beijing television station followed suit, declaring a Girls of Youth and Elegance pageant.
Now, the Shanghai event has been canceled while the Beijing affair has retreated from public view. 
Political puritanism, it seems, is back.
 
Picking a Beijing Flower
Three weeks ago, wobbling uncertainly on new high heels, 800 young women crowded into the Chongwenmen Cultural Palace to compete for the title of Beijing Flower in the capital's first beauty pageant in more than four decades.
''This is the first such contest in the capital similar to beauty contests in other countries,'' said Long Xinmin, the head of the Beijing television studio. 
''But ours puts as much emphasis on the participants' knowledge, performing technique and moral character as on their appearance and dress.''
Pageant officials printed up score sheets to evaluate the contestants, with categories ranging from ''teeth'' to ''length of legs,'' from ''color of skin'' to ''demeanor,'' from ''makeup'' to ''sense of humor.''
''Such contests are necessary to raise Chinese girls' awareness of grooming and deportment as a whole,'' Lan Guang, one of the eight judges, told the China Daily. 
''Esthetic education and training are also urgently needed in this country. 
The level of the contestant's grooming as a whole is rather low. 
A large number of them don't know what beauty is or how to use makeup or clothes to show off their natural beauty.''
 
Now a Closed Affair
Nervous young women were required to show off their talents by singing, dancing, reading aloud and expounding on their knowledge of Chinese culture. 
The finals of the Beijing Flower pageant, an extravaganza of music, color and fashion, was to have been broadcast by Beijing television, with the top 30 women offered modeling jobs.
In any case, those were the plans. 
Now, the Shanghai contest has been scuttled and the Beijing pageant has been reduced to a secret affair in a room somewhere in the city, closed to Chinese and foreign reporters alike and banned from television.
 
'Conditions Are Not Yet Ripe'
Shanghai's Communist Party chief, Jiang Zemin, was quoted by the official press agency as saying ''conditions are not yet ripe'' for a beauty pageant. 
An unnamed official was also quoted as saying that the city's economic problems require ''leaders and the 12 million city residents to be of one heart and one mind and to quietly immerse themselves in hard work.''
''It is premature to spend 450,000 yuan'' - about $126,000 - ''on a beauty pageant,'' the official said.
In Beijing, there was more mystery about what had happened, more rumors.
One story has it that the propaganda department of the Communist Party Central Committee frowned on the notion of picking a Beijing Flower and decreed that the show would not go on. 
Another rumor was that Hu Qili, a member of the Standing Committee of the Politburo, the most powerful body in the country, ordered the pageant scrapped.
 
'Not Good for the Girls'
Zhu Hansheng, a pageant organizer and a man of irrepressible good humor, deflected suggestions that politics had torpedoed his project. 
But he admitted that the grandiose schemes of last month had evaporated.
''Our way of doing things now is not quite the same as we originally planned,'' Mr. Zhu said, spreading his hands as if dropping a watermelon.
''We don't need to broadcast it on television,'' said Mr. Zhu, a director of the China Television Artists Association. 
''It's not good for the girls.''
No, Mr. Zhu insisted, there had not been any explicit instruction to tone things down.
''If Hu Qili had said stop, we would have had to stop immediately and I wouldn't have agreed to see you,'' he said. 
''China's not too rich. 
Some people don't eat. 
Some people say how can you hold a beauty contest if some people can't eat or dress properly?''
A collaborator in the pageant's organization, Zhang Andong, interrupted, ''We haven't received any directives directly from the authorities, but we can feel the atmosphere.''
''Feeling the atmosphere'' is a talent most Chinese have cultivated with care, for a loss of touch usually means trouble from above.
Mr. Zhu said the Beijing pageant would now be a private affair between the judges and the contestants. 
Previously announced prizes, including a piano, have been withdrawn. 
Instead, he said, the winners will receive ''Olympic-style medals.''
Across the Formosa Strait, Taiwan, which banned such beauty contests until last year, reveled in the attention it attracted by staging the Miss Universe Pageant, which ended today. 
''This kind of publicity is something our Government cannot possibly buy,'' Yao Ying-chi, an official of the ruling Nationalist Party, told The Associated Press in Taipei.
But Mr. Zhu, foreshadowing a sobering of Communist attitudes toward parading female pulchritude, said, ''If the whole country started to do this, it wouldn't be good.''
