
In the two months since student protests led to the dismissal of Hu Yaobang as the party leader, a series of Central Committee documents have attacked the protesters, criticized Mr. Hu and outlined the limits of the campaign against Western ideas.
One of the documents, all of which have been read to party members, said that Mr. Hu had encouraged ''bourgeois liberalization.''
Others contained an denunciation of student protesters by Deng Xiaoping, the paramount leader; an outline of agricultural policy, and instructions on the dissemination of an essay on legal education.
The documents, in the form of party directives, appeared designed to affirm both ideological orthodoxy and the policy of economic change.
Although Mr. Deng, who emerged as an ideological watchdog, was given prominence in the documents, foreign diplomats and some Chinese wonder whether he remains fully in charge or has been weakened by those who oppose economic change.
 
Six Documents Circulated
So far, according to Hong Kong press accounts, six documents have been circulated to party units. 
The texts of some of them have been published in Hong Kong.
Last week, a party member read several documents to reporters for The Washington Post, the Kyodo news agency and Agence France-Presse. 
This unusual revelation of party documents prompted speculation over the motivation in releasing the information.
The first document, distributed Jan. 
2, contained remarks by Mr. Deng attacking student protesters and saying that the demonstrations should be suppressed.
''When necessary, we must deal severely with those who defy orders,'' Mr. Deng was quoted as having said in a Politburo meeting Dec. 
30. ''We can afford to shed some blood. 
Just try as much as possible not to kill anyone.''
Referring to Wei Jingshen, a dissident serving a prison term for ''counterrevolutionary propaganda,'' Mr. Deng said:
''The opposition to bourgeois liberalization must be pursued for 20 years. 
We have arrested Wei Jingshen and we will not release him. 
We do not need to pay attention to the faces of foreigners in doing this. 
By doing this we will not tarnish our image abroad.''
 
Deng Demanded Purge of 3
In the Politburo meeting, Mr. Deng also called for the purging of Fang Lizhi, an educator; Liu Binyan, a journalist, and Wang Ruowang, a writer, all three of whom were in fact later expelled from the party.
The second document, according to the Hong Kong press, was the text of a speech made by Mr. Deng at a party conference in September, in which he said there were proponents of ''bourgeois liberalization'' within the party.
The third document, issued Jan. 
17, contained a critique of Mr. Hu during his tenure as the party's General Secretary of the party. 
This document, according to the Hong Kong press, was based on a report compiled by Bo Yibo, a deputy chairman of the Central Advisory Commission, a body of elder statesmen.
The document said Mr. Hu's ''attitude toward opposing bourgeois liberalization was not resolute.''
It took issue with a comment said to have been made by Mr. Hu at a gathering of writers that the 1983 campaign against ''spiritual pollution,'' a movement against Western ideas, would not be revived.
''The Central Committee believes that spiritual pollution and bourgeois liberalization are one and the same thing,'' the document said.
It further charged that Mr. Hu did not correctly promote ''ideological rectification'' to insure that party members complied with the current line.
''He said that party rectification was aimed at promoting the economy, that the main criterion of party rectification should be economic results,'' the document said.
 
Hu Accused of Adventurism
Mr. Hu was also accused of seeking to stimulate economic development by encouraging greater consumer spending.
''Thus he again committed the mistake of economic adventurism by raising expectations beyond China's reality,'' the document said. 
''In meetings with foreign visitors, he said things that he should not have said about our country's crackdown on economic crimes.''
This point is believed to refer to an 1986 interview given to a Hong Kong publication in which he said that children of senior party leaders had been accused of economic crimes such as fraud and embezzlement and would be dealt with severely.
Among the accused was Hu Shiying, the son of Hu Qiaomu, a Politburo member. 
The son had been accused of embezzling more than 1 million yuan ($270,000).
Hu Yaobang, the party leader, according to the document, made unauthorized speeches.
''He broke party discipline and gave speeches all over the country on many occasions without the authorization of the Central Committee,'' the document said. 
''The result was that a lot of his formulations were not in accord with the Central Committee's.''
 
Limits on Anti-Western Drive
The fourth document sets forth rules governing the campaign against bourgeois liberalization. 
In a speech to the nation for the Chinese New Year. 
Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang outlined some of these rules, limiting the purge campaign to among party members.
''The press,'' the document said, ''should unconditionally propagate the party line and policy and should perform the role of the party's mouthpiece. 
It should strengthen the system of censorship.''
Those publications that have committed political mistakes and those of low quality should be closed.''
The fifth document, described as 10,000 words long, has not been published in the Hong Kong press, which says that it deals with agricultural marketing, rural industry and the responsibility system, whereby farmers contract to grow a certain amount for the Government and can sell the rest on the free market.
The sixth document called on party members to publicize a lengthy document on legal education approved Jan. 
22 by the National People's Congress, the nominal legislature.
