
China today criticized an American decision to curb the export of some high-technology products to China, saying the move was ''not reasonable.''
On Thursday, the State Department announced that it was suspending consideration of whether further high technology could be transferred to China because of what it has said is China's continued sale of Silkworm anti-ship missiles to Iran.
Iranian Silkworm missiles have been blamed for three attacks on targets in Kuwaiti waters in the last nine days, including a strike that damaged an oil-loading terminal on Thursday.
Iran has not confirmed that it was responsible for the attacks, and although it acknowledges having Silkworm missiles, it says it captured them in battle with Iraq.
A Souring in Relations
Iran's Ambassador to China repeated that assertion today and said that his country possessed far more missiles of another variety - the American-made, surface-to-air Stinger - than had been reported.
Referring to reports that Iran may have obtained as many as 16 of the shoulder-fired Stinger missiles from the arsenal of anti-Soviet guerrillas in Afghanistan, Ambassador Alaeddin Boroujerdi, said, ''the number of Stinger missiles we have is much bigger than that.''
The decision by the United States signaled a souring in relations between the two countries, some senior Western diplomats here said. 
Already, China has reacted heatedly to a recent Senate resolution criticizing Beijing's policies towards Tibet and the country's senior leader, Deng Xiaoping, has personally accused several Congressmen of ''ignorance and arrogance'' for their views on Tibet.
Nonetheless, the United States Embassy here has made a great effort to portray the high-technology decision as a relatively minor issue and to suggest that relations continue normally.
 
China Issues Dispatch
China's reaction to the State Department action was contained in a four-paragraph dispatch issued by the Government-controlled New China News Agency here in Beijing.
''It is not reasonable at all for the United States to halt the review of relaxing controls of high-tech exports to China under the pretext of mounting tension in the gulf,'' the agency said. 
''The current strain in the gulf area is caused by the sustaining and escalating Iran-Iraq war, and further intensified by the military involvement of the big powers there.
''The liberalization of high-tech export controls on China has nothing to do with the situation in the gulf,'' it said.
China has encouraged the United States to expand the range of sophisticated technology that can be imported here, both because it believes the technology will help rejuvenate its industry and because much of its weaponry is outdated.
 
China Denies Sales to Iran
The United States has been reviewing requests by China to expand the kinds of products that it can import.
For months, the United States has protested to Beijing about the sale of Silkworm missiles to Iran. 
But China consistently denies that it has sold the missiles or any military equipment, to Iran.
The Silkworm, which is usually guided by radar, is not considered accurate enough to select a particular ship from among several in a small area. 
But when fired into a general area, it is likely to find one of the targets.
As recently as Wednesday, a spokesman for the Foreign Ministry here reiterated his Government's position. 
''We have stated on many occasions that China does not sell arms or missiles to Iran,'' he said.
But The Wall Street Journal reported Thursday that the Reagan Administration has shown Chinese officials photographs of Chinese weapons being loaded in China and unloaded in Iran.
The Iranian Ambassador told foreign reporters here that the Silkworm missiles his country had were not Chinese.
American Embassy officials refused to say today whether the Chinese have officially protested the curb on high-technology exports.
