
As China's campaign against ''bourgeois liberalization'' captures the headlines, Zhen Wen gets her facials.
''We all like to be beautiful,'' said Miss Zhen, a 32-year-old machinery designer, whose blue jeans and feathered hair would blend into any New York crowd.
She waved her arm at the dozens of people around her in a Beijing beauty parlor, luxuriating in their new hairdos, manicures and facial treatments, and added: ''This concerns how people live. 
Bourgeois liberalization concerns ideology, student demonstrations and that kind of thing.''
That sentiment suffuses and consoles Beijing. 
While tempests rage in Communist Party circles, and the Great Hall of the People is filled with calls to exorcise ''bourgeois liberalization,'' most people quietly enjoy their new-found bourgeois pleasures.
 
'People Like to Be Beautiful'
''We fight against bourgeois liberalization,'' said Sun Fenghua, a 30-year-old cashier, as a hairdresser expertly shampooed and molded her hair. 
''But Chinese people like to be beautiful, just like other people.''
Some of China's aging leaders, who regularly hail the virtue of ''plain living,'' may take a harder line on preening oneself than does Miss Sun.
But comments like those from Miss Zhen and Miss Sun underscore two facts of life here: how far China has come in the last few years, and the resistance to any broadening of the anti-liberalization campaign that in the last few months has constricted intellectual life and economic experimentation.
In just a few years ,the Chinese people have radically changed their appearance. 
Ethnic Chinese visitors from Hong Kong or Singapore used to be instantly recognizable by their colorful clothes and fashionable haircuts.
Local residents, although they had often graduated from the blue Mao suits that they wore during the Cultural Revolution from 1966 to 1976, wore dour, drab clothing and plain, unisex haircuts.
 
A Rainbow of Colors
Now a visitor to Beijing needs color film. 
Old people still usually wear Mao jackets or other somber colors, but the young wear red, pink, green, blue and other colors that until recently were only seen here in rainbows.
Even the bicycles that jam the capital's streets, although still mostly black and white, are sometimes painted green or blue. 
Young women commonly curl their hair or have it styled in other ways. 
Some wear earrings in newly pierced ears.
''This is civilization,'' Liu Yufen, a 24-year-old kindergarten teacher, said as she displayed the loop earrings running through her lobes.
An unanswered question is whether the leaders of the anti-liberalization campaign, which showed its strength after student demonstrations late last year, frown on such sartorial pleasures. 
Equally uncertain is whether the population would accept a broadening of the campaign to clamp down on the small liberties of fashion that to most people matter more than speeches about remote topics like bourgeois liberalization.
 
No Turning Back Seen
''The campaign against bourgeois liberalization is falling on stone-deaf ears,'' said an American businessman living here. 
''And people simply won't allow the Government to push them backward in their daily lives to the way they used to live.''
A Chinese official who runs a company in Washington State that supplies timber to China, Yao Wei, said economic changes would continue, partly because ''it is not possible to stop them - people wouldn't allow it.''
On the other hand, analysts who are more pessimistic say that the Chinese people may not be consulted and that turmoil in the past was not always predictable. 
In the Cultural Revolution, for example, many of the same people who now buy lacy underwear or bright blue bicycles did all they could to undermine their beauty and sex appeal.
For all the uncertainties, there are signs that in its effect on daily life the campaign against liberalization is primarily a retrenchment or a pause instead of a sharp retreat, as some have feared.
 
Bikinis in Beijing
Later this month, for example, women body builders wearing bikinis will take part in China's first national body-building and aerobic exercise tournament. 
Chen Haosu, the Deputy Mayor of Beijing, where the tournament will be held, asked people not to overreact to the bikinis, adding, ''Don't classify bikinis in the scope of bourgeois liberalization.''
The Government, however, recently has cracked down on restaurants in southern Guandong Province that use bikini-clad waitresses to entice customers.
This month, the Chinese Army announced that it would go ahead with the reintroduction of military ranks, which were abolished as a mark of class consciousness in 1965.
An exchange for trading bonds opened this month in Tianjin, adding to stock and bond markets already set up within the last year in Beijing, Shanghai, Wuhan and Shenyang.
 
Reappearance of the Maid
Other daily pleasures that might strike even an American as bourgeois scarcely raise an eyebrow here. 
Cosmetic surgeons in Beijing and other cities are performing record numbers of breast augmentations, nose corrections and operations to make Chinese eyes look more Caucasian.
Maids, who largely disappeared during the Cultural Revolution, are reappearing with a vengeance. 
There are about 30,000 maids in Beijing alone, almost all of whom started work in the last few years. 
They serve wealthier families for $10 a month, plus room and board. 
Five state-run companies place maids, and five more such companies are being formed.
These days the maids are called by a new name - service attendants -to reduce bourgeois associations, but their work is the same. 
And they apparently have support at high levels.
The general manager of the biggest of the state-run maid-supply companies, Li Ruiqin, said one of her customers was Li Peng, a Soviet-trained Deputy Prime Minister who is widely mentioned as a candidate for the Prime Minister's job.
Li Peng himself apparently sees no contradiction between maintaining the campaign against bourgeois liberalization and retaining his maid, a young woman from Hunan Province.
Miss Li, the company manager, said, ''Our information is that he is very satisfied with her.''
