
Mao was a customer. 
So was Zhou Enlai. 
Deng Xiaoping is one now, as are the Communist Party chief, Zhao Ziyang, and the rest of China's inner circle of leaders.
Tian Atong, tailor to the mighty, slipped from an envelope a glossy color photograph - a formal portrait of the five-member Standing Committee of the Communist Party's Politburo. 
He trailed a finger across the print.
''I did these,'' he said. 
''I did each of these suits.''
In the middle of the group, a trim Mr. Zhao was the clear fashion plate in a subtle two-button double-breasted blue pin stripe.
''Not bad, eh?''
Mr. Tian said, his gaze lingering. 
''It's not so wide like the British. 
The waist is narrower, so it looks sleeker.''
 
A Cut Above the Rest
Mr. Tian pirouetted into the public eye last month when Mr. Zhao, in a display of nationalist pride, flashed the red and white label of the Hongdu Fashion Corporation inside his suit coat to foreign reporters skeptical of its local origins.
''I hope you will send out a dispatch saying all my suits are made in China and look very smart,'' the new party chief said.
Mr. Tian, it was learned, was the architect of this smartness.
Here in the Chinese capital, where the sartorial skirmishes of Seventh Avenue or the Rue du Faubourg-St.-Honore seem like tepid tea, the political cut of a man is usually, though not always, apparent from the cut of his clothes. 
And it is Mr. Tian, owlish behind his horn-rimmed glasses, who has been called on, time and time again, to cut the fabric.
 
'That's My Work'
The most prominent monument to his work is the pale gray, high-collared suit worn by Mao in the 30-foot portrait hanging over the gate to the Forbidden City. 
''That's my work,'' said Mr. Tian, now 63 years old.
In 1937, when he was 13, he left his home in Changshu and followed his brother's footsteps into a Shanghai tailor's shop. 
''I wanted to learn how to be a tailor,'' Mr. Tian said. 
''My brother was a tailor, so he introduced me to a shop where I studied as an apprentice for four years.''
''I worked at a British clothing shop on Nanjing Road until the Japanese came,'' he said. 
''The British people in the shop were interned and I was the only tailor left. 
After the war, the British came back and picked up running the shop.''
After the People's Republic was founded in 1949, Mr. Tian moved to a state-owned garment factory on the other end of Nanjing Road. 
A faint echo of the swagger that put Shanghai onto the fashion map of world travelers in the 1930's and 40's remained for a while, Mr. Tian said, but it dissipated in the march of Communism.
 
The Making of the Mao Suit
Still, Mr. Tian retained a mastery of cloth that set him apart from other Shanghai tailors and that brought him to Beijing to make Mao suits for the country's leaders. 
''The first Mao suit I ever made was in 1956, when I came to Beijing,'' Mr. Tian said.
Though it was known formally as a Zhongshan suit, after a style popularized by Sun Yat-sen (or in the Chinese dialect of the north, Sun Zhongshan), the dress adopted by Mao and his colleagues was subtly different.
''We took the pleats out of the pockets,'' he said, transforming the garment of Chinese republicanism into the dress of Communism.
In those days, Mr. Tian said, everything was secret. 
''I never went to measure Mao personally,'' he said. 
''I didn't know him myself. 
His secretaries would come and tell me what he wanted.''
Although nearly every official wore a Mao suit, Mr. Tian said, he made Western-style suits once in a while. 
''In 1960, the Foreign Minister was going abroad and I had to make a Western suit for him,'' Mr. Tian said.
But with the onslaught of the Cultural Revolution and the denunciation of everything Western, particularly in the arts and fashion, Mr. Tian was once again reduced to making Mao suits in dark or light gray - a regimen that he endured until 1980.
 
Lapels a Bit Too Narrow
''That year, Zhao Ziyang became Prime Minister,'' Mr. Tian said. 
''He was the first to get a Western suit. 
That first suit, well, the lapels were a bit narrow and the shoulders a little flat. 
Hu Yaobang was also one of the first.''
Mr. Hu, who was the party leader until forced from the post after last winter's student demonstrations, had a proclivity for Western styles, even going to the point of encouraging the Chinese to forsake chopsticks in favor of Western cutlery.
Mr. Tian, who wore a charcoal pin-stripe vest with lapels over a beige wool sweater, wandered into the workshop where he trained young tailors. 
He ran his palm down the front of a chestnut-colored suit coat, still sleeveless, hanging on a plastic mannequin. 
''This is new,'' he said. 
''See, one button. 
Very smart.''
Around him, dozens of tailors worked in rows under flourescent lights. 
Swaths of wool and silk were piled about.
Much of Mr. Tian's time is spent supervising his workshop, which churns out clothing for the leadership. 
His hand becomes more evident, however, when the suit is for Mr. Zhao or other very senior leaders.
''Zhao Ziyang's suits are a little smaller now,'' he confided, snatching a ruler from a sewing table. 
He moved his finger toward the three. 
''He's been doing a lot of exercise these days so he's thinner. 
About three centimeters in the waist.''
Mr. Zhao invited Mr. Tian over this year for a chat about the rag trade. 
''I talked about how difficult it is for Chinese to have new clothes,'' Mr. Tian recalled. 
''He suggested that we set up more clothing shops.''
 
A Few Fashion Hard-Liners
Not all the top Chinese want Western creations. 
''Some leaders still want Mao suits,'' he said. 
''They won't wear anything else, Li Xiannian, Peng Zhen, Deng Xiaoping.''
Both Mr. Li, China's President, and Mr. Peng, the chairman of the National People's Congress, are regarded as hard-line Marxists often uncomfortable with what they see as the creeping influence of Western ideas in China. 
Mr. Deng, on the other hand, has been the prime mover behind China's effort to cast off the shackles of traditional Communism.
Mr. Tian earns the same as other senior tailors at Hongdu, about 200 yuan a month, or $54, a salary that perhaps explains the low price of his creations: a vested suit costs just 66 yuan, slightly less than $18.
Mr. Tian turned toward his visitor, sizing up the Paul Stuart suit with the eye of a turkey carver. 
He fondled the gray wool lapel with a thumb and forefinger and muttered, ''A bit old-fashioned, wouldn't you say?''
