
There is an ancient adage, whispered these days, that goes: ''First marriage, to please one's parents; second marriage, to please oneself.''
Such sentiment, the poetic yearning for carnal delights, have been trampled under four decades of official proletarian morality. 
Now, however, some men in Shanghai believe it is about time this veil of socialist opprobrium should be lifted.
In three extraordinary letters published in Liberation Daily in Shanghai, the workers speak frankly of their desire for a mistress, for their need to expand the romantic boundaries of regimented, constrained, suffocating lives.
''I've thought a lot about it and come to the conclusion that I need a 'third person' for my marriage,'' wrote Ni Lin, a worker at the No. 2 Light Industry Company. 
''Coming home from work in a great mood, I step through the door calling out 'Hello!' only to be greeted by a stony 'Don't be such a hypocrite!'
At times like this, I really feel I need a gentler 'third person' in my life.''
 
Sex-Education Courses
Any discussion of sex has, until very recently, been discouraged, or indeed prohibited, by the moral puritanism brought to China by Communism. 
Those strictures have eased somewhat in the last year with high schools and universities publicizing sex-education courses.
But these classes, eagerly attended according to official reports, are purely pedagogical exercises in mechanics, designed to dispel ignorance and encourage healthy marital lives.
Indeed, eroticism itself is taboo, a pronounced departure from a cultural tradition that for millenia celebrated sexual dalliance. 
During the Ming Dynasty, which endured for nearly three centuries until Manchu invaders claimed the throne in 1644, a vast corpus of erotic literature, so-called ''wind and wave novels,'' appeared in a vernacular prose accessible to any literate person.
Some of these novels, ''Jinpingmei,'' or ''The Golden Lotus,'' and ''Roubutuan,'' or ''The Prayer Mat of Flesh,'' were widely read, never for reasons of prurience, but as social criticisms of public morality and political decadance as well as for their depiction of amorous pursuits.
Wrote the author of ''The Golden Lotus'':
 
However minute his precautions,
door bolted, and early home,
between him and her love
towers a wall of precipitous rock.
One spark of youthful desire
and the threads of marriage are snarled.
Though he set her about with bars,
one day he finds the cage empty.
For their part, China's cultural watchdogs have been riveted only by the explicit eroticism in such novels, labeling them ''obscene'' and promptly banning their publication.
 
Western Literature Suppressed
Even more, Western literature that explores the erotic has also been long suppressed. 
Last month, however, an obscure publishing house in Hunan announced that it would publish D. H. Lawrence's banned ''Lady Chatterley's Lover,'' a work attacked as pornography by hard-line party elders during a wave of intellectual repression last year.
But Suo Tianzhang, a professor of English who provided an introduction for a new six-volume collection of the Victorian author's works, wrote: ''Lawrence is not a frivolous writer, and his 'Lady Chatterley's Lover' is no pornography. 
What should be admired in him is the all-embracing humanity which pervades his work.''
China's authorities routinely insist that ''obscene publications,'' a loosely defined term, provoke criminality. 
A recent survey of young hooligans, reported by the official Chinese press agency, found that most had been exposed to obscene works.
In from the margins of Chinese life, in the vast arena of average existence, it remains difficult to detect the depth of sexual unease. 
The letters in Liberation Daily begin to provide that insight. 
Of course, in China's male-dominated society, the urge to infidelity not unsurprisingly appears from the pen of unhappy husbands, not disgruntled wives.
It would be unthinkable for a woman to confide her views about sex, inside marriage or outside it, to acquaintances, much less strangers.
 
A Beijing Poll, of Sorts
An obscure poll of married workers in Beijing cited in a recent book, ''New Trends in China: Marriage and the Family,'' found that only 35 percent of the couples are ''on good terms'' with their spouses with 2 percent ''in some kind of family crisis.''
The remaining 63 percent, the survey found, fell somewhere between these poles.
More startling, given the climate of strict social conformity, was the finding that 9 percent of couples were ''not opposed to the idea of extramarital sex,'' and that another 4 percent said it was all right to ''take a romantic interest in another person.''
But the three letters emblazoned across page 4 of Liberation Daily suggest that marital discontent is a subject for public discussion and having affairs is no longer unthinkable.
 
Competition and Marriage
Li Siyuan, who gave his address as Xinshi South Road in Shanghai, appropriated a formula from the country's process of economic restructuring to buttress his argument for having a mistress.
''The introduction of the mechanism of competition into the economy has drastically transferred our society in a few short years,'' he wrote. 
''People don't deny the usefulness of competition simply because a few factories have gone under. 
Similarly, we should also be advocating competition in marriage and the 'third person' would provide just such a competitive force. 
If society allowed this sort of competition to exist, the two parties to a marriage are bound to feel that with constant hard work the threat of the 'third person' always lurks nearby.''
While there are no explicit laws against infidelity, neighborhood watch committees and the acute shortage of living space conspire against enduring extramarital affairs. 
Even more, the prevailing ethics of Chinese socialism attach an unsavory ideological stigma to individual desires, impulses that imply a rejection of collective order.
But Deng Pengfei, a worker at the Dazhong Rubber Factory, thinks a ''third person'' ultimately will keep families together and offered a brutal Darwinian argument to support his view.
''I heard that in a National park in Alaska,'' Mr. Deng wrote, ''large numbers of deer in the reserve were becoming weak and sick. 
Alarmed, the Government poured funds in to save them, but to no avail. 
Finally, a bright employee introduced a few fierce wolves into the reserve and the sick and the weak were promptly eaten. 
This measure put a stop to the spread of disease and the deer also improved in health since they now had to run to escape from the wolves. 
I don't wish to compare the 'third person' to a wolf, but objectively that person's presence has the same kind of effect on a married couple's life.''
