
National Zoo officials celebrated a long-awaited event today when Ling-Ling, the giant panda, gave birth to a squealing, apparently healthy 4-ounce cub.
But while the cub appeared to be doing well, officials were cautious about predicting its chances of survival. 
Ling-Ling has given birth to two other cubs, but neither they nor any other giant panda born in the country survived, said Robert Hoage, the zoo's public affairs director. 
The only other pandas now in the United States are a pair on loan from China to the Bronx Zoo in New York.
Lisa Stevens, the zoo's manager of collection, witnessed the birth at 3:33 A.M. over closed-circuit television.
''I was thrilled, I wanted to jump up and down and go to the phone and call everybody but I couldn't move from the monitor,'' she said.
Ms. Stevens said the cub looked ''very much like a rat'' and had been squealing. 
''The baby appears to be healthy, it has a healthy set of lungs,'' she said. 
If it survives, the cub could grow as large as 6 feet tall and 300 pounds.
Zoo officials were optimistic about the mother's ability to care for her offspring. 
''Ling-Ling is showing totally appropriate behavior,'' cuddling and licking the newborn, Ms. Stevens said.
Officials monitoring the pandas by television said they would not know the sex of the cub until they could get close to it.
Ling-Ling mated with the zoo's male giant panda, Hsing-Hsing, several times in March, a zoo spokesman said.
A cub born to Ling-Ling in 1983 died of a prenatal bronchial infection three hours after birth and another cub was stillborn in 1984.The mother, about 18 years old, is the oldest giant panda in captivity, With the birth, the Panda House is expected to be closed for several months. 
But the public can view Ling-Ling and the cub on closed-circuit television in the Zoo's education building.
Hsing-Hsing and Ling-Ling are usually kept apart, and the father will not be allowed near the cub.
Ling-Ling and Hsing-Hsing were gifts from China in 1972. 
The Chinese Embassy will be given the first opportunity to name the cub.
There are six other surviving pandas bred in captivity outside of China, in Mexico City, Tokyo and Madrid.
It is estimated that fewer than 1,000 giant pandas survive in the wild, and they are listed as an endangered species.
