
Crowds chanting ''Down with blacks!'' in the eastern city of Nanjing this week have laid bare the gap in China between the official warmth extended to African countries and the suspicion that many Chinese seem to harbor toward African people.
Since 1949 China has cultivated special relations with black Africa. 
The ties have been founded in the spirit of third world camaraderie and in the hope that Mao's brand of agrarian Communism might influence Africa.
China has denounced apartheid in South Africa, and has devoted some of its scarce resources to aid for black Africa. 
It also offers scholarships to Africans, and 1,500 Africans now are studying across China.
But today more than 130 of those African students remained confined to a Government guest house in Yangzhou, 50 miles northeast of Nanjing, to protect them from angry crowds that earlier in the week screamed for the ''black devils'' to face punishment. 
With them were a handful of dark-complexioned Nepalese and Pakistani students who also were threatened by Chinese who in some cases had only a hazy idea of what an African looked like.
 
How Recent Unrest Began
The disturbances in Nanjing began after a brawl Saturday night between African students and Chinese students and university employees. 
For seven hours a few thousand Chinese besieged the Africans' dormitory and hurled rocks and bottles while chanting slurs.
Rumors spread that the Africans had beaten up, and perhaps killed, many Chinese. 
Another crowd, outraged that they should go unpunished, gathered on Sunday morning to attack the dormitory and demolish the possessions of the Africans. 
The Africans fled to the train station.
Several hundred students marched through Nanjing this evening, but the streets were generally quiet, Americans there said by telephone.
The Chinese students have said they will demonstrate each evening until the authorities punish the African students who they say are responsible for the initial brawl, which left 11 Chinese students and university employees injured. 
The African students say the Chinese started the fight.
 
Beijing Denies Racism Charge
In Beijing, a Foreign Ministry spokesman, Li Zhaoxing, said the authorities were investigating the disturbances and would deal with them in accordance with the law. 
Mr. Li also said the disturbances were not a sign of racism in Chinese society. 
''The incident that has occurred in Nanjing is an isolated one, having nothing to do with racial discrimination,'' he said.
Nonetheless, it is common here to hear racial stereotypes that would make most Americans cringe.
''Chinese students do not like most African students,'' a young Chinese man, an electronics student at Beijing University, said with typical bluntness. 
''The Africans usually are not high quality people. 
They have a bad attitude, and they do bad things.''
Pressed for specifics, the Chinese student said the Africans do not obey university rules, are not punctual and try to lure Chinese women into relationships by lavishing money on them.
Yet if racial stereotypes seem widespread, there also seem to be exceptions. 
Asked about racism, a black American business executive who travels widely in China recalled not a single unpleasant incident. 
While racism exists, the executive said, it usually disappears when the Chinese see a black person who speaks Chinese and is perceived as non-threatening.
Perhaps what is surprising about Chinese racism, the executive mused, is that it is so openly expressed.
 
Insults on the Streets
''The racism here is very striking,'' said Boubacar Traore, a philosophy student from the West African country of Mali who has lived in China for 10 years. 
''When we walk on the street, people insult us. 
They call us black devils, and so on. 
Even if we're alone, they insult us. 
And if we're with a girl, they say she's a hooker and is doing it for the money.''
To be sure, Mr. Traore and other Africans say many Chinese are friendly and helpful. 
Yet there is little doubt about the underlying tensions between African and Chinese students. 
Most of the Africans receive Chinese Government scholarships that are several times larger than the stipends the Chinese receive. 
The living conditions are also better: at Hehai University, where the disturbances in Nanjing began, each African has a single room, while Chinese are housed eight to a room.
''They don't like to see a black person living better than they do, while it's more acceptable to see whites getting preferential treatment,'' said Cynthia A. Griffin, a 25-year-old black American studying in Nanjing. 
Some Chinese students apparently feel that Africans should not get special treatment because conditions in their home countries are no better than those in China.
 
A Preference for Light Skin
Among themselves, the Chinese tend to regard a light complexion as beautiful. 
Chinese women generally have better marriage prospects if their skin is light, and Chinese poetry exalts light skin as the standard of beauty.
In addition to resentment of the benefits that African students enjoy, and the hostility that is sometimes aroused when they date Chinese women, a common source of conflict has been Chinese complaints that African students hold parties that are too loud. 
Major brawls were reported between Chinese and Africans in Shanghai in 1980 and in Tianjin in 1986, while African students in Beijing demonstrated in January 1987 after an anonymous letter slurring blacks was circulated at several universities in the capital.
Why do the African students come if they believe they face racism?
Some seem to accept it as the price of a better education than they can get at home. 
And some apparently do not know what they will face.
''Many of them had no idea what this country was like until they came,'' said the ambassador of an African country. 
''They have no problems in the classroom, but they regret very much coming here because of experiences outside the classroom.''
