
In its first comment on the Communist Party conference in Moscow, China said today that although Soviet leaders have recognized the need for political and economic change, they are confronted with serious difficulties and resistance in that effort.
The commentary, issued by the official New China News Agency, declared: ''The party has to decide whether to push the reform forward or let it fall through, as in the 1950s and 1960s.''
The Chinese press has reported extensively on the special party conference, with Moscow-based correspondents describing details of Mikhail S. Gorbachev's keynote address Tuesday as well as the reactions of delegates.
In many respects, the themes discussed by Mr. Gorbachev are familiar to the Chinese. 
Separation of the party from the workings of government, change in the way the national legislature is chosen, leasing of agricultural land, and revision of the price structure are areas in which China's leadership has made strides.
But in its commentary today, Beijing's press agency made no effort to compare the accomplishments of China's economic restructuring and its still early efforts to divorce the Communist Party from the administrative duties of government with Mr. Gorbachev's plans. 
Rather, it focused on the obstacles faced by the Soviet leader and the distance he has to go before his changes affect the average citizen.
''The necessity and urgency of reform have been recognized,'' the press agency said. 
''Reform, now a major trend in Soviet society, has pounded at the Soviet economy, stagnant for decades.''
 
Soviet Party as Innovator
''Over the last three years,'' it continued, ''the party has extended the scope of openness, further developed socialist democracy, encouraged criticism and self-criticism, analyzed experience and lessons of all periods since the founding of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, criticized theories divorced from reality, attacked rigid economic and political molds and exposed power abuses, corruption, stagnation and crises.''
Despite these accomplishments, the extraordinarily blunt Chinese commentary said, Soviet citizens have seen little in the way of tangible benefits from these changes. 
It said the road ahead, for Mr. Gorbachev as well as the Soviet people, would not be an easy one.
''Chronic maladies in the economy still exist, and there is a shortage of commodities on markets,'' the press agency declared. 
''The ordinary Soviets have not benefited much from the reform.
''The reasons are that the reform is still in the initial stage, the new economic mechanism has not come into full play, and the old economic mechanism, coupled with the red tape of departments in charge, has almost devitalized the reform measures.''
The commentary added: ''Bureaucracy, dogmatism and conservatism are deep-rooted; so are old economic and political structures. 
Problems piled up over the years are hard nuts to crack.''
The Chinese press agency said that ''the major task for the years to come is a quicker, comprehensive reform of the entire economic mechanism, including pricing, loan and material supply.''
Central in this effort, the agency said, is the process of reordering Soviet political life so that citizens have a greater say in their government and the work of the party is distinguished from that of the government.
