
The 12th grader's report card arrived home the other day from Freeport (L.I.) High School. 
It read as follows: History, 95; Humanities, 93; Social Studies, 94; Advanced Placement Physics, 91; Math, 99.
There was no line on the report card, however, to record the most remarkable fact of all: Three years ago the boy did not speak a word of English.
The boy, Ngoc, a slim 18-year-old with intense black eyes and a ready smile, is one of 563 Vietnamese boat children who have been placed in foster homes in the New York metropolitan area.
These are the children who fled from the Communist Government in Vietnam, leaving their families behind and setting out in overcrowded fishing boats across the South China Sea for refugee camps in Hong Kong, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Indonesia.
Teen-age Vietnamese boys who escaped to US without their families have made great strides in education and assimilation; Richard Panneitz and Richard Carpenter, who have taken six youths into their Freeport, New York, home, and Carmen Hellman, supervisor of Staten Island group home for 12 boys, comment; photos (M)
''The families in Vietnam turned to the oldest and the brightest of their children - the ones they felt were most able to succeed,'' said Beverly Gross, director of the city's Refugee Entrant Assistance Program for Unaccompanied Minors.
She said the families of the youngsters had ''paid heavily in gold to get the children aboard fishing boats, and they were subject to piracy, starvation and death before they even got to the refugee camps.''
''These are the survivors,'' she said. 
''These are the kids who have made it.''
 
An Ordeal at Sea
Take Ngoc, for instance, whose last name and the last names of other refugees are not being used in this article in order to protect their families in Vietnam.
Ngoc comes from a middle-class family in Da Nang, where his father was a teacher until the Communists took over in 1975.
Four years ago, Ngoc, who was then 14, and his 15-year-old brother, Nga, set off in the middle of the night with 16 other people on an 18-foot fishing boat.
''The trip very terrible and the ocean very bad with small boat, but thank God, I am still living,'' Ngoc said in an account of the trip taped by his foster father a few months after his arrival in this country.
After 13 days, the boat reached Hong Kong, and Ngoc and Nga were taken to a resettlement camp where they stayed for a year.
Three years ago they finally reached the United States under the Unaccompanied Minors Program and were placed with Richard Panneitz, a computer specialist, and Richard Carpenter, a retired embalmer, in a large house in Freeport. 
The two men, whom the boys refer to as Dad and Uncle, have taken in six Vietnamese boys in all.
Life at the house in Freeport is bustling. 
The boys help with the housework and the garden, do their homework, play soccer and go roller-skating with their American friends. 
Nga is at college now and Ngoc will be going next year. 
They have been joined in the house by Tac and Long, two 15-year-olds.
''Most of my boys learned English within three months,'' said Mr. Carpenter, who taught them himself, although tutors are available under the program. 
''I teach them 10 new words a day. 
I started off with nouns - table, ashtray - and then we went into adjectives and then verbs.''
''It's a very rapid transition from Vietnamese refugee to American student,'' Mr. Carpenter added smiling.
In 1979 Joseph Califano, who was then Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare, asked all states to develop programs for minors in refugee camps.
That year New York City took in 90 of the minors. 
Since then 686 children have come in under the program - 565 Vietnamese and ethnic Chinese from Vietnam, and an assortment of Cambodians, Laotians, Iranians and Ethiopians.
 
Reunification of Families
One of the major aims of the program is the reunification of families. 
The children are encouraged to sponsor their own families and bring them to the United States under what is officially known as the Orderly Departure Program.
So far, according to Mrs. Gross, about 65 of the children who live in the New York area have been reunited with their parents.
All the New York children without their families, most of them teen-agers, are in the custody of the City Human Resources Administrator. 
Placement in foster homes for the federally financed program is made through six voluntary social agencies, which keep a close watch on the children and their foster families.
Not all the youths live with families. 
Some of them, like 17-year-old Quoc, first moved in with a foster family and then asked to move on to a group home.
There are 12 Vietnamese boys, 17 to 19, at the Mission of the Immaculate Home on Staten Island. 
''I love it,'' Quoc said as he prepared a mixture of Chinese vegetables, rice, noodles and beef for dinner for the residents of the home. 
''Nobody bothers me.''
 
A Typical Teen-Ager's Room
Quoc shares a room on the second floor with another boy. 
It does not look much different from the room of any other teen-age boy in the country. 
The walls are decorated with pictures of rock stars and Quoc's Long Island soccer awards: All Star, Most Valuable Player 1982, Most Valuable Player 1984.
''These kids are very good,'' says Carmen Hellman, the group home supervisor. 
''They come here with a purpose - the purpose of making something of themselves. 
They have the goal of someday bringing their families here.
There are very few behavior problems, she said. 
''There's very little truancy and they have a lot of pride in what they do,'' she said. 
''They know their parents made a big effort to send them here.''
Mrs. Hellman says that most of the youths who have been in the home have 75 to 80 averages in school and that 40 to 50 percent of them go on to college. 
Most of the others go to vocational schools, she said.
Presumably not all the Vietnamese youths who have come here have had success stories. 
Mrs. Hellman was asked to talk about the failures she had encountered.
''Out of 30 or 40 that have been here, I can only think of one,'' she said. 
''He followed the wrong crowd and after he was discharged, I heard from other kids that he had had some problems. 
But now he's got a job. 
He's working in a Chinese restaurant as a waiter and I think he has straightened himself out.''
Mr. Carpenter and Mr. Panneitz tell about the first Vietnamese boy they took into their home. 
His name was Tam and he arrived four years ago at Kennedy International Airport with no shoes and no English. 
A social worker from the Sheltering Arms Children Service was there to interpret and make introductions. 
Everyone was nervous.
 
Last Link to Homeland
The social worker left and the two men carried Tam to the car. 
But it soon became evident that he was concerned about something but did not know the words to tell them what it was. 
He became increasingly worried, and they finally telephoned the interpreter the next morning to have him talk to the boy.
Tam, it turned out, had a suitcase containing a bolt of material he had bought to send home to his parents. 
It was his last link to his former life and he thought it was gone forever.
The two men immediately put Tam in the car, drove to the airport and recovered the suitcase.
There is a dead-end residential street in West Babylon, L.I., lined with neat one-story houses and flowering azaleas. 
A 10-year old girl, cuddling a Cabbage Patch doll, comes skipping down the street, her ponytail bobbing. 
She is smiling to herself. 
Her name is Huong and she is an Amerasian child from an orphanage in Vietnam. 
She has come to live with the Lopez family, who have been married 21 years and always wanted a daughter. 
They have four sons of their own and now - they look rather bemused as they tell the story - they have three new Vietnamese sons in addition to Huong.
''The agency called last fall and told us they had an emergency,'' Mrs. Lopez said. 
''They asked us to watch two boys for the weekend and said they would pick them up Monday. 
The boys, who are 16 and 17, came in Friday evening, very scared and very quiet. 
By Monday we knew we could never let them go.''
It turned out that one of the boys had a brother in a refugee camp in the Philippines. 
He has also come to live with the Lopezes. 
Every night they sit down 10 to dinner and Mr. and Mrs. Lopez look just as pleased as they can be.
''In the beginning they do go through periods of depression, but then, for the most part, their experiences are put behind them,'' Mrs. Lopez said.
 
A Harrowing Boat Trip
Danh, who is 17, said he had left Vietnam after having escaped from prison. 
He said he had fled on a fishing boat that ran out of oil and drifted for 52 days during which 19 of the 65 passengers died.
He jumps up from the sofa after his recital, leaves the room and returns with a snapshot. 
It is a picture of a large group of Vietnamese. 
Danh explains that these are the ones who survived the boat trip. 
Matter of factly, he then points to one after another and tells how many relatives each lost during the trip.
What is most affecting about the picture is how very normal these people look. 
They could be a group of Vietnamese enjoying a pleasant day in the country. 
Indeed, that is what is most striking about the Vietnamese teen-agers living here: not the scars left by their journeys but the will to put all that behind and to get on with the living of their lives.
