
They were sweeping the floor the other day and getting the plain wooden sleeping platforms ready again at this refugee center on Palawan Island.
A West German ship, Cap Anamur II, had found several hundred more Vietnamese in small craft floating in the South China Sea.
The precarious migration of Vietnamese boat people, now in its 12th year, shows no signs of ending. 
In fact, figures compiled by the office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees show that in the first four months of this year the number of boat people arriving at asylum ports from Hong Kong to Indonesia rose 6 percent over a comparable period in 1985. 
In Thailand, despite the hazards of piracy and weather, arrivals from January to May were up 18 percent.
Moreover, there are indications that the arriving Vietnamese are being joined in flight by Cambodians, whose escape route by land has been made more difficult and dangerous since Hanoi's troops and Phnom Penh's civilian labor brigades have fortified and barricaded sections of the Thai-Cambodian border to keep out anti-Vietnamese guerrillas.
 
Drifting to Jakarta
Vietnamese refugees say they sometimes stop to pick up fleeing Cambodians before heading toward Thailand's Trat Province. 
In June a boat of exhausted refugees who said they were Cambodians drifted into Jakarta harbor, nearly 1,200 miles away.
It is possible that a million Vietnamese have taken to sea since April 1975, when the North Vietnamese Army entered Saigon. 
More than 420,000 of them have been resettled by the United Nations refugee agency, mostly in the United States and China. 
Another 130,000 moved through Guam in the early days of the exodus. 
No one knows, or can guess, how many people have been lost. 
Refugee officials fear that when arrival numbers go up, casualties may also rise as more boats put to sea.
Why do they still come?
Refugee officials piece together individual stories; diplomats look for trends. 
Both see new kinds of refugees arriving, people who did not, for one reason or another, flee when the North triumphed, but made the decision to leave later. 
They are leaving north and central Vietnam as well as the south.
Here at the camp on the outskirts of Puerto Princesa city, a Filipino port town, hundreds of refugees have arrived in the last few months.
 
Gold Is Passage Fee
Khnog Nang Hanh, 51 years old, paid three ounces of gold for a place in a fishing boat packed with 101 people that sailed from the Mekong Delta on the night of March 26. 
Mr. Hanh, a former major in the South Vietnamese Army, said he had been released from a prison camp last October after 10 years of ''re-education'' and immediately began planning an escape.
According to Mr. Hanh, prison camp inmates are being released in batches of 50 or 60, reducing Hanoi's political prison population but adding new numbers to the ranks of boat people. 
Many freed prisoners, Mr. Hanh said, think there is no place for them now in Vietnam.
Dr. Van Ngoc An, 36, and his wife, Ly Bich Ngoc, 32, a teacher, left their hometown of Nha Trang, a resort on the coast of Central Vietnam, on April 24 and were at sea more than two weeks before reaching the Philippines. 
They came, Dr. An said, ''because I am a Chinese Catholic.''
Dr. An, a 1977 graduate of Saigon University's medical school, said that he was allowed to practice three years before being told there would be no more work for him. 
Unemployed since 1980, he finally decided that escape was his only hope of remaining in his profession. 
Other ethnic Chinese, particularly Roman Catholics, tell similar stories. 
Among them, and their disaffected ethnic Vietnamese counterparts, are people with skills Vietnam needs.
 
Poorer, Less Educated
For the most part, however, refugee officials say that people leaving Vietnam and Cambodia now are poorer and less well educated, and therefore harder to resettle.
There are more draft resisters among the boat people. 
For many Vietnamese families, a second or third generation of young men are going to war, this time in Cambodia. 
In Vietnam, there seems to be little commitment to that war among the young, and a great sense of weariness among older people being asked to sacrifice, once more, their hopes of a better life.
Behind many refugee stories is the plight of the Vietnamese economy. 
At Puerto Princesa, boat people who fled Vietnam in the last few months say that inflation is soaring. 
Pham Van Tho, a druggist who left six weeks ago, said that black market dollars are buying Vietnamese currency, twice devalued in the last year, at more than 125 times the official exchange rate. 
Rice prices rose two and a half times since March, he said. 
A day's wage sometimes buys only a bowl of soup, Mr. Hanh said.
 
Children Suffer
Vietnam, now one of the world's poorest nations, has health standards among the lowest in Asia, according to international organizations and officials in asylum nations. 
Children's nutritional levels have not improved in four years, Unicef researchers recently discovered. 
According to Agence France-Presse, the only Western news agency with a resident correspondent in Hanoi, Unicef found that Vietnamese children were getting only 45 to 60 percent of the required daily caloric intake, 65 to 70 percent of protein and 25 to 30 percent of lipids, or fats. 
Meanwhile the population growth rate is 3.2 percent a year, one of the world's highest, Vietnamese officials report.
The result, refugees say, is desperation.
''We risk our lives,'' Mr. Hanh said, but what else can we do?
When I left Vietnam, I thought to myself, 50 percent I will stay alive in this boat, 50 percent I will die. 
I had to take the chance.''
