
THE CHINA CARD By John Ehrlichman. 
523 pp. 
New York: Simon & Schuster. 
$18.95. IN reading John Ehrlichman's new espionage novel, ''The China Card,'' one is reminded of how out-of-date the updated maxim ''Politics is the last refuge of a scoundrel'' has become. 
Many in the White House class that graduated into political oblivion after Watergate along with their President, Richard Nixon, lost little time in recycling themselves directly into the writing profession. 
In the years since, they have produced a blizzard of books capitalizing on both their experiences in office and their well-known, albeit variously besmirched, names. 
And now, like an unexploded mine from this period, one of the most prolific, Mr. Nixon's former adviser on domestic affairs, John Ehrlichman, has produced yet another offering, this time a thriller about the opening of diplomatic relations with China, a central event of the Nixon Administration.
''The China Card'' centers on Matt Thompson, a fictional young Chinese-speaking graduate of Harvard Law School who is hired by the firm of Nixon, Mudge, Rose, Guthrie & Alexander, goes to work for Mr. Nixon in Washington after he is elected President in 1968, becomes a partisan of the People's Republic of China within the White House and secretly travels to Peking to negotiate with the Communist leadership long before Secretary of State Henry Kissinger. 
Thompson is kidnapped and shot at by rebels near Canton, and his heroic subsequent deeds end up paving the way for the President's historic 1972 visit.
Mr. Ehrlichman, already an expert on White House intrigue, has evidently done a good deal of research about this period of United States-China relations. 
He skillfully merges fact with fiction, marching the likes of Mr. Nixon, Mr. Kissinger, Alexander Haig and H. R. Haldeman onstage with not only Zhou Enlai, Lin Biao and Mao Zedong but an assortment of invented characters as well. 
Unfortunately, his plotting skills are not matched by his writing. 
His characters, even those celebrity figures we are naturally curious about, are treated as if they were merely ingredients that, if mixed together according to a recipe, would automatically produce a delectable cake.
Mr. Kissinger here is a publicity-hungry egomaniac. 
Zhou Enlai is a charming but ruthless and scheming Communist. 
The fictional Mr. Nixon is an insecure, paranoid President who calculates everything according to his advantage. 
Thompson is a boilerplate-handsome young lawyer whose unique feature is a faint glimmer of conscience. 
The love interest provided by a series of young women who fall for Thompson includes a glamorous Newport socialite with a nice body and a weak brain, as well as a bright, joke-cracking Washington lawyer who wants Thompson to get out of Mr. Nixon's employ before he is terminally polluted. 
Last but hardly least, there is a pretty Chinese interpreter. 
Not only does Thompson implausibly fall in love with her while secretly in Peking during the height of the Cultural Revolution's period of most rabid hostility to foreigners but he ultimately marries her, Mao suit and all, in what must be one of the most contrived boy-meets-and-gets-girl finales in recent publishing history.
None of the characters (real or otherwise) have any convincing ambiguity or the interesting inner tension that makes us identify with or want to know more about someone. 
Moreover, most of them are depicted as dark and self-serving. 
Once we get their stereotypes, we've got it all. 
FAR be it from me to argue that the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party and the Nixon White House were not filled with stereotypically ambitious, insecure and self-serving men. 
But characters sketched in such an unflattering and one-dimensional manner rarely make for good reading. 
Even in a thriller, a reader must be able to feel an author's empathy for his creations, regardless of how compromised he chooses to make them. 
When an author's sentiments toward those he writes about are limited to contempt and scorn, it's difficult for the reader to become involved.
That this is a novel written by a former Presidential adviser who, in the words of the dust jacket, ''has been there in a way no other novelist has - in the Oval Office, aboard Air Force One,'' etc. 
- is not enough to compensate for these shortcomings of craft. 
In fact, as I finished the book, I was so unmoved that I was forced to wonder - politics may not be the last refuge of scoundrels, but books like ''The China Card'' suggest that writing fiction may not be the last and best refuge of politicians.
