
Leonid I. Brezhnev sent a message to President Reagan today urging joint action in the United Nations Security Council ''with a view to bridling Israel and making it comply with Council decisions.''
The message, reported by Tass, the Government press agency, reiterated the Soviet contention that the Palestinian civilians in West Beirut had been massacred by Israelis. 
Mr. Brezhnev compared the incident to ''the atrocities of Hitler's Nazis during World War II.''
Tass, without making public a text, said Soviet leader had extended blame for the killings to the United States. 
The agency said Mr. Brezhnev ''stressed that a share of responsibility for the rivers of blood being shed in Lebanon is borne, in particular, by those who could have prevented, but did not prevent, Tel Aviv from doing what it did.''
MOSCOW, Sept. 
20 - Leonid I. Brezhnev sent a message to President Reagan today urging joint action in the United Nations Security Council ''with a view to bridling Israel and making it comply with Council decisions.''
Soviet commentaries on the massacre are viewed by Western diplomats as a campaign to use the incident to discredit the United States in the eyes of the Arabs and to depict the Soviet Union as an essential partner in any further mediation efforts.
 
Stress on U.N. Action
Some commentaries had urged action in the Security Council, where the Soviet Union, as a veto-wielding permanent member, would play a critical role. 
Today's message was the first effort to enlist United States help.
In another message, addressed to Yasir Arafat, the head of the Palestine Liberation Organization, Mr. Brezhnev said the massacre should dispel any illusions the Palestinians might have had about American offers of arbitration.
Mr. Brezhnev's message, replying to an appeal by Mr. Arafat to several world leaders, was the second to the Palestinian chief in a week. 
In the earlier message, Mr. Brezhnev cautioned Mr. Arafat to be wary of the United States, reflecting Soviet concern that the Palestinians were becoming receptive to Mr. Reagan's peace initiatives.
But in the wake of the Beirut killings, the Soviet warning was more blunt. 
Mr. Brezhnev told Mr. Arafat: ''If anyone did have illusions that Washington will support the Arabs and prevent the represssion of Palestinians after the withdrawal of Palestinian military formations from Beirut - for this was precisely what was officially promised by the White House - now these illusions have been dissolved in the streams of blood in the Palestinian camps.''
 
----
 
China Challenges U.S.
 
Special to the New York Times
PEKING, Sept. 
20 - China's Communist Party newspaper today challenged the United States to demonstrate its concern about the Beirut massacre by taking effective measures to stop what it called ''Israeli crimes'' in Lebanon.
The commentary in People's Daily came after a Foreign Ministry statement Sunday that attributed the massacre to Israelis. 
Chinese statements have made no distinction between Israeli forces and the Lebanese Christian militiamen who killed the Palestinians. 
The Foreign Ministry did not mention the United States, but People's Daily specifically said that the United States, ''as a supporter of the Begin regime, has taken no effective measures to stop the Israeli crimes.''
''Washington must show by deed and not by word what its real attitude is toward Israeli atrocities,'' it said. 
A commentary by the New China News Agency on Saturday said Israeli forces had invaded Lebanon ''under the aegis of the United States and with American weapons'' and ''the United States cannot shirk its responsibility for Israel's arbitrary acts.''
China has consistently backed the Palestine Liberation Organization, giving its office here diplomatic status and offering it $1 million in humanitarian aid after the Israeli forces invaded Lebanon. 
Peking has no diplomatic relations with Israel.
