
Leonid I. Brezhnev today underscored the importance he ascribes to improving relations with China in a brief survey of foreign affairs that was marked by its temperate tone.
The Soviet leader spoke to local Communist leaders in the course of a visit to Baku, the capital of Azerbaijan in Soviet Central Asia. 
''As regards Asia, we would deem it very important to achieve a normalization, a gradual improvement of relations between the U.S.S.R. and the People's Republic of China on a basis that I would describe as that of common sense, mutual respect and mutual advantage,'' Mr. Brezhnev said.
He did not pursue the subject further, and Western analysts saw the statement in the context of continuing Soviet efforts to reduce the animosity that has separated the two Communist giants for the last two decades.
MOSCOW, Sept. 
26 - Leonid I. Brezhnev today underscored the importance he ascribes to improving relations with China in a brief survey of foreign affairs that was marked by its temperate tone.
Mr. Brezhnev made a strong appeal for improved relations with China last March in Tashkent, and since then the Russians have made several tentative overtures to Peking. 
During the Chinese Communist Party Congress this month, Soviet commentaries were notable for their constrained and factual approach in comparison with the more combative tone used in the past. 
Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of Britain said during a visit to Peking last week that Soviet-Chinese talks were expected to start next month.
 
Unusual Moment of Levity
Mr. Brezhnev's nationally televised appearance before Azerbaijani party members had an unusual moment of levity and confusion when it turned out that the Soviet leader had started reading the wrong speech. 
A hurried consultation was visible among officials seated on the rostrum, and Andrei M. Aleksandrov, Mr. Brezhnev's aide, hurried to his side with a sheaf of papers just as the cameras turned away.
The 75-year-old leader displayed good humor and presence of mind when he said with a smile: ''It's not my fault, comrades. 
I have to start from the beginning.''
He did, and proceeded without evident trouble through the 40-minute address.
Since his return from his summer residence in the Crimea early this month, Mr. Brezhnev has pursued a vigorous schedule, including two state visits to Moscow by foreign leaders and his current trip to Baku, where his program has included a full range of official functions. 
He has appeared to be in relatively good health and fully recovered from whatever affliction kept him out of public view earlier this year.
 
Moderate Tone on U.S. and Israel
In his speech, Mr. Brezhnev touched relatively briefly on foreign affairs and avoided the acrimonious references to the United States and Israel that have characterized recent Soviet pronouncements. 
Instead, he affirmed Soviet constancy on international detente, which he said had struck ''deeper roots'' in Europe than elsewhere.
''But there exist possibilities for its strengthening everywhere and they must be used intensively,'' he added, continuing, ''I shall not speak here about our attempts to develop relations with the United States of America, to achieve just, mutually acceptable agreements on questions of the limitation and reduction of both strategic and medium-range nuclear weapons, for you know well about them.''
One reason for the shortage of references to the difficulties with Washington and of condemnations of Israel, diplomats suggested, may have been Mr. Brezhnev's reluctance to pre-empt the impending discussions between Foreign Minister Andrei A. Gromyko and Secretary of State George P. Shultz.
 
Mrs. Gandhi's Visit Hailed
Mr. Brezhnev declared his ''sincere satisfaction'' with the visit to the Soviet Union by Prime Minister Indira Gandhi of India. 
A joint declaration issued today on Mrs. Gandhi's return home repeated the effusive expressions of friendship made in earlier speeches and toasts.
It also reported a joint resolve to ''insure a 1.5- to 2-fold increase in the volume of trade'' between the two countries by 1986 and to maintain a high rate of growth in trade until 1990.
The Soviet Union has edged out the United States as India's largest trading partner, according to Indian diplomats here, and India ranks as Moscow's major trading partner among developing countries. 
In 1980 the trade amounted to 2.4 billion rubles, or about $3.3 billion at the official rate of exchange.
Much of the trade has been in the form of Soviet arms sales to India, but that area was not mentioned in the communique. 
The statement said the two countries agreed ''to examine possibilities for the further expansion of cooperation in such areas as ferrous and nonferrous metallurgy, coal and oil, machine-building and power.''
