
Leonid I. Brezhnev issued a new appeal to Peking today to revive the search for ways to end the Chinese-Soviet feud. 
The Soviet leader's comments in Tashkent, about 250 miles from the Chinese border, were the latest and most direct in a series of overtures that diplomats said were designed to take advantage of the United States-Chinese rift over the proposed sale of American jet fighters to Taiwan.
The specific proposals made by Mr. Brezhnev broke little new ground. 
But the tone in which they were couched was more conciliatory than the invective of most Soviet references to China in the two decades since the two nations drifted apart over ideology, territory and other issues.
Leonid I. Brezhnev issued a new appeal to Peking today to revive the search for ways to end the Chinese-Soviet feud.
Western diplomats said Mr. Brezhnev's speech was Moscow's most positive signal to the Chinese in several years, and certainly since the downturn in Soviet-Chinese relations following the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan.
 
Claim to Taiwan Is Backed
Mr. Brezhnev said the Soviet Union recognized Peking's claim to Taiwan, and rejected the ''two Chinas'' concept over which Peking has increasingly fallen out with Washington.
The Soviet leader denied that the Russians posed a threat to China or that they claimed any Chinese territory. 
He said the Soviet Union was ready to resume talks on disputed border segments, adding a proposal to discuss ''possible measures to strengthen mutual trust in the area of the Soviet-Chinese frontier.''
There was no elaboration, but the offer seemed to imply a mutual reduction in military buildup.
''We remember well the time when the Soviet Union and People's China were united by bonds of friendship and comradely cooperation,'' Mr. Brezhnev continued. 
''We have never considered normal the state of hostility and estrangement between our countries.
''We are prepared to come to terms, without preconditions, on measures acceptable to both sides to improve Soviet-Chinese relations on the basis of mutual respect for each other's interests, noninterference in each other's affairs and mutual benefit, certainly not to the detriment of third countries.
''This refers to economic, scientific, cultural as well as political relations, to whatever extent each side is prepared to take concrete steps in any of these spheres.''
 
Brezhnev Disavows Meddling
Mr. Brezhnev took pains to assure the Chinese that criticism of their foreign policy did not imply meddling in their internal affairs.
''We have never denied and do not deny now the existence of a socialist system in China,'' he said, ''even though Peking's association with the policy of the imperialists around the world contradicts, of course, the interests of socialism.''
Mr. Brezhnev made no such distinction a year ago at a Soviet party congress in discussing Chinese relations. 
At that time, he said that China's social and economic development demonstrated ''what a distortion of the principles and essence of socialism in domestic and foreign policy can lead to.''
Today's speech by Mr. Brezhnev followed a call by Prime Minister Nikolai A. Tikhonov last month for the resumption of a dialogue with China ''on the basis of equality and in the spirit of mutual understanding.''
 
U.S.-Chinese Strains Noted
Before Mr. Tikhonov's remarks, an article in the Government newspaper Izvestia had pointed to the strains between Washington and Peking, saying that ''as long as Americans are scaring themselves stiff with the 'Soviet threat,' they will always be haunted by the nightmare of normalization in Soviet-Chinese relations.''
Part of the present efforts at rapprochement was a visit here last week of three Chinese economic experts. 
Their purpose, Chinese sources said, was to study Soviet management methods, and they were received by Aleksandr V. Bachurin, a deputy chairman of the State Planning Committee. 
The visit was the first of the sort since the Chinese-Soviet break in the early 1960's.
In subsequent years, Moscow made several approaches to restore ties, but all overtures foundered. 
Border negotiations that began after frontier clashes in 1969 have been dormant since 1978, and some preliminary discussions on normalization were abandoned after the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan.
The souring of American-Chinese ties, however, revived speculation that China might be ready to play its ''Russia card,'' and Mr. Brezhnev's remarks suggested that the Soviet Union was prepared to play along.
 
Soviet Objectives Appear Limited
Diplomats believe that Soviet ambitions are limited, and Mr. Brezhnev seemed to support this view when he underlined the possibility of modest agreements.
The Russians are unlikely to believe that they can quickly remove the accumulated resentments and restore the alliance they had with China in the 1950's. 
A 30-year friendship treaty lapsed last year. 
Tensions over Afghanistan, India, Vietnam and the 4,500-mile Soviet-Chinese border are unlikely to dissipate soon. 
And China's trade with the United States, totaling $5.5 billion last year, far exceeds Chinese-Soviet trade, which was $400 million in 1980.
