
The international bridge scene will be marked in 1981 by the full emergence of the People's Republic of China. 
After many years of banning bridge as a bourgeois activity the Chinese government, perhaps influenced by Deng Xiaoping who is himself a player, indulged in a complete volte-face at the beginning of l979.
Within a year there were hundreds of teams taking part in competitions, indicating perhaps that the game had flourished in secret. 
Three months ago the Chinese joined the World Bridge Federation on terms that allowed the continued membership of Taiwan. 
Late this year they will compete in the Far East Championship, but before that happens they will have organized the first major tournament on Chinese soil, scheduled March 6-11.
Bridge column discusses full emergence of People's Republic of China into international bridge scene in 1981
The site will be Shanghai, which has repeatedly shown itself to be the strongest of China's bridge-playing cities. 
Invitations have been sent to 20 cities, mostly in Asia. 
A special invitation has been sent to Taipei, and its acceptance would be a historic landmark: the first direct meeting of players from Taiwan and the People's Republic in any sport or recreation.
Since some cities may send more than one team, and there will be several Chinese cities taking part, the total entry is likely to be between 40 and 50. 
Since the organizers are inexperienced there may be some problems, and there will be surprises for the American participants. 
The boards will consist of plastic wallets rather than metal trays, and the bidding will be written down in order to minimize language problems.
There will be four American teams including some famous players: Kathie Wei and Judi Radin of New York, the reigning world women's pair champions; Dorothy Hayden Truscott, the world's top-ranked woman player and reigning world women's team champion; Mike Lawrence of Berkeley, Calif., a former world team champion; and Ron Andersen of New York, whose score in winning the l980 McKenney Trophy, awarded for overall tournament performance, set a new record.
Also in the American party will be Jim Zimmerman of Shaker Heights, Ohio, President of the American Contract Bridge League for 1981. 
He is one of the strongest players to have held that office, and he demonstrated his skill in cardplay on the diagramed deal from a recent Regional Swiss Team Championship in Detroit.
Most players holding the South cards shown would be content with a game invitation after one heart had been raised to two hearts. 
But the good distribution and possession of three aces made Zimmerman's jump to game a reasonable gamble. 
North might well have declined an invitation, in which case a sound game would have been missed. 
It would be easy to make ten tricks if either red suit lay favorably, and although they did not, South survived.
West led the king of clubs and continued the suit. 
South ruffed and cashed the ace and king of hearts, discovering that East had a trump winner. 
The diamond queen was led for a finesse, losing to West's king. 
West should now have returned a diamond, but he helped South on his way by playing a third round of clubs.
Now South was able to ruff, lead to the diamond ten and ruff the last club in dummy. 
He then played his diamond winners and it did not matter whether or not East ruffed. 
He refused to do so, postponing the evil day, and Zimmerman led his last trump at the 11th trick. 
East had to win and lead from the spade king to give the declarer his contract.
 
NORTH S Q 7 3 H K 10 4 D Q 10 8 C 7 6 3 2
WEST EAST S J 9 6 2 S K 8 5 4 H 9 H Q J 3 D K 7 5 4 D 6 2 C K Q 10 8 C A J 9 5
 
SOUTH(D) S A 10 H A 8 7 6 5 2 D A J 9 3 C 4
North and South were vulnerable. 
The bidding: South West North East 1 H Pass 2 H Pass 4 H Pass Pass Pass
West led the club king.
