
To have two members of the same family, related by blood rather than marriage, qualify for world championship play with different partners is quite rare.
A notable American example is B. Jay Becker and Michael Becker, a father-son combination who qualified as teammates, but not partners, in 1973. 
The late Oswald Jacoby won a world title in 1935 and was the nonplaying captain when his son Jim won one of his three world titles 35 years later. 
And a brother-sister combination, Bill Seamon and Edith Kemp, have international credentials.
A recent example is the Gu family from Canton, China. 
Gu Xing was a member of the Chinese team at the 1984 world championships in Seattle. 
His sister, Gu Ling, playing with Zhang Ya-Lan, finished 12th in the 1986 World Women's Pairs in Miami Beach, the highest position for any pair not coming from Europe or North America. 
And their father, Gu Xuenan, was the nonplaying captain of one of the Chinese teams in Miami Beach.
 
City College Student
Gu Xing is currently a New York City resident, studying at City College for a master's degree in mathematics. 
In a recent duplicate game at the Beverly Club, he held the South cards and landed as shown in six clubs. 
The opening no-trump was the intermediate variety, promising 14-16 high-card points, and the response of two diamonds was game-forcing Stayman.
Six clubs appears to need an even trump split, slightly against the odds. 
But as South demonstrated, there is a secondary chance. 
He won the opening spade lead with the ace and cashed two trump winners. 
When these failed to break, he took all his winners in the major suits and led a club. 
This end-played West, who had to give a ruff and sluff or lead a diamond away from the king.
South was probably relieved that the enemy trump trick was on his left. 
If it had been on his right, he would have a difficult guess, with nothing to guide him, when East eventually led a diamond. 
Notice that six no-trump would have failed, for West would have been able to lead a heart when he gained the lead.
Preliminaries in the Grand National Team Championships will be played at these clubs in Manhattan: Academy, Nov. 
20 and Nov. 
21, evenings. 
(Information: 212-988-1542) Beverly, Nov. 
23, all day; Dec. 
5 and Dec. 
12, afternoons; Dec. 
14, all day; Dec. 
16 and Dec. 
17, evenings. 
(212-486-9477) Manhattan, Tomorrow and Nov. 
15, evenings; Nov. 
16 and Nov. 
23, afternoons. 
(212-799-4242)
