
Players from New York City will compete in two rather unexpected places a month from now. 
For the Spring Nationals, starting March 19, a large group will visit Niagara Falls, N.Y., where the scenic splendor will be available for the first time to participants in a national championship.
Some critics have expressed doubts about the adequacy of the hotel accommodations. 
Normally, such events are held in a large hotel, and the players stay there; in this case, there is no hotel big enough and the players will stay in various places.
Bridge column discusses how New York players will compete in Spring Nationals in Niagara Falls (NY) and in ChinaA Smaller Group in China
A much smaller group will be in Hangzhou, China, at the same time, competing in a tournament that is likely to attract players from many parts of the Far East. 
Leading the group will be Barbara Metselaar of Scarsdale, N.Y. 
For information, call (914) 472-6200.
In a recent duplicate game in Larchmont, N.Y. 
Mrs. Metselaar held the South cards. 
She decided reasonably enough to open one no-trump on the basis that her 15 points were ''good.''
In such cases the possession of some aces and tens, or the lack of them, is usually the deciding factor.
An opening one-club bid might have led to a two-heart contract (1 C, 1 D, 1 H, 2 H) but a Stayman auction carried the partnership quickly to game.
After the opening lead of the club king there were two obvious plans. 
South could have tried to ruff all her club losers in dummy, or she could have attempted to develop dummy's diamonds.
 
Adopts a Less Obvious Plan
Both these plans would have led to difficulties and likely defeat. 
South adopted a third and less obvious plan. 
She ruffed the opening lead in dummy and immediately attacked spades, leading to the ten. 
Spades had to be attacked sooner or later, and sooner was better.
There was a risk, of course, that the defense would be able to take two spade tricks and a spade ruff, but that would leave South in control if the defender with three trumps did the ruffing.
The defenders might not have found their spade ruff even if one was available. 
As it happened, there was not. 
When West won with the queen she shifted to a trump in an attempt to stop ruffs. 
This did not hurt South at all. 
She won, ruffed a club and drew trumps. 
By driving out the spade ace she was able to maneuver to discard her remaining club loser on the spade jack. 
She had made an overtrick in a contract that failed at several other tables.
The North Jersey Winter Tournament begins today in the auditorium of the Guardian Angel Church in Allendale, with this schedule: Today - Men's pairs and women's pairs, 1:30 P.M.; mixed pairs, 8 P.M. Tomorrow - Flighted pairs, 1:30 P.M.; open pairs and novice pairs, 8 P.M. Sunday - Flighted Swiss teams, 1 P.M. and 7 P.M.
 
NORTH S J 8 4 2 H 6 4 3 2 D A K 9 6 3 C -
WEST EAST (D) S Q 9 5 S A 7 3 H 9 7 H Q 10 5 D J 8 D Q 10 7 2 C K Q J 7 4 2 C 9 8 5
 
SOUTH S K 10 6 H A K J 8 D 5 4 C A 10 6 3
Both sides were vulnerable. 
The bidding: East South West North Pass 1 N.T. 
Pass 2 C Pass 2 H Pass 4 H Pass Pass Pass
West led the club queen.
