
China and Britain completed their latest round of negotiations on the future of Hong Kong today without indicating whether there had been further progress toward framing a mutually acceptable plan for the colony.
A three-sentence communique issued after the end of the eighth round of talks called the meetings ''useful and constructive,'' a standard phrase that has been used to describe the last four rounds of talks.
The communique did not elaborate. 
The statement after the seventh round of negotiations in December said that ''both sides reviewed the course of the talks and the progress made so far,'' raising expectations that the gap between their positions was narrowing.
China and GB complete latest raound of talks on future of Hong Kong without indicating wheter they have made further progress; set new talks for Feb 22 (M)Next Talks in February
The statement today said the ninth round of talks would take place in Peking on Feb. 
22 and 23. 
Western diplomats in Peking agreed that the omission of a brighter characterization did not necessarily mean that the negotiations had run into new difficulty. 
The British and the Chinese have agreed not to disclose details while the negotiations are in progress.
Britain and China have been trying to reach agreement on the status of Hong Kong after 1997, when Britain's 99-year lease over most of the territory expires. 
China has insisted on regaining sovereignty and has refused to allow Britain an administrative role in the transition to Chinese rule.
There have recently been reports in the British and Hong Kong press that Britain has agreed to concede the issue of sovereignty and a transitional presence in return for China's assurance that Hong Kong could retain its existing social and economic system for 50 years after 1997.
Such reports have been neither confirmed nor denied, but they have coincided with a greater confidence on the issue expressed by China's Prime Minister, Zhao Ziyang, and the party General Secretary, Hu Yaobang.
 
Deadline is September
Such optimism may not signal a breakthrough in the near future. 
There has been some speculation that the Chinese could be exuding hopefulness as a device for pressing the British to accept Peking's terms and for blaming London if the talks do not produce tangible results by next September, the deadline that China has set for an agreement.
However, a Western diplomat who has followed the talks said he believed the latest round had started to focus on the technical details involved in a transfer of power, including the means of putting into effect a 12-point Chinese plan for Hong Kong, which could explain why today's communique made no mention of progress.
The Chinese proposal, details of which have been publicized by Chinese officials this month, would let Hong Kong keep its capitalistic system and way of life, including its stock, gold and foreign-currency exchanges and the convertible Hong Kong dollar.
The colony would be run by its residents as a newly created special administrative zone of China, with Peking handling only Hong Kong's military and foreign affairs.
The first round of talks got under way in Peking last july, after a preliminary phase of negotiations that began with Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's visit to China in September 1982.
 
Differing Descriptions
The first round of talks was described as ''useful and constructive,'' and the second round, two weeks later in July, was called only ''useful.''
The third and fourth rounds, in August and September, were not characterized at all, indicating that they had run into difficulty, and were followed by Chinese charges that Britain had taken a colonial attitude.
The climate began to improve by the fifth round in October and the sixth round in November, and the first allusion to progress came at the seventh round in December. 
Each round of talks has lasted two days, but since last fall they have been supplemented by informal contacts in Peking between the British Ambassador, who heads the British delegation, and the Chinese Foreign Ministry official who heads the Peking delegation.
The latest negotiations had two new chief delegates - the newly arrived British Ambassador, Sir Richard Evans, and China's Assistant Foreign Minister, Zhou Nan. 
Despite the changes, they hewed to the old format in their communique.
