
The British Foreign Secretary met today with China's Foreign Minister to review the negotiations on the future of Hong Kong.
Britain's lease over most of the colony expires in 1997.
Sir Geoffrey Howe, the British Secretary, discussed the issue of Hong Kong in separate sessions this morning and this afternoon with his Chinese counterpart, Wu Xueqian. 
A Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman, Qi Huaiyuan, said the talks were carried out in a ''warm, friendly and earnest atmosphere.''
British Foreign Sec Geoffrey Howe meets with Chinese Foreign Min Wu Xueqian in Peking, China, to review negotiations on future of Hong Kong, where British lease over most of colony expires in 1997; Howe portrait (M)
The talks were to evaluate the progress already made and to study what needed to be done to reach an agreement on Hong Kong's future, the spokesman said.
 
September Deadline for Accord
China, which intends to reassert its sovereignty over Hong Kong, has said it will announce its own plans if an accord is not reached by September.
The spokesman gave no details of today's talks, which were conducted with the same air of confidentiality that has covered 12 rounds of direct negotiations on Hong Kong.
Sir Geoffrey is the most senior British official to visit China since Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher first raised the subject in her official visit here in September 1982.
In a toast at a dinner this evening, Sir Geoffrey said that he was ''heartened'' by the progress that had been made on the issue of Hong Kong since Mrs. Thatcher's visit.
''The excellent relations which exist between Britain and China encourage me in the view that we can reach an agreement under which Hong Kong's stabilityI and prosperity can be maintained,'' he told Mr. Wu.
 
Speculation of Breakthrough
The British Foreign Secretary's visit has raised speculation in Hong Kong that some breakthrough might be forthcoming. 
Sir Geoffrey tried to dampen this hope Sunday by calling his visit ''only one stage in the complex and difficult process'' of agreeing on the best way to preserve Hong Kong's stabilityI and prosperity.
After his arrival Sunday aboard a Royal Air Force plane, Sir Geoffrey was quoted by his spokesman, John Goulden, as saying: ''A good deal of progress has already been made by our negotiators. 
It is now timely to review the position at the ministerial level and to decide how best we can take the process forward from here.''
The visit is seen partly as a way to reassure the 5. 
5 million inhabitants of Hong Kong. 
They remain unsure of their future despite recent Chinese assurances that the colony's economic and social system will be left unchanged for at least 50 years after China reasserts its sovereignty.
For this reason, Sir Geoffrey is expected to withhold any subtantial comments on his talks here until after he arrives in Hong Kong on Wednesday.
 
Top Company Leaving Colony Hong Kong's stock market fell sharply late last month after one of the colony's leading companies, Jardine Matheson, announced that it would move its legal domicile to Bermuda because of uncertainty over the colony's future.
On Tuesday, Sir Geoffrey is scheduled to meet Ji Pengfei, a senior Chinese official responsible for Hong Kong, and Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang. 
He may also meet China's paramount leader, Deng Xiaoping, on Wednesday before flying on to Hong Kong.
The 12 rounds of lower level negotiations, which resume again on April 27, have been held in virtual secrecy. 
But Mr. Wu said last Friday upon his return from a visit to Europe that China did not let Britain raise the issue of sovereignty over Hong Kong. 
Peking says this is not negotiable.
''The sovereignty of Hong Kong could not be discussed and will not be discussed,'' Mr. Wu said.
