
China and Britain agreed today to negotiate the future of Hong Kong through diplomatic channels but did not reach any consensus on the fundamental question of who would have sovereignty over the colony.
Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of Britain, after spending 2 hours 20 minutes with Deng Xiaoping, China's paramount leader, read a carefully phrased joint statement to reporters that said:
''Today, the two leaders of both countries held far-reaching talks in a friendly atmosphere on the future of Hong Kong. 
Both leaders made clear their respective positions on the subject. 
They agreed to enter talks through diplomatic channels following the visit, with the common aim of maintaining the stabilityI and prosperity of Hong Kong.''
PEKING, Sept. 
24 - China and Britain agreed today to negotiate the future of Hong Kong through diplomatic channels but did not reach any consensus on the fundamental question of who would have sovereignty over the colony.
At a news conference, Mrs. Thatcher repeatedly refused to go into any details of her discussions with the Chinese leaders, including the issue of who had the right to Hong Kong.
''I think the people of Hong Kong will recognize that to maintain confidence, you must also maintain confidentiality,'' Mrs. Thatcher said.
 
Chinese Add a Paragraph
But the New China News Agency, in releasing the joint statement as Mrs. Thatcher's news conference was about to start in the Great Hall of the People, added a further significant paragraph:
''The Chinese Government's position on the recovery of the sovereignty of the whole region in Hong Kong is unequivocal and known to all.''
A Hong Kong journalist whom the Chinese briefed privately said that the Chinese sought to include their position on sovereignty in the joint statement but that the British refused. 
Mrs. Thatcher was apparently not aware that the New China News Agency had added the paragraph.
Britain acknowledges that its lease on 90 percent of the colony's territory will expire in 1997 but has insisted that the rest, including the island of Hong Kong, was ceded to Britain in perpetuity.
China insists that the entire colony was seized illegally by the British through unequal treaties in the 19th century and must in principle be given back.
In responding to one of the 30 questions at her news conference, which concluded her talks in Peking, Mrs. Thatcher also confirmed rumors that new Chinese-Soviet talks would take place next month.
She replied that the Chinese view of the Soviet Union had not changed, then added, ''I do know that talks are being held, is it next month?
October, yes.''
 
Familiar Format for Talks
A Western diplomat here noted that the format adopted by Britain and China to continue discussing Hong Kong paralleled the one used by the United States and China in arriving at their communique last month on American arms sales to Taiwan. 
The negotiations on this issue were also carried on through the embassies in each other's capitals, with Vice President Bush calling on Mr. Deng last May.
The Chinese and British Embassies have been consulting on the Hong Kong question since spring in preparation for Mrs. Thatcher's visit. 
Today the British Prime Minister stressed that future talks would be more than just a continuation of existing contacts.
''The whole thing must now be speeded up and discussed much more intensely and in much greater detail than it has been before,'' Mrs. Thatcher said.
Although she seemed to allude to the delicate question of business confidence in Hong Kong, Mrs. Thatcher insisted that the joint statement, with its reference to stabilityI and prosperity, should sufficiently encourage Hong Kong's residents.
''Now and then, if you're entering into talks and you wish to be successful, you must in fact keep those talks confidential,'' Mrs. Thatcher said. 
''You must. 
That should inspire more confidence than blabbing all over the place.''
She observed that no one had expected a solution to emerge from the current meetings, which are the first on the issue at the head-ofgovernment level. 
''It would not have been possible today to get much further than we have,'' said Mrs. Thatcher, who called the issues complex.
The Prime Minister may have dug in her heels on the sovereignty issue to gain a good bargaining position. 
But she also said that ''my responsibility as Prime Minister of Her Majesty's Government is to the people of Hong Kong, and that is how I tackle it.''
 
Nervousness in Hong Kong
There has been financial nervousness in Hong Kong over the 1997 deadline because mortgages and other long-term planning are already being affected. 
There have been reports that some capital is shifting to Singapore and other commercial centers.
When a journalist asked Mrs. Thatcher today what she would advise British businessmen who were considering new investments in Hong Kong, she replied tartly: ''I'm not an adviser on investment to any company. 
I'd make a lot more money if I were.''
The British recognize that Hong Kong island could not survive as an independent entity without the rest of the colony and want to resolve the status before the deadline.
China also has an interest in an orderly transition because it earns 40 percent of its foreign currency from Hong Kong and does not want its commercial value to dissipate.
One proposal unofficially floated by the Chinese has been the gradual transition of Hong Kong into a ''special administrative zone'' under China's flag, a favored status similar to the one offered to Taiwan for peaceful reunification.
Mr. Deng has said that Hong Kong investors should set their minds at ease. 
Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang said Thursday that Hong Kong need not be concerned about the future. 
But both leaders have also made clear that China expects to reassert sovereignty.
