
On Sept. 
25, 1980, when Fung King Hey was in New York on a business trip, Manhattan' Borough President, Andrew J. Stein, saw fit to proclaim ''Fung King Hey Day,'' characterizing Mr. Fung's financial conglomerate as ''the Merrill Lynch of Hong Kong.''
Today, Mr, Fung, the 60-year-old chairman of Sun Hung Kai, seems likely to become the largest shareholder in Merrill Lynch & Company, through an agreement that gives Merrill Lynch a substantial stake in the Hong Kong firm in return for debentures convertible to about 4 percent of Merrill Lynch's common stock, a holding valued at about $50 million.
Mr. Fung made his first million in his native China - and lost it in the Communist takeover in 1949. 
He began building up real estate interests in Hong Kong soon after his arrival there in the early 1960's.
On Sept. 
25, 1980, when Fung King Hey was in New York on a business trip, Manhattan' Borough President, Andrew J. Stein, saw fit to proclaim ''Fung King Hey Day,'' characterizing Mr. Fung's financial conglomerate as ''the Merrill Lynch of Hong Kong.''
Today, although his real estate interests continue under the name of Sun King Fung, Mr. Fung is best known for Sun Hung Kai Securities, which he established in 1969 after being invited to join the newly opened Far East Stock Exchange in Hong Kong.
Mr. Fung had been barred from the Hong Kong Stock Exchange because he does not speak English, the language in which that exchange did business. 
With the opening of the new exchange, though, Sun Hung Kai Securities rapidly became the biggest stockbroker in Hong Kong.
Last year, the securities firm earned $38.7 million on revenues of $74 million, while Sun Hung Kai Finance, which began as a banking division within the securities firm, earned $12.6 million on revenues of $117 million.
Mr. Fung is considered a linchpin of the Hong Kong Chinese business community, with an extensive network of personal acquaintances with other Chinese businessmen throughout Southeast Asia. 
He is a free spender, with a penchant for yachts, fancy cars and travel.
Mr. Fung's son, Tony, who was born in Hong Kong, seems to be following in his father's footsteps: He is a director of Sun Hung Kai and is currently in charge of property interests.
