
ONE of the last acts of the imperial regime that ruled China in 1911 has come back to plague not only the modern Peoples Republic of China but America's State Department and Federal courts as well. 
Depending on how it is resolved, it could become a serious obstacle to trade between the United States and China.
The Qing dynasty, just before it collapsed, issued millions of dollars worth of bearer bonds for the construction of the railroad that runs from Canton to Peking. 
The 1951 maturity date on these Hukuang Railways Sinking Fund Gold Loan bonds came and went, but the bondholders never got paid. 
Many of them now hold the bonds more as curios than as financial paper.
But on Aug. 
21, 1981, Federal District Judge U. W. Clemon of Birmingham, Ala., entered a $41.3 million default judgment for the bondholders. 
China, as has been its custom whenever sued in United States courts, did not show up to defend itself. 
As the old Chinese proverb would have it: ''To enter a court of law is to enter a tiger's mouth.''
Since then, however, China has, for the first time, hired an American lawyer to conduct its defense: Eugene Theroux, of Washington's Baker & McKenzie.
Mr. Theroux, who has had long experience working with the Chinese, has asked Judge Clemon to set aside the default judgment and dismiss the bondholders' claims. 
''It is an odious debt forced on the Chinese by foreign bankers, on terms that were unfair,'' he said.
Mr. Theroux's request to overturn the default judgment is backed by the United States Government. 
Several months ago the State Department filed a statement of interest in which Secretary of State George P. Shultz said the case had become a major irritant in American-Chinese relations.
And in court papers filed last week, the Justice Department told Judge Clemon that allowing the default judgment to stand would exacerbate international tensions and could be ''expected to affect adversely our bilateral relations with China.''
The case is scheduled for argument Jan. 
17.
People familiar with the railway bond case and other pending American claims against China say the question of the default judgment is central to the future of relations between the two countries.
The Chinese maintain that China, as a sovereign government, has no obligation to appear in the courts of another nation.
''The United States has concluded that the Peoples Republic of China's belief that it is immune from judicial proceedings, including any obligation to appear and argue that immunity, is strongly held as a matter of principle,'' said the Justice Department in its filing.
As a practical matter, China has a lot to lose if it does appear in court. 
There are many other issues of bearer bonds floating around, some of which have already given rise to litigation in New York and Pittsburgh. 
So if China defends itself in the Birmingham case but loses, it would likely face a flood of legal claims in this nation, and fighting these would require considerable resources.
On the other hand, if China does not get the railway bond case dismissed, lawyers for the bondholders have said they will try to collect on the default judgment by attaching Chinese bank accounts and assets in this country.
The railway case could have ramifications well beyond the bond claims, too.
As Chinese exports to this country increase, so do product liability claims against the Chinese Government. 
So far, the Chinese have not been defending themselves in such actions. 
In the most publicized case, a 17-year-old boy whose right eye was injured by defective Chinese fireworks sued. 
The Chinese never appeared in court to defend the case, but the claim was apparently dropped after a secret out-of-court settlement.
Still, as China does more business in the United States and as such suits proliferate, most observers believe that China will have to come to grips with the American judicial system.
''As the Chinese come into this world and work with us, they ought to recognize their contractual obligations,'' said Edward Sills, the lawyer who filed the New York bond litigation against China. 
''Under international law, there is sovereign immunity for acts of state, but there is a very clear limitation on sovereign immunity when it comes to commercial transactions. 
The Chinese are really hung up more on the political question than the legal one. 
The Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act clearly indicates that the raising of money through a bond issue is a commercial transaction.''
As his court filings point out, however, the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act was passed in 1976, long after the bonds had been issued.
