
IN two weeks, Xi-Qing Gao, a 33-year-old associate at a large New York firm, is scheduled to be sworn before a judge to practice law in the United States. 
Last summer he became the first citizen of China to pass the New York Bar examination.
Mr. Gao, who was working on a railroad in southwest China 15 years ago during the Cultural Revolution, is the latest in a growing number of lawyers who are able to make their way through the thicket of complex American and Chinese commercial laws and rules.
For a long while after relations between China and the United States began to thaw during the Nixon Administration, companies in the West were hard-pressed to find lawyers who could understand the intricacies of Chinese law. 
Furthermore, China had relatively few ''legal workers,'' as they were then called. 
Not many American schools taught courses in Chinese law and even fewer firms had employees who knew anything about the subject.
It was not just a shortage of lawyers that made deals more difficult. 
''They didn't have words to express the same meanings as our words: words such as contract, offer, acceptance,'' said Jerome A. Cohen, one of the first Americans to become a scholar of Chinese law. 
''When you're drawing a contract and one side says arbitration and the other thinks it means mediation, it can create lots of problems.''
But all of that is beginning to change. 
Last year, China began to institute examinations for its 50,000 lawyers. 
Chinese officals have said they expect to increase the number of lawyers to more than 500,000 by the turn of the century. 
Some Chinese law schools, closed during the Cultural Revolution, are now larger than law schools in the United States.
''One young student from Beijing said to me not long ago that law used to be undesirable because after studying it, it used to be the case that graduates would have to go back to the farm,'' said Mr. Cohen. ''But now, the student said, a law degree was a 'hot ticket.'
''
In the United States and Canada, 10 law schools have exchange programs with schools in Beijing and Shanghai.
''The first time we had a Chinese student back in 1982 was an exceptional transaction,'' said Paul D. Carrington, dean of the Duke University School of Law. 
''It seemed like such a remote place then. 
Now it is becoming a common occurrence, with people coming and going all the time.''
By most accounts, such exchange programs are expected to grease the wheels of trade between the two countries.
''Every year we have a few Chinese citizens who spend some time with our firm before going back to their country,'' said Mr. Cohen, a partner at Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison, which has one of the largest practices representing clients with business interests in China. 
''Now when we sometimes negotiate with the Government we run into people who worked in the United States and know how we operate.''
Other firms that have a significant practice of clients with Chinese investments include Baker & McKenzie, Coudert Brothers, Graham & James and Haight, Gardner, Poor & Havens.
Mr. Cohen, regarded in the field as one of the earliest and brightest players - he taught Chinese law at Harvard Law School for 17 years, wrote a book on the subject and speaks Mandarin, a Chinese dialect - declined to name any of his firm's clients. 
But among the American companies with some of the 8,000 contracts worth $20 billion in investments that have been signed in the last eight years are Gillette, H. J. Heinz, American Motors and Foxboro.
Many more companies are expected to invest in China, according to Craig Allen, an international trade specialist at the Commerce Department, despite recent figures that American investment had fallen last year.
Still, China forbids foreigners to practice law or appear in its courts, although some observers have said that Japan's decision earlier this year to open up its legal system to foreigners has been looked upon in Beijing as a favorable development.
For Mr. Gao, who teaches Chinese law in the law schools of Fordham University and American University when he is not working on bonds at Mudge, Rose, Guthrie, Alexander & Ferdon, the move to train more Chinese lawyers means more than just being able to conduct international commerce.
''I consider myself to be lucky because I had many friends who are much brighter than I who either died on the railroads or have been moved to factories,'' he said. 
''It's as much an incentive as anyone needs to work harder and do more.''
