
China's military modernization program is making ''limited progress'' but still has far to go before Peking attains fully modernized armed forces, according to Central Intelligence Agency analysts.
Their report was part of a compendium of papers issued today by the Congressional Joint Economic Committee, assessing China's drive to upgrade its industry, agriculture, military forces and science and technology.
Represenative Henry S. Reuss, Democrat of Wisconsin, chairman of the committee, noted that despite advances since the death of Mao in 1976, ''China faces serious economic problems.''
WASHINGTON, Aug. 
25 (AP) -China's military modernization program is making ''limited progress'' but still has far to go before Peking attains fully modernized armed forces, according to Central Intelligence Agency analysts.
He added: ''Agricultural production is barely keeping up with the population. 
Oil production peaked in 1979 and has been declining, and energy can be expected to be a constraint on growth for the next few years.
''The defense burden has been rather moderate, outlays having been reduced or kept level in the past several years. 
But there are pressures to increase defense allocations. 
Such a change in policy could have serious consequences for the economy.''
The question of Chinese military modernization has emerged as a particularly sensitive issue in the past few years, since the United States moved to establish full diplomatic relations with Peking and restrict official ties with Taiwan.
Under the terms of a joint United States-Chinese communique issued on Aug. 
17, the Reagan Administration agreed to limit American arms sales to Taiwan but set no date for a full cutoff.
John C. Holdridge, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific affairs, subsequently went before a House subcommittee to offer assurances that the United States could move ''quite rapidly'' to assist Taiwan in case it was threatened by an attack from the mainland.
In the Joint Economic Committee publication, two C.I.A. analysts, Sydney H. Jammes and G. Lawrence Lamborn, wrote that ''although China's defense modernization is still in an early stage and undoubtedly faces severe tests, the program is making limited progress.''
But they said the program would be successful ''only if the nation enjoys prolonged political stabilityI, retains access to foreign capital and technology, avoids costly foreign military campaigns and moves forward in higher priority efforts to modernize agriculture, industry and science and technology.''
Peking's drive to upgrade its military forces has been spurred by strong apprehension over Soviet military intentions in Asia. 
However, Mr. Jammes and Mr. Lamborn noted that ''China evidently views the Soviet Union as a long-term rather than as an immediate danger, and defense modernization probably will continue to hold the lowest priority among the 'Four Modernizations.'
''
While Chinese armed forces should achieve ''limited gains'' by 1985, the analysts said, ''weaknesses in China's electronics industry will prevent the widescale introduction of new radars, sonars and other electronic equipment.''
They added: ''Tactical mobility and logistical support will continue to be hampered by shortages of vehicles and by limited capacity for repair and maintenance. 
And although new ground force equipment such as air defense and antitank missiles will appear in limited numbers, their production will fall far short of P.L.A. needs.''
The P.L.A. is the Chinese Army.
Another specialist on the Chinese military, Thomas W. Robinson of Georgetown University, wrote that the Peking leadership has apparently decided to ''persevere along traditional lines, making internal improvements only when it can be demonstrated that total costs will not rise drastically.''
