
On a quiet street in this tidy, conservative village of 8,000 is a yellow gingerbread parsonage that stands as a symbol of how differently Canada and the United States have dealt with China.
The house in this resort community 100 miles north of Toronto is the birthplace of Dr. Norman Bethune, a Communist who died while serving as a frontline surgeon with the guerrilla forces of Mao Zedong. 
For the last eight years it has been maintained by the Federal Government as a museum.
''There's never been any controversy at all about this place, no problems or protests'' said Helen Winters, one of the Ministry of Parks guides who gives tours of the former parsonage. 
Dr. Bethune, the son of a Presbyterian minister, spent the first three years of his life here in the 1890's.
''I suppose the exhibits emphasize Dr. Bethune's humanitarianism more than his political views,'' said Mrs. Winters, who was awaiting word on whether Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang would visit the parsonage during his weeklong state visit to Canada that begins on Monday.
Article on expected arrival in Canada of Chinese leader Zhao Ziyang focuses on Dr Norman Bethune, Canadian-born Communist who died while serving as frontline surgeon with guerrilla forces of Mao Zedong; for the last eight years Bethune's home located 100 miles north of Toronto has been maintained by Federal Government as a museum (M)18,000 Visitors a Year
As it turned out, it was announced that Prime Minister Zhao and his party would not visit the museum. 
''There simply wasn't enough time,'' said John Hadwin, the Canadian diplomat in charge of the visit.
Mrs. Winters said that of the 18,000 people who visited the museum in each of the last few years about 4 percent were Chinese travelers paying homage to the man whom Mao once glorified in an essay on selflessness that became mandatory reading during the Cultural Revolution.
Dr. Bethune is a greater hero in China than he is in Canada but here, too, schoolchildren learn of his heroism. 
All of this is in keeping with Canadian attitudes toward China that were shaped in part by Canadian missionaries to China, who unlike their United States counterparts generally favored Mao over Chiang Kai-shek.
Then, too, Canada's Prime Minister, Pierre Elliott Trudeau, wandered through China in the civil war years. 
He returned to China in 1960, 10 years before Canada recognized Peking and before he entered politics, and as a result of that visit wrote a book with his traveling companion, Jacques Hebert, entitled ''Two Innocents in Red China.''
Occasionally the book has been cited by right-wing critics as proof that the Prime Minister is or was infatuated with Marxism. 
Others might regard the work as the enthusiastic writings of two young men infused with the thrill of travel and discovery.
 
A Special Relationship
The special relationship between Peking and Ottawa, a tie that has been much less contentious than the links between Washington and Peking, will be reaffirmed this Tuesday when Mr. Zhao becomes the first Communist leader ever to address a Canadian Parliament. 
Though some members of the Conservative opposition are known to have bridled privately at the invitation, there has been virtually no public outcry or political controversy about the speech.
Mr. Zhao will also visit the Canadian side of Niagara Falls and travel to Montreal, Toronto and Vancouver.
''Unlike the United States we have always had a one-China policy,'' explained Mr. Hadwin, who heads the Chinese section within Canada's Department of External Affairs. 
''We have considerable trade with Taiwan but it is on a private basis and we have no official representation there; furthermore, we have no arms sales at all to Taiwan,'' he added in explaining the differences in the current Canadian and United States relationships to China.
Starting in 1981 Canada committed 90 million Canadian dollars in aid to China over a five-year period. 
The sum was not intended for capital projects but for management training and technical education programs - about 1,500 Chinese are studying in Canadian universities. 
But for the Chinese delegation arriving here, trade is clearly a greater concern than aid.
 
$1.5 Billion in Sales to China
Since 1979 Canada has extended lines of credit to Peking with financing terms averaging around 10 percent. 
The umbrella trade agreement between the two countries runs out next year and it is expected that the Chinese delegation will be seeking greater concessions. 
This year China will be buying more than $1.5 billion worth of Canadian goods, mostly raw materials, while Canada is to purchase only about $200 million of Chinese wares, all of them manufactured products.
Mr. Hadwin pointed with pride to Canada's recognition of the Peking Government in 1970, three years before the United States opened official contact with Peking. 
Many Canadians cherish this decision not only in terms of the relationship with China but as an example of maintaining an independent foreign policy distinct from that of the United States, Canada's closest and sometimes overwhelming ally. 
The United States did not formally recognize Peking until Jan. 
1, 1979. 
The Canadian economy has also benefited: Ottawa was selling surplus wheat to Peking in the 1960's.
Yet coinciding with Mr. Zhao's visit have come suggestions that the Canadian decision to recognize the Chinese Government was delayed for years because of pressures from Washington, notably from President Eisenhower. 
As early as the autumn of 1949, while war between Chiang Kai-shek's Nationalists and Mao's Red Army continued, the Canadian diplomatic legation in Nanjing was urging recognition of the People's Republic of China.
The head of that mission was Chester A. Ronning, a former diplomat and teacher who now at the age of 89 has written an article for Peking's China Daily outlining the delays that took place since he first urged Ottawa to recognize the newly formed Government in Peking.
''As weeks went by, I despaired because it was obvious that the fund of friendship in China for the West was being dissipated,'' Mr. Ronning wrote, adding that finally on June 25, 1950, he was instructed to enter into negotiations on recognition.
 
Delayed by War in Korea
''It was too late,'' Mr. Ronning recalled. 
''On that day, war broke out in Korea.''
He added that he was ordered to close the embassy and return to Ottawa to head the Far Eastern Department in the Foreign Ministry. 
In 1953, he wrote, he again sought to reestablish ties but the idea met resistance from the Canadian Government of Prime Minister Louis S. St. Laurent. 
Some of Mr. St. Laurent's papers, released here recently by the archives, show his resistence to the idea of recognition despite the urgings of Foreign Ministry officials. 
In 1958, wrote Mr. Ronning, he was advised by Foreign Minister Lester B. Pearson that Canada had decided to recognize Peking and that he would be named as the first Canadian Ambassador to Peking.
''Shortly before the formal announcement was to be made,'' wrote Mr. Ronning, Mr. St. Laurent and Mr. Pearson went to Washington to inform President Eisenhower of the decision.
''To their surprise, President Eisenhower, who was embittered by the Chinese intervention in the Korean War, protested,'' wrote the retired diplomat. 
''He said other nations would follow the Canadian example and this might result in the People's Republic being admitted to the United Nations. 
If China was seated, the President warned, the United States would withdraw from the United Nations.''
It was not until Oct. 
13, 1970, that Canada formally recognized China. 
In his article for the Peking newspaper, Mr. Ronning wrote that this event lent support for President Nixon's decision to visit Peking and the eventual United States recognition. 
He wrote that it came about ''21 years and 13 days after my initial recommendation.''
