
HE BIN rarely leaves home without his Great Wall credit card. 
One of this city's most successful entrepreneurs, Mr. He uses China's latest status symbol with a casual confidence that belies the long hours and political uncertainties he faces.
Five years ago, he was a disgruntled worker in a state shoe factory. 
''I had a skill to make shoes and run a shop,'' he said. 
''The factory 'big bowl' system was not for me.''
The ''daguofan,'' or big bowl, refers to the system of paying workers in state-owned factories a fixed salary regardless of ability or ambition. 
Although the overwhelming number of Chinese still work for the state, Mr. He and hundreds of thousands of others struck out on their own in the early 1980's when the political climate changed under Deng Xiaoping.
The entrepreneurs now hope their careers are not short-lived. 
As hard-line Communist Party leaders reassert rigorous adherence to socialism, the fate of private business in Canton and elsewhere in the country will be the ultimate measure of China's commitment to economic reform.
Mr. He suffered in a previous era of dogmatic socialism. 
''My father began a shoe business in 1921,'' he said. 
''We kept in business until 1958. 
That year, they closed the shop and I went to work in a leather shoe factory.''
In 1958, Mao Zedong launched a three-year effort to accelerate the country's economic growth by creating huge agricultural communes and backyard industries. 
A catastrophic famine resulted in which 30 million people may have died. 
Throughout this period, and the calamitous decade of the Cultural Revolution that ended in 1976, Mr. He and his family lived in the former shoe store on Wanfu, or Ten Thousand Happiness, Street.
In 1982, Mr. He was given the opportunity to begin again. 
He borrowed money from a bank and opened a small shop, which was successful from the start. 
''Before I opened the shop I was worried,'' he said. 
''The first day I sold more than 20 pairs of shoes. 
I didn't expect that at all.''
Unhappy with the quality and styles of state-produced shoes, Mr. He built a factory to make Western-style laced bankers' shoes, slip-ons and women's pumps with delicate leather ribbing. 
$135,000 a Year Today, he said, he and his wife sell about $135,000 worth of shoes a year, an immense sum by Chinese standards. 
''We can turn out a new product in three days,'' he said. 
''It may take the state three months to produce a new shoe.''
There are 50 other independent shoe makers in Canton, he said, and probably 350 private shoe shops.
From the watch repairer's small case on the back of a bicycle to Mr. He's shoe factory, more than 150,000 people work in private businesses in the southern province of Guangdong. 
Private restaurants and clothing stores compete side by side with state-run counterparts. 
Canton's proximity to Hong Kong, which is 85 miles away, and its distance from Beijing, which is 1,200 miles away, have nurtured a self-assured independence in economic life that is unknown in the north.
Cases in Mr. He's shop display the 150 styles of shoes he sells at prices about 10 percent higher than those in state stores. 
There are padded benches - unheard of in state stores - for waiting customers.
''People's living standards are higher,'' Mr. He said. 
''They require quality products.''
Indeed, officials agree that the purchasing power of the Chinese has grown tremendously as a consequence of economic liberalization.
Mr. He's shoes are made in a four-story red brick building that also serves as his home and a dormitory for 18 of his workers. 
He borrowed about $27,000 from a bank to build it and expects to have the loan repaid in three years. 
He said his workers earn about $18 a month, about double what state shoe workers get. 
He also provides housing for his employees and is responsible for their medical fees.
Despite his success, Mr. He admitted that the vagaries of the political climate could affect his and other private concerns here. 
''But so far,'' he said, ''the political changes in Beijing have had no effect.''
A top provincial official said there was no turning back on the economic liberalization. 
''We have been carrying out the correct policy,'' said Xu Zhi, Canton's deputy secretary general. 
''We will not slow down on economic reform.''
In any event, Mr. He said, there was nothing else to do but to work hard. 
''Since 1982 until now, I have been open every day,'' he noted. 
''I am open 13 hours a day. 
I have never closed for even one day.''
