
As recently as eight years ago, the Bank of China here was a stodgy outpost of the Beijing Government that barely mattered on the local banking scene.
Since China's opening to the West in the 1970's, however, the bank's growth has been extraordinary. 
Since 1979, deposits have increased 5.8 times, loans have gone up 8.5 times and revenue has increased twelvefold. 
The Bank of China group has taken to capitalist-style competition so swimmingly, in fact, that it has become the second-biggest bank in the colony.
The bank seems to think this is just the beginning. 
It is building a 70-story headquarters that will be Hong Kong's tallest building, with executive offices that offer a view down on the headquarters of the giant Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation, the only bank in Hong Kong that is larger.
''It's extremely competitive, both in terms of service and in terms of interest rates,'' said David K. P. Li, chief executive of the Bank of East Asia, another Hong Kong bank that has been expanding. 
''It's very dynamic.''
For some Hong Kong businessmen, deeply apprehensive about what will happen after the colony reverts to Chinese control in 1997, having the Bank of China as a competitor may be strangely reassuring. 
It provides evidence of the Beijing Government's willingness to tolerate capitalistic practices and of its expanding financial stake in the well-being of Hong Kong. 
In the process, China has been gaining financial experience and raising funds for investment on the mainland.
This growing presence in Hong Kong has not been painless, however. 
The Bank of China group seems to be sacrificing profits to gain market share, and diplomats and other bankers have doubts about the quality of its loan portfolio. 
It is also taking some significant risks as it develops its expensive new headquarters in the face of an extremely uncertain property market, and as it makes very long mortgage loans that lead to a mismatch between short-term deposits and long-term loans. 
There are also signs that the Bank of China group will face increasing competition, in Hong Kong as well as China, from other Government-owned financial institutions.
The Bank of China remains secretive, and it refused to make its two top executives in Hong Kong available for interviews. 
One other senior executive did grant an interview, after three months of prodding, but his information was limited. 
He could not say, for example, when the chief executive in Hong Kong, Huang Diyan, assumed office; how old Mr. Huang is; where he lives, or whether he has a car at his disposal. 
Other information was gathered from interviews with competitors, financial analysts and diplomats and from analysis of the limited financial records the bank provides.
 
Group of 12 Banks
The Bank of China, which is based in Beijing, heads a group of 12 other Chinese banks and one finance company operating in Hong Kong and the nearby Portuguese enclave of Macao. 
These sister banks operate exclusively in Hong Kong, although eight of them are technically registered in Beijing. 
They remain under the control of the Bank of China, although they have separate boards of directors and distinct specialties.
This Bank of China group missed the profits made by Hong Kong banks in the late 1970's, when the economy was booming and land prices were soaring. 
So the sister banks tried to catch up after China's dramatic policy shift of 1979. 
They hurried into property lending without waiting to develop their skills in credit analysis. 
It was an inauspicious start. 
The property market collapsed in 1982, along with much of Hong Kong's economy, and there are indications that many members of the banking group lost substantial sums of money.
Court records show that several of the banks had lent heavily to the Carrian Group, a Hong Kong investment firm that failed in 1983. 
Apparently, the individual banks did not know that other members of the group had also lent to Carrian. 
To avoid such credit risks, the Bank of China formed a Hong Kong and Macao regional office, which oversees the sister banks and approves large loans. 
The sisters are also linked by computer, and they clear checks among themselves.
Huang Diyan, the chief executive of the regional office, assumed the leadership in late 1985, and shortly thereafter began to shuffle people into retirement. 
Mr. Huang, who previously headed the Bank of China's international division in Beijing, appears to be highly regarded in the Communist hierarchy. 
He is still in his mid-50's -young for a position of authority in China - and last year was named vice chairman of the overall Bank of China. 
Because Mr. Huang is often traveling, the daily management rests with Zhang Xueyao, a pipe-smoking, English-speaking former diplomat who previously headed the Bank of China operation in New York. 
Mr. Zhang, and to a lesser extent Mr. Huang, are playing a more active role in the banking cocktail circuit than their predecessors. 
Neither man, however, speaks Cantonese, the Chinese dialect spoken in Hong Kong.
This has been no obstacle to growth, however, particularly among working-class and middle-class families, who are attracted by a good branch network and excellent mortgage terms. 
Since 1983, the Bank of China has advertised widely.
 
Politics Brings New Business
The Bank of China group has also picked up a great deal of commercial business, but it is not clear how much of this is based on merit. 
Many of the group's business clients are the 3,000 companies from China that have opened offices in Hong Kong in the last half-dozen years. 
And many others appear to be corporations, mostly based in Hong Kong, that think it is good politics to maintain at least one account at the Bank of China.
The bank group's staff has doubled since 1979, to 11,000, but reportedly there have been tensions between the recent university graduates and the less-educated middle managers they work under. 
Although some young managers have been promoted very rapidly, many have quit out of frustration, banking rivals say.
''There is a gap between the abilities of the employees and the demands of the job,'' conceded Chen Wen-jing, a senior executive of the Bank of China's regional office. 
As a result, he said, the bank has set up training programs that have been attended by thousands of employees.
Nevertheless, there are strong indications that bad loans are substantial and that profitability is low. 
The problem in making such assessments, however, is that the group's financial reports are sketchy and (with the exception of the four sister banks registered in Hong Kong) are unaudited by outside accounting firms.
Even by their official earnings statements, the profits of many of the banks in the group have fallen in the last few years, after adjusting for a devalued Chinese currency. 
One fairly typical member of the group, for example, the Bank of Communications, reported a $25.3 million profit in 1983, but just $14.9 million in 1985, the most recent year for which figures are available.
The 1985 profit amounted to just a 6.9 percent return on capital, compared with 17.8 percent at the Bank of East Asia, an independent Hong Kong bank.
Some rival bankers complain privately that the cut-rate mortgages and long repayment periods offered by the Bank of China have aggravated an already very competitive banking environment.
''Foreign banks can't match them,'' complained the head of one foreign bank operating in Hong Kong. 
In the last few years, several local banks have failed, and several foreign banks - including the Bank of America and Barclays Bank of Britain - have cut back their presence. 
One reason for these moves may have been the declining profitability of retail banking because of the Bank of China's policies, bankers say.
''They are taking business away,'' said Teresa Ma, an analyst in Hong Kong for Jardine Fleming Securities, ''not from the Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation, but from the medium-sized Chinese banks.''
Although the Bank of China is often cast as a warrior in a titanic battle with the Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation, most bankers and analysts see it differently. 
In 1985, the last year for which figures were reported, the Hongkong and Shanghai bank gained market share, analysts said. 
And the two giants tend to pursue somewhat different markets: The Bank of China is after the smaller depositor and borrower, and the Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation seeks larger customers, both individual and corporate.
''We are two big players in a very competitive banking scene, but there are a great many others,'' said Michael Broadbent, a spokesman for the Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation. 
''We're pretty confident that we can retain our market share.''
