
Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang and former President Jimmy Carter called tonight for a continued strengthening of Chinese-American relations in after-dinner toasts at the Great Hall of the People that were directed more toward the Reagan Administration than toward each other.
The Prime Minister used the welcoming banquet for Mr. Carter to publicly thank President Reagan for his expressions of readiness to continue to develop the relations that the Carter Administration formalized two and a half years ago. 
Specifically, he thanked Mr. Reagan for a personal letter of friendliness delivered by Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. in June.
Mr. Carter said that when he decided to establish full relations with China, he hoped that Chinese-American ties would be seen as ''of such obvious value that the processes would be irreversible and able to withstand the inevitable shocks of changing political times.''
Chinese Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang and former President Jimmy Carter call for continued strengthening of Chinese-American relationsPeking Wary on Arms Sales
Despite efforts at reassurance by the Reagan White House, the Peking leadership remains wary that Mr. Reagan may still decide to authorize the sale of advanced jet fighter planes to Taiwan - a move that Peking has said would be a severe blow to Chinese-American relations. 
Mr. Reagan has shelved the issue so far, but Peking fears that if it accepts offers for military aid from the United States, it might be eventually forced to accept American arms sales to Taiwan.
The former President arrived in Peking last night on a private 10-day visit. 
It was not Mr. Carter's first visit to China, however, as Prime Minister Zhao learned to his surprise at a reception before the banquet. 
When Mr. Zhao asked the standard warm-up question of whether this was a first visit, Mr. Carter replied, '' No.''
Mr. Carter said that as a young submarine officer, he visited Shanghai and Qingdao in 1949. 
In the latter city, he said, he could see the campfires of the surrounding ''Mao forces,'' which had Qingdao surrounded and were preparing for conquest.
 
'Outstanding Contributions'
This trip was Mr. Carter's first major sojourn abroad since he left the White House, and the Chinese treated him, as the President who formally recognized China, with great respect. 
Prime Minister Zhao, at the beginning of a meeting this morning that lasted 1 hour 45 minutes, said he had made an ''outstanding contribution'' to Chinese-American relations. 
''We will never forget it,'' he said.
According to Jody Powell, the former White House press secretary who accompanied Mr. Carter, Mr. Zhao revealed that he, like Mr. Carter, was a jogger and suggested that they run together in the future.
This afternoon, the former President, his wife, Rosalynn, and daughter, Amy, toured the Forbidden City. 
Mr. Carter was expected to meet Thursday with China's principal leader, Deng Xiaoping, who is the senior deputy chairman of the Communist Party.
 
Strong Ties Emphasized
Like other members of his Administration who have preceded him to China, Mr. Carter emphasized the theme that Chinese-American relations were too valuable and too strategic to trifle with over the unmentioned issue of Taiwan.
''There is no doubt that the cause of world peace has been advanced by this Sino-American friendship,'' Mr. Carter said in his toast tonight. 
He went on: ''It is important that bilateral cooperation in economic, scientific, cultural, and defense areas continues to grow.
''The strategic importance of the Sino-American relationship can only be understood in the context of these three global problems: expansionism, the pressure of natural resources, and the worldwide threat to peace.''
Premier Zhao noted that the relationship between China and the United States, both strategically and economically, ''enjoys the extensive support of U.S. political circles, a support that is bipartisan.''
Before he came to China, Mr. Carter talked by telephone to Secretary Haig and to the former United States Ambassador to China, Leonard F. Woodcock.
