
TO THE STORM The Odyssey of a Revolutionary Chinese Woman. 
By Yue Daiyun and Carolyn Wakeman. 
Illustrated. 405 pp. 
Berkeley: University of California Press. 
$17.95.
WITH their belief in the individual and progress, intellectuals in the 19th century never conceived of 20th-century totalitarian terror. 
Yue Daiyun, the narrator of ''To the Storm,'' had 19th-century views.
A third-generation intellectual who has triumphantly survived waves of political purges, she was born in 1931 in Guizhou province in southern China. 
She was an active member of the flourishing student Communist underground, one of 20 at Peking University admitted to the party in 1949. 
In 1952, when she graduated, there was much revolutionary optimism among her peers.
Miss Yue was elected valedictorian of her class, secured a faculty position and was about to make a brilliant marriage to Tang Yijie, a philosophy professor and the son of the president of the university. 
She had also received early acclaim as a poet -though in 1966, out of fear that her work would be seized and used as incriminating evidence, she burned it all, including the prescient poem ''To the Storm,'' from which the title of this unusual and intimate memoir of a revolution is taken. 
For instead of taking an assured place as part of China's intellectual elite, the couple spent most of the next 30 years in a state of terror of political reprisals.
Like so many bourgeois Communists, Miss Yue was more bourgeois than Communist. 
Her cultural referents included ''Gone With the Wind'' and ''Jean Cristophe''; her father translated Somerset Maugham into Chinese, and her brother liked to sing ''My Old Kentucky Home.''
Her notion of being a good Communist was to to shun a fancy wedding while voicing what she took to be Russian Marxism.
Her idealism too was 19th-century; she was filial and wifely, and she wanted her children to carry on the family's academic tradition. 
She failed to perceive the contradictions in her position: as a student member of the Party, she helped to purge individuals she considered rightist, yet she gloried in her in-laws' social status.
Mao Zedong, whose own origins had been bitterly humble, never trusted intellectuals like her. 
He recognized that they ''tend to be subjective and individualistic, impractical in their thinking and irresolute in action.''
More important, their education and skills in a country where more than 80 percent of the population is rural peasantry gave them oligarchic power to rule and to transfer their power to their children.
When the government moved to smash such intellectuals, one obvious place to attack was the universities. 
Miss Yue was a member of a prominent family and a campus personality as a result of her poetry and academic standing. 
I N 1958 her ordeal began. 
She was declared a rightist enemy of the people by the party and abruptly removed from her nursing infant son and sent to the countryside. 
In Zhaitang she tended pigs and took orders from peasants on a collective farm. 
She endured hard labor, near starvation, isolation and constant physical degradation.
Miss Yue was caught in a familiar trap: to preserve some sense of her own identity while living in demoralizing conditions, she needed to cling to her faith in the revolution she had helped create and believe in the correctness of the party. 
But when she returned to her family in Peking in 1960, infested with lice, her small children were suspicious of her, and her friends avoided contact.
Then, after a brief respite, the Cultural Revolution of the mid-1960's resumed and intensified the purge of intellectuals. 
Miss Yue, Mr. Tang and most of their friends were hunted down and abused; many members of the professional class were killed.
During this anarchic period, many academics were forced to work in what amounted to chain gangs; they had to confess their crimes by singing ditties to jeering children. 
The scholars had to wear dunce caps; their children were deprived of an education and sent to the countryside to become peasants. 
Mr. Tang was branded a member of the ''black gang'' - an academic warlord opposed to Mao - and suffered permanent physical injury.
The chaos finally evolved into rival Red Guard groups. 
The intense Red Guard warfare took a little heat off the academics. 
Ironically, during the next round of political developments, the new Clean the Class Ranks Movement had to sort through so many purged teachers it was difficult for them to know whom to elevate to positions of responsibility. 
Clearly, the soldiers and workers in charge of restructuring the universities had no idea who was who.
Reading between the lines of this detailed and unremorseful account, one senses that the desperate need for well-trained intellectuals that began to be recognized at this point was the reason Miss Yue and Mr. Tang survived and rose again. 
If you are a member of a small, highly trained elite and manage not to be killed, then you might always have a chance for political resurrection when a new group needs you. 
T HE last section of the book gives an interesting account of the machinations of those close to Mao. 
In 1970, as the terror of the previous years subsided, Miss Yue was appointed a ''five same-thing teacher'' - she ate, lived, labored, studied and reformed her thoughts with her students.
During this period Mr. Tang managed to regain some political standing. 
The Clean the Class Ranks Movement, begun in 1968 with the support of Mao's wife, Jiang Qing, needed intelligent leaders like him. 
Miss Yue is a loyal wife in her description of the ensuing events, so a reader can't tell from this distance whether Mr. Tang had a real alternative to becoming a leading member of Liang Xiao, the group of scholars that prepared criticism of Lin Biao. 
Miss Yue says he did not. 
After Mao's death, Mr. Tang was found guilty of leftism in a national trial, and the family was again disgraced.
But by 1977 the terror had waned. 
The couple were rehabilitated and their children allowed to continue their education. 
In a postscript, Miss Yue says her daughter, now married, works in computer science and lives in New York City and her son, a physicist, also lives in America. 
She and her husband have top university jobs in China, and she has been able to visit the United States.
It is an amazing sign of the changes in China that she feels free to publish her story. 
At the end, she reaffirms her faith in the revolution and says she has rejoined the Communist Party -one can't tell whether from continued idealism or expediency.
The book is the result of an unusual collaboration. 
Yue Daiyun and Carolyn Wakeman became friends while Miss Wakeman was teaching English in 1981 in Peking, and Miss Wakeman has shaped Miss Yue's extensive conversations and notes into a first-person memoir. 
It is a valuable report on a world from which we have had little news, by an intelligent woman survivor who was at the center of the turbulence.
