
It was the practice of the very earliest Chinese emperors, such as those of the Shang Dynasty from around 1,500 to 1,000 B.C., to have a group of slaves slaughtered at the time of their own deaths, so that the souls of the slaves could continue to serve the emperor's soul in the afterlife.
Around 200 B.C., however, these killings gave way to a more civilized practice that eventually developed into one of China's oldest and most refined artistic traditions: ceramic funerary art. 
Under this practice, life-size ceramic sculptures of slaves would be interred with the royal figure.
An exhibit now at the Philadelphia Museum of Art, which continues through May 24, provides the first major museum survey of the tradition of Chinese ceramic funerary art. 
With its 157 sculptures, the exhibition demonstrates that not only human figures, but ceramic sculptures representing the full range of Chinese life, were also made for burial.
In this show are sculptures of cows and cats, of horses and houses, of musicians and dancers, of soldiers and stable boys. 
Many funerary sculptures were made not for emperors but for wealthy landowners, who re-created their entire estates in miniature ceramic form for burial, complete with small models of granaries, rice hulling machinery and irrigation systems of which they were especially proud.
 
Four Terra Cotta Sculptures
The centerpiece of the exhibition is a group of four of the famous life-size terra cotta sculptures - a horse and three soldiers - made for the first emperor of the Qin Dynasty, whose tomb in Shaanxi Province has been excavated in recent years and found to hold some 7,000 such sculptures.
''For the imperial tombs, there was a vast bureacracy just getting ready for the burial of the next emperor,'' said Felice Fischer, a curator of Far Eastern art at the Philadelphia Museum who installed the present exhibition. 
''There were workshops and bureaucrats in charge of making sculpture, and they put out edicts regularly on the proper number and size of ceramic figures to be made for persons of given rank.''
The present exhibition is organized chronologically, beginning with funerary sculpture taken from Neolithic burial mounds dating from between 8,000 B.C. and 2,000 B.C. There are a handful of small pieces from the slave-based Shang and Zhou Dynasties, leading up to the life-size Qin sculptures.
It is during the Han Dynasty - a period of national unification, internal peace and economic development that lasted about 400 years around the time of Christ - that Chinese ceramic funerary art flowered. 
Some of the best examples are represented in this show.
 
Scenes of Farm and Home Life
In the Han period, work made for wealthy landowners appears, and figures depart from the strict military style of the Qin period into agricultural and domestic tableaux, as well as scenes of music, dance and entertainment.
From the Han Dynasty onward, further technical innovations - such as the use of glazes and paints - appear in the work, which reached its height in the famous three-color glazes of the Tang Dynasty, whose ''tomb guardian'' figures are among this show's most elaborate and impressive pieces.
Among the exhibition's most recent pieces are Ming funerary figures from between A.D. 1368 and 1644, made of the distinctive colorful glazed porcelain that is best-known from the vases of the same period.
Important trends in the cultural history of China can be read in the stylistic evolution of the sculptures in this show. 
In works from the Wei Period, for instance, between A.D. 386 and 556, the soldiers, servants and other figures depicted increasingly come to resemble the staid, impassive image of Buddha, reflecting the increasing contact and trade between China and India at that time.
 
Sculpted Camels Also Appear
Later, brilliantly glazed Tang-period sculptures of dromedaries -some with bolts of silk lashed to elaborate saddles - depict the animals used by traders plying the silk route between China and the West. 
The fierce faces and the often stylized, dancing poses of the tomb guardian spirits of the Tang period also reflect an influence from Hindu sculptures depicting that religion's variously warlike and ecstatic deities.
The present exhibition, organized by George Kuwayama, senior curator of Far Eastern Art at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, opened to the public at the Philadelphia Museum of Art, and not in Los Angeles, because the Los Angeles museum's exhibition schedule did not permit.
The show will travel to the Museum of Fine Arts in Houston from June 28 to Sept. 
6; to the Los Angeles County Museum of Art from Oct. 
15 to Jan. 
3, 1988, and to the Cleveland Museum of Art from Feb. 
7 to April 10, 1988.
