
THE China Institute of America, long the territory of those who supported Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek and the Kuomintang Party that ruled Nationalist China before Mao Zedong's Communist takeover, finally opened its arms to the People's Republic, and its diplomats were on hand the other night at a black-tie dinner honoring C. Douglas Dillon.
The gathering at the Helmsley Palace began with drinks, during which 400 guests stood nibbling hors d'oeuvres and studying one another. 
Some Caucasians were either born in China or had ties going back before World War II, and several women wore Chinese attire. 
But it was the Chinese- American women in their embroidered silks and impressive jewels who stole the show, gathering around Grace Chu, whom Millie Chan, a teacher of Chinese cooking who knows not a word of Chinese, introduced as ''the Julia Child of Chinese cuisine.''
Charlotte Curtis article on dinner honoring C Douglas Dillon at Helmsley Palace (M)
Across the room, Liang Yufan, China's chief delegate to the United Nations, was deep in conversation with Morley Cho, the shipping executive. 
The representative, true to People's Republic protocol, wore his immaculately tailored if austere gray uniform with its Mandarin collar. 
He said he was having a nice time.
Several years ago, this political mixture would not have been possible. 
When Chiang and his followers fled to Taiwan, the cultural institute's affection and sympathy went with him. 
Thus was born a segment of the so-called China lobby, which opposed American recognition of Mao's regime. 
But times do change.
In 1979, in step with President Jimmy Carter's normalization agreement, members began to include the occasional Chinese mainlander. 
And last fall, 10 years after President Richard M. Nixon's celebrated rapprochement, the institute officially invited Beijing's diplomats and trade executives.
''This is one of the few organizations I'm for,'' said Shanghai-born Richard King, an associate of Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette, the accounting concern. 
''It's apolitical.''
''The old wounds are healing,'' said Mrs. Wan-go H.C. 
Weng, the American-born daughter of a leading Kuomintang official. 
''Whether you love Taiwan or the mainland, there's only one China. 
The sooner we all realize that, the better off we'll be.''
Mrs. Weng was in midsentence when Kitty Carlisle Hart, chairman of the State Council of the Arts, arrived clutching the script for her part of the program and practicing her 12 words of Mandarin. 
''She's very good,'' Mrs. Weng said, adding that Bi Jilong, the Under Secretary of the United Nations, was expected.
At that point, Nathan Pusey, former president of Harvard and the dinner chairman, borrowed a taxi whistle from Robert L. Houguet, the banker, and blew a shrill blast. 
''That ought to get them moving,'' Dr. Pusey said, though it did not. 
So he blew it again, and the guests gradually trooped off to dinner. 
They had reached dessert when Dr. Pusey announced that he'd never before been what he called the lead-off man. 
''I gather I'm supposed to calm you down and say a word of welcome,'' he said. 
And when guests went right on talking, he said there was no point in his being there. 
That quieted everyone.
Dr. Pusey said the assembly marked ''our shared love of things Chinese and beyond that our love for Doug,'' a reference to Mr. Dillon. He said, too, that he detected ''a kind of crimson atmosphere,'' a reference not to communism but the dozens, including Mr. Dillon, who went to Harvard. 
He introduced the diplomats. 
He discussed Mr. Dillon's affection for things French, including art, wine and middle-size poodles, and handed the podium on to Mr. Weng, the institute president, who introduced Thomas Lawton of the Freer Gallery of Art, who spoke on the study of Chinese art.
Then came Mrs. Hart, describing eight Chinese paintings Mr. Dillon had given the Metropolitan Museum. 
Finally, Mr. Hoguet, the institute chairman, extolled Mr. Dillon's accomplishments as longtime chairman of the Metropolitan and presented him with a calligraphy scroll. 
Mr. Dillon appeared genuinely touched.
He said he became interested in Chinese, Japanese and East Asian art 15 years ago when he discovered that the museum's holdings ''were so lamentably weak.''
He said, ''The only way we could acquire what we needed was to get it in very large gobs,'' which he did. 
His first gift was 25 major paintings.
''When I began to see these treasures,'' he said, ''it changed my life. 
I fell in love. 
There is no other way to describe it. 
Other people contributed. 
We were then able to acquire other things that interested the museum. 
We're coming along. 
Now, we have 250 paintings.''
The Dillon Galleries also contain porcelains and bronzes from the 11th to the 18th centuries, thereby explaining the choice of words on the honoree's new scroll. 
Translated, it says: ''Looking at the ancient to develop the present.''
What it means, of course, is that you can't understand the present without knowing what went before.
Correction
The Charlotte Curtis column yesterday, on a dinner in honor of C. Douglas Dillon, misidentified the firm of Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette. 
It is an investment banking house.
Correction-Date: November 30, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition
