
FROM THE WINDOW OF HIS SKYSCRAPER office, Hughlyn F. Fierce looks out over Hong Kong harbor, jammed with sampans and junks bound for the South China Sea. 
A senior vice president and Chase Manhattan's man in charge of the Asia-Pacific area, Fierce commands an empire that encompasses 11 nations, 1,500 employees and $5 billion in assets. 
A husky 52-year-old, he wears an amiable expression that belies the large demands he makes on himself - and his staff.
This day, Fierce is talking in his customary, understated manner about his 25-year rise through the ranks of the Chase Manhattan Bank. 
His voice picks up intensity as he reaches the year 1974, when a call for help came from the Freedom National Bank of New York, a Harlem institution in deep trouble. 
Would Fierce, then a vice president in Chase's corporate lending office in Manhattan, take a leave of absence to become president and chief executive officer of the ailing bank?
He had just about decided to refuse the offer, he recalls, because he was concerned that it might hinder his upward mobility at Chase. 
Then his mother, Helen Wilson Fierce, weighed in, urging him to pursue ''a more noble ambition.''
Fierce took the job, and when he returned to Chase three years later, Freedom National was back on its feet.
As it turned out, Fierce's stint at the Harlem bank proved invaluable to his career with Chase. 
It established his credentials as a leader and as an inventor of ingenious solutions for intractable problems. 
And it brought him for the first time into close contact with investment bankers. 
Says Fierce, ''It was John Whitehead who first enlightened me about the business.''
Whitehead, then a senior partner at Goldman, Sachs & Company, is now Deputy Secretary of State.
Those lessons are paying off in Hong Kong. 
In company with other leading American commercial banks scrambling to move beyond their traditional lending activities, Chase has plunged its overseas branches into more lucrative, fee-generating activities - underwriting securities and arranging currency and interest-rate swaps. 
But Chase has come late to the party, where American and foreign banks are locked in frenzied competition on the Asian frontier, and Fierce is struggling to catch up. 
He must inculcate his staff with the ''aggressiveness and tenacity'' required for them to do battle in investment banking. 
''You really have to change their way of business behavior,'' he says.
Last year, Fierce's group, which does not include Japan, earned the lion's share of the $33 million profit Chase reaped on its Pacific Rim operations. 
For a bank with 1987 losses of $895 million on total revenues of almost $11 billion, that represented something of an island in a sea of red ink.
WHEN FIERCE ARRIVED in Hong Kong, in August 1986, he was immediately faced with a crisis: a $30 million loan default by the Wah Kwong Shipping Group, Hong Kong's third-largest shipowner. 
Fierce says, ''You know how when a rookie joins the National Football League and someone comes up and hits him as hard as he can, saying, in effect, 'Welcome to the N.F.L.'?
That's what Wah Kwong was like.''
The shipowner owed $850 million to dozens of creditors. 
A broad restructuring plan had been developed to save the company, victim of a worldwide slump in the shipping market, but it required the approval of all the major players. 
Chase balked - and seized the three ships on which it held mortgages.
Day after day, articles appeared in the local press suggesting that Chase was hindering Wah Kwong's survival. 
The South China Morning Post, the main English-language newspaper, warned in an editorial: ''Think about the reaction of the community at large to the decision by a commercial bank that might ultimately be responsible for the collapse of the entire restructuring scheme.''
It was not until November that calm was restored, with Chase acquiescing to a modified restructuring plan. 
A year later, Wah Kwong was reporting a six-month profit of $12.5 million. 
Meanwhile, Chase sold the three ships for a reported 40 percent of the mortgage value. 
It might have recouped more by waiting for the shipping market to recover, but, Fierce says, ''If we had kept them, there would have been carrying costs. 
There would have been hassles that would have diverted us from the business of making money.''
EIGHT MEMBERS OF THE Asia-Pacific Area Risk Council are sitting around a conference table in Hugh Fierce's Hong Kong office. 
They are there to discuss credit risks of clients and potential clients in their bailiwick, which ranges over a broad arc from South Korea to Pakistan and includes Australia. 
Fierce is seated in front of a huge yellow and blue silk panel adorned with frolicking dragons. 
In a corner of the office a Reuters monitor flashes the latest financial news.
He calls the risk council to order. 
In one of the area countries, he says, ''There is a group that has been assassinating locals. 
We do not know at this time of any assassinations of Westerners, but it is entirely possible that they may identify Western diplomats as targets. 
American bankers could be targets too.''
Fierce suggests that bank records in the country be duplicated, and copies sent elsewhere. 
And he urges his aides to exercise care should they travel to the country. 
Then he moves the meeting along to more typical banking risks - those involving money, not human life.
As the meeting progresses, Fierce pushes and probes. 
A subordinate makes a statement, and Fierce asks, ''Are you comfortable with that?''
The man explains his point at greater length, and Fierce repeats: ''Are you confortable with that?''
The subordinate finally figures out what the boss expects to hear and answers with an unambiguous ''Yes.''
In Asia, where people avoid confrontation or giving offense, where issues are sidestepped rather than tackled head on, Fierce is direct. 
While he thinks of himself as being ''friendly and relaxed,'' he admits that his staff tends to view him as ''intense, striving and unreasonable in my expectations.''
Dennis M. Goggin, the Hong Kong country manager for Chase, once told him, ''You're the kind of person who feels that if Sisyphus had used a little more effort, he would have gotten that rock over the hill.''
Fierce is on the road as much as 50 percent of the time, visiting the bank's offices around the region (''Pushing the troops,'' he calls it) and the headquarters office in Manhattan. 
His schedule also includes encounters with the elite of the business and political worlds, from Y. K. Pao, the Hong Kong shipping and real estate magnate, to Henry Kissinger, a longtime acquaintance. 
One recent visiting fireman was former Vice President Walter F. Mondale; Fierce briefed him on local political and economic issues.
As the new head of the Asia-Pacific group, Fierce was expected to meet what he calls ''some rather challenging goals'' laid down by headquarters - including a 15 percent return on equity. 
He demanded that the various offices in the region raise their income 30 percent to 80 percent. 
At the same time, he cut expenses and staff by 10 percent to 25 percent. 
Last year eight of the countries in the region met their goals.
''In 1987, Hugh set budget standards that nobody, including me, thought were achievable,'' says Arjun K. Mathrani, a senior vice president and country manager for Korea. 
''They were actually exceeded.''
Donald L. Boudreau, Chase's executive vice president for international banking, based in New York, says that ''Asia exceeded its income goals in 1987 -and took many real positioning steps - mostly due to Hugh Fierce's leadership.''
HUGH FIERCE WAS reared in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn. 
(''We didn't find out it was a ghetto until somebody told us it was a ghetto,'' he says.) His younger brother, Milfred, earned a Ph.D. from Columbia University and is now chairman of Africana Studies at Brooklyn College. 
''What drove my brother and me was my mother and my father,'' Fierce says. 
His father, Millus, worked as a receiving clerk in the textile business, his mother in real estate sales. 
''Daddy was steady and sturdy. 
He made the sun come up each day. 
It was Mama who said, 'The sun is going to be golden.'
''
After graduating from Boy's High School in 1953, Fierce enlisted in the Army and served in France, his introduction to the world beyond Bedford-Stuyvesant. 
Back in the United States, he enrolled at Morgan State University, a black institution in Baltimore. 
It was there he met his future wife, Jewel Marie Crews.
In 1961, with his bachelor's degree in economics in his pocket, Fierce sought work at several banks in New York. 
''It was suggested to me that I might want to select another career,'' he recalls. 
He had no such intention, and he managed to find a trainee position with the Citizens Trust Bank in Atlanta, Ga.
Fierce again made the rounds of New York banks in 1963. 
Now, he recalls, the times were changing: ''The buildup of civil rights activities began to question the conscience of America, particularly of American business.''
He received expressions of interest from several banks, but an interview with Chase's personnel director made his decision easy. 
''You have to understand that my wife and I were living at my mother's house in Brooklyn,'' he says. 
''I went to the Chase Manhattan Bank building and it was 60 stories high, a mass of glass and steel. 
I was tense, nervous, but when I went in to see the personnel director, he put his feet up on his desk. 
He said, 'Relax, don't get serious.'
Then he spilled his coffee and cussed. 
I thought it was great. 
I thought, 'This is the place for me.'
''
Fierce was enrolled in a training program for assistant managers. 
Over a two-year period, he was assigned to several branches. 
In 1967, at the Times Square branch, he was asked to run a risk assessment on a major dress manufacturer. 
''I felt the company had done something with the balance sheet that made them look more positive than they actually were,'' he recalls. 
His analysis impressed the branch manager, and soon Fierce was a loan officer on Times Square. 
He was named a second vice president in 1969 and a vice president three years later.
Then Freedom National Bank called. 
At the time, Freedom had not paid a dividend in nearly three years. 
The average deposit was about $100. 
The Comptroller of the Currency had threatened to close the bank.
Fierce immediately wrote off $2 million in bad loans and put a moratorium on mortgages. 
''When I said stop to the mortgages,'' he says, ''it was to understand what we were doing wrong. 
We had to cut out the cancer. 
We went back into mortgages a year later, with new policies that would keep us from repeating our mistakes.''
In order to make Freedom a viable operation, however, Fierce needed to draw deposits from companies outside Harlem, and he had an idea. 
Major corporations deposit their Government income tax and withholding tax payments in their banks, and there is usually a 10- to 20-day float period before the Government collects its money. 
Fierce called on such companies as A.T.& T., New York Telephone, Heublein, the American Can Company and Philip Morris and convinced them to pass their tax payments through his bank. 
''For 10 days,'' he recalls, ''Freedom would have the use of $20 million. 
It wasn't very much to a large bank, but it meant a lot to Freedom.''
Fierce also arranged a refinancing package for the bank - $3.7 million in preferred stock and a capital note -with the help of Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley & Company, who provided their services gratis. 
''For three years I lived with investment bankers,'' he says. 
Running Freedom, he adds, ''gave me support for the idea that I could handle a much larger opportunity.''
On his return to Chase in 1977, Fierce was appointed a senior credit-policy planner with responsibility for the bank's global loan portfolio. 
But he was based in New York, and he felt he needed overseas experience. 
So he obtained an advanced professional certificate in international finance at New York University's Graduate School of Business Administration, where he had earned his M.B.A. a decade earlier.
Fierce's new academic credentials and his stint at Freedom - a combination he refers to as ''scholarship and scar tissue'' - led to his appointment as general manager of the Chase Manhattan Bank in Singapore in 1979. 
He and his family - the Fierces have three daughters -transferred back to New York in 1981, and he was put in charge of the bank's operations in French-speaking Africa, then all of Africa, then Africa and the Middle East.
Langdon Palmer, now chairman and C.E.O. of the Horizon Bank in Morristown, N.J., preceded Fierce as head of Chase's African operations. 
In March 1982, the two accompanied David Rockefeller, who had stepped down as chairman of Chase a year earlier, on a trip to Cameroon, the Ivory Coast, Nigeria, Senegal, Zimbabwe, Guinea, Zambia and Angola. 
''It was the first time I had ever made a transcontinental flight in the Chase jet,'' says Fierce. 
The trip exemplified the powers and perks of high-level international banking.
In Guinea, the late President Ahmed Sekou Toure proclaimed a national holiday and called for a parade in honor of the visiting bankers. 
In the Ivory Coast, Fierce and Palmer were quartered in a guesthouse alongside the presidential palace. 
While the two men lounged in the swimming pool, liveried houseboys served them champagne in crystal goblets carried on silver trays. 
The bankers ate off solid-gold plates and, as Palmer recalls, told each other, ''This ain't bad.''
IN 1970, THE THREE LARGEST banks in the world, ranked by assets, were American: Bank of America, First National City (which became Citibank) and Chase. 
Eighteen years later, 9 of the top 10 banks in the world are Japanese. 
The leading American bank, Citibank, comes in 22d, and Chase, just ahead of Bank of America, is in 48th place. 
''You can't look to U.S. banks as being as big a factor as we have been in the past,'' Fierce allows. 
''However, I remember the time when the Middle East banks had the money, and I've got this feeling that everything that comes around, goes around.''
Within the United States, commercial banks have been prohibited by the Glass-Steagall Act from owning brokerage firms or engaging in the underwriting of securities. 
Those barriers have been eroding of late -most recently, with last June's Supreme Court decision allowing Chase Manhattan Capital Markets Corporation, an affiliate of the Chase Manhattan Corporation, to underwrite and sell commercial paper domestically.
Outside of the United States, most international banks have been moving aggressively into investment banking, a field already crowded with experienced American players such as Shearson Lehman Hutton and Merrill Lynch, and with British merchant banks that have special claims on the Asian turf they dominated in colonial days.
International banks, especially those in Asia, have downplayed their commercial banking because the Pacific Rim countries are awash in liquidity. 
Japan's Nomura Securities reports that borrowing by East Asian and Southeast Asian countries dropped 24 percent in 1986 and 65 percent in the first quarter of 1987. 
Another major spur to the expansion into activities other than lending has been the banks' woeful track record in Latin America, where they have been forced to write off billions of dollars in loans. 
''As a result of that experience, banks have turned more and more to nontraditional banking enterprises that do not put the bank's assets at risk,'' says Robert F. Grealy, Chase's Asia-Pacific director of international relations. 
''So we're talking about service, currency trading, merger and acquisition arrangements, where the bank performs a service and there's no risk. 
That's what banks would rather be doing.''
The investment banking arm of the Asia-Pacific group, Chase Manhattan Asia Ltd., had, until the late 70's, restricted itself primarily to syndicated lending. 
It then slowly expanded into selling securities and offering fixed-income investments. 
An executive who works at an investment bank in Hong Kong says, ''Bankers Trust took concrete steps toward becoming a merchant bank five to six years ago. 
Chase, in comparison, is viewed as one that is lagging behind in terms of strategy and in terms of implementation.''
''Maybe we missed it by two to three years,'' Fierce acknowledges. 
But he says that Asia-Pacific's achievements last year reflected a concerted effort to catch up. 
''We pushed corporate finance business, which is basically our financial advisory and our merger and aquisition business. 
We started to have special types of corporate finance products - leveraged leasing, for instance. 
It all kind of came together in 1987.''
In a leveraged leasing deal, the bank finds a company with taxable profits to buy equipment - a jet plane, for example. 
The company then leases the jet to an airline. 
Since the purchasing company is able to offset its tax liability with depreciation charges on the equipment, it can afford to offer the airline favorable terms on leasing fees. 
Everyone benefits: the aircraft manufacturer, the purchaser, the airline - and the bank.
Early in 1987, the region's investment banking arm was involved in two leveraged leasing deals, one with CAAC, China's national airline, for $100 million, the other with Cathay Pacific Airways for $91 million. 
At that point, the investment banking group reported directly to Chase headquarters in New York. 
Then, in the space of a few months, Oliver Greeves, head of the group, and two of its top executives left Chase, and Fierce was temporarily put in charge. 
At year's end, the added assignment became permanent.
During the first quarter of 1988, the investment banking group handled eight mergers and acquisitions. 
Among other projects, it underwrote, with two other banks, a $14.1 million equity issue on behalf of an agro-industrial company in Thailand, and it is helping put together a $52 million convertible bond issue for a company in Taiwan.
Several of Chase's competitors in the Hong Kong investment banking community remain unimpressed. 
Says one banker: ''They really have not done much in the way of classical investment banking, merger and acquisition deals, or corporate finance work or even capital markets.''
Another, a Chase alumnus, attributes the bank's record in Asia to its ''formidable name and long-standing relationships in almost every region'' and to the fact that Chase is ''trying hard.''
Still, it remains to be seen whether Chase can maintain its position of influence in Asia in the face of the powerful Japanese and Hong Kong banks, and with increasing competition from American investment banks.
MANY MORNINGS, FIERCE arrives at the bank before 7 o'clock and must awaken the guard before he can get to his office, whip off his suit jacket and set to work. 
He does pause to eat lunch at his desk - a box lunch of cha gai fan, rice with pork and chicken, is a favorite. 
And he may stay late so that he can telephone New York, which is 12 hours behind Hong Kong time.
The Fierces and their teenage daughters, Heather and Brooke, live in an exclusive neighborhood on Barker Road, near Victoria Peak. 
The girls attend the Hong Kong International School, and an older daughter, Holly, lives in Boston. 
The family entertains at the Hong Kong Country Club or the American Club, which, Fierce says, is ''more California than New York.''
Fierce keeps abreast of political developments in such tinderbox areas as Tibet and South Korea, and he closely follows the news from China, which will take control of Hong Kong in 1997.
Already, Fierce says, ''China is a major investor in Hong Kong, if not the major investor.''
From his apartment, he can see the most dramatic evidence of China's increasing presence, the 70-story headquarters of the Bank of China, designed by I. M. Pei. 
Though not due to open until next year, it already dominates the Hong Kong skyline.
Opinions are by no means unanimous about the future of the crown colony. 
On the whole, Fierce says, he is ''a little more positive on China than some people. 
They have been absolutely impeccable in reacting to us and attempting to understand Chase's position.''
But Fierce will probably not be in Hong Kong when it reverts to China. 
Chase tends to rotate its executives' foreign assignments every five years. 
At the end of the fifth year, Fierce plans to come back to New York. 
''Maybe, if someone twisted my arm, I would go to London,'' he says.
No matter where he is assigned, however, Fierce intends to stay with Chase. 
''I grew up in the bank,'' he says. 
''I have a great emotional and professional attachment to it. 
There are days when I think the sun shines on the bank and days when I think the bank is difficult - just like one feels about one's wife or one's kids - but I think that Chase is a very good place to be.''
