
Group 41 of the Federal Drug Enforcement Administration has been assigned to break up the Chinese Drug rings that transport heroin along ''the China White Trail,'' from the mountains of Thailand to the secret criminal societies of Hong Kong to the quiet Chinese neighborhoods in Queens.
What follows is a firsthand description of undercover drug buys in New York City, of surveillances and arrests.
The account is a kind of diary of impressions and observations of the people and events in the life of Group 41 as it seeks to fulfill its mission in the summer of 1987. 
Plaza Hotel, Wednesday, Time: 5 P.M. Inside the drug world, nothing is quite what it appears. 
Faces are often mirrors. 
Answers are mostly lies. 
Cases have beginnings, but never really end.
So here at the center of an international drug enforcement operation - two rooms under chandeliers and molded ceilings -the drug agents of Group 41 react with a start in their suite at the Plaza Hotel each time the phone rings. 
They know anything can go wrong.
Three agents, ties askew, lean over a coffee table scattered with slices of cold pizza and cans of Diet Coke. 
Another agent, in T-shirt, jeans and sneakers, munches on a tuna sandwich from a delicatessen down the block.
Although renting the Plaza suite may be necessary for an undercover operation involving lavish drug traffickers, the agents are not willing to pay the price of room service. 
''Jeez, $12.50 for a bottle of nuts,'' said one of the agents, looking down the price list of snacks in the room's refrigerator. 
''Can you believe that. 
Who can pay $12.50 for nuts?''
Today's operation involves an undercover American drug agent who has posed as a courier and brought heroin with a street value of $46 million from Bangkok.
If all goes according to plan, representatives of the people who bought the drugs, major Chinese heroin dealers in New York, will pick up the shipment in the lobby of the Plaza.
The agents do not expect to make arrests at the hotel. 
Instead they will follow the drugs, hoping the trail will lead to the major buyers.
At that point the drug agents, in coordination with the Thai and Hong Kong police, will arrest the buyers and sellers on both sides of the Pacific.
''It's a tricky operation,'' said Richard, the 39-year-old special agent who heads the group. 
''But it could pay double dividends.''
For 19 months the 10 agents of Group 41 have performed such operations in an attempt to penetrate the hidden world of Chinese heroin traffickers, As a result of intelligence gathered by the group of white, black and Chinese-American agents, law-enforcement officials recently were able to sketch a striking new picture of the New York heroin industry, a multibillion-dollar business that is now dominated, they say, by Chinese drug traffickers.
In the lives of drug agents each arrest is really just a beginning that leads to new information, new cases and new arrests. 
Each face, each license plate, each address and each criminal relationship is a small piece in the puzzle of the China White Trail. 
The phone rings. 
An agent listens for a moment and hangs up. 
He smiles and says: ''It's show time.''
Plaza Lobby, An Hour Later No one in the milling crowds would notice the middle-aged man in a tan suit, sitting with a green cloth suitcase by his side. 
He is, in fact, an undercover agent playing the part of a corrupt diplomat who has smuggled the heroin on a flight from Bangkok.
Eight feet away, Richard is slouched by a doorway, appearing weary but relaxed. 
His gaze drifts slowly around the lobby but never falls directly on the undercover agent. 
A two-way radio is hidden in his folded newspaper.
Richard is regarded as one of the few experts on international Chinese drug traffickers by United States and European law enforcement officials. 
He is fluent in French, Thai and the Chinese dialects of Mandarin and Cantonese.
Suddenly, a round Chinese man pops through the grand revolving door at the hotel entrance. 
He beams a smile to the undercover courier. 
The courier rises and disappears through the door and down the hotel's front steps.
''We have movement,'' Richard whispers through his radio to a platoon of agents hidden on corners, on benches and in cars. 
Their best protection is the camouflage of New York street life.
Just beyond the hotel awning the Chinese man and the courier lift the suitcase into the trunk of a blue Buick with the New York license plate ZMC 223. 
The car, with two other Asian men in the front seat, pulls out into traffic.
 
'Who Is On the Blue Buick?'
In an instant, the undercover agent portraying the diplomat has slipped back into the hotel and Richard is alone on the street, watching the Buick fade away. 
His face freezes. 
Something is definitely not working.
''Who is on the blue Buick, New York plates, Zebra - Michael - Charlie 223?''
Richard says into the radio. 
There is no response. 
''Who is on the blue Buick?''
Richard repeats.
No response. 
Richard mutters a curse.
Somehow, even with seven cars on surveillance and more than a dozen agents in the area, everyone but Richard missed the deal. 
He has one minute, possibly two, to save the New York end of the operation by finding the Buick. 
Richard jumps into a Group 41 car parked nearby. 
#58th Street Chase ''Let's move,'' he says.
The agent behind the wheel, a former surveillance specialist with the Federal Bureau of Investigation, puts his foot on the gas and his car swings down 58th Street after the blue Buick, now the only link that connects the sellers in Hong Kong to the buyers in New York. 
Thanks to several traffic lights, the two agents spot the Buick at the entry ramp to the Queensboro Bridge.
The driver of the Buick, as he careers between lanes and cuts off other cars, may now have noticed a car 50 feet behind, mimicking his every move. 
The agent driving says he has no choice. 
His is the only car trailing the Buick.
Back at the hotel an agent had substituted imitation blocks of heroin for the real drug. 
74th Street In Queens, Time: 1 A.M. A day at the Plaza has turned into dark night in a parked car in Jackson Heights.
The night has brought a pounding summer rainstorm, followed by a cool breeze. 
In the darkness, the smell of fresh-cut lawns and wet sidewalk wafts through the car window as Richard and another agent listen to the sputtering voices of other agents on the radio.
They are parked in a driveway around the corner from the blue Buick. 
The car, with the suitcase still inside its trunk, has sat five hours, ever since the driver parked and entered a brick three-story house on 74th Street in Jackson Heights. 
Four other drug agency cars are parked nearby.
Six times a white Oldsmobile with a bashed fender has circled the block, stopping twice by the side of the Buick. 
The driver, a slender Chinese man with a beeper on his belt, has even stepped out and walked the street. 
Yet he has not opened the trunk.
 
Questions on Both Sides
The slender man knows something may be wrong, Richard explains. 
So now he must confront the classic quandary of a drug dealer: Is this really worth the risk?
Am I just being paranoid?
And Richard is facing the classic questions of a drug agent: If he picks it up, should I arrest him here ?
If I follow him, will he lead me to his compatriots?
Such ruminations are interrupted by a distant scream.
''He's gonna kill me!'' yells a voice with a Hispanic accent. 
''He's crazy!''
The two agents jump out of their car and see a small man running down the middle of the street, through the pools of light cast by street lamps.
''He's gonna kill me!'' the man says again, running past.
The agents stare at each other in confusion. 
A gypsy cab is abandoned in mid-road a block away. 
Another man, barrel-chested, with biceps like ham hocks, is running towards them. 
The agents block his path.
 
'Please, Let Me Kill Him'
''Please, don't stop me,'' says the pursuer, panting. 
''He tried to sell crack to my 14-year-old sister. 
That's how they sell it, these Colombians, from gypsy cabs. 
Please, let me kill him!''
Richard slaps a palm onto his forehead.
''Oh, just what we need,'' he says. 
''A homicide over crack.''
When there are no police officers around, Federal drug agents must intervene to stop a violent crime. 
Agents on the street sometimes have been drawn out of undercover roles to prevent bank robberies, assaults, even murders. 
But agents are reluctant to jeopardize major drug cases.
Suddenly, a red gypsy cab screeches to a halt at the intersection. 
Seconds later six more cabs from the same company come piling into the area to help their comrade.
A taxi drives onto the sidewalk, a driver jumps out of his cab with a knife in hand. 
An agent leaps on him, thrashing his body up against the car. 
The knife drops inside the car.
By the time the agent looks up again, a row of gypsy cab drivers is out in the street. 
Nine drug agents have come out of hiding and stare back like a line of well-disciplined troops. 
A crowd of onlookers gathers.
''Move on, now,'' Richard yells, flashing his badge. 
''We're taking care of this.''
A precinct patrol car appears and two uniformed officers issue warnings. 
The taxis, the enraged pursuer and the crowd disperse into the night. 
No one is arrested.
The confrontation came and went like the summer thunderclap: sudden, frightening and apparently meaningless. 
Yet it may have had a lasting impact. 
The driver of the white Oldsmobile does not reappear. 
74th Street, Time: 8:30 A.M. The agents of Group 41 stand in the sunlight beside the blue Buick. 
The suitcase is still inside the trunk. 
The agents's eyes are red and some stomachs are raw from too much bad coffee.
The agents hold in their frustration as they question a teen-age Chinese boy who lives in the house on 74th Street where the driver parked the Buick. 
The boy says the driver's name is ''Sammy.''
He entered the house and left through a rear door. 
The boy says he does not know where Sammy is or how to find him. 
The boy's father interrupts. 
''I am so worried about this kid,'' says the father, who was visibly shaken by the arrival of Federal drug agents at his door this morning. 
''I am trying to save money and give him a good home. 
I am going to buy a house in Jersey. 
But he gets involved with gangs.''
 
'We'll Try to Do Better'
''It is a very serious business,'' an agent warns.
'' I know, I know,'' says the father. 
''We'll try to do better with him.''
Drug agents in Manhattan have arrested a man they believe was a look-out at the Plaza Hotel. 
The police in Hong Kong are about to arrest four men, one of whom is believed to be associated with 14K, a powerful criminal secret society based in the Crown Colony.
And agents plan to check the home addresses of people who rented the cars seen in yesterday's surveillances. 
The agents will record the names and addresses. 
They will remember the faces.
The operation in New York has ended in disappointment. 
Yet a few new pieces have been fit into the puzzle. 
D.E.A. Office, Tuesday, Time: 10 A.M. ''Sometimes I wish I hadn't chosen this profession,'' Richard says. 
''It is so all consuming, it is impossible to get away. 
It is impossible to have another life.''
A soft-spoken man with a near-academic manner, Richard's eyes dart around an office adorned with the souveneirs of a 16-year career: a plaque from the police in Malaysia and Hong Kong, a bulletproof vest, a poster of the Galerie Roussard in Paris and a poster that says, ''A cleaner Chinatown is up to you.''
Officials say it is from Richard's work in the last year and a half that they learned the size and importance of the China White Trail in the New York region.
Raised in an Italian-American family in Pittsburgh, Richard had no interest in the Chinese until he joined the agency's New York office in 1971 and fell into a group that happened to be handling numerous Southeast Asian heroin cases. 
Soon Richard developed a passion for things Asian, a passion his parents in Pittsburgh would never really understand.
 
Advised French Police
In the years that followed he worked in Thailand, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Paris. 
While serving as a special adviser to the French police, he met and married a woman from Korea.
In January 1986, Richard was brought back to New York to form a new group of agents targeting solely Chinese traffickers. 
It was an imposing task, for practically no one in New York had informants inside Chinese drug organizations and no one in law enforcement knew the scope of their activities.
In the first months, the agents of Group 41 walked the streets of Chinatown and cultivated the friendship of agents overseas, hoping that eventually they would get a tip on a heroin shipment coming in.
On Sept. 
10, Group 41 got its first major break. 
They seized 33 pounds of heroin hidden inside Thai furniture and made one arrest. 
A string of other arrests and seizures followed. 
Some defendants agreed to cooperate, introducing the agents to their contacts, suppliers and other organizations.
 
'No Letup'
What emerged was a subculture of drug traffickers in New York, with links that extended throughout the overseas Chinese communities of Asia, Europe and South America. 
In some cases the trafficking groups were loose confederations of businessmen and smugglers who associated for a single deal. 
In other cases, they involved complex organizations of dozens of people in Asia, Europe, South America and the United States.
''There's really been no letup since,'' Richard said. 
Shortly after their arrival in New York, Richard's wife began to notice that he was never home. 
Almost everyday she would signal him on his beeper. 
He would call back and say he had no idea what time or even what day he would return.
One evening at their house, she showed him a newspaper advertisement for Jacoby & Meyers, the law firm, and pointed to the firm's telephone number. 
She said with a smile that someday his beeper will tell him to call that number back. 
It will be her new lawyer asking for a divorce.
 
Strained Family Relations
Now, whenever Richard's beeper goes off, another agent is likely to crack, ''Uh oh. 
Jacoby & Meyers.''
The joke has a sharp edge to it. 
Many drug agents experience one or more divorces in their careers. 
Few family members can tolerate the tortuous schedules year after year, the exhaustion, the irritation and worst of all, the agents's inability to explain what they are doing with their days and nights.
Despite the hours, the isolation and the anonymity, however, many agents seem almost obsessed with their profession.
Most admit that it is not a crusader's zeal that keeps them on the job - some agents believe they are helping to stop the spread of drugs, others do not. 
Rather, veteran agents say they are people who cannot part with the unspeakable thrill of a chase and the mystery of entering hidden worlds. 
More important, perhaps, they realize that only agents and their informers truly understand what life is like inside a case. 
Once they have left this quiet fraternity, they know, in some strange way, they will always be alone.
''A lot of the time it seems we are tilting at windmills,'' Richard said. 
''I don't know. 
But maybe, when you retire somebody will say 'He was a good manager. 
He made some good cases.'
That is all I ask for.''
Tuesday, Time: 11 A.M. Two agents are loading the last thick wads of $100 bills into the green suitcase that carried the courier's heroin a week ago. 
Every bill has been counted and every serial number has been recorded. 
The suitcase is filled with $850,000.
A Chinese-American agent of Group 41, playing the undercover role, will show the money to two heroin sellers as they sit inside a stretch limousine on the Upper West Side.
He is wearing a gold Rolex watch and a crisp khaki suit. 
His hair is slicked back to suggest he was a tough street youth in Chinatown not long ago. 
Another agent will play the part of his chauffeur, a muscular man clad in a cream-colored jacket, chomping a thick cigar.
This case, one of dozens of cases the group is working on these days, began recently when the undercover agent was introduced to a Chinese couple from Queens who said they could provide large shipments of China White on a regular basis. 
Richard says he believes the couple works for a group of smugglers active in the Bangkok-New York trade.
 
An $86,000 Deal
On June 30, the Chinese-American agent met the couple on the corner of Third Avenue and 63d Street. 
The couple and two other men gave the agent a brown paper bag containing a pound and a half of China White. 
Mr. Wong paid them $86,000 in cash.
Group 41 followed the four suspects to Chinatown where, they say, the money was handed off to a fifth person, a short, young Chinese man with a thick mustache. 
They followed the man with the thick mustache to a string of massage and gambling parlors.
The first deal was designed to gain the couple's trust and identify their associates. 
Today the group plans to make arrests. 
The West Side, Tuesday, Time: 5 P.M. Following the flash of the cash as the limousine sat parked on West 66th Street, Group 41 has trailed the couple through Manhattan for hours. 
Now the agents and their quarry have converged on this block across the street from Lincoln Center waiting for the heroin to arrive.
The undercover agent stands with the couple in front of a Coward shoe store. 
A white Camaro pulls up to the curb. 
The undercover agent gives a signal.
''Bingo,'' says another agent who has spent the day as the driver of a yellow taxi.
 
Guns at Lunchtime
Suddenly, diners lunching at outdoor tables of the Saloon restaurant see a cab driver jump from his car armed with a revolver. 
Two young, well-dressed women jump from a sports car, also carrying guns. 
Even some diners jump up from their tables, and they, too, are brandishing pistols.
In a moment, a semicircle of agents have surrounded the couple and placed them under arrest.
The couple will later be identfied as 28-year-old Dong Hsiang Chen and Yin Yuen Wong, 29, both of 4045 Ithaca Street in Jackson Heights, Queens, and charged with conspiracy and the sale of narcotics.
Other agents grab the driver of the white Camaro, Lee Hong of 3 Doyers Street in Chinatown. 
From inside his car, they say, they have recovered $7.5 million worth of heroin and a .38-caliber revolver.
''Who are you guys?'' yells a uniformed police officer with his hand on his pistol. 
He confronts what looks like a crowd of Manhattanites suddenly bristling with guns.
Often drug arrests take place before the officers of the local precinct can be warned. 
At such times, the agents can only hope the patrolman on the beat has cool nerves.
''D.E.A.,'' says Richard, flashing his identification.
''Oh,'' says the officer, putting his hand to his chest. 
''That's a relief.''
These arrests again are just a few more pieces falling into place. 
Since last September, Group 41 has seized 155 pounds of heroin and arrested 39 more people - an impressive record by the standards of law enforcement. 
And yet as long as Group 41 is among the few law- enforcement groups in the nation pursuing the mysteries of Chinese organized crime, officials acknowledge that most of the players and their activities will probably never be apprehended or known.
Today's work will continue into the night and into tomorrow morning. 
The prisoners must be read their rights and asked other names, faces and deals. 
The agents must search three houses with warrants. 
And they must pay a visit to a gambling parlor where someone last saw the man with the thick mustache.
And Richard must remember to call his wife. 
No, he will tell her, he cannot say when he will be home.
