
It took a Chinese-language petition signed by 3,000 immigrant seamstresses to get it started, and today it will be opened formally: the Garment Industry Day Care Center of Chinatown.
The dedication of the little red- brick schoolhouse in the heart of Chinatown culminates a cooperative effort by government and private business that the city would like to see duplicated, officials said.
Mayor Koch and Matilda Cuomo, the Governor's wife, will be at the opening, and the children, most of whom speak only Chinese, plan to serenade them with their favorite song in English: ''Jingle Bells.''
The cost of the center is being borne, in small part, by the parents of the children themselves. 
The idea for the center, however, came totally from the people involved, immigrant women who labor long hours as they struggle to make their way in their new country.
Garment Industry Day Care Center to open in Chinatown, NYC, after much petitioning by local residents who work small garment shops; children illustrated; Mayor Edward Koch and Mrs Matilda Cuomo to visit; NYC, factory owners' group and parents to share costs (S)Day Care Common in China
''In China, any unit that you belong to has a day-care center as a matter of course,'' said Katie Kwan, a union activist who helped lead a campaign to open the center.
She said the immigrant mothers ''can't believe it when they get here and there's nobody to take care of their kids.''
Because most of the husbands work in restaurants while their wives sew piecework, she said, the children were often taken along to work or left in groups with untrained babysitters for lack of an alternative.
Mrs. Kwan and other members of Local 23-25 of the International Ladies Garment Workers Union drew up a petition and spent their lunch hours carrying it up and down the narrow stairs of many of Chinatown's 500 small garment factories to gather the signatures. 
There were delays, she said, but in the end the union championed their cause.
 
Costs Are Subsidized
The center, at 115 Chrystie Street, opened its first classes last Nov. 
28. It now cares for 70 pre-kindergarten children of union members.
The Agency for Child Development of the city's Human Services Administration will be paying about half the operating costs, with funds from the Federal Emergency Jobs Act.
Private assistance comes from the Greater Blouse, Skirt and Undergarment Association Inc., which is made up of owners of the small factories for whom the immigrant seamstresses work. 
The association will pay $32 of the weekly cost of $82 per child.
To cover the rest of the cost, parents will be assessed by the city on a sliding scale pegged to income. 
The cost will range from $2 to $8 a week for each child.
''We would like to be able to market similar services to other employers,'' said Irene Greim, a spokesman for the Agency for Child Development. 
The city benefits by sharing day-care costs, and employers benefit by having the city handle administration, she said.
 
Rosh ha-Shanah Observed
The center also provides a service in helping the children adapt to the language and culture of their new home. 
Each of its four classes has at least one teacher who speaks Chinese, said the director, Mee Ling Chin. 
But after the first month or so, once the children get used to school, English will be the order of the day.
There are few signs of China in the decor or curriculum. 
The older children are already beginning to study the alphabet in English, not Chinese characters.
In Alice Leong's classroom, 3- and 4-year-olds are preparing a cardboard dragon for Chinese New Year Feb. 
2. But at Christmas, she said, they learned about Santa Claus, and they will also observe Rosh ha- Shanah, the Jewish New Year.
''We'll celebrate all the holidays,'' she said.
