
THROUGHOUT his childhood in China, it was common to step over the bodies of the dead and dying in the streets, recalled Dr. John McLean Morris, a professor at Yale University.
''Unwanted female infants were disposed of by throwing them through a small hole in one of the dozens of stone huts erected for the purpose around the countryside,'' he said.
Dr. Morris's experiences in Anhui Province as the son of a Presbyterian missionary were the genesis of his medical career. 
Dr. Morris, 67 years old, is now the chief of gynecology at the Yale-New Haven Hospital.
His lifelong contacts in China, which he left as a teen-ager, were cut off when the Communists took over in 1949. 
But they were revived two years ago when China's Ministry of Public Health invited Dr. Morris and a medical committee from Yale to reestablish an exchange program at Hunan Medical College in Changsha, capital of Hunan Province.
Contingent of 8 Chinese doctors and professors of medicine begin a year as observers at Yale-New Haven Hospital in Connecticut
Hunan Medical College, an affiliated hospital, nursing school and Yali High School (named for Yale), were built in the 1920's by the Yale-China Association with funds contributed by the philanthropist Edward Stephen Harkness. 
The complex flourished as a teaching and treatment center until the revolution, and remains one of the leading facilities of its kind in China.
But in 1951 the American staff was asked to leave the country and the property was nationalized by the Chinese Government. 
Today it is administered and operated by the Chinese, with Yale doctors serving only as visiting professors and surgeons.
In New Haven, an old, red-frame building on Temple Street houses the staff of the 80-year-old Yale-China Association, plus Chinese art, memorabilia and literature. 
The house vibrates these days with the excitement of Yale students and faculty preparing to depart for China, or introducing their newly arrived Chinese counterparts to life in New Haven.
A few months ago a contingent of eight Chinese doctors and professors of medicine began a year as observers at Yale-New Haven Hospital. 
Two American doctors are currently in China through the program, and others will be going later this year. 
Other American doctors have already been there on the Yale program and are now back in the United States.
Expenses of $10,000 for each Chinese doctor are paid by the association, which also pays for the Yale representatives at Hunan College and Hubei Medical College in Wuhan. 
The association's endowment fund of $1.2 million will increase by $500,000 through a settlement in which the Chinese Government agreed to make restitution for the property that was nationalized.
To help underwrite the $750,000 cost of the medical exchange and also a language program in China, the association conducts two annual tours of China for small groups of Americans, priced around $4,000 and tied to joining the 1,000-member association. 
It receives no financial support from Yale University, but operates ''in confluence with university policies,'' said John Bryan Starr, executive director of the association.
''The basis for the successful reestablishment of Yale-China ties is the overwhelming interest of the Chinese Government in scientific technology,'' Mr. Starr said. 
Chinese medicine, in Dr. Morris's opinion, is ''about where the United States was 40 years ago.''
At a recent gathering in Dr. Morris's office, his Chinese colleagues discussed some of the differences between medicine here and at home.
For one thing, ''women have taken over the field of gynecology,'' said Dr. Zhang Shichun, head of surgery at Hunan Medical College. 
Dr. Cheng Suqian, chief of gynecology at Peking Medical College and wife of a surgeon, noted that in China ''examinations for cervical cancer are mandatory for married women every other year. 
Most women are visited in their homes to obtain the (Pap) smear.''
The use of acupuncture, which Dr. Pei Wusun said enables his patients ''to remain conscious and take nourishment during open-heart surgery,'' is also used in the delivery of babies. 
''Anesthetics limit contractions and reduce the levels of oxygen for the infant,'' Dr. Cheng said.
''There are some Chinese practices that we might learn from,'' Dr. Morris said. 
''Certain aspects of acupuncture and herbal medicine, and their reluctance to take extraordinary measures to preserve a life.''
''Of course, the economics are taken into account to a greater extent there, but I think we may be going too far with these heroic procedures,'' he said, using as an example the use of mechanical means to keep premature infants alive.
The fact that American doctors may perform surgery in China, but no foreign doctor may do so here without an American medical license, has been a contentious issue with the Chinese.
''Observation is useful, but it is not the same,'' said Dr. Lu Xinsheng, a Hunan surgeon. 
Nevertheless, Dr. Morris receives an increasing number of applications each month from Chinese doctors who wish to come here and learn, he said.
A second and equally important program run by the association is the sponsorship of ''Bachelors,'' Yale graduate students with at least two years of Chinese language instruction, who are sent to China for two years as English teachers at the colleges in Hunan, Hubei, Wuhan and Hong Kong. 
About 14 students are involved in the program this year.
Leaving for China July 1 as a Bachelor is Julian Chang, a Chinese-American who visited China for the first time recently and experienced ''the old roots feeling that China is my homeland,'' he said. 
''There were minor cultural differences … no ice cubes on a hot day in Peking, but you get over that very quickly.''
As fluent in Russian as he is in Chinese, Mr. Chang majored in political science at Yale and contemplates a career in international relations.
''I'm interested to see how I deal with the bureaucracy of a Communist government. 
To me, China is like the United States of the 1860's - it has a huge potential.''
The numbers of students eager to become Bachelors are an indication that ''America's love-hate relationship with China is on an upswing of the pendulum,'' said Susan O'Sullivan of the China Council of the Asia Society, which is headquartered in Washington D.C. 
The Yale-China Association is a member of the Southern New England council of the society.
''Education is not the only basis for rekindled interest in China,'' Miss O'Sullivan pointed out. 
''North Carolina had strong ties with the Chinese tobacco industry at the turn of the century, and that council is becoming active again.''
Yale University has taken initial steps to institute a cooperative exchange program between the Yale School of Music and the Shanghai Conservatory, Mr. Starr said. 
Apart from the United States, where Stanford University in California and other institutions have been organizing exchange programs, the pursuit of person-to-person relations with China seems to interest only France among Western nations, he noted.
''A two-year stint teaching French in China is an alternative to military service for both men and women,'' he said of the French program. 
''There is a large colony of French nationals at Wuhan University,'' most of whom are involved in language programs, he said.
Jean Heller, a Bachelor going to China in July, looks forward to ''the excitement of seeing what is worthy of imitation on both sides.''
''Every relationship we form will be magnified and will send out waves of influence,'' she said.
