
FEI LO is the author of ''The Dim Sum Book: Classic Recipes from the Chinese Teahouse.''
 
By EILEEN YIN-FEI LO
V egetarianism in China is as old as Buddha. 
And the Chinese co ncept of elaborately arranged artistic banquets of many courses is as old as Confucius. 
Somewhere in time, felicitously and naturally, th e ideas came together. 
These days the vegetarian banquet, with beancu rd, vegetables and doughs artfully dressed to appear as something th ey are not, is common to such disparate parts of the country as Ca nton, Peking or Shanghai, whose cuisines are quite different.
One traditional center of vegetarianism is Hangzhou, whose name means ''City Across the Stream.''
Hangzhou is built surrounding the beautiful West Lake with its pavilions and palaces, its boats, its tree-shaded paths and gardens and its thickets of magnolias, camellias and azaleas.
Eileen Yin-Fei Lo discusses cooking vegetables the Chinese way
In the days when Hangzhou was a warm-weather resort for the wealthy of Shanghai, it had a tradition of specialty restaurants, a tradition that continues in a small way today, for it is in Hangzhou that one finds restaurants of many regions of China, including several fine Moslem eating places. 
It is in that city that the arts of carving melons and gourds into table decorations and arranging sliced foods on plates so that they resemble butterflies, roosters and birds flourish.
Hangzhou is also known for its restaurants serving temple food, the food of the Buddhist temples, vegetarian foods such as vegetables, soybean products and breads of grain.
One of these, more than 30 years old and perhaps its best, is the Spring Vegetable, on Yanan Street, just one short street away from the eastern rim of West Lake. 
On a recent trip to China I had the experience of eating in that restaurant a banquet that was as much an art exhibit as it was a meal. 
There were slices of beef that were actually kneaded dough, a fish constructed of mashed taro root, duck of bean curd and meatballs of minced vegetables. 
It was an artful feast, and a delicious one.
The Spring Vegetable is not the only vegetarian outpost in the resort city. 
Others include Kui Yuan Guan on Jiefang Road, justly famous for its vegetables and noodles; the Hangzhou Hotel Restaurant, perhaps the most sophisticated in the city; San Wai San inside the Hangzhou Botanical Garden, where the specialty is soup made with the vegetable called shuen chai, native to Hangzhou. 
But we were the first Westerners to come to the Spring Vegetable, we were told, and the restaurant wanted our banquet to be very special. 
And it was.
Much of the $30-per-person banquet was based on the soybean, one of China's most important staples. 
In most of the country it replaces the need for dairy products, providing more protein an acre, nutritionists tell us, than any livestock could produce. 
It is also quite versatile. 
The beans are seldom eaten as grown, they can be fermented, they can be ground into flour, they can be sprouted and those bean sprouts used as a vegetable accompaniment, they can be milled. 
When they are milled wet they form a spongy mass that when pressed dry and cooked become those bean curd cakes (called dau-fu by the Chinese, tofu by the Japanese) that are so popular these days. 
The bean curd skins are really a byproduct of boiling the soybeans, and are skimmed and dried and used often in soups.
The Spring Vegetable, just across the street from the Islam Food Shop, is a rather small restaurant, two floors high, and, like the majority of the restaurants in China, is somewhat short on decoration. 
It was obvious that the restaurant's effort goes into its food, which is as it should be.
We sat down around large round tables and after a sip of plum wine the first course came out. 
Actually it was a series of three cold platters of ''duck,'' ''chicken,'' and ''beef.''
Th e first was dried bean curd ski n rolled tightly and sliced across, dressed with sesame oil and quick ly deep-fried. 
It did indeed taste like pressed duck. 
The chicken w as likewise of bean curd skin, but skin that was rolled flat and then sliced so that it resembled slices of breast of chicken. 
The beef was a dough, kneaded, allowed to ferment, rinsed incold water, f lavored with anise and sugar and colored with dark soy sauce before frying. 
All the frying, by the way, was in peanut oil.
The second course was ''scallops,'' again made of fermented dough, flavored with garlic, vegetable stock and sugar and cut to resemble scallops. 
They were stir-fried with bok choy, the green stalk vegetable so widely used by the Chinese.
Three vegetable courses followed. 
First there were fresh bamboo shoots with soaked black mushrooms in a light soy sauce. 
Then came a chicken soup made of vegetable stock into which was put sliced bamboo shoots; then the soup was garnished with fresh roasted sesame seeds. 
Mushrooms and fresh water chestnuts in a thick sauce of soy and water-chestnut powder came next.
The sixth course was a platter of fresh bean curd cakes, their centers opened and filled with minced vegetables, and vegetarian spring rolls, filled with shredded bamboo shoots, mushrooms, water chestnuts and carrots. 
The skins of the spring rolls were made of dried bean curd.
The next dish was an imitation Chinese sausage, made of bean curd skins, tightly rolled, deep-fried, c olored wi th soy sauce and sliced diagonally. 
These were mixed with choy sum, a small stalk green vegetable, with sliced black mushrooms and fr esh tiny straw mushrooms.
Our palates were refreshed and sweetened with courses eight and nine. 
First came fresh sweet red dates coated with tapioca flour, then a sweet soup concocted of fresh water chestnuts cooked to tenderness, sweetened with rock candy and thickened with waterchestnut powder.
The highlight of the banquet was the 10th course: Our ''fish'' was presented. 
Its body consisted of taro root, (the poi of Hawaii) cooked until soft and seasoned with salt, pepper, sesame oil and sugar, then mashed. 
This was shaped like a fish. 
The head and gills were shaped out of fresh bean curd cakes. 
The tail and fins were finely cut dried bean curd skins. 
The aroma of the fish was nutlike (from the sesame oil dressing) and the platter was garnished with fresh, green coriander. 
It was a triumph.
The last two courses were almost anticlimactic, and would have been had they not been so good. 
There was a sub gum, which means a mixture of 10 ingredients, and it was sort of a reprise of stir-fried dried bean curd skins, slices of dough, vegetables and nuts. 
The finale consisted of a soup of fresh bean curd cut into small cubes, of vegetarian meatballs, chopped vegetables, bok choy and tiny fresh mushrooms.
That was to settle our stomachs, we were told, as were the cups of hot, steaming green tea, the Dragon Well tea for which Hangzhou is equally famous. 
It was altogether a splendid memory to take with us as we left on the train for Shanghai a couple of hours later.
 
Hong Kong
Two of Hong Kong's monasteries serve meatless, fishless meals. 
One is the Po Lin Monastery on Lan Tau Island, a day trip by boat from Hong Kong proper, where Buddhist monks will prepare lunch (with advance notice). 
The second is the Chang Chung Koon Monastery in Castle Peak, the New Territories, outside of Kowloon, where Taoist monks do the same. 
Arrangements are made through the Hong Kong Tourist Association.
