
China announced Friday that its frontier guards repulsed a large-scale attack by Vietnam Thursday across their tense border after 10 hours of heavy combat.
A dispatch by the official New China News Agency from what it said was the front line in Yunnan Province, where another battle was reported a month ago, said that after the fighting, ''the invaders fled in utter confusion.''
It said Chinese troops, working in the rain, had fortified their positions in preparation for a new attack.
 
First Reported by Vietnam
The border hostilities were confirmed by the Vietnamese News Agency. 
It accused China of shelling Ha Tuyen Province, which abuts Yunnan, with artillery and rockets since early July, killing civilians and seriously damaging property.
Vietnam has accused China of creating border incidents to tie down Vietnamese troops and take pressure off guerrillas in Cambodia who are fighting Vietnamese occupation forces there. 
China supports the Cambodian guerrillas, while the Vietnamese, who invaded Cambodia at the end of 1978 and installed the regime of Heng Samrin, are allies of the Soviet Union.
Chinese newspapers and radio carried the first domestic reports of the fighting Friday morning. 
The armed forces newspaper, Liberation Army accused Vietnam of taking ''a new ferocious step on its wrong road against China.''
The initial dispatch of the New China News Agency Thursday night said a Vietnamese division with artillery support mounted an incursion into Malipo County in Yunnan at 5 A.M. Thursday local time. 
But it said the Vietnamese ran into stiff resistance from Chinese frontier guards, who stood their ground and inflicted heavy casualties.
 
Battle Reported Over
''Fierce fighting was still going on at sunset,'' the Chinese press agency said Thursday night. 
Its report Friday implied that the battle was over, at least for the time being.
A broadcast by the Voice of Vietnam, monitored in Bangkok today, repeated the Vietnam News Agency report that Chinese gunners had fired 5,000 artillery shells into two districts of Ha Tuyen Province this month. 
But it made no mention of the battle that China said took place Thursday.
The Vietnamese radio also said more than 200,000 artillery shells had been fired into Vietnam's six northernmost provinces from China in the last two months, wounding hundreds of civilians and destroying homes and property.
There was no way to confirm the accuracy of either version, since independent observers have not been allowed into the remote area. 
Similar recriminations have been traded off and on over the last three months. 
Foreign diplomats in Hanoi and Peking believe that reports on both sides tend to be exaggerated for greater propaganda effect.
The reports of border clashes have been circulated since early April, which is far longer than the duration reported in previous years. 
The tensions in the past coincided with Vietnam's spring offensive against Chinese-backed guerrillas in Cambodia and tapered off as the fighting there wound down.
Members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations reportedly told the United States and other ''partner'' nations at a meeting in Indonesia Thursday that the anti-Vietnamese coalition in Cambodia was ''working very well'' and causing serious military problems for Hanoi.
 
Frontier Guards Exhorted
Liberation Army Daily, which is read in the Chinese armed forces, contended today that hostilities with Vietnam were continuing. 
If the Vietnamese provoked border incidents, the newspaper said, ''we can do nothing but hit them back in self-defense and fight to the finish.''
It urged China's frontier guards, who operate as light infantrymen with artillery support, to defend every inch of Chinese territory and hit back hard at Vietnamese attackers. 
Liberation Army Daily is not permitted reading for foreigners, but the New China News Agency took the unusual step of circulating extracts of the article to give it greater authority.
Liberation Army Daily charged that Vietnam was committing fresh troops to its continuing border conflicts because it regarded China as the biggest obstacle to its aggressive ambitions of controlling Southeast Asia.
 
New Strains With Soviet
The latest reports of fighting come at a time when Moscow's support of Hanoi has caused new strains in Chinese-Soviet relations. 
On June 25, Liberation Army Daily accused the Soviet Union of inciting the Vietnamese to engage in ''armed provocations'' along the border. 
Otherwise, it said, ''the Vietnamese authorities could not have been so brazen in their outrages.''
Last week the weekly magazine Outlook called Vietnam's ''strategic alliance'' with the Soviet Union the root of tension and turbulence in Southeast Asia. 
Peking has charged that Moscow is using Vietnam as a forward base for its hegemonistic strategy in Asia and the Pacific.
Vietnam has leveled similar charges at China. 
On Thursday, Vietnam's Foreign Minister, Nguyen Co Thach, said China had launched an ''absolutely unprovoked attack'' at several points along their border. 
Mr. Thach, who was flying to Mongolia, another Soviet ally, for a visit, contended that Asia should guard against China's ''new expansionist designs.''
 
Terrain Is Rugged
The clashes along the Chinese-Vietnamese border are confined to a rugged terrain of densely vegetated mountains, limestone cliffs and narrow valleys and streams, which would normally restrict the scope of military operations. 
The reported fighting seems to be over the high ground that can dominate both sides of the border.
Friday's Chinese press accounts observed that Vietnam mounted a regimental-sized attack in the same area of Malipo County earlier on June 11. 
Chinese frontier guards said then that they repulsed six Vietnamese assaults that day, inflicting heavy casualties.
By contrast, the Vietnamese claimed to have retaken three Chinese positions dug a half mile inside Ha Tuyen province, capturing ''many'' Chinese prisoners and seizing 12 artillery pieces and 6 mortars.
The New China News Agency quoted Chinese military sources as saying the Vietnamese spent a month preparing for Thursday's attack, a period that would have given Chinese troops time to reinforce their positions.
