
Pope John Paul II, who has based his globe-trotting pontificate on finely tuned diplomatic acumen and pastoral compassion, is going to face a severe test of those skills as he pursues his ''heartfelt longing'' for closer relations with Catholics in China.
Encouraged by the fact that the Chinese Government is allowing churches to reopen and Christians to practice their faith publicly, the Pope closed his recent Asian trip by expressing a desire to heal the breach that has separated the Vatican and Catholics in China for more than two decades. 
He dispatched the Vatican's Secretary of State to Hong Kong to meet with the ailing Chinese Bishop Dominic Tang, presumably to discuss ties with Catholics in China.
But diplomatic visits may not be enough to reconcile the Vatican either with the estimated three million Chinese Catholics, nor with China's Communist Party leadership. 
For the past three decades, China's Catholics have existed in an anomalous situation. 
Their persecution by the party on one hand and their virtually unprecedented independence from the Vatican on the other have combined to create an almost distinct brand of Catholicism. 
A rapprochement with the Vatican will undoubtedly be complicated both by doctrinal and by political difficulties.
Vatican hopes to close brach that has separated Catholics in China
To many Chinese, moreover, the history of Christian missions is an unhappy tale of foreign domination. 
In the early days of the Christian mission to China, millions were converted to Christianity, but the church there remained tightly controlled by the missionaries. 
Of the 143 Roman Catholic bishops in China in the 1940's, only 20 were Chinese. 
During the early days of the Communist uprisings, missionaries were identified with the imperialism of Western nations, especially with America's ''gunboat diplomacy.''
Chinese animosity toward outside churches increased when millions of Christians fled the country after the 1949 revolution, and the Vatican urged Catholics who stayed on the mainland not to cooperate with the new Government. 
Later, the Government-sponsored Catholic Patriotic Association ordained bishops without Vatican approval. 
The Vatican censured the church in China and still considers those bishops ''validly, but illicitly'' consecrated.
At the same time, years of persecution and isolation, especially during the Cultural Revolution, forced Christians in China to develop an indigenous Christianity in a hostile environment. 
Regular public worship became impossible. 
Gung Binmei, the Vatican-appointed Bishop of Shanghai, was sentenced to life imprisonment in 1960, and is still in jail; meanwhile, the Vatican has refused to recognize Zhang Zhuishu, elected Bishop of Shanghai by the Chinese Catholics in 1960. 
Catholics continued to worship in Latin, unaware of changes in the church.
The official policy of Chinese Catholics is that the Vatican is responsible for the break in relations. 
When several Maryknoll priests met with the Bishop of Peking, Michael Fu Tieshan and other Chinese Christian leaders in January, a priest told the Rev. John Cioppa that he did not have ''gan ching'' - feelings of loyalty and affection - for the Pope, because the Vatican had ordered Chinese Catholics not to be patriotic. 
Further resentment is provoked by the Vatican's recognition of Taiwan.
Chinese Government officials and some Chinese Catholics also feel that foreigners are still meddling in their affairs. 
For instance, a pamphlet issued by the Roman Catholic bishop of Hong Kong telling Chinese Catholics how to celebrate the mass ''in situations of emergency and persecution,'' was seen as an attempt to interfere with the authority of bishops in China. 
Anglican Bishop Ding Guangxun, formerly head of the theological seminary in Nanking, told visitors this year that ''all missionary activities, including radio broadcasts beamed at China, are expressions of disrespect and unfriendliness.''
Clearly, both Christian and non-Christian Chinese are wary of anything that might tie the church to foreign influence. 
Bishop Michael (an irregularly consecrated bishop), responded coolly to the Pope's comments about closer ties and said Chinese Catholics would not surrender ''organizational independence'' to Rome.
But despite continuing tensions, both the Vatican and the Chinese feel the need to heal old wounds. 
Some Chinese Christians are actively seeking contacts with churches in the rest of the world. 
A delegation of Protestants visited the World Conference on Religion and Peace meeting in Princeton last year, and Chinese Catholics will be represented at a conference on the church in China in Canada this fall.
The theme sounded by Pope John Paul during his Asian trip was ''forget the past, look to the future.''
But he is likely to be extremely circumspect in his overtures to the Chinese Catholics. 
More than any other recent Pontiff, he knows what a church faces in a hostile society, having begun his own theology studies secretly in Nazi-occupied Poland. 
He may also know that if there is to be a rapprochement, it is likely the Vatican that will have to make the most compromises, such as endorsing the self-government of the Chinese church, or even accepting the bishops ordained without Rome's approval. 
Neither the Peking Government nor the Chinese Catholics - for reasons of patriotism or political expediency - are likely to do anything that would imply that the church in China is subject to Rome.
The Rev. Lawrence Murphy, M.M., president emeritus of Seton Hall University in New Jersey, who went to China with the Maryknoll delegation, agrees that future contact with Christians in China must be on Chinese terms. 
No one wants to repeat the missionary mistakes of the past, he said. 
Like many former missionaries, Father Murphy admits that the church did not always respect the values and beliefs it found in other cultures. 
''The mission enterprise was once colored by Western colonialism,'' he observed. 
''But today the view of mission in the world has changed.''
