
The Georgia Institute of Technology will become the first American university to enter into joint ventures to help develop industries in China for the manufacture of advanced-technology products.
The agreement was signed in Peking last weekend by officials of Georgia Tech and the China Association for Science and Technology, an umbrella organization representing hundreds of Chinese professional scientific and engineering groups. 
It will cover products ranging from ultralight aircraft to optical fibers.
According to the terms of the agreement, Georgia Tech will enter into collaborative efforts with the Chinese in the development of small to medium- size technology-based industries in Shenzhen City, near Hong Kong; Tianjin, which is about 70 miles southeast of Peking, and Nantong, about 65 miles northwest of Shanghai.
Georgia Institute of Technology and China Association for Science and Technology sign agreement under which Georgia Tech will help develop small to medium-size technology-based industries in Shenzhen City, Tianjin and Nantong; Chinese are initially expected to put up $500,000 in seed money toward agreement; Reagan Administration backs agreement (M)
As part of the agreement, Georgia Tech is studying the possibility of opening an office in China to coordinate its work. 
In addition, representatives of Chinese industries may be based in Atlanta at the university's Advanced Technology Development Center, a nonprofit organization set up by state and university officials to assist in the development of high technology industries.
 
$500,000 From China
A spokesman for Georgia Tech said the Chinese were expected to initially put up about $500,000 in seed money toward the agreement.
By participating in joint venture contracts that could eventually lead to the development, licensing and exporting of specific industrial applications, Georgia Tech has gone well beyond previous arrangements that American universities have had in China.
For the most part, these have been confined to scholarly exchanges that involve representatives of Chinese scientific or academic institutions.
Officials at Georgia Tech said their agreement had the backing of the Reagan Administration, which has relaxed trade restrictions with China. 
Among the members of the Georgia delegation who went to China to sign the agreement was George Busbee, a former Governor of Georgia who is a member of President Reagan's Export Council.
The products identified by the Chinese that could be covered by specific contracts include a variety of technical and consumer items, such as solar energy cells, hearing aids, air-conditioners, high speed elevators, radiophones, electrical circuit boards, woven fabrics, polyester filament and telephone equipment.
 
Potential Military Uses
According to the Commerce Department, most of the products on the Chinese list include components or technology that are subject to Government export controls because they have potential military applications. 
As a result, an export license will be required before the products or particular technology can be transferred overseas.
Henry Bourne, vice president for academic affairs at Georgia Tech, said the agreement marked part of what he called a larger trend, in which Chinese scientists will continue to reach out to research laboratories at American universities for help in developing science and engineering technology.
''I don't think we'll occupy a unique position for very long,'' said Dr. Bourne, adding that Georgia Tech ''has very little to lose and a lot to gain for the country as a whole by building these kinds of bridges with the China.''
But a variety of experts on trade and technology with China said they could not say for certain that this agreement would lead to similar relationships with research facilities at other American universities.
''I would be surprised to see a large number of such agreements,'' said Pierre Perrolle, an official with the National Science Foundation in Washington. 
He said what was significant about the agreement was that it reflected ''the loosening that has been going on in the Chinese system that allows a section of industry or a group of academics to experiment with such an approach.''
 
Accord With Japanese
The agreement not only reflects the growing Chinese appetite for American technology, but increasing aggressiveness on the part of American universities in seeking research support abroad. 
Last year, for example, Georgia Tech entered into an agreement with Nissho Iwai, a Japanese trading company, to market its technology and inventions in Japan.
In the last five years, financing of university research in this country by Japanese industry has increased dramatically.
Over all, Georgia Tech ranks third in the nation in the amount of public and private support it receives for engineering research and development.
According to A. Ray Moore, a spokesman for Georgia Tech, a representative of the Chinese Association for Science and Technology visited several research sites earlier this year, including the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the Research Triangle complex in North Carolina.
He said the Chinese settled on Georgia Tech, in part, because of the university's new Advanced Technology Development Center. 
The Chinese have since established their own New Technology Development Center, using Georgia Tech as its model.
