
The China Times, considered the most influential Chinese-language newspaper in the United States, has ceased publication.
The paper's publisher, Yu Chi Chung, who also publishes The China Times in Taiwan, abruptly announced earlier this month that he would shut down the American paper because of ''business difficulties.''
Some experts on Chinese politics say, however, that the liberal China Times was the victim of Taiwan politics.
Prof. Andrew Nathan of Columbia University's East Asian Institute, said the events leading up to the demise of The China Times provided ''a window on Taiwanese politics'' as well as evidence of ''the long arm of the K.M.T. into the American press.''
He was referring to Taiwan's ruling party, the Kuomingtang.
The China Times, published in New York City's Chinatown and considered most influential Chinese-language newspaper in United States, ceases publication; paper's publisher, Yu Chi Chung, who also publishes paper in Taiwan, cites 'business difficulties,' but others say liberal publication was victim of Taiwan politics; photo (M)
Professor Nathan added that the events had also shown the tough response by the Taiwan leadership to any suggestion of a reconciliation with Peking, particularly after the recent agreement by Britain to turn over control of Hong Kong to China in 1997.
 
Belief in Democracy
''Most Chinese-American intellectuals are very sad because these events are not a good sign for the future of Chinese democracy and a free Chinese press,'' said Lu Keng, the publisher of the independent Chinese-American Sino Daily Express in New York. 
''The conservatives, afraid of any change, remain the dominant faction in the Nationalist Party leadership while the liberals like The China Times believe Taiwan must go the democratic way to compete with mainland China.''
In Washington, a representative of Taiwan's unofficial mission, the Coordinating Council for North American Affairs, referred to a statement by a Government spokesman in Taipei on Nov. 
19.
The spokesman, Dr. Chang King-yuh was quoted as having said that The China Times of America was closed because of ''financial difficulties and personnel problems.''
He said rumors that the Nationalist Government had used pressure to cause the closing were ''groundless.''
 
Two American Editions
In Taiwan, The China Times is the largest newspaper, with a circulation of more than one million. 
The American newspaper was separately written and edited, with a more liberal editorial view than its Taiwan counterpart, former employees said. 
Publication began Sept. 
1, 1982, in two locations: New York and Los Angeles. 
The New York edition grew to a circulation of more than 20,000, and the Los Angeles edition had a circulation of 10,000. 
The newspaper, which was published daily and Sundays, employed a total of 200 people.
The newspaper's former chief editorial writer, Yu Kuo Chi, said he believed that the publisher could have overcome his financial difficulties and that the newspaper was closed ''mainly for political reasons - just too liberal for the leaders in Taiwan.''
The paper's problems reportedly erupted last summer over coverage of the Olympic Games in Los Angeles. 
The team from China, participating for the first time, won 15 gold medals. 
While most Taiwan news organizations downplayed the event, The China Times of America gave the Chinese triumph front-page coverage.
This coverage, according to news reports from Taipei, was discussed at a meeting of the Standing Committee of the Central Committee of the Nationalist Party on Sept. 
5. The publisher, a member of the Standing Committee, was accused of ''making propaganda for the Communist bandits.''
The publisher was reported to have responded that his paper had always been attacked by the Communists and that, as for the Olympic Games, the paper was merely reporting the facts.
Then, on Sept. 
12, The China Times of America published an editorial with the headline: ''There Is No Conflict Between Politics and Religion, Only a Reagan Problem.''
Criticism of the Reagan Administration is unusual in Taiwan-American news organizations.
''Reagan and his fundamentalist comrades were the commanders of the Dallas convention,'' the editorial said. 
''They cooperated to produce the most reactionary platform of the Republican Party in several decades.''
In Taiwan, President Chiang Ching- kuo accused the newspaper of ''hurting Sino-American relations.''
 
Writers Were Dismissed
Mr. Yu, the publisher, flew to New York on Sept. 
28 and dismissed both the chief editorial writer and the subordinate who wrote the Reagan editorial.
This apparently did not satisfy the Taipei leadership, and the publisher was told that in the future, the ruling party in Taiwan would appoint the general editor, the chief of editorials and the general manager of the American newspaper.
It was reported that until Mr. Yu bowed to these demands, he would not be able to export capital from Taiwan to help finance his American venture.
On Nov. 
11, Mr. Yu announced that the publication would cease.
The closing occurred at a time when the Chinese-American community was nervous over the killing of a Chinese writer, Henry Liu, the author of a biography critical of President Chiang of Taiwan.
''It's unfortunate that pressure from the K.M.T. forced the closure of The China Times,'' said John Wang, a Chinese journalist.''Although it was pro- Taiwan, The China Times reporting on China was balanced and it raised the standard of Chinese journalism in this country. 
It could have been a useful forum to encourage further liberalization in mainland China and strenghten Taiwan's credibility as it moves towards democracy.''
Andrew Kwan, chief editor of another Chinese language newspaper in America, the pro-Peking China Daily News, insisted that financial problems were not the major factor behind the closing, but rather ''pressure from Taiwan.''
