
China said today that its forces had counterattacked against Vietnam in recent days after weeks of ''provocations'' along the border.
The Foreign Ministry statement today gave no indication of the scope of the military actions undertaken by Peking in recent days, nor any other details.
But officials said that the military actions were continuing, and were on a scale greater than has usually been the case in the sporadic fighting since 1979.
China reports its forces have counterattacked against Vietnam after week of 'provocations' along border; Foreign Ministry gives no indication of scope of military actions only to say they are continuing and are on greater-than-usual scale (M)
For the moment, Western diplomats here said that a new war seemed unlikely. 
They noted that Chinese military leaders told a visiting American military delegation last week that Peking did not intend to prejudice its domestic economic growth with military ''adventures.''
 
Heavy Losses in 1979
Moreover, the diplomats said, it was far from clear that Chinese prospects in a new war would be any better than in 1979, when Peking incurred heavy losses against stiff Vietnamese defenses.
Nonetheless, there were signs that tensions in the region had increased to a dangerous degree as a result of recent Vietnamese attacks on Chinese- supported guerillas in Cambodia, which has been occupied by Vietnam since 1978. 
Among other things, the attacks have sharpened longstanding animosities between China and the Soviet Union, Vietnam's ally.
As the fighting between China and Vietnam has developed, Peking and moscow have sent high-ranking envoys to reaffirm their stands.
The Chinese Foreign Minister, Wu Xueqian, was in Bangkok, Thailan, today, where he was reported to have told his Thai counterpart, Sidhi Savetsila, that China would ''teach Vietnam a lesson'' if Vietnamese troops carried their attacks on Cambodian guerillas into Thailand. 
The phrase was the same as that used by china's pre-eminent leader, Deng Xiaoping, to justify the 1979 attack on Vietnam.
Meanwhile, a Soviet Deputy Prime Minister, Nikolai V. Talyzin, is visiting Vietnam on a mission that has been officially described in Hanoi as one of support for Vietnam's ''defense'' and ''economic reconstruction.''
Western military experts here noted that a hint of some Chinese action came earlier this month when five additional Chinese infantry divisions were moved into forward areas, along with several hundred additional combat aircraft.
A Vietnamese Foreign Ministry statement issued five days ago indicated that a focal point of the fighting was in an area that the two armies contested vigorously last April. 
The statement said that for three days last week Chinese forces occupying hills inside Vietnamese had bombarded surrounding areas, firing more than 500,000 shells and mortar rounds.
