
Social unrest is unavoidable as China continues to change its economic and political structure, Prime Minister Li Peng told a meeting of senior security personnel on Tuesday.
Today, the Chinese Public Security Minister, Wang Fang, said at the same forum that riots and ''anti-revolutionary activities'' were growing in frequency across the country and must be dealt with harshly.
Mr. Wang also said that foreign-instigated sabotoge had recently increased, although he refused to specify which countries were responsible.
These admissions of social upheaval, and of sabotage, are remarkable in a country where the leadership takes pains to present a portrait of a society at peace with itself despite occasional publicized incidents of protest or disturbance.
While Chinese leaders have acknowledged the fact of criminal activity -pictures of criminals on trial are regularly broadcast on the evening news -crime is routinely described as relatively minor and under control. 
The statements by Mr. Li and Mr. Wang seem to belie these contentions.
 
Unruly Students and Monks
Since late 1986, China has had several instances of acute social disturbance, including a wave of student demonstrations that was crushed by the police in January 1987 and a series of violent protests late that year and early in 1988 by Tibetan Buddhist monks calling for independence of the region from Beijing.
But the Chinese leadership remains aware of the possibility of spreading social upheaval as the country's ambitious program of economic restructuring spurs sudden and intense inflation, a recent phenomenon that has unsettled most urban residents who see their already small incomes being rapidly eroded.
Mr. Li's remarks were not reported in full; brief excerpts were published by the official New China News Agency on Tuesday night.
''Li said that deepening the reform will unavoidably cause some 'social upheavals' and sharpen various contradictions,'' according to the Government press agency's account. 
''Organs of public security should be fully prepared to deal with any kind of trouble-making, riots, sabotage and serious crimes, Li urged.''
 
Veiled Political Reference
The Prime Minister, who assumed his post in March, also called for more serious penalties for ''crimes harmful to the country's political stabilityI,'' the press agency said.
Although he was not specific, he apparently referred to the sporadic outbreaks of protest by college students as well as the continuing unrest in Tibet. 
Chinese authorities regularly denounce student protests, saying they threaten to upset political stabilityI. 
Several Chinese journalists said their papers have been instructed to play down news of strikes in Eastern Europe related to economic reform policies there and to ignore incidents of domestic unrest.
Late last month, 1,000 people from a village southwest of Beijing, who were protesting the dumping of polluted water through their community, were clubbed by hundreds of police officers who broke up the demonstration. 
Only after the incident was reported in foreign newspapers did the official press mention the protest, and even then it ignored the actions of the police.
Mr. Wang's remarks, the first of this kind in many years, acknowledged the spread of antistate agitation, sabotage and rioting. 
As with Mr. Li's comments, the Chinese press agency only paraphrased his speech.
''While riots - especially ones involving anti-revolutionary activities -are on the rise,'' Mr. Wang said, ''sabotage instigated from abroad has also recently been intensified.''
No reports of sabotage by foreign agents or of Chinese acting at the behest of foreign powers have appeared in the country's newspapers in recent years, so it was not clear to what exactly Mr. Wang was referring.
 
Potential for More Trouble
Last month, groups of students at Beijing University organized a series of demonstrations to protest against inadequate living conditions and price increases. 
The protests, quickly stifled by university authorities and the police, exposed the potential for wider unrest caused by urban inflation.
As the Chinese economy shifts toward a more market-oriented system, prices, especially in urban areas, have risen sharply in response to pent-up demand. 
The cost of food and basic consumer goods, the two largest expenditures for city families, are now climbing at an annual rate of nearly 20 percent, far exceeding salary increases.
While it appears that there have been no organized protests by workers in urban areas over the price increases, it is clear that the degree of strain is worrying Chinese leaders. 
Already, some income subsidies have been granted in an effort to alleviate the squeeze.
But the leadership has so far given no indication that it intends to retreat from its economic policies, even if they mean some short-term pain for urban dwellers, who make up about 20 percent of the national population.
