
The independent Chinese Catholic Church has restored a large 19th-century church in Peking, in time for use before Christmas, an Italian religious news agency said today.
An Vatican radio expert on Catholiism in China said the church would probably be used by the Patriotic Catholic Association, the group that was created by the Chinese authorities in 1957 to supplant the Vatican as the controlling body.
The religious news agency, Agenzia di Informazioni Missionarie, which is operated by missionary orders, identified the Peking church as the Church of the Savior, a large building built in 1887, and said that Catholics had collected money to install an organ.
The agency said it would be the third church to reopen in Peking in recent months as part of a more relaxed Government attitude toward Catholics.
The Church of the Savior was closed in the 1950's, and Maoist Red Guards used it as a warehouse during the Cultural Revolution, the agency said.
 
Gesture Toward Catholics
The Vatican radio expert said of the reopening, ''It could be a genuine gesture or it could be political, in the sense that the Government wants to demonstrate that there is religious freedom in China, or simply that it seeks the support of Chinese Catholics.''
The Vatican seemed at pains to portray the decision as a Government gesture toward Catholics, who have been treated more liberally of late, after repression during the Cultural Revolution. 
The Vatican radio said recently that 51 Catholic churches were reopened by the Chinese authorities last month in Fujian Province alone.
The Chinese Catholic Church broke with the Vatican in 1957 under Government pressure and now ordains its own bishops and priests. 
Rejecting the innovations of the Second Vatican Council (1962-65), the Chinese church still celebrates mass in Latin.
The Chinese Government's Religious Affairs Bureau, which supervises religious faiths in China, estimates that there are as many as three million Catholics in the country.
Pope John Paul II has rejected the contention of the Chinese church that it is Catholic, but he has said that he favors a warming of ties with China. 
He repeated that appeal in a special message to the Chinese people in July.
 
Taiwan Ties a Stumbling Block
Similarly, the Vatican has played down its links with Taiwan, presumably in the hope of eventually establishing ties with Peking. 
The Vatican's diplomatic relations with Taiwan have been a stumbling block to normalization of relations with Peking.
China has continued to crack down on priests and faithful suspected of maintaining ties with the Vatican. 
But recent developments have rekindled Vatican hopes for improvement.
There have been visits by Roman Catholic prelates to China, including discussions with leaders of the Chinese church. 
Last January, the Rev. Aloysius Jin Luxian, who long supported ties with Rome, was appointed Auxiliary Bishop of Shanghai.
In July, a Shanghai court released the Rev. Ignatius Kung, 84 years old, who was appointed Bishop of Shanghai by the Vatican in 1950 and spent more than 30 years in forced-labor camps after having been accused of anti-Government activity.
The Vatican's astronomical observatory recently signed an agreement of cooperation with China, including the transfer to a Chinese university of a telescope from the observatory at Castel Gandolfo.
