
China, on the eve of Premier Zhao Ziyang's first visit to the United States, is testing the waters of international capitalism.
The experiment, which began on a significant scale only last spring, is being conducted worldwide. 
In the United States, for example, the Chinese province of Guangdong has invested in a meatpacking plant in Clive, Iowa. 
The China International Trust and Investment Corporation has taken a 19 percent interest in Santec, a personal computer company based in Amherst, N.H. 
And the China National Metals and Minerals Import and Export Corporation has joined the Wheeling-Pittsburgh Steel Corporation in an international joint venture to trade metals and minerals.
Outside the United States, China is negotiating investments in potash mining in Saskatchewan and wood pulp manufacturing in British Columbia; has bought into a forestry project on the Solomon Islands and has invested in fisheries in Sri Lanka.
According to a State Department estimate, the overall value of such investment abroad by Peking may be as high as $1 billion when Hong Kong real estate is included. 
But analysts say the figure is certain to rise as China becomes more comfortable with the hurly-burly ways of capitalist markets.
 
Display of 'Unusual' Confidence
''It shows a confidence by Peking in the international economic system that is certainly unusual for a Communist government,'' said one Administration foreign trade official who asked not to be identified. 
''It also shows a confidence in their own abilities to get out and play with the big boys.''
The issues of bilateral trade and investment are expected to be major topics during the Chinese Prime Minister's visit to the United States and Canada. 
Mr. Zhao, who will be the highest ranking Chinese official to visit Washington since China's leader, Deng Xiaoping, came here in 1979, is expected to sign an agreement on industrial cooperation while in Washington. 
Mr. Zhao left Honolulu today after a day of sightseeing there, and was scheduled to arrive in Williamsburg, Va., early Monday to continue his North American tour. 
He is scheduled to meet with President Reagan on Tuesday.
According to one American official, a nuclear-technology exchange agreement could also be reached during the Chinese Prime Minister's three-day visit to Washington. 
Such a treaty would permit American companies to sell nuclear power reactors to China, which has an ambitious program on the drawing boards to increase electric power generation for several of its major cities.
American analysts say the Chinese have several specific objectives for their investment and trading program: to improve their technical and management skills; raise foreign exchange earnings; get around protectionist barriers that are rising in many of their markets, and secure a stable source of supply of raw materials.
This investment abroad coincides with a rising interest by American companies in joint ventures in China and a new concentration by both Governments on concluding a treaty defining rights and obligations of investors in both countries.
American industrialists see important markets developing in China as it continues with ambitious expansion programs aimed at quadrupling output by the year 2000.
Last year, 20 American companies - including Squibb, Occidental Petroleum, American Motors and Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing - announced expansion moves in China. 
According to the National Council for United States-China Trade, a body with a membership of 500 American companies that facilitates trade with China, the overall stake of the 20 companies is about $100 million.
Along with two-way investment, two-way trade is also picking up. 
According to the council, trade between the two nations could reach a record $5.5 billion to $6 billion this year compared with $4.4 billion last year. 
The rise will be led by growing sales of American capital goods and wheat, the council says.
To date, American companies have been faring well in the China market, Over stiff European, Canadian and even Russian competition, for example, General Electric recently won a contract to provide 200 diesel electric locomotives for Chinese railroads, which will add more than $200 million to the export total this year.
 
Big Honeywell Order
And under recently relaxed Washington guidelines for the sale of American high technology goods to China, Honeywell recently won clearance to sell $23 million worth of personal computers.
According to figures filed with the International Monetary Fund, which it joined in 1980, China has accumulated some $20 billion in foreign exchange and gold reserves in recent years. 
But many analysts expect that the reserves may quickly decline as China gets deeper into its domestic industrial expansion programs. 
According to its own estimates, China may be spending as much as $50 billion by the end of the century to expand coal production and $20 billion on offshore oil development.
Some of the expected slack is likely to be taken up through development loans, however. 
With strong American backing after the restoration of full diplomatic ties in December 1978, China became a member of both the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank in 1980 - accepting their disclosure requirements.
 
$1 Billion World Bank Loan
China has already received about $1 billion in loans from the World Bank. 
Senior bank officials, such as David W. Berk, acting division chief for China programs, and Edwin R. Lim, senior economist for East Asia and the Pacific region, project that China's borrowing could rise to $2 billion a year in the second half of the 1980's.
Meanwhile, Peking has been putting its huge currency reserves to work in both direct foreign investment and the capital markets.
The China International Trust and Investment Corporation, the vehicle for much of the foreign investment, recently drew $100 million from Tokyo capital markets. 
The Development Corporation of Fujian Province, just across the Formosa Straits from Taiwan, also borrowed around $20 million in Tokyo recently.
