
Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang said today that when he visits the White House next week he will not press President Reagan to halt ''immediately or completely'' the sale of United States military hardware to Taiwan.
But he said he expected the United States to abide by the pledge it gave in a joint communique in 1982 to start phasing out such arms deliveries.
Mr. Zhao made the comments in an interview with American and Canadian correspondents based in Peking, whom he agreed to receive before his trip to North America. 
The meeting underscored the importance that Peking appears to attach to the visit, the first official trip by a Chinese Prime Minister to North America. 
Deng Xiaoping, China's paramount leader, visited the United States in 1979.
Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang says when he visits White House next week he will not press Pres Reagan for immediate halt to sale of US military hardware to Taiwan, but he does expect US to abide by pledge it gave in joint communique in 1982 to start phasing out such arms deliveries; says he seeks to develop Chinese-US relations; Zhao's trip will be first official trip by Chinese Prime Minister to North America; photo (M)
The trip by Mr. Zhao, as head of government, opens an exchange of visits with President Reagan, who is scheduled to come here in April.
 
Tone Is Conciliatory
Mr. Zhao broke little new ground in a question-and-answer session that lasted an hour and a quarter at the Great Hall of the People. 
But his remarks were clearly conciliatory as he sketched out prospects for cooperation and played down difficulties that have marked the relationship over the last few years.
Although ''great progress'' has been made, Mr. Zhao said, ''the level of Chinese-American relations is far from what should be desired.''
''China attaches importance to the development of Chinese-U.S. relations,'' he declared. 
''We hope that through joint efforts of our two sides we will be able to remove obstacles, so that relations between our two countries can develop on a stable and durable basis.''
The 64-year-old Prime Minister talked animatedly in the pronounced drawl of his native Henan Province, stopping sometimes to sip from a glass of orangeade. 
In contrast to the officials around him, including Foreign Minister Wu Xueqian, Mr. Zhao wore a well-tailored brown Western business suit with a pale yellow shirt and coordinated polka-dot tie.
 
Visit Begins in Hawaii
The Prime Minister said he would fly across the United States three times during his trip, which will take him first to Hawaii next weekend. 
He will visit Washington, New York and San Francisco between Jan. 
10 and 16, before going on to Ottawa for the Canadian part of his trip from Jan. 
17 to 23.
Mr. Zhao made clear that the political climate would continue to affect China's economic dealings with the United States.
''The United States is the biggest developed country in the world,'' he told the reporters. 
''It has capital and technology. 
While China is the biggest developing country in the world. 
It has untapped resources and markets. 
So there is much that our two sides can do in developing economic cooperation and trade between our two countries.''
''Of course,'' he continued, ''economic matters are different from political matters, but in the final analysis they are not absolutely separate. 
If the potential in economic cooperation and trade and technological cooperation are to be fully kept, there must be a good political relationship.''
 
Taiwan the Main Problem
Turning to the major difficulty, Mr. Zhao reiterated China's position that United States backing for the Nationalist regime on Taiwan constitutes interference in China's internal affairs. 
The Peking Government treats Taiwan as a breakaway province that must be reu nited with the mainland. 
Because the Chinese have struggled for centuries to reunify their country, Mr. Zhao said, ''there is no room for China to make any concessions on the question of Taiwan.''
Mr. Zhao conceded that President Reagan's feeling of friendship toward Taiwan was understandable. 
''China is not against the United States' maintaining unofficial economic, trade and cultural relations with the people in Taiwan,'' he said. 
''Actually, there are relevant provisions for it in the communique establishing diplomatic relations between China and the United States.''
But he insisted that Washington must not regard Taiwan as a separate political entity.
Three joint communiques now govern relations between the two countries, the Prime Minister observed, and China makes no demands beyond them. 
Mr. Zhao alluded to the 1972 Shanghai communique that opened the way to normalization, the document that established formal diplomatic relations on Jan. 
1, 1979 and the communique of Aug. 
17, 1982 that tried to bridge the differences over the Taiwan issue.
 
'A Legacy From History'
All these documents accepted the premise that there was only one China, with Peking as its capital, and that Taiwan was an inalienable part.
''The question of U.S. relations with Taiwan is a legacy from history,'' Mr. Zhao said. 
''That was why we did not put it forward as a precondition for the establishment of diplomatic relations between our two countries. 
We left it aside at the time of the establishment of diplomatic relations and were prepared to try to solve this afterward. 
And we waited four years before the Aug. 
17 communique was reached.''
Mr. Zhao observed twice that the 1982 communique stated that American military sales to Taiwan would not exceed in quantity or quality the levels of deliveries in recent years and that the United States intended gradually to reduce the arms sales, leading over a period of time to a final resolution of the problem.
 
No 'Drastic Approach' Taken
After more than a year, Mr. Zhao said, the arms sales have not declined in quantity and have improved in quality. 
''The Chinese people are most unhappy about it, but we have not adopted any drastic approach because of this,'' he said.
Mr. Zhao added: ''In my visit to the United States, I'm not going to ask President Reagan or the United States Government to stop the United States arms sales to Taiwan immediately or completely. 
This is how the Chinese side is going to strictly implement the principles embodied in the joint communique.''
In response to another question, Mr. Zhao implicitly denied that China regarded the United States and the Soviet Union as superpowers equally bent on expansionism, as the Chinese press routinely implies.
 
Soviet Troop Buildup Noted
''Any big power, if it pursues a hegemonistic policy, is hegemonistic and China cannot but oppose it,'' he said.
Referring to the Soviet buildup of troops along China's northern borders, Mr. Zhao declared: ''I believe that we know better than the Americans where our threat comes from. 
In this regard, we do not equate the United States and Soviet Union either.''
A new Chinese-American cultural agreement is due to be signed. 
Mr. Zhao said that ''many very important'' documents were being discussed but he declined to say if they would be ready in time for his visit. 
''I'm not a fortune teller so I can't tell you,'' he said.
