
As the most important Soviet visitor in 15 years left for home today, officials on both sides asserted that an important watershed had been passed in the long struggle to re-establish good relations between the two Communist powers. 
Attention among Soviet and Chinese officials here focused less on the economic and technical agreements reached during the nine-day visit of First Deputy Prime Minister Ivan V. Arkhipov than on the warm atmosphere that prevailed throughout his stay.
One Soviet official recalled the situation after President Nixon visited here in 1972, a trip that he said was important more for the fact that it occurred, and for its friendly atmosphere, than for any notable political breakthroughs.
 
'Atmosphere Has Been Changed'
''Now,'' the official said, ''our side has come, and although we haven't overcome the big problems, the atmosphere has been changed.''
Chinese Foreign Ministry officials who discussed the trip privately made a similar assessment. 
Peking stuck to its demands that disagreements over Afghanistan and Cambodia and tensions along the Chinese-Soviet border be tackled before normal political ties are resumed, but the officials said there was ''no doubt'' that Mr. Arkhipov's visit had changed matters considerably for the better.
(In Washington, a Reagan Administration official said that the talks represented ''a significant new development'' in relations between the two nations, but added that it was ''not unexpected.'')
For the moment, there is no talk in Peking of a reconciliation as far-reaching as that achieved between China and the United States, and realists on both sides say that factors such as geographical proximity, rivalry within the Communist world and differing domestic policies probably rule out anything like that between Peking and Moscow for many years.
Nonetheless, the new beginning that was referred to frequently by Mr. Ark hipov and the Chinese Politburo members who met him here has many aspects, by no means all of them limited to the basic issues of a five-year trade pact and Soviet technological assistance to outdated Chinese industry that dominated the talks. 
Just as much else in Peking has changed drastically over the last decade, so has the prevailing attitude toward the Russians.
For several years after the border clashes of 1969, antipathy toward the Soviet Union was encouraged. 
The Soviet aid program that had helped China onto its feet after 1949 was derided, with special visits provided for Westerners to Yellow River dam projects and other undertakings that the Russians were said to have botched. 
Children's books depicted Soviet border troops as menacing, and nearly everything the Soviet ''social imperialists'' did at home and abroad was held in contempt. 
Much of this receded with the other excesses of the Cultural Revolution, the leftist-inspired turmoil that gripped China for a decade beginning in 1966. 
But it is only in relatively recent times, since the resumption of six-monthly talks at the Foreign Ministry level in 1982, that a much more tolerant attitude toward the Russians has emerged. 
Though only limited momentum has gathered so far, the manifestations are striking.
 
Intererst in Russia Voiced
No longer can Westerners hope to gain points here by adopting a supercilious attitude toward the Soviet Union. 
Inquiries about life in Russia put to Americans who have lived there are sympathetically phrased. 
And not only among the high officials who met Mr. Arkhipov is there a new appreciation of the money and effort expended by the Kremlin on its aid program here during the 1950's.
To a far greater degree than has been the case for 20 years, ordinary Chinese can now learn something about Russians and their culture. 
On the anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution last month Chinese television showed its first contemporary Soviet film in two decades, and the one it picked, ''Moscow Doesn't Believe in Tears,'' a moving depiction of a young woman of rural background struggling to make her way in the capital, won widespread popular acclaim.
About 30 other exchanges have taken place this year. 
China has been host to an exhibition of 20th century Soviet painting, a Soviet writers' group has visited for lectures and discussions and a Russian tenor, Yuri Marusin, won a standing ovation for a concert in which he sang Russian folk songs and selections from Tchaikovsky and Verdi. 
A photo exhibition on Soviet life that was held at the National Gallery during the Nov. 
7 anniversary drew large crowds.
At the Waiwen Bookshop on Wang Fu Jing Street, Peking's principal source of foreign books, an effort has been made to upgrade the selection of Soviet publications. 
Several new Chinese- Russian dictionaries have been printed, there are coffee-table books about the beauties of the Soviet Union and Soviet children's albums offering a glossy view of Russian life are on sale.
However, as in the broader relations between the two countries, reservations remain. 
While the English-language selection at the bookstore includes P. G. Wodehouse, Anthony Burgess and Henry James, among others, the Russian fiction available is mostly 19th or early 20th century classics by Pushkin, Lermontov and Chekhov. 
The only recognized writers of the Soviet period are early ones like Vladimir Mayakovsky, and there is nothing by any Soviet leader, even Stalin.
The choice of Mr. Arkhipov to be the first senior Soviet official to come here since Prime Minister Aleksei N. Kosygin's brief airport stop in 1969 was well taken, since he had headed the Soviet aid program here and evidently made strong friendships with several of the men now in power. 
Insistent gratitude was shown by Politburo members like Chen Yun, who spoke of having got along ''swimmingly'' with the Soviet official in the 1950's.
Mr. Arkhipov responded with some ingratiating remarks of his own about ''the great changes'' now taking place in China under the regime of Deng Xiaoping, which have had a chilly reception from the official Soviet press.
The official New China News Agency even quoted Mr. Arkhipov as having said that the changes constituted ''a magnificent plan for the future.''
