
Chinese leaders have summoned an emergency congress of the Communist Youth League in an attempt to quell mounting student protests against Deng Xiaoping's so-called open door policies.
The Communist Party newspaper People's Daily said today that the youth league will meet in special session on Thursday. 
Without mentioning the protests, the newspaper said the conference would urge young people to ''stand in the forefront'' of the changes, and to maintain discipline.
The paper also said there would be changes in the leadership of the league's central committee, suggesting that Mr. Deng has ordered a shake-up in an attempt to get control of the situation. 
Sudden moves to convene party gatherings have been rare in the orderly political atmosphere of recent years.
The development followed two student marches in recent weeks to Tiananmen Square in the heart of Peking. 
Similar marches have occurred in at least three other cities since September, some of them resulting in clashes with the police. 
On each occasion the ostensible target has been Japan, but the underlying motive appears to have been to call attention to dissatisfaction with Mr. Deng's general policy of broadening foreign relations.
 
Context of Student Protests
Concern about the protests reflects the history of student movements in modern China, which have often been a prelude to broader unrest. 
One unanswered question about the demonstrations is whether they have been spontaneous, as official accounts have maintained, or inspired by party officials seeking a means to unsettle the policies. 
Similar oblique tactics have been used in the past.
What is clear is that Mr. Deng has resolved to close off the protests, or at least to channel them into support for his policies. 
Party newspapers have run a spate of articles criticizing the Peking demonstrations and admonishing students to work within authorized party channels. 
They have been told not to launch movements on their own, and not to stir up ''antiforeign'' sentiment.
To co-opt the protests, the Government has planned a series of rallies in Peking and other cities on Dec. 
9, the 50th anniversary of a student uprising in the capital that played a role in prompting Chiang Kai-shek to join the Communists in a united front against Japan. 
In a preliminary move last weekend, veterans of the 1935 demonstration attended a forum at Peking University to counsel students not to persist with their agitation.
Reports in People's Daily and China Youth News made it clear that the issue in the demonstrations has not been Japan alone, but the broader issue of China's growing foreign ties. 
The protests featured calls for an end to Japan's ''second occupation,'' meaning the growth of Japanese commercial links, as well condemnation of what the students described as a resurgence of Japanese militarism.
 
Major Topic Among Students
People's Daily quoted one student at the weekend forum as saying that concern about abuses of the ''open door'' policies is a major topic among students. 
It said students had cited the wave of corruption, embezzlement and other irregularities that have dogged the relaxation of economic controls, problems that have dominated the party's attention for much of the year.
''Some students made sharp and frank criticisms of unhealthy tendencies among leading cadres and discussed with the old comrades how to correct these problems within the party,'' the newspaper said.
The broader implications of the protests appeared to be confirmed by the advice that party veterans were quoted as having given the students. 
Among other things, the veterans were quoted as saying that the students have become ''confused'' in their patriotism, agitating against foreign contacts when they should be supporting them. 
The veterans' reasoning was that the ''open door'' policies would strengthen China by modernizing its economy.
Participants in the Peking University meeting were also quoted as telling the students that it was wrong to launch movements on their own.
