
Despite flood and drought, China is on target for a record 1981 harvest that will probably cause a reduction in grain imports next year, Western agricultural analysts said today.
Deng Xiaoping, the Chinese leader, has told visitors in recent weeks that China's agricultural outlook is excellent and the projections bear out his statement that the new individual incentives introduced in the countryside are spurring production.
The analysts estimated that China's harvest will total 334 million tons of grain, potatoes and soybeans, up from the previous record of 332.5 million tons in 1979. 
''Our feeling is that it's going to be above the record,'' one analyst said. 
The 334-million-ton figure is the first reliable estimate to emerge showing a new record.
Record harvest is expected in China this year; grain imports will probably decline considerably
Soybeans are projected at roughly 8 million tons, up from last year's 7.8 million. 
Rice is put at 144 million tons compared with 143.7 million last year. 
But wheat is off at 57.5 million tons against 62.7 million in 1980.
The incentive system allows peasant families to farm designated areas and keep a percentage of their harvest, which they can sell in rural markets.
Agricultural output had been in doubt because a series of floods and droughts hit China this year. 
The worst apparently was flooding that hit Sichuan Province this summer, wiping out 1.5 million tons of rice. 
But Sichuan is one of the provinces, along with Hubei, Hunan and Fujian, that have reported bumper harvests. 
Despite the floods, Sichuan's overall output was 3 percent higher than the 1980 total of 32.6 million tons, the Government announced last weekend.
The foreign analysts said the record 1981 crop will provide sufficient foodstuffs to spare China from having to expand food imports during the first part of 1982. 
The Chinese are estimating they will import about 11 million tons of grain in 1982, down from 14.5 million this year, the analysts said. 
They may be forced to expand grain imports in the last half of 1982, however, if the winter wheat crop now being planted suffers because of a drought on the north China plain.
The Chinese already have signed long-term agreements committing them to purchasing 12 million tons of grain in 1982 from the United States, Canada, Australia, Argentina and France.
