
An official guest from China came to the Parrinos' home here in this Westchester County village today, and as he pushed himself from room to room in a wheelchair, he commented on the wide, smooth hallways and the picture-window views of the outdoors.
Features such as those, he told his hosts through a translator, could help disabled people like himself to forget they were restricted at all.
The visitor was Deng Pufang, the eldest son of China's pre-eminent leader, Deng Xiaoping. 
His public role as director in chief of the China Fund for the Handicapped, which is intended to aid disabled people in his country, stems from personal misfortune.
Nearly 20 years ago, during China's Cultural Revolution, Deng Pufang was paralyzed from the waist down in his senior year at Beijing University.
 
Active and Visible Spokesman
The cause was not accidental, but coincided with the period of political disfavor for his father, who at the time had been stripped of his post as Secretary General of the Communist Party and made a factory hand.
Red Guards came to Deng Pufang's room on the upper floor of a dormitory, where they attacked him and then either pushed him or forced him to jump to the ground.
Mr. Deng will probably never walk again, but the changing political fortunes of his father have allowed him in recent years to become an active and visible spokesman for the disabled in China and abroad. 
The connection to his father has apparently also allowed him, through treatment abroad, a measure of health not available to thousands of others who were victims of physical attacks in the Cultural Revolution.
The road that led Deng Pufang to Briarcliff Manor, at the start of his first trip to the United States, began with a meeting last year in China with Sandra Swift Parrino, chairwoman of the National Council on the Handicapped, an independent Federal agency.
 
Understanding and Respect
Mrs. Swift's eldest son became a quadriplegic shortly after his first birthday because of an illness that has never been fully diagnosed. 
When she and her husband, Dick, built a house in Briarcliff Manor, they designed it, wherever possible, to be accessible by wheelchair.
Mr. Deng, who is 43 years old, took a particular interest in the Parrinos' home. 
He and a variety of Chinese officials, in advance of a series of meetings this month in New York City, Washington, Florida and California, visited the Parrinos' home, where they asked questions about policies toward the disabled in this country. 
Mr. Deng later took a brief tour of the home, perhaps looking for ideas for his own home in Beijing, although an official in his position would be unlikely to concede such a thing.
The discussion on programs here ranged from centers for independent living to automated lifts in public buses, which caused Mr. Deng to ask who paid for such amenities. 
''There must be a conflict between your Council for the Handicapped and your Department of the Treasury,'' he said.
Mr. Deng, whose vigorous hand motions and square, deep jaw seemed to reflect the same determination as his father, listened intently and nodded when the executive director of the National Council on the Handicapped, Lex Frieden, described the ''subtle, psychological and often inadvertent'' ways that handicapped people face discrimination in this country.
That problem was no different in China, Deng Pufang said. 
The toughest battles faced by the disabled are often not against their own disability, he said, but against the reactions of others.
For that reason, Mr. Deng said he was urging a policy of four steps to treatment of the disabled, which he said could apply not only in his country but anywhere.
''First must come understanding of the disabled, and then respect,'' he said. 
''Then concern, and then help. 
Otherwise, if it's only the last two, then it is not really help at all, but only pity.''
