
China's Communist Party is about to mount an extensive drive to examine the loyalty of its 40 million members and discipline or expel those who oppose the policies of Deng Xiaoping.
An unannounced work committee has begun mapping details of the campaign for discussion and endorsement shortly by a plenary session of the party's Central Committee, according to Chinese and foreign diplomatic sources.
The campaign, known as a ''rectification of party style,'' could result in the expulsion of a million or more party members who are found to be corrupt, incompetent or too radical for the leadership headed by Mr. Deng.
At least a quarter of the party members were admitted during the 1966- 1976 Cultural Revolution, when the so-called Gang of Four ran China.
China's Communist Party plans extensive drive to examine loyalty of its 40 million members and discipline or expel those who oppose policies of Deng Xiaoping; campaign, known as 'rectification of party style,' could result in expulsion of million or more party members who are found to be corrupt, incompetent or too radical (M)'Ideological Preparation'
The correct new party line follows the political pragmatism set out by Mr. Deng in speeches and writings that were published here to great fanfare as his ''Selected Works'' last July. 
A 4,000- character commentary on the front page of People's Daily today pointedly called Mr. Deng's works ''an important ideological preparation for the overall rectification campaign'' that will get under way throughout China this autumn and winter. 
The Communist Party newspaper, implicitly answering doubts by some party hard-liners that Mr. Deng's policies were consistent with orthodox Marxism, said today that ''the handling of both historical and current issues and the principles adopted in the economic, political and cultural fields have demonstrated the high Marxist level of our party and Comrade Deng Xiaoping.''
Mr. Deng introduced practical measures to spur productivity in agriculture and industry and opened the door to commerce with the West while rejecting Western values and ''bourgeois'' freedoms. 
Many of his innovations have been at variance with the dogma of Mao Zedong.
 
Maoists Are a Major Target
A primary target of the new rectification drive will be Maoists who have been obstructing change. 
Many got their government and party sinecures during the Cultural Revolution. 
But the party leadership has also said it wants to clear out those guilty of corruption and other abuses of authority who have damaged the party's prestige among ordinary Chinese.
The campaign was originally announced by the party's General Secretary, Hu Yaobang, at the 12th party congress in September 1982. 
Mr. Hu admitted then that ''it is true that impurities in ideology, style and organization still exist within the party and no fundamental turn for the better has as yet been made in our party style.''
To correct the situation, Mr. Hu said, ''the Central Committee has decided on an overall rectification of party style and consolidation of party organizations, which will proceed by stages and by groups over a period of three years beginning from the latter half of 1983.''
Since then, pilot projects to swing the party rank and file into line have been instituted throughout the nation. 
People's Daily complained last June that ''some problems still remain unsolved.''
It said some party committees were afraid to confront ''the malpractices of some leading cadres.''
 
Resistance in the Army
The objections to a rectification drive are believed strongest in the army, but there are also reports of Maoist resistance to Mr. Deng's policies in provinces like Hunan and Guangxi in southern China.
Mr. Deng has already shuffled some key jobs in the provinces and military regions. 
Today's commentary in People's Daily hinted that the new drive would scrutinize the loyalties of party members in the middle echelons.
''All party members, those holding positions at and above county level in particular, must acquire a clear understanding of the stand, point of view and methods Comrade Deng Xiaoping used in dealing with all kinds of problems,'' it said.
The official press has insisted that the campaign will not turn into the kind of witchhunt that the Maoists mounted during the Cultural Revolution. 
''With regard to criticism launched by comrades, we must adopt a comradely approach, stress reasoning and seek truth from facts,'' said Lu Dingyi, a Central Committee member, in a speech People's Daily published in late August. 
''We must oppose the trumping up of charges and exaggeration. 
We must allow comrades to reply to charges.''
The drive is being modeled, at least ostensibly, on the first party rectification campaign that Chairman Mao held at the guerrilla base area of Yanan in 1942 to neutralize the pro-Moscow faction of the party led by Wang Ming.
 
'Handful Will Be Expelled'
Mr. Hu said at the party congress 13 months ago that following political study and self-criticism, all party members would have to register anew. 
''Those who still fail to meet the requirements for membership after education shall be expelled from the party or asked to withdraw from it,'' Mr. Hu said. 
However, in recent months there has been virtually no stress on re-registration.
Diplomatic estimates of the number of Chinese who could be stripped of party membership has run from one to three million. 
The leadership has avoided mentioning any percentage, possibly for fear of suggesting a quota of miscreants that zealous subordinates would try to fill.
An Zhiguo, political editor of Beijing Review, wrote in its current issue that ''only a small handful will be expelled from the party.''
''This has once again proved,'' he added, ''that rumors abroad that the party consolidation will be a 'great purge' are groundless.''
