
China's acting Prime Minister, Li Peng, opened the annual session of parliament today with a call to continue the economic and political initiatives that have dramatically affected the lives of the nation's one billion people.
But his call was tempered by an insistence that China should not go too far too fast.
''The Government should put reform at the center of all our undertakings,'' Mr. Li said, but urged officials to ''take into account what the state, the enterprises and the masses can tolerate.''
Mr. Li delivered his remarks, a review of the nation's accomplishments and prospects, at the opening session of the National People's Congress, China's lawmaking body. 
Attended by 2,978 delegates, the congress is to solidify the constitutional and legal bases of the country's economic restructuring, approve the appointment of new ministers and ratify the reorganization of parts of the Government.
For the first time in the four decades of Communist rule, constitutional protection will be accorded to private enterprise and the right of people to buy and sell the right to use land in what amounts to the re-emergence of private property.
 
Hard-Liners Are Quiet
Gone from this year's congress is the ideological breast-beating that dominated proceedings 12 months ago, when party hard-liners sought to whip up opposition to ''bourgeois liberalization.''
Instead, pragmatism, economic growth and Government restructuring are the new orthodoxy.
The public is being barraged with newspaper and radio coverage of the day's developments at the congress.
Debate among the delegates, often vigorously pursued, is also being shown on television for the first time.
Mr. Li, a 59-year-old engineer who was trained in the Soviet Union, is expected to be confirmed as Prime Minister at the congress. 
He was named to the post in an acting capacity when Zhao Ziyang resigned to become head of the Communist Party last November.
Many diplomats here said they were watching Mr. Li to see how aggressively he would push the policies of economic restructuring and rapid growth propounded by Mr. Zhao.
 
Grain Policy Is Upheld
Standing behind a thick wooden lectern, Mr. Li spoke to the delegates for slightly more than two and a half hours, outlining plans for the coming five years.
He began by addessing China's policy of self-sufficiency in grain, a central economic concern of the more traditional wing of China's leadership. 
Many young Chinese economists disparage this policy, arguing that some farmland is more profitably used for cash crops.
''The steady growth of agricultural production, especially grain production, is the foundation for sustained economic development,'' Mr. Li said.
Mr. Li cajoled, exhorted and occasionally rebuked the lethargic bureaucracy that is to carry out his Government's policies, which were set forth last fall by the Communist Party.
He said China's enterprises, from state factories to local general stores, must abandon archaic management practices and encourage autonomy for directors and managers.
Mr. Li said housing must be commercialized so that it is bought, sold and rented like refrigerators or bicycles. 
Housing is now the most heavily subsidized element of the economy and something often doled out in a system of party and Government patronage.
