
For the Chinese journalists following Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang, this has been a trying trip. 
They often look bewildered, both by their more aggressive American counterparts and by the maze of security precautions. 
Worst of all, they can't get near Mr. Zhao.
''At home, we talk to him freely,'' said Li Dan, a reporter with the Peking radio.
Chinese journalists following Chinese Premier Zhao Ziyang on his trip to US often look bewildered, both by their more aggressive American counterparts and by maze of security precautions; many Chinese reporters say Zhao has been isolated from Chinese press; photo (M)
The Chinese said they expected to be treated more as part of the official delegation. 
Their problems have been compounded, they say, by security precautions and by what they call the disorganized fashion with which the trip has been handled on the American side - a contrast to the sleek organization of the 1979 trip of the paramount Chinese leader, Deng Xiaoping.
''The Chinese Premier has been isolated from the Chinese press,'' complained Yuan Xianlu, Peking correspondent for People's Daily, the official Chinese Communist Party newspaper. 
''This time we cannot write anything. 
We don't know what has been going on.''
 
'Difficult to Get the News'
''I think if the President of your country visits China and you are treated the same way,'' he told an American reporter based in Peking, ''you will be very unhappy.''
''We know security is the number one thing and we try to understand,'' added Mr. Li. ''But it's very frustrating. 
Security is too tight.''
These views are echoed by others in the 38-member Chinese press contingent, including Zhang Yunwen, the Washington bureau reporter of People's Daily.
''It's very difficult to get the news,'' he said. 
''Our people in China should know everything about this trip, not just general description. 
We need more chances to have facts and details.''
Conceding his press corps' problem with competition, Mr. Zhao thanked President Reagan last week for giving the Chinese press a separate White House photo session so they would not have to get into a shoving match with the more experienced White House press corps.
''I think American journalists are more capable than Chinese journalists,'' Mr. Zhao told the President. 
''They have trained themselves through competition.''
If the Chinese are frustrated by their problems on tour, they are delighted with the performance of their Prime Minister.
''He has been very correct in his answers and quick in his responses to sensitive situations,'' Mr. Zhang said.
 
'The Ice Has Become Firmer'
Chen Hui, 56 years old, an editorial board member from China Daily, China's English-language newspaper, agrees. 
''At first both leaders were treading a little bit on thin ice,'' he said, ''but as the visit has progressed, the ice has become firmer and firmer.''
The reporters seem baffled by the news judgment of the American journalists, who often give equal attention to official meetings and pro-Taiwan demonstrations against Mr. Zhao.
By contrast, the Chinese have given short shrift, or no shrift, to such demonstrations in their reports.
The New China News Agency, the Chinese wire service, reported the demonstrations in Washington that drew between 600 and 800 protesters by saying ''they were just a handful of people.''
Mr. Zhang, in his stories, ignored the protests completely.
''It's not a big issue,'' said Mr. Zhang, 53. 
''When your friend, Mr. Reagan, visits our country, we will not put pictures of demonstrations side by side with the formal meetings. 
It's not appropriate to our standards of reporting.''
 
Defends Chinese Press
The Taiwan press covered those afternoon demonstrations live in Washington - the middle of the night for their viewers - and did not devote any air time to Mr. Zhao's official doings.
The Chinese reporters defend themselves against the criticism of some who call them propagandists.
''A lot of people from the West think our journalists are a propaganda machine, but I can't agree with such a view,'' said Mr. Zhang. ''In your country, journalists want to do something sensational in contradiction with the Government's policies. 
In our country, it's quite different. 
We don't feel we should argue or doubt our policies. 
What we should do is bring our people the facts.''
''We are more conscious of the impact of the press than American reporters,'' Mr. Chen said. 
''We are more conscious of repercussions that stories might make at home or abroad. 
We don't want to give the wrong impression to people who are not following events too closely.''
