
Some of New York's 10 Chinese-language daily newspapers - once genteel bulletin boards for marriage, business and community announcements -are sending their reporters out to hunt down stories on crime and justice.
Last fall, the second largest of the dailies, The Centre Daily News, began to get more aggressive and assigned a reporter to cover the Manhattan Criminal Court complex on Centre Street in lower Manhattan - like all courthouses a repository of compelling stories and sometimes gripping details.
Almost immediately, the city's largest Chinese daily, The World Journal, based in Flushing, Queens, followed suit.
Now at least four papers have reporters covering crime and the courts part time, all of them concentrating on crimes or lawsuits involving Chinese-Americans.
Some journalists and Chinese community leaders say that the new attention to the judicial process by the Chinese papers - in both civil and criminal cases - is a result of broader changes in the community.
Low Crime Rate
For example, they point to the diminished impact of the tongs, or associations, which in the past would mediate in many disputes among Chinatown residents. 
Community leaders say that the authority of the tong leaders, most of whom speak Cantonese, has deteriorated as immigrants with widely different dialects have entered the community.
''There are some very complicated problems,'' said Louis Liu, a longtime reporter who was also one of the first journalists to begin covering the courts, for The Sing Tao Daily. 
''The old immigrants are settled down, many have businesses. 
The new immigrants mostly have no money and must work hard, long hours, mostly for those older immigrants.''
''The Chinese used to hide among themselves,'' said Emile Bocian, a reporter for the United States-China Economic Journal. 
''Now they're more involved in the community, in the government.''
Almost all the papers are not shy about trumpeting their political views in the news columns - which range from The World Journal's strong pro-Taiwan position to The China Daily's pro-Peking stance.
Some of the papers have subdued graphics and a conservative tone. 
Others are more daring. 
The World Journal is a four-color broadsheet with a generous use of large pictures.
 
Greater Resources Available
Journalists at the papers say that although the courts are in Chinatown's backyard, they have never been covered regularly by the Chinese-language media.
Partly, they say, this is because the Chinese population in New York - and thus the number of civil and criminal actions involving immigrants -has never been large enough to warrant it, and partly because none of the papers had the financial resources for such coverage.
But the waves of new Chinese immigrants over the last decade have changed all that. 
For the papers, the new immigrants have brought greater circulation and advertising revenues than ever had been imagined a few years ago - thus allowing staff increases at many papers.
At the same time, as the Chinese immigrant population has doubled in the last five years to at least 250,000 - mostly in Manhattan and Queens - the number of civil and criminal court actions involving Chinese-Americans has risen sharply. 
The increase has swamped the old Chinatown associations, which once dealt with the kind of disputes now ending up in the courts.
''Chinese papers have become much more sophisticated,'' said Justin Yu, president of the Chinese Language Journalists Association of New York. 
''A few years ago, they were in a very primitive state - they were all community news, marriages, who was opening a business. 
Now they're just Chinese versions of American papers. 
Sensational stories - blood, sex, crime - they're the most popular.''
 
Change in the Newsroom
Despite changes in the community, however, the Fifth Precinct, which includes Chinatown, has one of the lowest crime rates in the city. 
Moreover, in the first six months 1985, the total number of felonies dropped 5.6 percent, to 2,020, from 2,139.
A spokesman for the department said the drop was partly a result of an increase in police manpower in the precinct that followed a rise in crime in the previous several years.
The emphasis on court coverage has created new pressures in the newsrooms. 
First, reporters must be fluently bilingual - not a requirement in covering Chinatown or the Chinese community in Queens.
Also, reporters must have some familiarity with the United States legal system. 
And for the papers, it is a major financial commitment to assign a reporter to cover the courts. 
The staffs at all of the papers are relatively small - The World Journal, for example, has 10 reporters in New York and the Centre Daily has eight.
Editors say that the pool of potential candidates -college educated, fluent in both English and Chinese and able to write well in Chinese - is relatively small, and that competition for good reporters is intense.
 
A Personal Rivalry
For example, three papers have hired a reporter to concentrate on the courts in the last six months, and all three of the reporters were educated in colleges in the United States.
At the city's two leading papers, there is a personal, though friendly, rivalry, between two former classmates at Michigan State who began covering the courts last December - Huang Yuan-Ling, a 27-year-old native of Taiwan who works for The World Journal, and Carol Huang, a 31-year-old Taiwan native, who is on the staff of The Centre Daily News.
The two reporters, who are not related, said that they have encountered difficulties, partly because of the sometimes arcane rules of the system, and partly because they are new to New York. 
But both also feel they serve an important function.
''I think that many Chinese papers created a false impression in the past,'' said Carol Huang. 
''We would report an arrest - then nothing. 
We didn't tell our readers anything about what happened after that, what the punishments were, or how the legal system worked.''
''We haven't built up a relationship with the court,'' said I-Der Jeng , assignment editor at The China Daily News, which hired a reporter to cover the courts about four months ago. 
''The time is very short.''
 
Administrative Problems
Court officials say that the number of cases involving Chinese-Americans remains small but can often lead to administrative problems, especially in regard to language.
A case pending next week in State Supreme Court, for example, involves two different Chinese dialects - one spoken by the family of a murder victim, the other by the accused murderer. 
And since there are no Chinese language interpreters on staff in New York City, according to the State Office of Court Administration, the two interpreters needed for the trial will have to hired on a freelance basis.
Circulation figures for the city's Chinese-language papers, many of which are only a few years old, are sometimes exaggerated, according to officials at the Chinatown Planning Council, which oversees economic development in the Chinese-American community. 
Moreover, none of the papers are members of the Audit Bureau of Circulation, which accredits circulation numbers.
However, the council estimates that the four largest papers are The World Journal, with a circulation of about 100,000 nationwide - about 50,000 of it on the East Coast; The Centre Daily News, with about 65,000 nationally; The China Daily News, with about 50,000, and The Sing Tao Daily, with about 25,000. 
Other papers are The Sino-Daily Express, The China Post Daily, The United Journal, The China Tribune, The Pei Mei News and The International Daily News.
