
Deng Xiaoping, China's foremost leader, said today that China and the Soviet Union are likely to hold a summit meeting next year, diplomats reported. 
It would be the first such meeting in 30 years.
Mr. Deng, in a meeting with President Mauno Koivisto of Finland, also expressed confidence that long-strained relations between China and the Soviet Union will improve, members of the Finnish delegation said.
Foreign Minister Qian Qichen is to travel to Moscow later this year, and he is expected to discuss plans for a summit meeting between Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, and Chinese leaders. 
It is generally believed here that Mr. Gorbachev will visit Beijing next year.
Mr. Deng's statement was the first by a Chinese to predict that the summit meeting, the first since Nikita S. Khrushchev came to China in 1959, would probably take place next year.
 
No Place or Time Set
A Foreign Ministry spokeswoman, Li Jinhua, said at a briefing today that it was still too early to name a time or place for the summit meeting.
''The timing for the meeting between the top leaders of the two countries depends on whether the conditions are ripe or not,'' she said. 
''Now is the time for the creation of the conditions.''
Members of the Finnish delegation said Mr. Deng also brought up the three obstacles China has cited as holding up the improvement of Chinese-Soviet relations: Vietnam's occupation of Cambodia, the Soviet military presence in Afghanistan and the Soviet troop concentration on the Chinese border.
A report by the official New China News Agency on the meeting today made no mention of a summit meeting. 
It only quoted Mr. Deng as saying political and economic relations between China and the Soviet Union will never be the same as those of the 1950's, when Moscow dominated Beijing.
 
Deng No Longer Travels Abroad
Any summit meeting is likely to take place in Beijing because Mr. Deng, 84 years old, no longer travels abroad. 
Mr. Gorbachev would probably hold talks with Prime Minister Li Peng and the Communist Party General Secretary, Zhao Ziyang, the two men responsible for the day-to-day running of the Government and the ruling party.
As Mr. Deng met with the Finnish delegation today, Prime Minister Li was quoted as denying that a recently announced program to cool off the overheated Chinese economy was a setback for market-oriented innovations.
Mr. Li's comments were made Tuesday and carried by the New China News Agency today.
He said ''some domestic figures and members of the foreign press'' had suggested that China's decision to ''improve the economic environment and rectify the economic order'' over the next two years means a halt in the reforms.
''All these doubts or hesitations show that such people have not yet arrived at a full understanding of the relationship between the key tasks of creating economic stabilityI and bolstering reform,'' he said.
Last month the Communist Party Central Committee outlined a two-year period of belt-tightening to bring under control an economy hit by overspending, serious shortages of raw materials and consumer goods, and an inflation rate of at least 20 percent.
