
China has cautioned Stanford University that future cultural exchanges with the United States may be impaired if the university reverses the expulsion of a graduate student who angered Peking while doing research in China.
A lawyer for Stanford, Iris Brest, said the school would not be influenced by the warning, conveyed in a letter from the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences.
Steven W. Mosher, the student who was dismissed in February 1983, has appealed to the university president, Donald Kennedy, to reinstate him. 
In May Mr. Kennedy partially reopened the case by asking for more information from both Mr. Mosher and the Chinese authorities.
China cautions Stanford University that future cultural exchanges with United States may be impaired if university reverses expulsion of graduate student Steven W Mosher; Mosher was dismissed after allegations of 'illegal and seriously unethical conduct' while in China in 1979 and 1980; portrait of Mosher (M)
Mr. Mosher, following the steps prescribed in university regulations, had appealed to three other Stanford officials, who upheld the original decision. 
The appeal to Mr. Kennedy is the final one provided by university rules. 
Mr. Mosher has threatened to sue Stanford if he is not readmitted as a doctoral candidate.
 
Student Dismissed in '83
Stanford's anthropology department dismissed Mr. Mosher by a unanimous vote, charging that he was guilty of a pattern of ''illegal and seriously unethical conduct'' while in China in 1979 and 1980.
The school's action touched off a major dispute about academic freedom, with some supporters of Mr. Mosher accusing Stanford of bowing to pressure from China, with whom it has a sizable exchange program. 
China banned further field research by American scholars after Mr. Mosher's departure from the country.
When an anthropology department committee in 1982 was investigating Mr. Mosher's activity in China a senior official of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences wrote to Stanford expressing the hope that the university would deal with him ''severely'' and asking to be informed of the school's decision.
Although neither Stanford nor Mr. Mosher has released a 95-page report prepared by the investigating committee, some members of the anthropology department have said privately that the charges against Mr. Mosher involved bribing local Chinese officials to get government documents, smuggling and making a trip into a province closed to foreigners. 
Mr. Mosher has denied these accusations.
 
Letter Released by Mosher
The latest Chinese letter to Stanford was made public by Mr. Mosher, who now lives in Fresno, Calif. 
The letter was given to him last week by Stanford, which has pledged to provide him with any material used as evidence.
The letter, from Wang Ping, a deputy department chief in the foreign affairs department of the Social Sciences Academy, was written in response to a request from Mr. Kennedy for information about the case.
Mr. Wang wrote that China was concerned that Mr. Mosher had given out false information about his case after his expulsion by Stanford and suggested that ''Stanford should clarify and correct Mosher's incorrect speeches, so that the truth is known.''
''For the future normal and beneficial exchange between our two countries,'' Mr. Wang wrote, ''I trust that you will make a correct judgment based on the facts and properly handle this matter.''
Mr. Mosher, who last year published a book based on his research in rural China, ''Broken Earth,'' a critical account of the conditions of peasant life under Communist rule, has just finished a second book, this one about his trip by van into the restricted province, Guizhou. 
Mr. Mosher contends he had permission for the trip and has given Stanford a copy of his travel permit.
Although he only spent two days there before being detained, Mr. Mosher says in the book that he found Guizhou to be extremely poor, with villages without a single machine and houses without furniture or metal cooking pots. 
In an area inhabitated largely by non-Chinese peoples, he says he found the local officials were all Chinese.
