
Li Xiannian's knack for survival has served him well over many years. 
His appointment as China's new President, its first in 15 years, caps the career of a crusty old revolutionary who still commands the nation's respect.
In his time, Mr. Li has been a tough soldier and an astute negotiator. 
He has no known formal education, but his self-taught grasp of the complex Chinese economy made him its leading exponent. 
He has traveled widely in Communist and developing nations, while displaying a deep suspicion of both the United States and the Soviet Union.
PEKING, June 18 - Li Xiannian's knack for survival has served him well over many years.
Though he has been known as a political moderate, his inate conservatism made him a rallying point for hard-liners who distrust the economic policy changes instituted by Deng Xiaoping, China's paramount leader. 
''He is an embodiment of China, far more than Deng,'' said a Western diplomat here.
Li Xiannian is believed to have been born in 1905 to a poor family in Huangan County north of the Yangtze River in central Hubei Province. 
In 1927 he joined the Communist Party and the Red Army and quickly displayed an aptitude for command that brought rapid promotion. 
He helped organize the Communist base area in Hubei and later joined the celebrated Long March. 
By 1941 he was a seasoned combat veteran with 60,000 troops under his charge.
 
A Top Commander in Civil War
He was elected to the party's Central Committee in 1945. 
With the defeat of the Japanese, he rose to general commands in the renewed civil war against the Nationalists. 
After the Communist victory in 1949 Mr. Li was rewarded with top party and government posts in Hubei Province.
Mr. Li became interested in economic affairs while Mayor of the industrial city of Wuhan, which was recovering from the ravages of long warfare. 
After two years as Mayor, Mr. Li was brought to Peking in 1954 to confront the problems afflicting the national economy. 
He soon succeeded Deng Xiaoping as Finance Minister and also became a Deputy Prime Minister, a post he would hold for 26 years. 
He joined the party's ruling Politburo in 1956.
As Finance Minister in the 1950's, Mr. Li was assigned two Soviet advisers, with whom, he said later, he quarreled daily. 
The experience fueled his suspicion of the Soviet Union, but he also disliked the United States for its continuing support of the Nationalists on Taiwan.
Mao Zedong reportedly never quite trusted Mr. Li but kept him on because of his competence and Prime Minister Zhou Enlai's support. 
Mr. Li's responsibilities covered almost every facet of the economy, from industry and agriculture to trade and the budget.
Mr. Li was less astute in anticipating the political winds of change. 
When Mr. Deng was sent into disgrace for a second time, Mr. Li called in a speech in October 1976 for the nation to ''deepen the struggle to criticize Deng Xiaoping.''
Mr. Li, who at one point was expected to succeed Hua Guofeng as Prime Minister, had to step down as Deputy Prime Minister in September 1980 in a maneuver by Mr. Deng that gave the top Government post to Zhao Ziyang. 
Mr. Li has kept his seat in the Standing Committee of the Politburo.
 
Critical of Deng Policies
Though Mr. Li had disapproved of Mao's rash economic panaceas, his later identification with the faction of the bureaucracy that wanted to sustain heavy industrial growth set him at cross purposes with Mr. Deng, who pressed changes that emphasized light industry and the consumer.
Mr. Li has suffered in recent years from frail health, with rumored ailments ranging from cancer to kidney problems. 
But he is apparently strong enough to carry out the mostly ceremonial duties of the presidency.
The new President is married to Lin Jiamei, who has worked in the Ministry of Public Health as well as the State Council's Office of Finance and Trade.
