
The drive to professionalize China's armed forces took a step forward today with the announcement that 47,000 officers, about a tenth of the officer corps, will be retired before the end of 1986.
The announcement had political ramifications since the officers involved are mostly men who joined Mao Zedong's guerrilla forces before the Communists seized power in China in 1949. 
Although there has been an official retirement policy for 25 years, the practice had been to allow those who took part in the guerrilla struggle to remain in uniform until they died or voluntarily stepped aside.
Deng Xiaoping, the 80-year-old army veteran who holds pre-eminent political power, has made the remaking of the army one of his priorities. 
He wants to replace the poorly educated peasant boys who made the revolution by younger, better-trained men.
Chinese Government announces that 47,000 military officers, about 10% of officer corps, will be retired before end of 1986 in effort to professionalize country's military; political impact noted in light of fact that most officers joined Mao Zedong's guerrilla forces before Communists seized power in 1949 (M)Aim Is to Curb Army Influence
Mr. Deng has political as well as military objectives. 
By clearing the officer corps of revolutionary veterans, he hopes to curb the political influence wielded by the army in the past, often in favor of the so-called leftist policies Mr. Deng has discarded. 
He has also said that the army, which had a woeful experience in the 1979 war against Vietnam, must be modernized.
The New China News Agency said the officers being retired were men who joined up in the war against the Japanese occupation forces in the 1930's, or in the civil war against the Nationalists between 1945 and 1949. 
Most of them had achieved junior rank up to regimental level, the agency said, indicating that they were mostly the equivalent of majors, or less.
The retirees were said to be part of a larger group of 70,000 to 80,000 officers designated to retire in the next few years, the press agency said. 
Western military attaches said this suggested that a decision had been taken to retire officers as they reach the nominal retirement age of 60, except at higher command levels. 
An example is the commander of the armed forces, Yang Dezhi, a Deng appointee who is 75.
The move to purge the junior officer corps has been accompanied by pressure on veteran senior officers, thousands of whom have been retired since 1980. 
Late last year, Mr. Deng obtained the retirement of 40 officers on the command staff who held ranks equivalent to lieutenant general and higher.
The halting progress in carrying out the retirement policy appears to reflect resistance among those affected as well as constraints on Mr. Deng's own political power. 
At times he has sounded testy on the subject, as when he struck out in 1982 at officers whom he called ''undisciplined, arrogant, extravagant and lazy.''
When he was purged twice during the Cultural Revolution, between 1966 and 1973 and again in 1976-77, Mr. Deng was under army guard in provincial exile.
 
Better Pensions Offered
As compensation for retirement, there has been a drive to improve pensions and other benefits. 
The New China News Agency said today that 30,000 apartments had been built for retiring officers and that the Ministry of Civil Affairs, which cares for the retirees, had appointed a special staff to look after their needs. 
One point of strain has been an order that retiring officers vacate their army quarters.
Similar policies have been applied among the nine million party workers in civilian jobs. 
The Central Committee's Party Organization Department, in charge of personnel, said recently that 900,000 party workers over the age of 60 had retired, allowing 80,000 professionally competent middle-aged party workers to be appointed to responsible posts.
Mr. Deng has laid stress on promoting men in their 30's and 40's, saying that it is to them that China must look for leadership for the rest of the century. 
In the armed forces, General Yang has stipulated that division commanders should be about 45, with regimental commanders 40 or younger.
