
THEY say it was the women of ancient China who created the anonymous art form of embroidery called paintings in thread. 
The Chinese still excell at hand embroidery, but as the role of women changes, the art is gradually becoming industrialized.
At the same time, the Chinese have given a whole new dimension to the American table linen industry, providing hand embroidery, crochet work and laces previously imported from Europe at extravagant prices.
''China is the last bastion of fine quality hand embroidery for reasonable prices,'' says Ruth Nesi, co-author of the book ''China's Crafts.''
Mrs. Nesi, a stylist for the Sunweave Linen Corporation, a New York table linen manufacturer, has worked with Chinese embroiderers for five years.
In Shanghai, Liu Jinqi, director of the China National Embroidery Factory, speaks with satisfaction about the American connection. 
The factory is the largest of its kind in China and last year ''graduated'' from the arts and crafts corporation to the category of light industry.
The factory's production has doubled in the last five years to two million pieces, Mrs. Liu said, with 80 percent going to the American market, mostly tablecloths, tablemats, curtains, aprons, pillowcases and cushion covers.
American buyers discovered modern Chinese handwork in the mid-1970's at the Canton Fair, and importers moved in aggressively, according to Mrs. Nesi.
But it wasn't easy, she says; there were basic cultural differences. 
How could young rural Chinese women produce designs for Americans when they hadn't seen American movies, knew nothing about American life and ''didn't have the foggiest notion what a place mat is or where knives and forks and spoons go?''
At that time, some enterprising New York importers decided that the best way to familiarize the Chinese with contemporary tastes in hand embroidery was to take them examples of work from Madeira. 
That Portuguese island used to be an international center for hand embroidery until the young women started to work in the tourism industry.
In 1980, Mrs. Nesi began working with designers of what was then called the No. 1 Embroidery Factory in Shanghai, suggesting designs and colors that would appeal to the American market. 
Until then, the factory had been exporting classic table linen to Europe and Hong Kong.
Sunweave reached an agreement with the Shanghai factory in 1981 and since then, most of its production has been for the American market. 
No problems of protectionism have arisen because there is no hand embroidery industry in the United States to be threatened, according to Mrs. Nesi. The agreement could be affected if new laws set quotas for piecework.
''What is so wonderful about the Chinese is their understanding of the old art form, which has enabled them to create good contemporary commercial products,'' Mrs. Nesi said. 
''Ten years ago American consumers had good solid color and prints made in U.S.A. but had to pay a fortune for imported embroidery work from Switzerland, Italy, Belgium or Madeira or else do it themselves.''
The Chinese have adapted fast. 
Mrs. Nesi recalls that five years ago Mrs. Liu was head designer and has risen through the ranks to become vice manager, working with new products and new machinery. 
Last spring, the Chinese designer, who speaks no English, was invited by Sunweave to work with designers in New York. 
She visited Lord & Taylor and Macy's and ''took it all in her stride,'' Mrs. Nesi said.
''Our production is half and half, half machine, half by hand,'' Mrs. Liu said as she escorted visitors through the Shanghai factory. 
Some of the 1,024 workers were operating old Singer sewing machines, some were making intricate stitches by hand and others were using new Japanese machinery bought in 1984.
Factory workers earn an average of 63 yuan ($21) a month for an eight-hour day plus bonuses, according to Mrs. Liu. A branch factory for making only curtains in a Shanghai suburb employs 600 more people.
Most of the workers, however, are peasant women living in Shanghai's outlying rural districts and do piecework for the factory. 
About 10,500 regular employees work at home for 3 yuan ($1) for a day's work.
Mrs. Liu stressed that it wasn't easy to keep up with the changing American market and said the factory wouldn't be able to do it if American buyers didn't bring them new designs several times a year.
''Chinese don't always like the American designs,'' the factory's technical director said. 
They prefer traditional designs like peacocks and princesses, she said, and are enthusiastic about polyesters - which they call nylon - because they are thin, washable and no-iron. 
They can't understand why Americans love natural fibers, she added.
There are these main types of Chinese embroidery, Mrs. Liu said:
* Suzhou, appliques with flat surface, tight stitches, even thickness and harmonious colors.
* Hunan, with soft shaded hair-thin stitches used in landscapes.
* Guangdon, the ornate style with gold or silver thread and seed-pearls or other embellishments.
* Sichuan, mainly large stitched squares used as wall hangings or for quilts.
Although they seem to prefer machines, some skilled workers demonstrated that they could still make ''invisible'' stitches by splitting one thread 60 times. 
In the old days, the light was so bad that working with this thread ruined the eyes. 
Early this century, the Government is said to have banned the Peking knot, which was so tiny it caused blindness. 
Now, with better working conditions, there is no longer a ''forbidden stitch.''
Mrs. Liu believes hand embroidery will never disappear altogether but predicts that in time most work will be done by machine. 
''Women are getting tired of handwork,'' she said. 
''Particularly now with the one-child family, people don't want their child to stay home and sew. 
Everyone wants to go to the university.''
