
China, in a step aimed at encouraging imports of foreign products needed for its modernization campaign, today reduced customs duties on 149 categories of industrial equipment and raw materials.
At the same time the State Council, the ruling Government body, raised tariffs on other items of equipment that China already produces.
Import duties were lowered on timber and timber products, rubber, leather, pulp and paper, as well as on raw materials for China's energy industry. 
Tariffs were also reduced on some machinery, parts and accessories used in the textile and other light industries, which the Government is trying to strengthen.
China reduces customs duties on 149 categories of industrial equipment and raw materials
In announcing the adjustments, the official New China News Agency did not disclose the new tariff rates, which it said applied to 16 percent of the total number of items subject to duties.
 
A Ban on Exemptions
In a related decisio n likely to affect West ern companies doing business with China, a spokesman for the Gene ral Administration of Customs said that, in general, no customs exe mptions would be granted to foreign companies and that they wo uld not be permitted to write any such exemptions into their contract s with Chinese enterprises.
Today's tariff actions followed a confirmation by a prominent Chinese foreign trade specialist that China would continue to import essential foreign technology and equipment to develop its economy.
Zhou Jiannan, a deputy minister of the Administrative Commission on Import-Export Affairs, said in the latest issue of China's foreign trade magazine that such imports would include equipment for the transportation and energy sectors and the textile and other light industries.
 
More Selective About Imports
Officials have said that China will become more selective in buying foreign products, concentrating on advanced technology and machinery that it cannot yet manufacture domestically. 
China will also be more diligent in seeking attractive terms, including lowinterest credits, and joint ventures, they add.
Examples of the kind of imports that China is seeking have included coal-mining equipment from Britain, Japan and West Germany, worth about $800 million altogether, Japanese electronic technology to make color television and sophisticated shipbuilding equipment.
To solicit more investment funds, the People's Bank of China announced earlier this week that it would raise interest paid on deposits to a maximum of 7.92 percent annually for an individual deposit fixed for five years. 
Deposits by overseas Chinese would earn a maximum of 8.28 percent annually for five years. 
The new rates are to take effect April 1.
The bank did not say what its new lending rate would be, but said the rates would be higher for joint ventures with foreign partners than for strictly domestic enterprises.
