
The Security Council failed again today to choose a new Secretary General as China continued to veto Kurt Waldheim's candidacy for a third five-year term.
Although Mr. Waldheim received 11 votes on today's two ballots, two more than needed for nomination, diplomats said his prestige had been bruised.
At the same time, the United States cast the decisive blocking vote against Salim A. Salim of Tanzania. 
He twice won eight of the Council's 15 votes today. 
This was two more than his poorest showing yesterday, but most Council members now regard his candidacy as all but hopeless.
UN Security Council fails to choose new Secretary General as China continues to veto Kurt Waldheim's candidacy for third five-year term
China's intentions remain the central question. 
It vetoed Mr. Waldheim twice in 1971 to demonstrate its insistence that the United Nations should be run by someone from Asia, Africa or Latin America. 
Later China relented, abstaining on the third round.
This time there have been six inconclusive rounds of voting thus far. 
Whoever is nominated by the Security Council must still be approved by the 156-nation General Assembly, where election is by a simple majority.
Council members believe that China is waiting for the Latin Americans to put forward a candidate in the expectation that the Soviet Union will then cast a veto and share with the United States the onus of thwarting third-world aspirations.
The Waldheim backers hope that China will then lift its veto, satisfied that it has done its best for a third world whose Council members have been unable to vote together as a solid bloc.
The Soviet Union would not like saying ''no'' to a third-world figure. 
But the Soviet delegate, Oleg A. Troyanovsky, has made it clear that Mr. Waldheim is as much the choice of the Soviet Union as he is of the Western nations.
Through the first six ballots, Mr. Troyanovsky has been telling reporters that he has not cast a single negative vote and he has appeared to enjoy what he views as United States discomfort over rejecting Mr. Salim.
There is no assurance that the Soviet Union would veto every Latin American. 
Ten years ago, it blocked Carlos Ortiz de Rozas of Argentina. 
But since then, Argentina has shipped much needed wheat to the Soviet Union. 
Mr. Ortiz de Rozas is again a potential candidate.
The first Latin candidate to appear openly may be Javier Perez de Cuellar of Peru, until recently a United Nations Under Secretary General. 
Peru has said that it would nominate him if the Council decided that it was deadlocked.
Jeane J. Kirkpatrick of the United States told reporters that there was a long discussion today in the Council chamber to determine when an impasse constituted a deadlock. 
The Council may continue this discussion when it meets again on Friday.
Mr. Waldheim's second term runs out at the end of the year. 
If he survives this election, he will be the first Secretary General to gain three terms.
Those present at today's voting behind closed doors said 11 nations had voted for Mr. Waldheim on each round and four against, including the critical Chinese ballot. 
Mr. Salim received eight votes each time with one ''no'' on the first round and two on the second. 
Six nations abstained in the first round and five in the second round.
All five of the Council's permanent members - the United States, Soviet Union, Britain, France and China -have veto power. 
The three African members, which are thought to have voted steadily for Mr. Salim, are Tunisia, Uganda and Niger. 
The other third-world members, some of which have apparently failed to vote consistently for Mr. Salim, are the Philippines, Mexico and Panama. 
The other members are Japan, Spain, Ireland and East Germany.
