
China's Foreign Minister called on the United States yesterday to cease any ''official or semiofficial'' relations with Taiwan.
In his first public speech in this country, the Foreign Minister, Wu Xueqian, said the continuing contacts between Washington and Taipei were the basic obstacle to improved relations between the United States and China, and he demanded that the United States reduce its arms sales to Taiwan.
''As far as the bilateral relations between China and the United States are concerned,'' he said, ''the principal obstacle is the issue of Taiwan.''
China's Foreign Minister, Wu Xueqian, in New York for opening of UN, says continuing contacts between Washington and Taiwan are basic obstacle to improved relations between US and China; claims Taiwan is 'inalienable part of China's territory' (M)His First Visit to U.S.
It was the first visit to the United States by Mr. Wu, who was appointed Foreign Minister in November 1982. 
He is in New York for the opening of the United Nations General Assembly, which he will address on Tuesday. 
Mr. Wu's remarks came in an speech before the National Committee on United States-China Relations at the Waldorf- Astoria Hotel.
''If the United States truly desires to see a peaceful settlement of the Taiwan question,'' Mr. Wu said, ''it should refrain from doing anything detrimental to the peaceful reunification of China, refrain from having any offical or semiofficial relations with Taiwan and gradually reduce, both qualitatively and quantitatively, its arms sales to Taiwan, leading to a final termination.''
''Taiwan is an inalienable part of China's territory, and the people of Taiwan are our own flesh and blood,'' Mr. Wu said. 
''Therefore, the question of Taiwan is an important one involving China's sovereignty and the national feeling of the one billion people.''
 
Two-Edged Approach
Mr. Wu's comments reflected Peking's two-edged approach to the issue of Taiwan. 
On the one hand, China has tried, largely through public pronouncements, to persuade other nations to cut off their relations with Taiwan. 
On the other hand, Peking, whose posture has continued to evolve in the last 18 months, has most recently sought to reassure Taipei that Taiwan would be able to retain its social and economic systems after reunification.
After reunification, Mr. Wu said, ''while it is the People's Republic of China alone that will continue to represent China on the international arena, Taiwan as a special administrative region can maintain systems different from those of the mainland.''
Mr. Wu delivered only the opening and closing paragraphs of his speech. 
The body of the address was read to the 200 guests of the National Committee in English by a Chinese Government interpreter.
The Chinese Foreign Minister responded to American concerns that his country's relations with the Soviet Union might also affect relations with Washington.
''Such views do not tally with reality,'' he said. 
''China has always adhered to principles, neither playing the Soviet card to put pressure on the United States, nor playing the American card to put pressure on the Soviet Union. 
Mr. Wu said in response to a question after his address that while China regretted and was shocked at the shooting down of the Korean Air Lines jet by the Soviet Union, his country had abstained from the Security Council vote condemning the Soviet action because ''some circumstances leading to the downing are not quite clear.''
