
A proposed law that would prevent Communist Party officials from interfering with the operations of China's state factories and enterprises appears to have become the latest casualty in the crackdown on Western influences here.
When the National People's Congress convenes on Wednesday it will not vote on the proposal, which would have restricted the economic role of party bureaucrats in industry and have given the managers of state-owned factories a freer hand.
The Standing Committee of the legislature, at a meeting presided over by its chairman, Peng Zhen, decided last week not to submit the proposal to the congress. 
The 85-year-old Mr. Peng is regarded as unenthusiastic about many features of the economic policies introduced by Deng Xiaoping, China's senior leader.
Many Beijing-based diplomats saw the proposed legislation as a significant milestone in the economic changes introduced by Mr. Deng and expected it to be ratified this year. 
Some Chinese economists contended that the move was indispensable in making the country's inefficient factories profitable.
 
Reports of Division on Issue
''Opinions from various aspects need to be aired on a number of important issues,'' said Chen Pixian, the vice-chairman of the standing committee that deferred consideration of the proposal. 
The New China News Agency had recently reported that committee members were divided over the role of the party in enterprises.
Despite the decision to withhold action on the proposal, Mr. Chen said that the current policy of promoting greater managerial responsibility should not be abandoned.
On Friday, as part of the campaign against the infiltration of Western ideas into China, an expanded volume of speeches by Mr. Deng was issued with 22 new selections. 
Many of them stress the need for ideological conformity and the permanence of Communist Party leadership.
Mr. Deng was quoted in one of the newly published speeches as saying that since 1976, ''a dubious ideological trend dubbed 'bourgeois liberalization' had appeared in China. 
It is characterized by worship of 'democracy' and 'freedom' of the Western capitalist countries and rejection of socialism.''
The new book includes other speeches in which Mr. Deng asserts that the campaign against ''bourgeois liberalization'' will not affect the economic policies he has advocated.
While the new version of his selected speeches portrays him as a hard-liner on questions of ideology and politics, Mr. Deng raised the prospect of political reform during a meeting last week with the visiting Governor General of Canada, Jeanne Sauve.
 
TWO PROTESTERS SENTENCED
BEIJING, March 22 (AP) - Two Shanghai workers have been given long prison terms for inciting crowds during pro-democracy student demonstrations in Shanghai in December, the New China News Agency reported today. 
The two were among at least 14 people, all non-students, reported to have been arrested in connection with pro-democracy student demonstrations in more than a dozen Chinese cities in December and January. 
Keep folo.
