
A mother asks an old family friend to help get her soldier son transferred from the battlefront. 
''I only have one son,'' she pleads over the telephone. 
''We have done enough for the revolution.''
But she is unable to stop him from being sent off to war, where over half of his company gets wiped out. 
China's enemy this time is Vietnam, and the place is their short but bloody border war in early 1979.
China presents a play about its Vietnam war
A popular new play, ''Wreaths at the Foot of the Mountain,'' has become the ideological highlight of Peking's current theater season. 
It was so well received when first performed in the Manchurian province of Liaoning that the Liaoning People's Art Theater brought it to China's capital in March.
 
Party Supports the Play
The Communist Party has given the play its blessing by sending some of its leading comrades to see it.A second drama troupe in Peking is simultaneously performing the play, which is also being shown on television. 
A feature film version is being shot less than a mile from China's tense frontier with Vietnam.
The play has been adopted from a short novel by Li Cunbao, 37 years old, a writer serving in the army. 
The novel was acclaimed when it appeared earlier this year in the literary magazine New China Digest. 
Mr. Li said the novel was based on his interviews with soldiers when he spent four months on the Yunnan front at the time of the border war.
The popularity of the play coincides with the latest round of border clashes, leaving little doubt that Vietnam has been made an authorized artistic target. 
An audience one recent night responded enthusiastically to allusions about Hanoi's ingratitude for help that Peking rendered during Vietnam's war with the United States.
 
The Broader Message
Yet the broader message of ''Wreaths at the Foot of the Mountain'' is that China still needs martyrs. 
In an essay in Xinwen Zhaibao, Li Cunbao explained that he was upset to see the army ''disrespected and insulted in public places'' and that he wanted to extol its continuing sacrifices.
The hero of the play, Zhao Mengshen, is a self-indulgent young man assigned to an infantry unit as a political instructor. 
He chafes at the Spartan barracks life, wants to get transferred to a comfortable urban billet and displays character flaws such as dancing to disco music.
His sympathetic mother is a prominent health official whose revolutionary background has given her lots of good connections. 
She agrees to help get him out of the infantry.
But the crusty old division commander rebuffs her. 
The political instructor, Zhao, apologizes to his men for trying to shirk his duty and accompanies them into Vietnam.
The company storms the Vietnamese fortifications, and the selfless company commander is killed by shrapnel when he tosses back a hand grenade hurled by a Vietnamese in hiding. 
Other casualties in the battle include a cheerful new recruit known to his comrades only by the nickname ''Peking.''
Chastened by his baptism of fire, Zhao, the political instructor, resists his mother's entreaties to quit the army. 
When the platoon leader, Jin, is denied a posthumous medal because he violated army discipline by going off to steal sugar cane for his beleaguered troops, Zhao hands the grieving widow his own medal.
The audience seemed moved by the sharp exchanges between Zhao's mother and the blunt old general. 
''It's only natural for me to show concern for my son,'' she argues. 
''My son was on the battlefield. 
Where was your son during the war?''
''Let's go down to the cemetery,'' the general suggests sadly, and there he shows her the unmarked grave of his son, who concealed his family connections by using the nickname of ''Peking.''
The play ends tidily in the tradition of socialist realism. 
The political instructor, Zhao, discovers that his company commander's mother was the wet nurse who raised him from infancy. 
His own mother corrects her selfish maternal attitude.
