
Chinese students in the United States have obtained a copy of a Chinese Government document confirming that Beijing has set new limits on the number of years students will be allowed to attend college abroad and has also established central control over who will be allowed to apply for foreign study.
Nine days ago, when asked to respond to reports that China plans a drastic reduction in the number of its students abroad - especially in the United States - a spokesman for the Chinese Embassy in Washington said Beijing's policy of allowing thousands of students to study overseas ''is not changed.''
Officials said yesterday that no one would be available for further comment until Monday.
American experts on China say they have received independent indications of the change in policy. 
They say the change comes at a time of growing concern in Beijing that too many young scholars are staying overseas or are becoming too Westernized. 
The new policy is a sharp departure from the program of letting students go abroad, begun in 1979 as part of modernization efforts by Deng Xiaoping, China's paramount leader.
Obtained From Chinese School
A leader of an ad hoc Chinese student group in the United States, who did not want to be identified, said the document ''was mailed to us by an American who came from China and is a friend of ours.''
The student said: ''It is obtained from a president's office of a major Chinese university. 
Every university president got one, because they need the cooperation of the university to withhold students' transcripts and letters of recommendation. 
We received it Friday.''
The students had previously said they knew of a separate secret directive that called for shifting the flow of Chinese students abroad away from the United States. 
That policy, they said, would limit the proportion of students in the United States to 20 percent of the total sent overseas, compared with the current 68 percent. 
Such a shift would mean a maximum of 600 new Chinese students arriving in this country each year, instead of the approximately 8,000 who have come in each of the past two years.
Asked about the new policy, Merle Goldman, a professor of Chinese history at Boston University, said, ''The Chinese Government is exercised by the brain drain.''
Of the 40,000 students now abroad, she said, between 27,000 and 28,000 are in the United States.
''They are telling more students to come home earlier,'' she said. 
''I know of one student in the humanities who has been here only a short time, but has to return in order to allow someone to come in his place to study the sciences, because only 20 percent of the students going abroad from his university can go to the United States.''
 
How Long Students Can Stay
The document obtained Friday by the students is titled ''Document from the State Education Commission (87) Standardized Serial No. 679 - Directive on Issuing Several Specific Regulations on Controlling and Managing Personnel Studying Abroad.''
It says a student who wants to go to the United States to earn a master's degree is limited to 1 and 2 years; a student with a bachelor's degree seeking a doctorate is limited to 5 years, and a student with a master's degree seeking a doctorate is limited to 4 years. 
Similar limits are set for study in other countries, with no student allowed to stay abroad for more than 5 years.
For Chinese, many of whom have only a rudimentary command of English when they arrive, finishing a Ph.D. program in four or five years would be very difficult, the students said.
