
A Chinese scientist who became a hero among thousands of students who demonstrated for greater democracy over the last month was dismissed today as the Communist Party moved to reassert control over intellectuals with unacceptable views.
The scientist, Fang Lizhi, a vice president of the University of Science and Technology in Hefei, was charged by the Communist Party's Central Committee with having ''defamed the party's leadership'' and having ''slandered the socialist system.''
A denunciation of him was read to university officials in Hefei, the capital of Anhui Province.
The university's president, Guan Weiyan, was also removed from office for failing to restrain his subordinate and for being ''responsible for the nationwide bad influence'' caused by the student unrest in the university.
The official New China News Agency said Mr. Fang and Mr. Guan would both be assigned positions as research fellows at the institute of physics in the Academy of Science.
Mr. Fang, a 50-year-old astrophysicist, was frequently hailed by student protesters for advocating broader rights in China and for his defense of intellectual and academic freedom.
 
Rumors of Political Upheavals
The two dismissals came amid rumors of other upheavals.
Speculation focused on the political future of Hu Yaobang, the General Secretary of the Communist Party, who has sometimes been cited as a possible successor to Deng Xiaoping, China's senior leader. 
Mr. Hu has failed to appear in public for several weeks and has missed three public events at which he was expected to be present.
In announcing the removal of Mr. Fang from his post, the official press agency said he ''attempted to shake off the party's leadership and depart from the socialist road in running his school and his ideas have resulted in vicious consequences in the university.''
The first in the recent tide of student protests began in Hefei on Dec. 
5. Students, who were upset by the refusal of local officials to allow them to nominate their own candidates for the local legislative body, marched through the streets of the provincial capital.
Although at the time Mr. Fang said he disapproved of the students' public protest, he defended their march as a right guaranteed under the Chinese constitution. 
As a result of the protest, local officials delayed the election so students could nominate their own candidates. 
In the election late last month, one of the student candidates was elected, as was Mr. Fang.
 
'Atmosphere of Democracy'
In an interview with the Beijing Review less than a month ago, Mr. Fang stressed the role of universities as free-thinking institutions.
''The emergence and development of new theories necessitate creating an atmosphere of democracy and freedom in the university, an atmosphere promoting the cultivation of intellectual ideology,'' he was quoted as having said. 
''In the university environment, there should be nothing that can only be upheld and that allows no questioning of why it must be upheld.''
In announcing the dismissals, Zhou Guangzhao, a vice president of the Academy of Science who also holds a seat in the party's Central Committee, attacked Mr. Fang's view, saying, ''The university's leading body must be reorganized to insure the leadership of the party and the state.''
The secretary of the Anhui Provincial Party Committee also denounced the scientist. 
''Fang Lizhi advocated bourgeois liberalization, defamed the party's leadership and party officials, negated the achievements of the party over the past decades, and slandered the socialist system,'' he said. 
''He also sowed discord among the party and the intellectuals, especially the young intellectuals.''
