
China has begun the largest census in history in a meticulous effort to discover just how many people it has. 
The Peking Government claims about a billion citizens out of a total world population of 4.5 billion, though officials concede that no one knows the exact number of Chinese.
The census drive, which started Thursday and was preceded by a publicity campaign with banners, colorful posters and loudspeakers urging cooperation, is ostensibly a response to a 1974 United Nations call for all countries to undertake a new census before 1985.
But with a baby born in China every 2 seconds, articles and speeches here have stressed that the census is crucial to Peking's task of feeding and clothing its population while trying to catch up industrially with the West.
In addition to providing raw statistics needed for a centrally planned economy, the census is expected to indicate how successful China has been in its stringent birth control policies, which are aimed at holding the population down to 1.2 billion by the year 2000.
PEKING, July 5 - China has begun the largest census in history in a meticulous effort to discover just how many people it has.
When Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang went to register his family Thursday, he told the New China News Agency that the census was of great importance for China's modernization program. 
In a televised talk last month, Deputy Prime Minister Yao Yilin described the census as ''a large-scale investigation of national conditions,'' a phrase that has been echoed since by other Chinese officials.
The Communist Government has counted its citizens twice since taking power in 1949. 
Its first census in 1953 revealed 601 million Chinese. 
In the second census in 1964, the population exceeded 723 million.
Both of these figures were tabulated using the abacus, a manual calculator that has been in wide use in China since the Ming Dynasty six centuries ago.
This time, 29 computers are being used to collate the information. 
The computers will be used for final tallies in every province but Tibet. 
The local tabulations will still be done by abacus.
Taiwan is being included in the census, using the Nationalist Government's figure of 18 million inhabitants, in keeping with Peking's claim that the island is its unrecovered province.
 
Five Million Census-Takers
On the mainland, the Government has recruited over five million census-takers and supervisors, a contingent larger than the Chinese armed forces. 
Most started today with bundles of questionnaires, traveling by bicycle or foot in the dense eastern cities. 
Other workers set out several weeks ago in sparsely populated regions like the highlands of Tibet and the prairies of Inner Mongolia.
The census-takers and supervisors are instructed to complete their enumerating and checking by mid-July. 
Then over 100,000 data coders and technicians will work for several months feeding the information through the computers.
The preliminary results are to be released next October, with full census data available by the end of 1984. 
China is officially spending $200 million on its census, but that figure must be multiplied several times to give a true picture of the cost.
 
21 I.B.M. 
Computers Used
The United Nations fund for population activities also donated $15.6 million for the Chinese to purchase and install 21 new I.B.M. 
4300 computers. 
China is also using eight other Western computers that it purchased earlier.
The computer network will give China the ability to process other economic data that will be needed in its drive for modernization. 
The new census form, which is printed in green ink on paper half as large as a newspaper page, contains 19 questions, as compared with nine questions in the 1964 census. 
In addition to the old categories of name, age, sex, nationality and occupation, the new questionnaire asks women of childbearing age about children they had last year or expect soon. 
Such questions are meant to help evaluate China's birth control program.
Attempts to count the Chinese are hardly new. 
Population surveys have been carried out for thousands of years through successive dynasties. 
By the end of 1981, the State Statistical Bureau reported that China's population reached 996,220,000, an estimate arrived at through the nationwide household registrations checked twice a year.
 
Signs of Official Concern
But the Chinese have long been suspicious of the census and once hid for fear that they might be taxed or drafted into the army. 
Last month, Deputy Prime Minister Yao promised that the new census enumeration ''will in no way affect the citizens' rights and interests and obligations.''
Nonetheless, there have been signs of official concern about potential evasiveness, particularly in the countryside where 800 million peasants live. 
Families sometimes do not report a recent death in order to use the extra ration card to get grain or cotton cloth. 
Couples may conceal the fact that they have several children.
In the cities, thousands of Chinese are thought to have drifted back illegally from the countryside, where many were sent during the Cultural Revolution. 
Even some officials may underreport the local population growth rate to meet family planning targets.
People's Daily warned last spring that ''conditions must be reported exactly as they are at the time. 
No hiding the truth or false reporting will be allowed.''
Recently, a Shanghai peddler was fined $6 amid great publicity for having lied about the registration of his children in a trial census last year.
 
37,000 Census-Takers in Peking
One census station in the Tianqiao district of southern Peking today offered a glimpse into how the time-consuming enumeration process works. 
Feng Guilan, one of 37,000 census-takers in Peking, sat at a small table checking off responses from Chen @Zhiqing. 
She recorded that Mr. Chen was 52 years old, repaired trucks for a living, had a son and two daughters and that his 46-year-old wife was not pregnant in 1981.
Miss Feng, who is on a two-month leave from her job as a tea salesclerk, filled out the form, read back the responses and then had Mr. Chen sign the form to acknowledge that it was accurate. 
The procedure took about 15 minutes.
The station supervisor, He Qing, acknowledged that the enumeration was starting slowly. 
''We are not so experienced so we are taking only eight households in these first two hours,'' said Miss He, ''but we'll take up to 20 households tomorrow.''
Shen Yiying, a 23-year-old factory worker, came in to register the family for her mother, who she said was illiterate. 
Ma Zhanyu, a 63-year-old retired worker, brought along a paper written by his son to supplement the information in his maroon-bound household registration document.
Mr. Ma, who lives with his grandchildren, said afterward that he had no misgivings about answering so many questions. 
''Our country will have a clearer idea of its population, how many men there are and how many women,'' Mr. Ma said.
 
Small Floating Population
Xie Ruibin, who heads the census group of the local Tianqiao street committee, said that his 223 census workers filled out each household's questionnaire themselves to avoid errors and would later take turns checking each other's findings.
He was asked what happened if a census-taker found someone living in Peking without a legal registration or committing some other violation. 
''The main aim of the census is to get a clearer idea of the population, but if irregularities are found out, they will be dealt with by the departments concerned,'' Mr. Xie said.
While the task is likely to be harder in the countryside, Li Chengrui, the director of the census office, said in a recent article that China had one of the world's smallest floating populations, which would facilitate the work.
The Chinese Government seems confident that the careful census procedure and the use of computers will leave negligible room for error. 
A pilot census undertaken two years ago in Wuxi, a small city northwest of Shanghai, produced a discrepancy of only 17 onethousandths of 1 percent from previous estimates, while another study in a remote area of Inner Mongolia found a discrepancy of nine-tenths of 1 percent.
