
The Communist Party Chairman, Hu Yaobang, has emphasized China's concern that the United States abide strictly by the provisions of a communique issued last month in which the Reagan Administration pledged to gradually reduce American arms sales to Taiwan.
China has interpreted the document as a pledge by Washington to phase out military sales to Taiwan. 
Mr. Hu specifically mentioned the communique, made public Aug. 
17, in the course of a lengthy report to the opening session of the 12th Chinese party congress on Wednesday. 
Today the New China News Agency released excerpts from the section of Mr. Hu's report that dealt with foreign policy.
''It is China's hope that these provisions will be strictly observed,'' Mr. Hu said. 
He noted that a ''cloud'' hung over Chinese-American relations because of the Taiwan Relations Act, under which the United States provides arms to the Nationalist regime on Taiwan.
PEKING, Sept. 
4 - The Communist Party Chairman, Hu Yaobang, has emphasized China's concern that the United States abide strictly by the provisions of a communique issued last month in which the Reagan Administration pledged to gradually reduce American arms sales to Taiwan.Expand Third World Cooperation
Mr. Hu also promised in his report that China would expand its cooperation with other third-world countries and insisted that China would never align itself to any large power or group of powers, a reference to the Soviet Union and the United States and their military allies.
The party Chairman also said that a normalization of relations with the Soviet Union would be possible if Moscow took ''practical steps'' to lift its threat to China's security, but he reiterated that Peking attached importance to Moscow's deeds and not its words.
Mr. Hu cited the stationing of ''massive armed forces'' along China's border with the Soviet Union and Mongolia, as well as the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, with which China also shares a small border, and other ''acts of expansion'' in Indochina and Southeast Asia. 
The Soviet Union has about 46 divisions along the Chinese border.
He also complained that ''some forces in Japan are whitewashing the past facts of aggression against China and other Asian countries,'' a reference to a controversy that has arisen over new school textbooks in Japan that minimize the Japanese invasion of China and Korea before World War II.
Mr. Hu's comments did not appear to stray from China's current foreign policy, which has stressed greater solidarity with the third world and a shift toward a more even balance between the United States and the Soviet Union.
But his remarks on Chinese-American relations were probably the most interesting because the communique was announced less than three weeks ago after nearly a year of talks on the problem of United States arms sales to Taiwan.
 
Step-by-Step Solution
Mr. Hu told the congress delegates that the communique provided for a step-by-step solution to the question of American arms sales to Taiwan ''leading to a final thorough settlement.''
In the ambiguously worded document, China said that it would seek reunification with Taiwan by peaceful means and the United States promised not to exceed the current levels of its military sales to Taiwan and to reduce them gradually.
The party Chairman expressed Peking's position that the act, by treating Taiwan as a separate entity, contravened the principles of the communique that led to the establishment of formal diplomatic relations between the United States and China in 1979. 
The United States had acknowledged that there was only one China and that Taiwan's future should be decided by the Chinese themselves.
Details of Mr. Hu's report to the party congress have been released over the last few days. 
The congress, the first in five years, is expected to approve a new constitution and other structural changes in the party leadership this coming week.
