
China today made its strongest threat yet of retaliation against American farmers if the United States imposes new restrictions on textile imports announced on Aug. 
3.
''Americans will be forced to swallow their own bitter pill,'' said the authoritative Chinese-language People's Daily in a commentary in today's issue.
A State Department official, analyzing the commentary, called it a ''clear indication that the Chinese are establishing a rationale for retaliation.''
An Agriculture Department official speculated that China, which has had bumper grain crops for two years, was looking for an excuse to curb its purchases of American grain.
China, through commentary in authoritative People's Daily, makes its strongest threat yet of retaliation if US imposes new restrictions on textile imports announced Aug 3, saying 'Americans will be forced to swallow their own bitter pill'; State Department official says commentary indicates that Chinese are establishing rationale for retaliation (M)
A senior trade official said the situation was ''disturbingly reminiscent of what happened last year when we froze imports of Chinese textiles,'' adding, ''U.S. trade to China fell by $1 billion.''
Both the American officials spoke on condition they not be identified.
 
Could Embarrass Reagan
A new suspension of wheat purchases could embarrass President Reagan in the farm belt, where he has been attacking former Vice President Walter F. Mondale, the Democratic contender, for supporting the curtailment of grain shipments to the Soviet Union in 1980 after the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan.
The Peking newspaper charged that the United States ''doesn't care about violating bilateral agreements with other countries,'' and said that many legislators, retailers, importers and farmers are concerned about the consequences of the new regulations for United States trade.
These concerns are well founded, the commentary said, because ''there is no reason to believe that only the U.S. can take unilateral action to violate international agreements and to restrict and harm others, and that others will not adopt corresponding measures.''
''Any attempt to impose one's own will on others can only harm trade between countries,'' it warned.
The executive order tightening so- called rules of origin governing imports of apparel goes into effect today for goods ordered after Aug. 
3, the date the order was published in the Federal Register. 
For goods ordered before that date, the old rules apply for shipments through Oct. 
31, That exemption, affecting about $500 million of merchandise that had been ordered for store shelves this Christmas, came in response to protests from retailers, farmers, third world countries and others.
The new rules are intended to prevent what Customs officials say is widespread ''circumvention'' of American textile import quotas. 
This occurs when goods are cut in one country and sewn in another, then enter the United States under the second country's usually more liberal quota.
Industry sources in Hong Kong have estimated that more than $100 million in semifinished Chinese textile products are shipped to Hong Kong alone each year for finishing and re-export to the United States.
Under the new rules, fabric made in China and turned into clothing elsewhere will be counted against China's quotas for shipment to the United States. 
China's quotas are not as liberal as Hong Kong's.
 
Outlook for Wheat Purchases
During an altercation over textiles last year China suspended purchases of American wheat.
Agriculture Department officials said that China may not renew a four- year wheat purchase agreement that expires at year-end, and that Peking furthermore may not meet its commitments in the current agreement.
But one Agricultural official noted that because of bumper crops in China ''it was very unlikely that China would fill its commitments in any case.''
China last year produced a record 387 million tons of grain, against 354 million in 1982 and 325 million in 1981. 
This year is expected to produce another record.
The current agreement calls for China to purchase 6 million metric tons of American grain a year over four years. 
Last year China bought 3.8 million tons - 2.2 million short of its purchase commitment. 
It stopped buying United States wheat during the earlier textile dispute.
So far this year China has bought 4.5 million tons - just over half of what it needs to purchase by the end of the year to meet its annual commitment plus last year's shortfall.
