
ON a Sunday late in February, right after the evening news, some 300 million residents of the People's Republic of China - 40 percent of its total population - are expected to watch the premiere of ''One World'' - a series of 15-minute international documentaries that is the first TV program produced in the West specifically for China.
The Chinese Government and experts on Chinese culture have little doubt that almost everyone with access to a television set will tune in. 
''There is a hunger in China for this kind of thing,'' said Kenneth Lieberthal, a specialist in Chinese politics at the University of Michigan. 
''It's going to be an overnight success.''
The General Foods Corporation, one of the sponsors of ''One World,'' has a lot riding on that success. 
It wants to develop a taste for coffee in China, a country of tea-drinkers. 
And it is making the debut of ''One World'' do double duty as the Chinese advertising debut of Maxwell House Coffee and its famous ''good to the last drop'' slogan.
General Foods is joining a burgeoning club of blue-chip American corporations - including the Procter & Gamble Company, Coca-Cola, the International Business Machines Corporation, Boeing, Eastman Kodak and Colgate-Palmolive - that are trying to promote their products and corporate images in China through advertising.
''We want to make Boeing synonymous with aviation in China,'' said Edward S. McLellan, advertising manager of the Boeing Commercial Airplane Company. 
''If we can achieve that, we've got one hell of a marketing edge.''
Many companies say this is the time to establish a beachhead. 
''Right now it's a seller's market in China,'' said Charles J. Diodosio, vice president for China development at the Beatrice Companies, which has been making soft drinks there for a year, and has plans for marketing ice cream and instant noodles. 
''People have money to spend but nothing to spend it on.''
Unlike Americans, the Chinese do not tune commercials out - or off. 
''People sit still for advertising because they are not saturated with it. 
It is viewed as a way of getting more information,'' said Scott D. Seligman, coordinator of China affairs for Burson-Marsteller, the public relations agency.
Until the advent of ''One World,'' American companies generally presented their commercials on CBS reruns that China Central Television, the country's sole TV network, acquired in 1984. 
Shows included sports events, segments from ''60 Minutes'' and made-for-television movies.
''The Chinese didn't pay for the shows,'' said Jayne Ferguson, CBS account executive for China sales. 
''It is a barter arrangement in which we provide the programs and they give us the advertising time.''
The one-hour programs - which generally appear on Thursday evenings during ''golden time,'' the Chinese version of prime time that runs from 7 P.M. to 11:30 P.M. - contain 5 minutes of commercial time. 
A year's worth of advertising, or 32 minutes, costs each sponsor $300,000, Miss Ferguson said.
The Chinese have bought another batch of reruns to show in 1986, and Miss Ferguson has signed up seven corporate backers: Boeing, Kodak, Stauffer Chemical and the Weyerhaeuser Company have each agreed to renew their agreement with CBS; Colgate-Palmolive, International Hydron and Philips Electronics Instruments are signing on for the first time. 
I.B.M., which had sponsored the CBS programs last year, declined to renew.
American corporations can buy time from China Central Television for shows other than the CBS reruns, but they cannot specify when they will appear. 
The Chinese network airs commercials on randomly selected shows, and the American spots appear in competition with local ads and commercials from several other countries, primarily Japan and Hong Kong.
Corporations thus generally prefer the CBS arrangement because it gives them some control. 
''We knew exactly when our commercials would appear and that they would be highly watched,'' said George Conte, director of international marketing communications for Kodak. 
FOR foreign companies to be able to advertise at all in Communist China is a relatively new occurence. 
For a decade during the Cultural Revolution, product advertising was banned as a ''Western gimmick'' and a ''capitalist poison.''
But now, millions of Chinese are wearing Western clothing, dancing to disco music and tasting fast food. 
About 50 million students are learning English and 40,000 of the country's most able college graduates have gone abroad to continue their studies.
In 1978, Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping, in a harbinger of future ''open door'' policies, permitted product advertising to return. 
And now ads blanket China's 305 newspapers, 633 magazines, 155 radio stations and 57 television stations.
Indeed, according to Government figures published in the English-language newspaper China Daily, more than 4,000 Chinese and foreign companies were advertising in 1984, compared to only 100 two years earlier. 
Companies that want advertising space in The People's Daily, the main Communist Party newspaper, or on China Central Television, reportedly must sometimes wait up to four months.
The products and corporations being advertised keep growing more diverse. 
As part of his program of the ''four modernizations'' - developing science and technology, agriculture, industry, and national defense - Mr. Deng has committed his country to obtaining up-to-date equipment and skills. 
Since 1979, the modernization program has included an all-out effort to promote foreign investment.
Direct investment in China by American companies now stands at $1 billion, most of it in the last two years, while exports to China were about $3.6 million in 1985, up 20 percent from a year earlier, according to John J. Callebaut, director of development for the National Council for U.S.-China Trade.
Joint ventures between foreign companies and Government business organizations are becoming more common, particularly in consumer goods production, where China wants to cut back on imports. 
Coca-Cola, for example, has joint ventures in four Chinese cities. 
Eric Riggle, a Coke spokesman, says the relationship is ''a standard franchise agreement -we sell them syrup and concentrate and they, in turn, sell the beverage.''
At the same time, the new economic freedom has led to rising consumer expectations. 
Before Mr. Deng's reforms, Chinese families dreamed of purchasing the ''three bigs'': a bicycle, a wristwatch and a sewing machine. 
Today, the upgraded ''three bigs'' are a washing machine, a refrigerator and a television set (preferably color).
The China Business Review estimates that 13 million to 15 million television sets will be sold in China this year. 
If accurate, that would increase the total number of television sets to 67 million - which would mean an even larger audience for programs such as ''One World.''
 
SO FAR, General Foods and
Procter & Gamble are ''One World's'' only official sponsors. 
But Yue-Sai Kan, the New York-based Chinese cable television entrepreneur who is producing and acting as host for the series, is looking for four more companies willing to pay $450,000 for a 30-second commercial to run twice a week for a year; the price is set by the Chinese Government.
In a parallel with the CBS arrangement, the Chinese Government is not paying Miss Kan to produce the 15-minute show. 
Rather, in the one-page official agreement with China Central Television, signed by Wu Fung, director of CCTV, Miss Kan is guaranteed the right to sell the commercial time for her series.
After production costs, Miss Kan said, any amount remaining from the $2.7 million in advertising revenue will be equally divided between herself and CCTV.
''I think either she will break even or she will make a lot of money,'' said Mark Goodson, of Goodson-Todman Productions, who has known Miss Kan for several years. 
''She will not lose money.''
Still, commercial success stories of companies that advertise in China continue to be based more on anecdotal evidence than statistical proofs. 
It will take many more years before the country's infant advertising industry reaches the sophistication of its Western counterparts.
For example, Stauffer Chemical, a subsidiary of Chesebrough-Pond's, has promoted Ordron, its rice field herbicide, in China since 1980. 
The commercials, says Stassen Song, market development manager of the Pacific Basin, have made the Stauffer name ''very famous.''
But there are no market surveys to back up his claims. 
No company has that kind of information.
''When you talk to the Chinese about viewer information,'' explained Mr. Seligman of Burson-Marsteller, ''they say only that they can promise a 'group of cadres of the highest level.'
''
John Eger, senior vice president, CBS Worldwide Enterprises, says that CBS hired a Hong Kong market research firm to do limited testing on the effectiveness of advertisements on its shows. 
The random survey, carried out in Peking, Shanghai and Canton, questioned 400 people.
''When asked what company makes film for cameras,'' Mr. Eger said, ''close to 70 percent of the people responded Kodak.''
Yet Mr. Conte of Kodak commented, ''We don't know who is watching, when they are watching, where they are watching from.''
Advertising in China is ''like using a shotgun rather than a .22,'' said Professor Lieberthal. 
''You are hitting a lot of people who have nothing to do with your product - and some who do.''
 
YUE-SAI KAN: AMUSING AN 'UNTOUCHED' AUDIENCE
Yue-Sai Kan is comfortably curled in a sleek black leather chair in her small apartment, a gentle blend of contemporary design and Chinese art in a fashionable section of Manhattan's East Side. 
Flipping through a sheaf of newspaper clips from mainland China's press, she translates some of the more colorful references.
One article, for instance, labels her a ''Chinese princess from the screen'' who sends out ''subtle fragrance.''
Miss Kan is the producer and host of ''One World,'' the made-for-China series scheduled to premiere on China Central Television on Feb. 
26. And the press attention is the Chinese Government's primary way of publicizing the show.
''This is only the beginning of a major print campaign,'' Miss Kan said. 
''The Chinese Government promised to promote my show the best way they know how - and believe me, they know how.''
Miss Kan, who is 37 years old, is a slender, dark-eyed woman with a taste for quality - Valentino dresses, silk upholstery, state-of-the-art audio equipment. 
''Yue-Sai is a strange combination of classically oriental in the sense of politeness and tradition, and also absolutely hard working and ambitious in a very capitalist and entrepreneurial way,'' remarked Mark Goodson, the television producer, who is a close friend of hers.
Miss Kan suggested ''One World'' to Chinese officials who had consulted her for advice about filming in this country for programs that are produced in China. 
In December 1984 the Chinese Government sent her a letter of agreement in which they gave her the right to produce the series and sell advertising on it, and promised her their full support in the endeavor.
Last year, she traveled to nine countries on what she calls a ''blistering'' schedule. 
Filming, production, and promotion of the series consumed at least 16 hours a day, said Miss Kan, who works with a staff of about 20.
The first segment of ''One World'' depicts the United States as a land of immigrants, with New York as an ethnic enclave. 
It shows the owner of a Polish sausage factory in Brooklyn dancing the polka, Indian women selling saris on the East Side and scenes from lower Manhattan's neighborhoods - Little Italy and, of course, Chinatown.
A later segment of ''One World'' will show a filmed message from Pope John Paul II. 
The Pope offers encouragement for China's ''commitment of modernization and progress,'' then adds, ''I pray that Almighty God may abundantly bless the Chinese people and their worthy aspirations for progress and peace.''
Other segments take a look at the Bastille Day celebration in France, and towns and cities in Egypt.
''The show is designed to entertain, to amuse and, lastly, to educate. 
I have an audience that is untouched,'' Miss Kan said. 
''What China needs is new information, good information.''
Miss Kan was born in western China to a well-to-do family that fled to Hong Kong after the Communists came to power. 
She left the crown colony to attend the University of Hawaii, then came to New York in 1970. 
She and a sister started a textile importing business that eventually developed into a multimillion dollar trading company.
Miss Kan, who had also been doing translations for cable TV, sold her share of the business to start ''Looking East,'' an earlier cable TV program that focuses on Asian topics for Occidentals and appears on 500 cable systems in 47 states.
Acquaintances say that Miss Kan has a unique opportunity to make history. 
''Whatever she says is going to have a tremendous impact on Chinese thinking,'' said Birabhongse Kasemri, the Ambassador and Permanent Representative to the United Nations from Thailand. 
''Her show augurs well -not only for China and the United States, but also for the rest of the world.''
