
China issued new economic regulations today aimed at attracting greater foreign investment by giving more preferential treatment to joint ventures.
Several Western business sources here thought that the new regulations, which were made public by the State Council, contained little that was new because many of the announced changes had already been quietly put into effect.
But the announcement promised to reduce the confusion that has persisted among Western investors about their rights and obligations in joint ventures with Chinese companies controlled by the state.
China issues new economic regulations aimed at attracting greater foreign investment by giving preferential treatment to joint ventures; new rules are aimed at reducing confusion that has persisted among foreign investors about their rights and obligations in joint ventures with Chinese companies controlled by state (M)
''It's comforting that we have it spelled out,'' a United States representative said.
The new regulations, which supplement China's first joint venture law promulgated in July 1979, apply generally to enterprises that combine Western capital and technology with Chinese factories and labor.
 
Exemption for Some Imports
Among other changes, the latest regulations exempt certain imported materials from customs duties and industrial and commercial taxes. 
Previously, Western investors were technically liable for duties on what they imported to make a product in China. 
The products made for export are also now formally exempted from the nation's consolidated industrial and commercial tax.
The purpose of the joint ventures has been to generate foreign currency for China by producing quality goods for export, and investors have been prohibited or strongly discouraged from marketing them inside the country. 
Now joint venture products that China urgently needs or would otherwise import can be mainly sold in the domestic market.
The new legislation now authorizes the department responsible for the joint venture to resolve any foreign- exchange imbalance caused by domestic sales, though it does not specify how. 
The new legislation also stipulates that disputes between the foreign and Chinese partners can be arbitrated in the country where the sued party is situated or in a third country if both sides agree. 
While the Chinese may still insist that disagreements be arbitrated in China, this gives an appearance of greater leeway for the foreign investor.
 
Directors' Status Recognized
The board of directors of a joint venture is now regarded as its highest authority and is empowered to make all major decisions under the latest regulations. 
Government departments in charge may offer guidance, assistance and supervision but not actual leadership.
''This provision reflects respect for the right of a joint venture to do business independently,'' Yuan Mu, a State Council spokesman, was quoted as saying at a news conference.
A report on the new regulations on joint ventures circulated today by the official New China News Agency did not clarify some problems that have perplexed Western businessmen.
For example, there was no mention of a requirement that Chinese management be paid on a par with Western executives in the joint venture. 
The Government has the habit of siphoning away most of this Western salary, leaving the Chinese manager with little more than the local prevailing salary.
Some Western businessmen said they were waiting to see to what extent the new rules would make it easier to do business in China. 
''The big question still is: How will it work in practice?'' one American said.
