
China said today that a fifth round of talks with the Soviet Union on normalizing relations was ''useful,'' and both sides expressed willingness to expand economic, trade, scientific and cultural exchanges.
Two weeks of talks concluded Friday in Peking and will reconvene in Moscow in April, a Foreign Ministry statement said.
China previously issued only terse, nondescriptive dispatches on the negotiations between the rival Communist powers that began in October 1982.
China says fifth round of talks with USSR on normalizing relations was 'useful'; both sides express willingness to expand economic, trade, scientific and cultural exchanges (M)
''The consultations proceeded in a frank, calm and earnest atmosphere,'' the statement said. 
''Both sides considered consultations and dialogues useful and decided that the next round of consultations would be held in April 1985 in Moscow.''
There was no mention of what China calls the three major obstacles to improved relations, which have been strained for more than two decades by ideological and territorial disputes.
China objects to an estimated 600,000 Soviet troops along the Chinese border, the Soviet military intervention in Afghanistan and Moscow's support for Vietnam's occupation of Cambodia.
The talks have been headed by Deputy Foreign Minister Qian Qichen and Deputy Foreign Minister Leonid F. Ilyichev.
 
'Some Positive Moments'
Mr. Ilyichev, who left Peking by special plane today for Moscow, told reporters at the airport, ''There were some positive moments.''
He did not elaborate.
The statement by the Chinese Foreign Ministry said, ''Each side set forth its position on the normalization of relations between the two countries. 
Both sides expressed the desire for improved Sino-Soviet relations and the willingness to further expand the contacts and exchanges between the two countries in the economic, trade, scientific, technological, cultural, sports and other fields on the basis of equality and mutual benefit.''
Despite their differences, both countries have moved to improve relations in nonpolitical areas since the normalization talks began.
Statistics reported by the official press on Oct. 
31 said 10,000 Soviet visitors came to China in the first nine months of this year, compared with 8,000 in 1983.
The reports also said Chinese-Soviet trade would reach $1.2 billion in 1984, up 60 percent from last year.
China and the Soviet Union were close allies during the 1950's, but disputes broke out in the late part of that decade over interpretations of Marxist ideology and frontier boundaries.
The Russians withdrew all advisers and aid to China in 1960, and border clashes occurred in 1969.
China has said repeatedly that it considers the Soviet Union to be the main threat to Chinese security.
