
The United States said today that it was granting asylum to three Chinese couples who said they feared persecution because they had violated China's policy encouraging one-child families.
In announcing the decision, Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d disclosed that the Justice Department had adopted new guidelines requiring immigration officials to ''give careful consideration to applications for asylum'' from Chinese who fear persecution at home ''because they refuse to abort a pregnancy or resist sterilization after the birth of a second or subsequent child.''
If such refusal is ''undertaken as an act of conscience, with full awareness of the urgent priority'' assigned to family planning in China, the guidelines say, ''it may be appropriate to view such refusal as an act of political defiance sufficient to establish refugee status.''
State Department officials said tonight that they were unaware of the new guidelines.
One-Child Policy
Members of the Chinese Communist Party and people living in urban areas of China are encouraged to follow the one-child policy. 
Couples who sign a pledge to have one child receive rewards that include free health care for the child, a 5 percent increase in pensions, priority in housing, schooling and medicine, and a monthly bonus.
People who have more than two children may lose their jobs and their membership in the Communist Party, and they may face difficulty buying fuel and agricultural supplies, the State Department said in an annual report on human rights around the world.
Each province of China sets guidelines, based on directives from Beijing, for the desired number of births each year, the State Department said.
But State Department officials said the one-child policy was not rigorously enforced in rural areas. 
In addition, the officials said, members of minority groups are sometimes allowed to have two or three children.
The Justice Department said the people receiving asylum were in the United States. 
The department said one of those granted asylum was a Phoenix doctor, but it released no further information about the couples.
A State Department official said, ''The Chinese are sensitive to criticism of their population policy, but I do not assume these cases will blow up into a major problem.''
The Chinese Government has often said it does not condone forced abortions or sterilizations to achieve the population policy, and that local officials can be punished if they coerce women into having abortions. 
Coercive practices still take place on occasion, but those are relatively rare, State Department officials said.
''In the past, contrary to announced central government policy, local officials coerced significant numbers of women who became pregnant without permission into having abortions,'' the State Department rights report said.
China has 1.09 billion people, and the population is growing at a rate of slightly more than 1.2 percent a year.
China has said its population should not exceed 1.2 billion in the year 2000.
