
Vice President Bush had barely begun a six-day visit to China today when one of the country's top leaders issued an unusually direct warning about the state of relations between the two countries.
At a banquet that followed a red-carpet welcome for Mr. Bush, Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang appeared to revive the issue of arms sales to Taiwan, a problem that soured Mr. Bush's last visit here as Vice President, in 1982. 
That visit led to a formal agreement that the United States would gradually lower the quantity and quality of the sales, but Peking has been restive over the marginal declines registered so far.
''We all know that there are obstacles in Sino-U.S. relations which prevent the proper and full tapping of the potentials in the mutually beneficial cooperation between our two countries,'' Mr. Zhao said in his banquet toast.
'Times Are Advancing'
He went on: ''This state of affairs is not satisfactory. 
Times are advancing, and the situation is developing. 
We should not let the old issues from the past hold us back. 
The Chinese side has already made significant efforts for the removal of the obstacles existing between our two countries. 
It is hoped that the U.S. side will make corresponding efforts.''
Although Mr. Zhao did not specifically mention Taiwan, the reference seemed clear in his allusion to China's hope that ''both sides will strictly abide by the mutually agreed principles'' of the communiques they signed in 1972, 1979 and 1982, in which the United States recognized that there was only one China, governed by Peking, and agreed to gradually reduce the arms sales. 
The sales are expected to total $760 million this year, down from $780 million in 1984.
When speaking of China's own efforts to remove obstacles, Mr. Zhao apparently was referring to Peking's position that Taiwan can keep its political and economic systems, as well as its army, if it agrees to reunification with the mainland. 
The country's paramount leader, Deng Xiaoping, whom Mr. Bush will be meeting, has described the bid for unity with Taiwan as China's top priority, ahead even of Mr. Deng's ambitious program of economic change.
 
Bush's Reply
Mr. Zhao's use of the first public exchange of the trip to revive an issue that Washington has been playing down appeared to surprise Mr. Bush, who amended his own text in reply. 
Having catalogued the progress the two nations have made in trade, academic exchanges and other ties, the Vice President departed from his text to note that Mr. Zhao had referred to ''problems'' in the relationship. 
He added: ''We know that, and we should work to solve them.''
United States officials had characterized the Vice President's trip as an opportunity to underscore Washington's support for Mr. Deng's program of change. 
Mr. Zhao also cited progress the two nations have made in other areas, and spoke of Mr. Bush, who was chief of the United States diplomatic mission here a decade ago, as ''a friend well known to the Chinese people.''
But the jarring edge to his remarks on Taiwan underscored the somewhat cooler attitude Peking has adopted in the last year to ties with Washington.
One of the changes that has affected the relationship since Mr. Bush was last here - the thawing of relations between China and the Soviet Union -was not mentioned at the dinner. 
But there were salient reminders of it in the presence here of several Soviet delegations. 
One of them is a high-ranking parliamentary group that includes Georgi A. Arbatov, the Kremlin's top adviser on United States relations.
 
Signs Are the Same
Officials in Peking and Washington have maintained that ties between China and the United States are independent of the progress being made in Peking's contacts with Moscow.
But Mr. Bush's entourage of 110 officials and journalists could hardly avoid being struck by the sudden budding of the sort of contacts between Moscow and Peking that were the prelude in the 1970's to the flowering of Washington's own relationship here.
Mr. Bush finds himself in China at a time when two major Soviet cultural attractions are being offered here: a tour by the Moscow City Ballet and a series of poetry readings by Yevgeny Yevtushenko, 51 years old, the writer who was in the forefront of the Soviet avant-garde in the 1960's. 
There is even a visit by a group of blind Russians renewing contacts between their organization and its Chinese counterpart.
Mr. Bush is expected to hold talks over the next two days with several of China's top leaders, including Mr. Zhao and Mr. Deng. On Wednesday, Mr. Bush will fly to Chengdu, capital of Sichuan Province, to open the fourth United States Consulate in China. 
He will go on from there to the resort city of Guilin, the southern city of Canton and to the Special Economic Zone of Shenzhen, near Hong Kong.
