
THE striking images of ''Yellow Earth,'' a Chinese movie about the forced marriages inflicted on teen-age peasant women before the Communist takeover, offer respite from a plot that bears the impress of the cultural arm of the Chinese Communist Party's Central Committee.
A group of farmers, chests bared, heads garlanded, pray for rain. 
Musicians with red drums and dancers in blue with white headbands make rousing recruiters for Mao Zedong's army. 
A wedding procession is seen far off as specks of red against the desert-brown landscape. 
The interior of a farmer's hut is so smoky it seems to be part of the earth. 
The guests at a wedding feast are served wooden fish; no real fish is to be had, but, as one explains, ''We must have fish with dinner.''
The movie, directed by Chen Kaige, which can be seen as part of the New Directors/New Films series tonight at 6 and tomorrow at 1 at the Museum of Modern Art, is not complicated, though the English subtitles seem designed to maintain the East's reputation for mystery.
The time is 1939. 
A Communist soldier comes to Shaanxi province to collect folk songs for adapting by the army. 
By luck, he settles in with a poor farm family, whose members -taciturn father, dull 10-year-old son and especially the pretty 14-year-old daughter - have the best voices in all Shaanxi and burst forth at inspirational moments, in the style of old Hollywood musicals. 
We see their hard lives and the life of their town through the soldier's sympathetic eyes.
The girl, who spends a lot of time carrying water from the river three miles away, falls in love with the soldier, who helps with the water. 
But he has to go back to the army, and she is sold into marriage. 
Her consciousness has been raised, however, and by the time he comes back for her, she has sailed daringly off on her own to find liberation, in the form of the People's Liberation Army, and the hills are alive with the sounds of ''It's the Communists who save the people.''
Love and Liberation YELLOW EARTH, directed by Chen Kaige; screenplay (in Mandarin with English subtitles) by Zhang Ziliang from a short essay ''Sanwen'' by Ke Lan; photography by Zhang Yimou; a World Entertainment Release. 
At Roy and Niuta Titus Theater 1, Museum of Modern Art, as part of the New Directors/New Films series; presented by the Film Society of Lincoln Center and the Department of Film of the Museum of Modern Art. 
Running time: 89 minutes.
This film has no rating. 
Ciu QiaoXue Bai Gu QingWang Xueqi The fatherTan Tuo HanhanLiu Qiang
