
''We are weeping from too many joys. 
We are rid of the shame of the past. 
Our forefathers can feel at ease in their graves.
O, my Motherland, you are no longer a broken bowl in front of an ancient temple.''
THOSE lines are from a poem that a man named Qing Xian recently sent to a Canton newspaper. 
And, like Mr. Qing, a great many Chinese these days believe that their country's nightmarish past has given way to a new dawn of prosperity and growth beyond their dreams.
Last year the real growth of the Chinese economy - a 13 percent increase in gross agricultural and industrial output, after allowing for inflation - was probably the greatest of any country in the world. 
Nor was that a flash in the pan.
In the past five years since Deng Xioping, the Chinese leader, began his modernization drive and his ''open door'' policy - opening China to the outside world and also opening up the domestic economy increasingly to the gyrations of the marketplace - the nation's total output has grown at an average rate of 10 percent a year.
As a result, economists, foreign businessmen and Chinese officials are coming to believe that China, with its own unique blend of planning and free enterprise, has reached that magic moment in its economic drive - a takeoff into sustained growth. 
So confident are China's new leaders about their nation's forward momentum, that they are even prepared to slow down the pace somewhat, to prevent inflation and an overdependence on imports. 
If China manages to avoid radical political change - and the 81-year-old Mr. Deng has moved to insure continuity by filling key jobs with a group of younger men loyal to him - the strategy, many believe, could succeed.
''They're not yet South Korea or Japan; they're still catching up,'' said Hidetoshi Ukawa, Japan's general consul in New York. 
But concern seems to be growing in Japan and other major Far Eastern exporting nations that the catch-up may come fast, that China may become an awesome economic rival as soon as 20 years from now. 
China, which has relied heavily on imports for consumer and industrial items ranging from refrigerators to trucks, is beginning to churn out its own - for consumption and for export.
And there are ample grounds for expecting China to generate sustained growth. 
On Friday, the World Bank issued a report saying that China's ambitious goal of increasing per capita income to $800, from $450 now, by the turn of the century, stood a good chance of success. 
It said the chances for doing so would be increased if China allowed even more play than it already has for market forces and decentralized decision-making.
There are other signs of optimism. 
Traveling through China this fall, one finds that living standards are rising far faster than anyone had imagined possible and this is itself the strongest reason to believe that the changes inaugurated by Mr. Deng will endure. 
People seem to appreciate what the changes are doing to their lives. 
They are unlikely to give them up.
''We will not get rid of our experiments,'' said Zhang Ge, a young deputy director for the Special Economic Zones at the State Council in Peking. 
''As in the natural sciences, we will learn from them, even when we fail. 
When we get the data, we will go on, we will not stop.''
And Richard Huber, who directs Citibank's operations in Asia, puts it another way: China, he says, is simply ''pretty close to the point of no return'' to the old ways.
But others have their doubts about whether the boom can last - and how much there is in it for foreign businesses and investors, if it does last. 
With several notable exceptions like Citibank, 3M, Exxon, Atlantic Richfield, McDonnell Douglas and I.B.M., American and other foreign companies continue to hold back from major investments in China.
They are concerned that the astonishing reforms that swept this Communist country in the past five years under Mr. Deng could, one day, disappear, propelling China back into an inward-looking and anti-Western stance. 
After all, such xenophobia marked a great deal of Chinese history, and never more so than during Mao Zedong's decade-long Cultural Revolution, which ended in the mid-1970's, shortly before Mr. Deng returned from his second banishment and achieved power in 1978.
Even Chinese peasants seem to fear a return to the older, less capitalistic ways. 
People's Daily, the leading Chinese Communist newspaper, published an article by Zhang Pingli in mid-September, saying that many peasants are so afraid that the Government will change its policy of ''making people wealthy'' that they are hiding their newly earned cash in their homes or putting it in banks far from their home villages.
''Just repeating the words, 'There will be no change,' is not enough to allay the peasants' fear,'' said Mr. Zhang. The peasants, he insisted, ''still need a political and legal guarantee.''
The peasants' concerns have taken on greater significance in Peking because farmers are playing an increasingly important economic role. 
In a land where agriculture accounts for 35 percent of the national income, and 70 percent of the population is rural, Mr. Deng's dissolution of the old system of collectivized agriculture is an important reform. 
Prof. Abram Bergson of Harvard, who recently led a team of Western economists through China, found that the return to China's ancient system of allowing families to farm the land was ''the most far-reaching and dramatic'' of the new developments his team observed in China.
Under the new arrangement, families, free of despotic controls, decide how, when and what crops to produce. 
The families, called ''brigades'' to preserve some flavor of Socialist acceptability, contract with the Government to produce set amounts of particular crops and are free to sell what they produce above those amounts in the open market and retain the cash they earn. 
These strong incentives have produced a surge of farm output. 
Grain production, for instance, has climbed from 305 million tons in 1978 to more than 400 million tons last year.
But China has tackled more than just agricultural problems. 
To foster industrial growth, it has created so-called special economic zones and open cities all around the nation, which Westerners have labeled ''pockets of capitalism.''
The areas, where economic decision-making is decentralized, encourage foreign investment through special tax programs and other incentives. 
''What the Chinese are thinking of is creating a series of Hong Kongs,'' said Mr. Ukawa, the Japanese consul.
As it tries to craft a new and stronger economy, China is determined to make its own rules. 
After witnessing the economic gridlock of Soviet-style Marxism and the failure, during the Mao years, of a rigidly planned economy in China, Peking has forged a sharply different course. 
Out of a poor, backward and Communist nation, it is trying to create a new model for Socialist development - a modern mixed economy where Socialism is coupled with a heavy reliance on market forces.
Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang told last month's Party Congress in Peking that China was already entering a new stage in which the economy would gradually shift from meeting people's basic needs for food and clothing to ''enhancing the quality of their lives.''
By the end of this century, he said, ''the Chinese people will achieve a relatively comfortable standard of living. 
Although this is a gradual process, it is increasingly apparent and we should be fully aware of it.''
One of the keystones of China's plan is to grow by about 7 percent a year for the next five years, a figure that officials are already conceding could be exceeded in practice. 
''A sustained 7 or 8 or even 10 percent growth rate over such a long time is rare in the economic development of any country,'' Prime Minister Zhao said, ''A similar situation has occurred in only a few countries and regions during the 'economic takeoff' stage.''
Only Japan and the ''little tigers'' of the Pacific rim - Singapore, Hong Kong, Taiwan and South Korea - have achieved comparable long-term growth rates, but the mainland Chinese now believe they could do it too.
The goal is to quadruple its gross agricultural and industrial output between 1980 and 2000. 
With its population of one billion growing by just 1.3 percent a year, as China presses its ''one-family-one-child'' policy, annual per capita income is projected to rise to about $800 by the end of the century, a level that would place it among the world's lower-middle-income nations, such as Egypt with $700 in current annual per capita income today and the Philippines with $760. 
China has already moved well ahead of such countries as Pakistan and India, with per capita incomes of $390 and $300, respectively.
And the rise would be striking: Per capita income was only $300 a year in 1980 and is now $450. 
To achieve its quadruple goal for the growth of total national output, China would have to invest an average of 30 percent of its national income each year - an investment rate slightly higher than that of Japan and the ''little tigers.''
The World Bank report released Friday said that if China raised its per capita income to $800, it would be a remarkable achievement almost unparalleled in world history. 
''Only one country - Japan - has indisputably caught up with the developed nations from a position of economic backwardness,'' the report said. 
But, it said China had ''a good chance'' of doing so.
However, the report included some warnings. 
''Unrealistically high growth targets cause fluctuations, shortages and inefficiency, while aiming too low has few adverse consequences,'' it said, offering two other options for more moderate and balanced growth.
The differences among the three options, labeled quadruple, moderate and balance, are in projected overall rates of growth and in their composition and assumptions about efficiency. 
The moderate option, although making most of the same assumptions as the one labeled quadruple, takes a less optimistic view of the future efficiency of China's economy, including slower rates of productivity increase in both agriculture and industry.
In the balance option, the World Bank team proposes giving greater weight to the services sector - especially to commerce and various business and personal services - which would shift the structure of China's economy away from the Soviet pattern and toward the pattern of Japan and other countries at comparable stages of development. 
This would mean improving both the quantity and quality of China's warehouses, shops, vehicles and other equipment and its communications system.
That option would raise employment in services to 25 percent of the labor force by the end of the century, cutting China's capital requirements, allowing a somewhat lower savings rate and permitting a more even growth of consumption and investment.
And, assuming overall national output growing by 6.4 percent instead of 7.3 percent as the quadruple model assumes, following the balance option would raise Chinese living standards just as much, while reducing the strains of forced growth and doing more to improve the quality of life.
China is taking these options seriously. 
''We examined the economic growth rate from various aspects, and calculated it from different points of view,'' Prime Minister Zhao said. 
And he acknowledged that China, with its fast rate of development, has been running into trouble, starting in the fourth quarter of last year and still continuing: ''A number of problems arose, such as an excessive rate of increase in industrial production, excessive investment in fixed assets, overexpansion of credit and consumption funds, sharp increases in some commodity prices and a drop in state foreign currency reserves.''
Already, according to forecasts by Wharton Econometrics, China's growth has slowed, and it will probably go to about 7 percent in 1985 from 13 percent last year. 
Although the 7 percent growth is what China wants for itself in the next five years, the slowdown this year was the result of more than just Government policies: It was also caused by a sharp foreign exchange shortfall and a slowdown in the rate of investment. 
Foreign exchange reserves, for example, which were at a peak of $17.1 billion in the second quarter of 1984, according to the International Monetary Fund, fell to $11.6 billion in June 1985 and reportedly declined further in the third quarter of this year.
Allen S. Whiting, a professor at the University of Arizona, who is a long-time China-watcher and former foreign service officer, points out other hazards that lie in China's path. 
They include the ups and downs of the world economy, to which China is now more exposed, with exports vulnerable to protectionism and imports to price fluctuations; exaggerated hopes of continuous progress that could be disappointed - and exploited by an opportunistic opposition; and natural disasters, such as floods, earthquakes and famines that have plagued China through its history. 
And given the scale of the population and the territory, there are sure to be other setbacks along the way.
But for now, the Chinese are committed to their plan of at least 7 percent sustained growth. 
''If the rate were too high,'' Mr. Deng told last month's Party Congress in Peking, ''that would create many problems that would have a negative effect on the reform and on social conduct. 
It is better to be prudent. 
We must control the scale of investment in fixed assets and see that capital construction is not overextended.''
He said it was important to manage production efficiently, insure quality and seek economic and social returns. 
The contrast with traditional Communist planning, aimed at ''overfulfillment of production norms,'' is striking.
The threat of inflation has alarmed the Government. 
Although official statistics put the rate of consumer price increase at just 6 percent during the past 12 months, unofficial estimates of foreign economists based in China put it much higher - at 10 to 15 percent, with Shanghai calculated at 17 percent.
The decline in foreign exchange reserves has also been worrisome. 
China, remembering its own earlier dependency on foreign capital and observing the development problems facing today's debtor countries in Latin America and Africa, would rather slow its rate of growth than pile up foreign debts. 
And when they decide to crack down on borrowing, they don't waste time: They turn it off. 
Mr. Huber of Citibank says: ''Their financial control system is pretty primitive - it's as though it has just one on/off switch, and either it's on or off.''
Besides concerns about inflation and the loss of foreign currency reserves, another recent development alarmed the Chinese Government and caused it to blow the whistle on breakneck development: evidence of corruption in industry.
The most notorious scandal was on Hainan Island, a designated ''open'' area where local officials were involved in a scheme that used up a lot of foreign exchange for cars and other consumer durables rather than using it for more productive purposes, such as purchases of capital equipment and machinery. 
Hainan is far from being an isolated case. 
The Government recently announced that it was investigating 200,000 ''business companies'' and ''trade centers,'' clamping down on ''unscrupulous profiteering, tax evasion and violation of business regulations.''
The Chinese continue to worry about the moral - or rather immoral - consequences of a freer economic system. 
At the recent Party Congress Chairman Deng warned that ''only Socialism can eliminate the greediness, corruption and injustice which are inherent in capitalism.''
But he did not try to deny the vulnerability of the Chinese. 
''In recent years,'' he said, ''production has gone up, but the pernicious influence of capitalism and feudalism has not been reduced to a minimum. 
Instead, evils that had long been extinct after liberation have come to life again.''
Nevertheless, neither Mr. Deng nor other high officials indicate any intention of reversing course as they try to achieve a more open economy. 
Last week the Shanghai-based World Economic Herald stated that Hainan Island was undergoing ''massive growth'' and that the car-importing scandal would not affect the ''open'' designation nurturing that growth. 
In Peking and in the Special Economic Zones of Shenzhen and Xiamen, officials took a common line in saying that they despised corruption and would do everything to stop it. 
But they denounced party opponents who would use corruption as an argument for trying to reverse Deng Xioping's open-door policy and economic reforms.
Chinese officials, especially in urging foreign corporations to invest in their country, insist that there will never be a change in their openness to foreign investment and the safeguarding of foreign property and rights to repatriate capital and earnings.
Yet some American and other foreign businessmen interviewed in Shanghai insist that serious problems exist for foreign investors, mainly involving the fact that the Chinese Government sometimes breaks a contract it doesn't like. 
The foreign businessmen call for stricter enforcement of Chinese laws protecting foreign investors, and improvement of the laws themselves.
The Chinese are sensitive to the complaints and say ''issues not covered by present laws and regulations may be incorporated into economic contracts stipulating in explicit terms the rights and obligations of both parties.''
The contracts, they insist, once approved by the Chinese Government, ''have full legal effect.''
But bureaucratic snarls or other tie-ups, say the foreign businessmen, sometimes prevent what they thought was a valid contract from getting the approval of the Chinese Government.
The legal situation, according to diplomatic sources in China, is getting better. 
Cyrus Vance, the former United States Secretary of State and now a lawyer in private practice, said at meetings in Shanghai and Dalian that China's legal system was improving, facilitating economic and technical exchanges. 
And Phillipe de Smedt of the Brussels Bar Association told a law seminar in Peking, ''European investors have become more eager to investigate opportunities in China as the Chinese framework of legal and tax regulations has developed more fully.''
But Chinese officials acknowledge that there is still room for improvement.
With an improving legal environment, a growing number of American businesses see enormous market opportunities in China. 
As one cigar-smoking businessman said to another in a recent New Yorker cartoon: ''There's a billion people in China. 
At some point, some of them are going to need agents.''
