
Consumers in China, a land where refrigerator doors fall off, the frames of bicycles crack as they are wheeled from the store and the hands of doughnut-sized watches ignore conventional notions of time, are up in arms. 
Or so the country's newspapers say.
In a rare, concerted attack on a Government ministry, newspapers have denounced a decision to cancel the country's first exhibition of the shoddiest consumer goods.
''It is a farce and deception,'' wrote Wu Jincai, a reporter for the official New China News Agency.
The Economic Daily lashed out at the ministry's decision as ''a humiliating disgrace'' for China's consumers.
In August, confronted with a nationwide growl of unhappy consumers, the Ministry of Light Industry declared that it would display the country's worst products - batteries that leak, washing machines that masticate clothes and color televisions that aren't in color.
 
Whistle-Blower Hunted
But in a covert collaboration between manufacturers and the ministry, the exhibition was canceled and then an investigation was begun to find the ministry worker who exposed how the decision was made, according to a barrage of articles in the nation's papers that provided a glimpse into decision-making here.
China's ambitious effort to reorder its economic system along more Western lines has borne fruit in the form of a range of consumer goods inconceivable only a decade ago. 
But this new cornucopia has come packed with a great many products that break or do not work.
As industries churned out more radios, tape recorders and washing machines, concern for quality gave way to demands for volume, according to many of China's newspapers. 
As a result, the Ministry of Light Industry, which oversees the production of a vast array of home appliances, bicycles and personal items, decided to exhibit the worst of the consumer goods in an attempt to shame manufacturers into producing better products.
But a few days ago, the ministry announced that the exhibition of shoddy goods ''has triumphantly finished its task.''
The assertion was greeted with astonishment in the normally compliant press.
''The organizers of the exhibition have obviously succumbed to pressure against exposing the inferior quality of some products, which had intensified as the opening date drew near,'' wrote Mr. Wu of the New China News Agency. 
#4,400 Complaints Received The Guangming Daily said that after the ministry announced its intention to stage the exhibition, it received more than 4,400 letters from across China from people complaining about products and urging that they be included in the show.
In the months that followed, the ministry assembled filled a warehouse with poor quality products. 
But, according to The Guangming Daily, the contents of the warehouse were closely guarded and the consumers' letters themselves were deemed secret.
''But someone in the househould appliances bureau under the ministry alerted a television station, which filmed the products and showed them on TV,'' the English-language China Daily wrote.
''A department of the ministry even tried to ferret out the 'informer','' Mr. Wu reported.
Zeng Xialin, the Minister of Light Industry, ''admitted that some people at his ministry were resentful of the exhibition,'' Mr. Wu wrote. 
He quoted the minister as saying, ''To protect their favorite factories, they deleted letters of complaints about their products from the computer.''
Worse, Mr. Wu maintained, ''factories brought pressure to bear upon the ministry.''
''For example, some factory managers threatened to stop supplying Beijing with their goods,'' he said. 
''The abortion of this well-intended event was just what some people expected from the beginning.''
 
Looking for Silver Lining
A reporter from Liberation Daily tried to find the silver lining of what was being widely portrayed as a national embarrassment.
''More than 800 repairmen from over 70 factories came to Beijing to repair or replace their low-quality products,'' the reporter, Si Maxin, wrote. 
''We can say that from this the aborted exhibition still contains a glimmer of success.''
But the next day, Mr. Wu pursued his theme by bemoaning the plight of China's consumers.
''Why can't consumers stand up for their rights,'' he asked on the front page of The Economic Daily. 
''In theory, one billion consumers occupy a position of dominance, but every letter of complaint is invariably the voice of only one individual. 
These voices never seem to be able to come together to become loud enough to command attention.''
''Now,'' he concluded, ''everything depends on the consumer. 
China's consumers must be modern consumers. 
They must have a new image, they must have the freedom to be choosy and the right to choose.''
