
China said today that it would retaliate economically against the United States if the Reagan Administration carried out a threat to curb imports of Chinese textiles unilaterally later this month.
The Administration announced last Tuesday that it would act to curb Chinese textile imports on Jan. 
15 if the two sides could not resolve the dispute in negotiations that are expected to resume here later this week.
The New China News Agency today quoted an official of the Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations and Trade as saying that China ''cannot but respond strongly in order to safeguard our own interests'' if the Reagan Administration carried out its threat.
Should the trade skirmish escalate, the unidentified official added, ''the U.S. side would bear all the consequences.''
PEKING, Jan. 
2 - China said today that it would retaliate economically against the United States if the Reagan Administration carried out a threat to curb imports of Chinese textiles unilaterally later this month.Talks Under Way Since August
At issue is a new agreement, under negotiation since August, to limit the quantity of clothing and other textiles that China may export to the United States. 
The current agreement expired on New Year's Eve, but the United States allowed that deadline to pass in hopes of giving negotiators a last chance to solve the dispute before Secretary of State George Shultz's scheduled visit to China on Feb. 
2.
The official did not say how China would respond to any curbs, but the Chinese have hinted in past talks with some businessmen that they might cut back on imports of American corn and wood products. 
American cotton sales to China have already dropped sharply, partly because of three successive record crops in China.
According to United States figures, China bought $2.57 billion worth of American goods in the first 10 months of 1982 and sold about $1.92 billion worth in the United States. 
The resulting trade deficit of $655.6 million is about half the imbalance that China incurred in the same period of 1981.
Textiles, however, accounted for $750.5 million, or 39 percent, of total Chinese sales to the United States in the 10-month period, up from $590 million in all of 1981. 
Overall, textile exports account for a reported 25 percent of China's foreign-exchange earnings.
The person quoted by the official news agency was not identified, but China's chief negotiator on the textile question, Li Dengshan, is a prominent official of that ministry. 
The American side has been led by Peter Murphy, an assistant United States Trade Representative. 
He is expected to return here for new talks that begin Thursday.
The previous three-year textile agreement expired last Thursday after the two sides failed to get closer to an agreement in three rounds of talks last year. 
The American side then extended the accord for 15 days to permit a new round of negotiations to begin.
The Chinese news agency quoted the unnamed official as saying that the Reagan Administration had ignored a Chinese offer to reach an interim arrangement through consultations and had set its own terms.
''This is an evident violation of the principle of negotiation on the basis of equality,'' the official was quoted as saying. 
''We are resolutely against it.''
In 1979, the Carter Administration also imposed textile quotas unilaterally after failing to reach an agreement. 
The Chinese side then returned to the negotiating table and worked out the treaty that is expiring.
 
Biggest Textiles Producer
Although China is the world's biggest textiles producer, it now accounts for just 10 percent of United States imports, which ranks it behind Taiwan, Hong Kong and South Korea, the three largest suppliers.
But the trade figures for the first 10 months of 1982 show that Chinese textile sales to the United States increased by 32 percent from a year earlier, with clothing and accessories jumping by 53 percent over the similar period in 1981.
The United States, meanwhile, has already negotiated new agreements with the three largest suppliers that allows them to increase exports at a rate of less than 1 percent a year from the year-earlier total. 
American producers want President Reagan to peg overall imports to the growth of the domestic market, which now runs about 1.5 percent annually.
 
Seeking 6% Growth Rate
China, however, does not want to accept the growth rate imposed on other Asian producers and argues that its share should be larger to compensate for the overall trade deficit that it runs with the United States. 
Its target is thought to be closer to the 6 percent growth rate allowed for secondary foreign shippers.
The differences between the two sides encompass more than the growth rate, however. 
They also include the basic quotas that would apply when a new agreement goes into effect, the categories of textiles to be controlled and the methods of future consultation.
The current consultation mechanisms give the United States the right to call for talks with China when it feels that too much of a given type of textile is being imported. 
It is one of the touchiest points for the Chinese, who want a more flexible system.
The previous agreement regulated 14 categories of textiles out of a possible 110, but the United States added another 14 categories to the regulated list last year. 
The American side reportedly wants about 30 categories included in the new agreement, while China wants only about 20.
 
----
 
Hopes for Accord
 
Special to the New York Times
WASHINGTON, Jan. 
2 - An American trade official said here today that the United States still hoped to reach an agreement on textile imports with China. 
''We've been down this road with the Chinese before,'' he added, when informed of China's threat. 
He did not comment further.
