
The Great Wall Hotel borrowed its name from China's ancient landmark and there the similarity ends. 
The operators of the new 22-story building, its exterior sheathed in reflective glass, say it is China's most modern hotel, which is hardly an exaggeration considering the state of hotels in this country.
The Great Wall Hotel, which opened the first 40 of its 1,007 rooms on Dec. 
10, is the biggest Chinese- American joint venture so far, involving an investment of $75 million and setting a new standard in the hotel boom in China.
The Westerners who descended on China after it opened its doors to foreign trade and tourism placed a strain on facilities that has yet to be resolved. 
Peking's Tourist Department reported last May that 456,000 tourists visited the capital in 1982, 2.4 times more than in 1978. 
Over the same period, Peking's hotel accommodations expanded by only 70 percent, to about 5,100 rooms.
 
Service Is Often Poor
At the height of the autumn season, tourists have been bused to other cities as much as 75 miles from Peking, or left sitting in airport lounges for lack of hotel space. 
Those who get into a hotel may confront bleak rooms, broken toilets, spasmodic hot water and indifferent service.
The reservation system is so chaotic that travelers seldom know where they will be billeted, and the hotel staff cannot tell callers who is registered. 
Restaurants and other facilities usually shut down early.
The dearth of comfort and courtesy has left a vacuum for foreign investors to fill. 
The pacesetter has been Peking's new Jianguo Hotel, a joint venture built by Clement Chen, a San Francisco businessman, for $22 million. 
The Jianguo, which looks like the Holiday Inn in Palo Alto, Calif., opened in 1982 and earned $1 million in its first 10 months.
 
Boom Spreads in China
A half-dozen other quality hotels, including the 2,000-room Lidu, are now under construction in Peking, and the demand has spread to other major Chinese cities.
Nanjing has the newly opened 37- story Jinling Hotel, with a revolving restaurant at the top. 
Canton's White Swan Hotel opened last February and a Hong Kong joint venture, the China Hotel, is expected to be completed shortly.
The Great Wall Hotel has tried to eclipse them with such novelties as an indoor swimming pool, a nightclub and a 24-hour coffee shop, as well as China's first computerized reservations system. 
The hotel's shiny steel pillars are reinforced to withstand earthquakes, and there is even a bomb shelter in the basement.
The Chinese employees wear sleek uniforms instead of the usual soiled white jackets. 
Their training program stresses knife-and-fork etiquette and the pronunciation of English tongue-twisters like cauliflower.
 
Ex-Bendix Official's Idea
The hotel was the idea of C. B. Sung, a Shanghai-born American businessman who was vice president of engineering and research for the Bendix Corporation until he resigned in 1974 and went into trade with China.
Through his California-based company, Unison International, Mr. Sung has advised or represented American clients like the American Motors Corporation, which has a $51 million joint venture to manufacture cross-country vehicles in Peking, and Parker- Hannifin of Cleveland, which invested $1 million to make rubber seals in China.
Mr. Sung, who has degrees from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the Harvard Business School, conceded, ''I know nothing about hotels, except for having stayed in them.''
But he saw the potential for a luxury hotel in China.
He joined with the Becket Investment Corporation, based in California, to create the E-S Pacific Development and Construction Company. 
As its chairman, he signed China's first joint-venture agreement, in October 1979, to construct the hotel in partnership with the Peking branch of the China International Travel service. 
The $75 million cost was financed through a consortium of Western banks led by the Nordic Bank of Scandinavia.
 
Dispute Over Construction
Problems developed after the ground was broken in March 1981. 
The American side favored a fast approach, in which construction pushed ahead while the detailed drawings were completed and materials purchased and shipped. 
This upset the Chinese side, which wanted the project to move in tidier stages.
Because of what was euphemistically called an incompatibility between Chinese and American construction practices, the American engineers were dismissed and the Chinese took over.
Mr. Sung declined to discuss the infighting. 
''This project has many problems like any pioneering project, so I don't need to rehash them, but I think we have learned a lot from them,'' he said.
The hotel met the Dec. 
10 deadline by opening the coffee shop and part of three guest floors while construction continued on the rest of the building.
The prices are the highest of any hotel in Peking. 
A double room ranges from $110 to $160 a day - three times what some other major hotels charge. 
A small pizza in the coffee shop costs up to $7, and a premium Scotch in the bar, up to $5. 
The customers pay because such treats are generally unavailable in China.
 
'Top People Are Spoiled'
Mr. Sung felt that the comparatively high prices would not deter Western businessmen. 
''Frankly, America's top people are spoiled,'' he said. 
''How can you ask them to stay in a hotel where they don't feel comfortable?''
In any case, the limited rooms are already full.
The secret of success in the hotel joint ventures lies in efficiency. 
The Jianguo Hotel, thanks to its smooth management by the Hong Kong Peninsula Group, has become the most popular with Peking's Western expatriate community.
By contrast, the more elegant Fragrant Hills Hotel, which was designed by I M. Pei, has deteriorated only 14 months after its opening. 
Its marble floors are scuffed and dirty, glass panels are smudged, and bathroom fixtures are broken or missing.
Mr. Sung felt that the emphasis on staff training would help the Great Wall Hotel avoid such pitfalls.
