
The Chinese national television network has signed an agreement with CBS to broadcast 64 hours of CBS television programming in China, beginning Dec. 
1. These will be the first regularly scheduled broadcasts of American television ever seen in China.
The programs will range from selected segments of ''60 Minutes'' to four animated ''Dr. 
Seuss'' specials to football, hockey and basketball games. 
Most will be broadcast in prime time. 
Included will be commercials from 10 major corporate sponsors, probably large international companies with an interest in the Chinese market, according to CBS spokesmen.
The agreement was described as a one-year arrangement, and not necessarily an exclusive one that would preclude the Chinese from negotiating with other networks as well. 
However, representatives of CBS and of China Central Television, the Chinese television network, said they expected an expanded American presence on Chinese television to evolve from this arrangement, which they consider only the first step in a long- term relationship with CBS.
 
'To Promote Understanding'
The agreement was signed yesterday at the CBS building, on 52d Street and Avenue of the Americas, in a news conference attended by a delegation from China Central Television.
''Our purpose in signing the agreement with CBS is to promote understanding between the Chinese and American people,'' Wang Feng, the director of China Central, said through a translator.
CBS officials said negotiations began more than two years ago, at the invitation of the Chinese. 
The agreement involves no exchange of payments; the only money involved will be that generated by the sale of advertising time, which CBS and China Central will share.
The China Central officials said that there were more than 45 million television sets in China, but that the number of viewers was much higher because so many people watch the programming on each set.
 
Reasoning Behind Choices
Chinese television, which is government-controlled, is run according to the Communist concept of television as a medium for ideological enlightenment rather than entertainment, and has heretofore resisted what is regarded as the corrosive influence of bourgeois values and trends.
''If you look at the programs they have chosen, they are really not controversial,'' said Joseph DiCerto, the director of communications for CBS/ Broadcast Group Worldwide Enterprises. 
''They were chosen because CCTV wants to provide additional programming that is informational and cultural rather than controversial.''
Many Communist countries buy Western programming to supplement their own government-controlled content.
Representatives of the Chinese station had screened hundreds of programs to make their choices. 
Selections from news programming include episodes from a series on aviation history called ''Air Power,'' Walter Cronkite's science magazine series, ''Universe,'' ''21st Century,'' a science documentary series, and ''World War II,'' a 12-part series.
 
Vietnam and Gardening
The ''60 Minutes'' segments are one on economic and social conditions in Vietnam, one on Chinese people living in Singapore, one on American gangsters, and one on English gardening.
Sports programming includes segments of New York Rangers ice hockey games, National Basketball Association games, probably from the 1985 N.B.A. playoff series; an ice skating special called ''Superskates'' and National Collegiate Athletic Association football, probably a Bowl game. 
Chinese officials said this would be the first football game ever broadcast on Chinese television.
However, some of CBS's most popular programs, such as ''Dallas'' and ''Falcon Crest,'' were absent from the list. 
CBS officials said that much of the network's prime-time programming had not been offered to the Chinese because CBS does not own the rights to many of those series. 
However, Chinese officials acknowledged that their choices had also been governed by their own sense of what would be appropriate for Chinese audiences.
The Chinese officials said that while individual programs from other nations had been seen on Chinese television, including some from Britain and Japan as well as the United States, the CBS programs would constitute the first extensive, regularly scheduled American programming.
