
China's populous southeastern province of Guangdong has begun recovering from severe floods that marooned 450,000 people and left at least 430 dead.
The floods, said to be the worst in Guangdong in 30 years, came after torrential rains early May 12. 
They affected over a million people in northern and western Guangdong and raised fears that Canton might be threatened.
PEKING, May 19 - China's populous southeastern province of Guangdong has begun recovering from severe floods that marooned 450,000 people and left at least 430 dead.
Today, People's Daily, in its first acknowledgment of the disaster, reported that the floodwaters were starting to recede and that stranded people were being evacuated. 
The official party newspaper did not say how many Chinese had died or been left homeless.
Fuller details, however, have appeared in the Hong Kong press, which reported on the casualties, and in a local newspaper, Canton's Yangcheng Evening News, copies of which reached Peking.
In Qingyuan County, less than 50 miles north of Canton, nearly 24 inches of rain fell in 13 hours, raising the North River to its highest level since 1949 and leaving some roads six feet under water. 
More than 4,000 soldiers and peasants were mobilized to reinforce the river's dikes.
 
46,000 Houses Collapse
The floodwaters inundated more than 286,000 acres of farmland, according to reports. 
The Yangcheng Evening News said 46,000 houses collapsed and 40 bridges were washed away along with telephone poles and smaller dikes. 
One account said Qingyuan and Yingde Counties were entirely under water. 
In all, 18 counties were affected.
The floods also swept away more than 20 miles of the main rail line between Canton and Peking. 
Rail traffic is not expected to be restored for two weeks, a local official said. 
Travelers arriving in Hong Kong reported being stranded on trains for 30 hours as the waters rose and landslides blocked the tracks.
Chinese television this week showed army units rescuing stranded peasants, some from rooftops. 
Military aircraft dropped tons of biscuits, clothing and candles. 
Helicopters also evacuated some people. 
Sailors in landing craft and rubber dinghies rescued others. 
More than 100,000 troops and civilians have been mobilized, according to one report.
The flood's effect has been felt in Hong Kong, where food prices jumped this week after the usual supplies of pork and vegetables were disrupted. 
Daily vegetable shipments from Guangdong dropped by more than a third over the weekend, and the Hong Kong authorities started ordering extra produce from Taiwan and Thailand.
Guangdong Province, whose population of 58 million exceeds that of Britain or France, is primarily agricultural, and the full impact of the devastation probably will not be known for some time.
 
Drought in Northern China
Other parts of Guangdong had floods last fall but recovered sufficiently to have a good harvest. 
The latest floods appear to be less severe than those in Sichuan and Shanxi Provinces last summer, when more than 1,000 Chinese were reported killed and up to a half million were left homeless.
Northern China, meanwhile, is having a drought. 
The authorities say Peking's water reserves are dangerously low, although rain in the last week has helped.
Guangdong's flood relief effort is being led by Yang Deyuan, a Deputy Governor. 
Li Xuan, a Deputy Minister of Railways, came from Peking to supervise the restoration of China's north-south trunk line. 
China's airline has sent extra planes to Canton to carry passengers and mail.
The New China News Agency, said Tuesday night in its first report on the flood, ''The water levels of rivers have been falling slowly in the past two days and surface water is subsiding.''
And in the province of Qinghai, People's Daily reported today, heavy spring snows last month killed 690,000 head of livestock.
