
China today rejected a proposal by Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, to hold a summit meeting with Chinese leaders.
The dismissal of the Soviet leader's overture came in a statement, issued by the Foreign Ministry this morning, that said: ''Chairman Deng Xiaoping has made quite clear the condition for a high-level meeting between China and the Soviet Union. 
At present it is the strong aspiration of the internatonal community that Vietnam should withdraw its troops from Cambodia promptly.''
Mr. Deng is China's senior leader, although he holds only one formal post, that of chairman of the Central Military Commission.
The rejection had been widely anticipated among Western diplomats here.
''Up to now, things will not change unless Vietnam pulls out of Cambodia,'' a Western diplomat said Monday. 
''The Chinese are not prepared to talk to the Soviets at the senior Government or party level until there is progress on this issue.''
Mr. Gorbachev's offer was made in an interview with the Chinese weekly magazine Liaowang that was made available in Moscow Sunday by the official Soviet press agency Tass.
The offer was part of a broad interview with Mr. Gorbachev, the first by a Soviet leader with a Chinese periodical in nearly three decades, that ranged over topics including Soviet-American relations and efforts to restructure the Soviet economy.
 
No Menion of Summit Proposal
Although China's newspapers and official press agency reported Mr. Gorbachev's comments on an array of subjects, these publications omitted any mention of his proposal for a summit meeting.
It was not the first time Mr. Gorbachev has suggested conferring with China's leaders. 
In December, he raised the possibility of meeting with Mr. Deng.
That offer was rejected, both by Mr. Deng and by a Foreign Ministry spokesman. 
China has maintained that three conditions must be met before any discussions at the leadership level can occur: the Soviet Union must withdraw from Afghanistan, it must reduce dramatically its armed forces along the Soviet-Chinese border, and Vietnam, which is supported by Moscow, must pull its troops out of Cambodia.
At the time, Mr. Deng told a Japanese visitor, ''Mr. 
Gorbachev has opposed any preconditions although he has said that he is willing to have a meeting with me and even said he would like to come to China. 
My proposal does contain a precondition, that is, the Soviet Union must urge Vietnam to pull out its troops from Cambodia.''
 
Major Change Thought Unlikely
Several Western diplomats said Monday that it was unlikely that there would be any substantial change in relations between the two countries.
''I don't expect any dramatic breakthrough in Sino-Soviet relations,'' a Western diplomat said.
As 1987 drew to a close, there was a flurry of discussions between Soviet and Chinese officials as well as several agreements signed between the two countries, including an annual trade protocol, a cultural exchange agreement and an accord calling for the exchange of athletes.
Still, Western diplomats and other analysts here attribute these agreements to a continuing relaxation in relations between Moscow and Beijing. 
They point, for example, to the visit of a Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister, Igor A. Rogachev, to Beijing in late December to brief Chinese officials on the Reagan-Gorbachev summit meeting. 
It was the first time a senior Soviet official has given such a briefing to the Chinese. 
The United States has regularly briefed the Chinese on Soviet-American exchanges.
Nonetheless, publicly the Chinese maintain that relations with Moscow are not likely to warm rapidly. 
Just last week a Foreign Ministry spokesman, Ma Yuzhen, reiterated his Government's expectations.
''Over the past year,'' he said, ''exchanges between China and the Soviet Union have increased to some extent in specific fields. 
As the three major obstacles have not been removed, no progress has been made in Chinese-Soviet political relations. 
China is willing to improve its relations with the Soviet Union and hopes that the Soviet Union will take practical action as soon as possible to remove such obstacles, particularly to urge Vietnam to withdraw its troops from Cambodia.''
 
A Growing Flexibility
Despite such seemingly obdurate remarks, some diplomats suggest that there is, at least among a segment of China's foreign policy establishment, a more flexible attitude toward Moscow.
''There hasn't been a dramatic shift in Chinese policy,'' a diplomat said, ''but there has been a shift in attitude by analysts on the Chinese side who see the Soviet overtures not just as a tactical exercise but as a strategic shift in policy, a pulling back somewhat from outside obligations.''
 
Comment by Shultz
OTTAWA, Jan. 
11 - Secretary of State George P. Shultz said today that Mr. Gorbachev's offer for a summit meeting with Chinese leaders would not affect American relations with either Moscow or Beijing.
Questioned by a reporter during his visit to Canada, Mr. Shultz said: ''It's not as though this is a new thing. 
And the Chinese have responded before, negatively. 
But I'm not predicting anything.''
