
The river forms a green gauze belt, the mountains are like jade hairpins.   -  Han Yu, a Tang dynasty poet
 
I'D timed my visit to coincide with the flowering of the osmanthus trees. 
So when I arrived in Guilin on a moonless night in early October after a one-hour flight from Hong Kong, I smelled the city of my forebears before I saw it. 
Even as I stepped off the plane, the pervasive sweet-orange scent made me shut my eyes both in reverie and in anticipation of what daylight would bring. 
The next morning, and every morning thereafter, I threw open my bedroom window to intoxicate myself, first with the delicate fragrance that suggested that I was in the Forest of Osmanthus Trees, as Guilin is translated, then with the unearthly scenery that convinced me that I was.
I was staying in my grandmother's house, a dignified half-timbered two-story brick and stucco house - sort of Chinese Tudor - that she had built in 1941 as a wedding present for my parents. 
Around the house ran a high, thick wall into which was built a row of small rooms that traditionally had no place in a Chinese house: a storage room for coal, a privy, a washroom with new shower, a kitchen and a larder. 
With the advent of modern plumbing, two bathrooms were installed inside the house, and my grandmother's home had the distinction of being the first in Guilin to possess Western-style toilets. 
Above and beyond the wall lay Guilin's totally improbable, impetuous mountains, some of them right in the middle of the city. 
I could see two of them from my bedroom terrace: to the left, Folded Brocade Mountain rose in layers of soft greens, grays and violets, like so many quilts piled one on top of the other; to the right, set on the river bank, the straight, proud shaft of Wave Restraining Hill was more than sufficient to contain the tranquil Li River, almost at a standstill now that it was the dry season. 
My grandmother had her house built close to and equidistant from the two mountains, not only for esthetic reasons but also for practical purposes: both contained caves that were natural air-raid shelters when the Japanese bombed Guilin during the Sino-Japanese War and World War II.
As I was a member of the four generations of Lis who lived under her roof, there was always a cousin, aunt or uncle to accompany me up some of the more famous limestone towers thrust up from their seabed 300 million years ago and carved to their present-day configurations by centuries of erosion. 
Luckily, the most famous had steps, requiring walking rather than scaling. 
So after a substantial breakfast of mi fen (rice noodles, a Guilin specialty), a cousin and I joined the crush of visitors - mostly Chinese from other provinces and several Americans and Japanese - who poured out of their tour buses to partake of the forces of nature from the pinnacle of Folded Brocade Mountain.
FROM its pergola-topped summit, Guilin's shan-shui - its otherworldly mountains, lakes and rivers - seemed straight out of a Chinese landscape painting. 
Scores of rocky crags and peaks soar straight up without warning from the verdant plain. 
The jade-green Li River meanders among them, dotted with rickety houseboats and the narrow bamboo rafts of fishermen using cormorants rather than nets to catch fish, looking like floating matchsticks from such a height. 
Gardens, walkways and pergolas embroider the edges of Banyan and Fir Lakes, all reasons why Guilin has for centuries been the destination of Chinese painter-poets in quest of immortalizing on silk, paper or stone the ''fragment of eternity'' to be found here.
Based on its dreamlike karst scenery, an abundance of myths and legends have grown up over Guilin's 2,000-year history, examples of which my cousin took pleasure in pointing out. 
Brooding yet indomitable, Old Man Hill sat facing away from the city in the direction of the sea, awaiting the return of his unfilial son. 
Piercing Rock's gaping hole was the result of a general's arrow shot in a contest of strength that re-established the allegiance of a rebellious tribe to the emperor. 
A kindly elephant who deserted the emperor's ranks to help Guilinese plow their fields during a time of famine dipped his trunk into the Li River to quench his thirst and is commemorated as Elephant Trunk Hill. 
I climbed Elephant Trunk Hill alone one morning, passing by the small Buddhist reliquary tower on its summit, the hilt of the sword thrust into the elephant's neck by a vengeful general. 
Taken altogether, the mountains of Guilin, one of China's major tourist cities, were once stones carried from central China by conscripted laborers to fill up the South China Sea. 
The laborers got only as far as Guilin, and the ''stones'' have remained here ever since, making Guilin the epitome of Chinese landscape when in reality it is a landscape unique to Guilin.
Guilin's importance as a commercial and cultural center began in 214 B.C., when the first Qin emperor built the nearby Lin Canal - one of the longest canals in the world and used today as an irrigation aqueduct - to connect the Yangtze and the Pearl Rivers, thereby establishing a north-south route for military transport and trade. 
From the Ming Dynasty (A.D. 1368-1644) to the 1950's, Guilin served as the capital of Guangxi Province, which, in southwestern China, was far from Beijing's administrative authority and cultural influence. 
Headquarters of an American Air Force unit in World War II, Guilin was described by Theodore White, then a foreign correspondent, as ''the most lovable and abandoned city in the Orient. 
For intellectual Americans there was always good conversation; for Americans of a more earthly sort there were women.''
For a group of Chinese liberals who took advantage of the province's reputation as a traditional thorn in authority's side, Guilin was a shelter from which to irritate Chiang Kai-shek's central government. 
For most of its history, Guangxi has been known for four things: its extreme poverty, its aversion to authority, the quality of its fighting men, and as a way station for opium shipments passing from India to neighboring Guangdong Province. 
Given the rebellious nature of Guangxi, it is not surprising that the Taiping Rebellion, which hastened the downfall of the decadent Qing Dynasty, began here, nor that the Northern Expedition, which my grandfather helped lead, had its starting point in the then capital of Guilin.
Even after the success of the Northern Expedition, which ostensibly stamped out warlordism and unified the nation, Guangxi, dissatisfied with the policies of Chiang's Kuomintang government, threatened more than once to secede. 
Even today the independent-minded province, a great many of whose inhabitants are members of several ethnic minorities, the largest of which is the Zhuang, is officially known as the Guangxi-Zhuang Autonomous Region.
IF Guilin's shan-shui as seen from its mountaintops seems straight out of a landscape painting, by riverboat it is a slowly unfurling horizontal scroll. 
The Li River cruise should not be missed, even though the return bus ride is long, bumpy and positively noxious with diesel oil fumes. 
It starts in Guilin, whose ''landscape is the best under heaven,'' and wends its way to Yangshuo, 50 miles downstream, a town that vies with Guilin for this accolade. 
Because it was the dry season, our boat didn't dock under Elephant Trunk Hill, the usual site, but at Yangdi, an hour away by bus. 
Here, where the hillocks resemble the horns of a goat, we threaded our way past vendors on the shore selling Mao caps and coolie hats, pomelos and panda bear pins, then past those on the river, their slender rafts loaded down with little bags of mandarin oranges or woven bamboo handbags, to reach our awaiting vessel, revving its engine and jockeying for position with a dozen other boats, all impatient to be on their way.
Once we had weighed anchor, river life flowed past like scenes from time gone by. 
Tiny villages of several houses apiece dotted the shoreline at distant intervals. 
A fisherman in a graceful bamboo boat sat motionless in the shade of a tall cliff waiting for a bite or more likely just to pass the time. 
A woman washed clothes by slapping them on the pebbly shore, while a throng of children played in the water, slicing it with their hands to see if the spray would reach our boat. 
A more serious youngster guided the family water buffalo into the river to give it a refreshing bath and a meal of duckweed from the river bottom.
The Chinese imagination takes pantheistic pleasure in giving a life and spirit to inanimate things, so our boat was fairly buzzing with botanical and zoological comparisons. 
Each twist and turn of the river, each new vista that appeared around the next bend, besides evoking sighs of delight or amazement, elicited a game that peopled the ''stone forest'' on our flanks with geological flora and fauna: here a mountain shaped like an apple, there a rock that looked like a turtle basking in the sun, and directly ahead Mural Hill - nine horses that nature had painted on the sheer face of a cliff, each in a different pose, though I could see only three with certainty.
BY midday, exercising our imaginations had whetted our appetites, and we scrambled down from the deck for lunch. 
Guangxi Province is renowned for the unusual animals - scaly anteater, bamboo rat, masked civet - that make their home in this hinterland and find their way onto restaurant tables here and in cuisine-conscious Guangdong. 
The highlight of our meal, however, was a quite commonplace though unquestionably fresh fish I had seen thrashing about in a net dropped over the side, hauled aboard just as our river safari got underway, and cooked in the tiny al fresco kitchen at the stern.
Green Lotus Peak, looking exactly like its namesake, announced our arrival in Yangshuo, a small but growing town that capitalizes on its proximity and resemblance to Guilin. 
Shaking out our sea legs, we followed winding paths lined with shops selling the usual scrolls and paintings, crocheted sweaters from Shanghai and embroidered nappery, ceramics and curios. 
Evidence of ''spiritual pollution'' abounded. 
Joanne's, a restaurant whose sign was written in English, invited us to try their ''best Irish coffee,'' while another establishment offered, also in English, a ''feast of menus - aren't you lucky!''
But the most interesting sign in our wanderings through Yangshuo, and certainly the most beautiful, was the single bold Chinese character emblazoned onto the side of a cliff: dai, which can mean many things, including bring and wear. 
The calligraphy is exquisite, a combination of painting and writing. 
Chinese calligraphy is, in fact, abstract painting, composed of structure, composition, rhythm, movement and balance and requiring of the calligrapher both tranquillity of mind and spontaneity of execution. 
''The artist must nourish in his heart gentleness and cheerfulness,'' a classic on Chinese calligraphy reads, ''the ideas must be harmonious. 
The heart should be quiet, honest, and sincere to the utmost, then the various aspects of human gladness and sorrow and every other thing, be it pointed, oblique, bent or inclined, will appear naturally in the mind and be spontaneously brought out by the brush.''
Some say the dai of Yangshuo comprises eight strokes; some say as many as 14. 
No one knows who put it there, or when. 
It was the attraction of these ambiguities - particularly after the straightforwardness of Yangshuo's appeal to the tourist dollar - that lent the huge ideogram a good part of its charm.
But it is not from Guilin's unearthly peaks or on the Li River's blue-green waters that one gathers a sense of the region or comes to feel the city's rhythm, but on the streets of the city. 
One morning at dawn, I walked along the Li River Promenade on my way to watch Guilin's elders practice the ancient art of tai chi in the small acacia-shaded park midway up Wave Restraining Hill. 
In the still-blue light of early morning, Guilin was alive with other forms of athleticism: people jogging, skipping rope, playing badminton, pedaling bicycles or huge tricycles that pulled wagonloads of people, produce, coal, bamboo or scrap iron. 
The trickle of cyclists became a steady stream as I entered the campus of Guangxi Teachers College, which in the 14th century was the palace of the emperor's nephew.
In the center of the campus, in the center of town, solitary Single Beauty Peak rose 306 knee-bending steps above Guilin, offering the sheerest climb, highest point, broadest and, after Folded Brocade Mountain, most breathtaking view. 
By midmorning I found myself on Zhongshan Street, the main thoroughfare and shopping street, where I bought a stone seal incised with my Chinese name, following the Chinese custom, albeit belatedly, of choosing one's mingzi, or first name, at the threshhold of adulthood according to one's own philosophy or experience. 
Still following the bicycle traffic, I crossed Floral Bridge, the tile-roofed and many-arched Song Dynasty beauty that leads to Seven Star Park. 
Inside the park are caves whose walls are lined with stelae that look like stone newspapers but really are poems carved in rock by visitors, dynastic and contemporary, inspired by Guilin's beauty. 
Deeper inside Seven Star Cave, stalactites and stalagmites re-enact the drama of Guilin's karst scenery above. 
The theatrical effect of colored lights ''coaching'' the rock formations to appear to be what they already resembled seemed melodramatic, besides robbing the imagination of a different interpretation. 
The same was true for Reed Flute Cave, a 15-minute motor scooter ride into the lush paddy fields and even higher peaks outside Guilin. 
According to legend, this technicolored grotto is a fragment of a heavenly crystal palace built at the beginning of time and hidden so that mortal eyes might one day gaze on it.
But after Seven Star Cave and the Li River cruise, I'd had enough of comparisons and associations, however apt, and wanted to see things as they were. 
The streets of Guilin were the place to find them. 
By late morning every thoroughfare wide enough for the simplest conveyance was a cacophony of bleating truck horns and ringing bicycle bells, a swollen river of cyclists unperturbed by close encounters with heavier transport and oblivious of pedestrians who ventured out into each intersection and managed each street as though it were a dare and an obstacle course combined. 
Such maneuvers would have been even more hazardous had the women's feet been bound, a former northern practice that the women of Guilin never had to tolerate.
I HAVE never seen, not even in Sicily, life lived so openly, so completely in the public eye as Guilin lives its daily life. 
For lack of adequate living space, personal life spills into the street in an almost Bruegelesque intensity. 
It is on the street that many Guilinese cook their midday meal and eat it as well, that they wash their dishes as well as their clothes, hanging clothes on ropes strung between trees to dry. 
Seamstresses hunched over treadle sewing machines make or repair clothing on the street; cobblers affix heels and soles on the street; bed quilts are sewn and shown to clients there; mattresses are dragged out of doors for a thorough wash and rinse there. 
Even the storefronts have no fronts: open barber shops, restaurants, pharmacies, shops of all kinds abound, testament to China's infatuation with private enterprise.
Toward dinnertime, the roads become passable; the populace retires indoors; the tinkle of bicycle bells sounds like music rather than a threat, and the mountains again predominate. 
For all the people who spill out of their Lilliputian dwellings onto the sidewalks and streets in daylight hours, Guilin seems smaller than its 400,000 population would suggest. 
Despite the influx of visitors and continuing construction of new buildings and repair of old ones, Guilin remains curiously rural. 
Even the several hotels, the three-stage 800-room Ramada Renaissance Hotel being the newest of the lot, do nothing to alter this impression. 
It is as if the primeval mountains that surround the city and rise right in its midst, like sentries, guard it against the march of progress elsewhere, preserving its aura of timelessness.
 
FLIGHTS, LODGING AND DINING
 
Getting There
 
C.A.A.C., the national airline, has direct daily flights to Guilin from major Chinese cities, such as Beijing, Shanghai and Canton. 
From Hong Kong there are daily flights via Canton on C.A.A.C., direct charter flights, and direct flights three days a week on Dragonair. 
There are also rail connections to Guilin from Beijing, Shanghai, Kunming, Zhanjiang and Nanning, as well as boat and bus service from Canton and Hong Kong.
 
Where to Stay
 
Several first-class hotels have been built in the last two years to help cope with the enormous influx of foreign visitors.
Ramada Renaissance Riverside, Yuanjiang Road; telephone 2611. 
Opened late last year, this 334-room hotel on the Li River will have 800 rooms and a shopping arcade when its two remaining phases of development are completed this year. 
The hotel has a heated indoor swimming pool, health club and Chinese, Continental and Japanese restaurants. 
A room with two double beds for double occupancy costs from $95 to $105; for single occupancy the rates are from $83 to $95. 
Reservations through Ramada Worldwide, 800-272-6232.
Holiday Inn Guilin, 14 South Ronghu Road; 3950. 
Situated in the center of town on Banyan Lake, this 259-room hotel has a ballroom, health club, banquet hall and telex. 
A double room, double occupancy, costs from $80 to $90; single occupancy is $75. 
For reservations call 800-465-4329.
Guilin Riverside Resort, Anjiazhou Road; 2291. 
This 236-room hotel with a river view from every room has both Western and Chinese restaurants, a swimming pool, tennis courts and a shopping arcade. 
A double room, double occupancy, costs $65 to $75. 
Direct reservations or through a travel agent.
Li River Hotel, 1 Shanhu Bei Road; 2881. 
Remodeled in 1986, this 360-room hotel is in the center of town on Fir Lake. 
At 14 stories one of the highest buildings in Guilin, it provides spectacular views of the surrounding landscape and has been the city's major tourist hotel for years. 
The price of a double room is $65 to $75. 
Direct reservations or through a travel agent.
 
Where to Eat
 
The best restaurants in Guilin are to be found in the best hotels, many of which serve both Western and Chinese (mostly Cantonese) cuisine. 
While not noted for the excellence of its cuisine, Guilin is nonetheless famous for the unusual nature of its regional offerings. 
Visitors who would like to try wild game dishes should specify their order a day in advance. 
There are also a number of good bakeries and noodle stands along Zhongshan Road, the main shopping street. 
For those who want to venture out on their own, two suggestions:
Yueyalou Restaurant, in Seven Star Park; 3622. 
Here you can have a vegetarian meal, or one of wild game, after visiting the park's six caves, bonsai garden and small zoo complete with panda.
Tonglai Guan Restaurant, Zhongshan Zhong Road; 3449. 
For the adventurous palate only. 
This restaurant just north of the Hotel Osmanthus Guilin is famous for its wild game, live examples of which are displayed in cages outside, and include pangolin (scaly anteater), bamboo rat, masked civet, snake and turtle.    L. 
L.
