
With a good harvest in sight, China does not expect to buy any more American grain this year beyond the six million to nine million metric tons already agreed upon for the year, Agriculture Secretary John R. Block said today.
Encouraging the Chinese to purchase more of this year's American crop had been one of the aims of Mr. Block when he arrived Friday for a visit that included talks with China's Agricultural Minister, Lin Hujia, and the Minister of Light Industry, Song Jiwen.
Speaking with reporters before his departure today, Mr. Block said that, ''at each of the meetings with each of the officials that we talked to, I did bring up that we have a large crop in the United States of very high quality at very attractive prices and would encourage the Chinese to look toward additional purchases if they have any needs.''
But he added that the Chinese had said that there was no indication that they would need more than the agreed-upon amount.
Agriculture Secretary John Block reports China is unlikely to make additional grain purchases from US in 1981Four-Year Pact Signed in 1980
China signed a four-year agreement with the United States in 1980 in which it agreed to buy a minimum of six million to eight million metric tons of wheat and corn annually through 1984. 
A metric ton is about 2,205 pounds and is equal to 36.7 bushels of wheat or 39.4 bushels of corn.
With the improvement in relations between the two countries, China has already become the fourth-largest foreign market for American agricultural products, and the largest purchaser of American wheat and cotton. 
American farm sales to China grew fourfold, to $2.2 billion last year from $573 million in 1978, according to Department of Agriculture figures.
To insure satisfactory grain quality, Mr. Block said, the Federal Grain Inspection Service will send a team here to investigate complaints that some grain deliveries have had insects and other foreign matter. 
The Secretary insisted that the problem was not serious. 
''It's just that this is such an important market to us that we're going to service it, as we would with any other important market,'' Mr. Block said.
 
Private Groups Plan Offices
To further develop the Chinese market, negotiations are under way for private organizations representing American growers of wheat, soybeans and feed grains to open their own offices in Peking.
The United States Feed Grains Council expects to have an office open here next January. 
United States Wheat Associates, the foreignmarket promotion arm of the American wheat industry, and the American Soybean Association also want to open China offices next year.
Robert M. Book of the United States Food Grain Council, who was traveling with Mr. Block's party, said that ''we would probably like to co-locate with agricultural trade offices; this is what we have done in other places.''
 
New $1.5 Million Bakery
This morning in Peking, Secretary Block visited a new $1.5 million bakery that has been built to use United States mechanized bakery equipment and American flour. 
Because Chinese traditionally have eaten rice rather than bread, it is one of the few major bakeries in China.
After it opens later this year, the bakery will be used to train Chinese bakers and as a model for baking technology. 
Its production capacity of 1,500 pounds of bread an hour will be sufficient to provide bread for a population of 50,000.
United States Wheat Associates bought the machinery for the bakery and is also working to help set up a similar model 150-ton flour mill in Peking and a plant making instant noodles in Shanghai.
''China already is our biggest wheat customer in the world so I think they will be using a lot of our wheat,'' Mr. Block said.
 
Scientific and Technical Program
The Secretary added that he had also encountered strong interest among the Chinese in more scientific and technical exchanges. 
Under the scientific and technical program begun in 1979, he said, 53 teams will have been exchanged by the end of 1981 and another 75 or 80 are planned.
Mr. Block said that the Chinese had also shown an interest in buying American forestry products and would be discussing this later. 
During the current visit, it was agreed to have teams examine quarantine policies so that some American swine could be sent to China for breeding purposes.
The Secretary had initially planned to stay in China until Wednesday, but dropped the Shanghai part of his visit and left today to assist with the Reagan Administration's new farm bill, which is now being considered by Congress. 
The other members of the trade mission are continuing to Hong Kong, Indonesia, Singapore and India.
