
China's Communist Party Central Committee meets Monday to deal with economic problems that have grown increasingly serious since the country embarked on an ambitious program of restructuring its economy nearly a decade ago.
In the last year, as China has moved farther away from the Soviet model of socialism, the country has been racked by soaring inflation, bank runs by panicky depositors, corruption within the bureaucracy and a rising tide of worker unrest.
China's financial system is in disarray with an uncontrolled growth of the money supply, its currency is sinking rapidly in value against the dollar and a patchwork of free and controlled prices has created gluts in some areas and shortages in others for everything from industrial raw materials to daily consumer goods.
Salt, the most basic seasoning in Chinese food, is now being rationed in Beijing. 
Pork, sugar, eggs and cooking oil have been rationed for six months now and people in the capital are beginning to voice doubts about the benefits of the country's economic direction.
'There Are Problems'
''Of course there are problems,'' a Chinese economist said recently. 
''But to change from the old way to the new way has never been done. 
We are exploring a direction that nobody else has.''
These problems, however, have severely shaken China's leaders, according to Chinese academics who are familiar with policyy discussions, and the Communist Party chief, Zhao Ziyang, has lost some of his authority. 
Already, hints that the leadership will dramatically scale back various forms of economic experimentation and restructuring have appeared in China's press. 
The 175 members of the Central Committee who will meet Monday are to ratify this slowdown in reordering the country's economy.
Deng Xiaoping, the country's senior leader, told a group of Japanese economists this weekend that China's policies would be modified to cope with these concerns. 
''The difficulties we are facing now concern development and are different from those we had before,'' Mr. Deng was quoted by the official New China News Agency as saying. 
''The readjustment we are going through now is not a change of policy. 
Neither is it a change of development strategy. 
We are working out methods and measures for future progress after summing up our experiences and we are capable of overcoming the present difficulties, including combating inflation. 
The rate of development is now too fast.''
 
'The New Economic Order'
''The transition from the old economic order to a new economic order is now generally blamed to be responsible for most of the irregularities of Chinese society,'' China Economic News, a weekly review of economic and financial issues, said recently.
This new economic order, what China's newspapers are calling ''the new order of socialist commodity economy,'' has achieved much, particularly in recent years. 
The country's farmers, almost all of whom till their own land, are thriving. 
For the first time in Chinese history, farmers are benefiting from substantial economic growth. 
They are building new homes, buying consumer goods common in urban areas and are educating their children.
In urban areas, department stores are jammed with consumer goods, from televisions to refrigerators to cosmetics. 
Vegetables are available in the winter in the north and fish are sold at many inland markets.
What has invigorated agriculture is now being tried in other segments of the economy. 
But transforming the industrial, power, housing and service sectors of the economy into a system propelled not by planners but the efficiencies of the market has proved far more difficult than most Chinese economists had envisioned.
For the first time since China began this process, the difficulties of erecting a new structure while slowly dismantling the old are becoming manifest.
 
Industrial Growth Put at 17%
Industrial growth is continuing to roar along, with the rate of increase for the first six months of this year at about 17 percent, according to the State Statistical Bureau. 
But this growth, a level many Chinese economists believe is excessive, has fueled inflation and unhinged efforts by the central bank, the People's Bank of China, to impose discipline on the financial system.
Thirty-six percent more money was put in circulation in the first six months of this year than during the same period last year, a trend the bank hopes to end.
''With more currency in circulation, bank loans increased rapidly,'' the press agency reported. 
And, as inflation picked up, it said, ''people panicked.''
Much of the panic stemmed from the widespread belief that prices would, and indeed did, begin a steep climb for most consumer goods. 
Accustomed to relatively stable prices, China's urban consumers for the first time faced official inflation rates of 24 percent and widely acknowledged, but unofficial, rates closer to 50 percent.
Retail sales in many cities jumped 50 percent over those of a year ago. 
''As a result, the supply chain of goods began to falter and the amount of goods in stock became 'weak,' according to the statistics bureau,'' China Daily reported over the weekend.
Many economists, both Chinese and foreign, argue that a major element in any structural reform of the country's economy is the freeing of prices from centralized control so that goods and services are distributed by market forces. 
Mr. Zhao, the party leader, has pushed aggressively for what he calls ''price reform,'' regardless of the short-term pain it would bring.
But other members of the leadership have decided that uncontrolled inflation and the potential for urban discontent are problems too severe to continue with price reform at the moment.
 
Putting Off Price Reform
In a meeting this weekend with Valentin L. Pavlov, the chairman of the Soviet Union's State Committee for Prices, Yao Yilin, one of the five members of the Standing Committee of the Politburo said that any further freeing of prices would be put off for two years.
The prices of half of the raw materials, industrial and consumer goods and food - including grains, cotton and edible oils - are still subject to control, Mr. Yao said, according to the New China News Agency.
''China is not prepared to free the prices of these commodities, nor is it ready to restore the prices of those commodities that have already been freed from Government controls, because this is conducive to production and consumption,'' the agency quoted Mr. Yao as saying.
At the same time, China's currency, the yuan, has begun sinking in value on the black market. 
Last year, one dollar fetched about five yuan. 
Today, the same dollar is worth between eight and nine yuan.
Although the official rate of exchange, 3.7 yuan to the dollar, is fixed, the growing disparity between the official and black market rates has raised the concern of foreign investors, who are burdened with the artifical rate in computing their transactions with the Government. 
Effectively, foreign investors and traders who are bound to the official rates are paying double for Chinese goods.
Of growing concern to China's leaders as well is the mounting level of industrial unrest. 
Chen Ji, a senior official of the All China Federation of Trade Unions, said that there have been 49 strikes reported throughout the country in the first six months of this year with many more strikes probably going unreported.
''Since we have begun reforms,'' he said in an interview, ''we have new contradictions between prices and wages. 
Now factory directors earn more than workers, and some workers earn more than other workers. 
There are new problems we never met in the past.''
