
Deng Xiaoping's campaign to rejuvenate China's sluggish bureaucracy has been stepped up with the naming of a new Shanghai party chief and the promotion of three 42-year-old officers to top military posts.
Earlier this week, the Government announced the appointment of nine new officials to head ministries that play a crucial role in Mr. Deng's modernization drive. 
At the same time, he has been pressing ahead with a shakeout of regional military commanders and top Communist Party and Government officials in the provinces.
Deng Xiaoping's campaign to rejuvenate China's sluggish bureaucracy is stepped up with naming of new Shanghai party chief and promotion of three relatively young officers to top military posts (M)
The latest changes are part of a process that began at least three years ago at lower levels of the bureaucracy. 
Mr. Deng, himself 80 years old, insisted that the retention of power at all levels by aging, poorly educated officials who began their careers in the the revolutionary period was a major obstacle to economic and social change.
He started a drive to ease these officials aside, some of them into retirement and others into advisory positions. 
By the end of last year, about 900,000 party and Government officials had been sent into compulsory retirement, and a process to weed out the armed forces' officer corps had begun.
As well as promoting younger, college-educated men, Mr. Deng has been using the changes to unseat officials with questionable loyalty to his policies. 
An example this month was the removal of Li Desheng, commander of the strategic Shenyang Military Region in the northeast, who was once an ally of Mao Zedong's widow, Jiang Qing. 
Several other elderly commanders in the 11 regions were also sent into retirement, and the number of regions was reduced to seven.
The change in Shanghai, the country's largest city and its industry and commerce hub, appeared to stem partly from dissatisfaction in Peking with the pace at which the city has put into effect the market-oriented policies at the heart of Mr. Deng's program.
The new party secretary in the city, Rui Xingwen, was previously Minister of Urban and Rural Construction and Environmental Protection, which has played a major role in the large building program that has accompanied the economic growth of recent years. 
He replaces Chen Guodong.
The new deputy party secretary, Jiang Zemin, was until this week Minister of the Electronics Industry, another sector that has expanded rapidly under Mr. Deng. Mr. Jiang will also serve as Mayor, or head of the city Government, replacing Wang Daohan.
Other reports confirmed the appointment of a new party secretary, Chen Huiguang, a 46-year-old engineer, in the Guangxi-Zhuang Autonomous Region bordering Vietnam. 
Changes in top posts had previously been announced for the provinces of Sichuan, Shandong, Jilin, Guizhou, Hebei, Jiangxi and Tibet. 
Most of the new appointees are in their 40's and 50's.
The new military appointments involve top positions on the general staff in Peking. 
The announcement noted that in addition to their youth - at 42, the new generals are at least 20 years younger than the men they replace -those promoted are military academy graduates.
He Qizong becomes a deputy chief of the general staff, Zhou Wenyuan becomes a deputy director of the general political department, and Zong Shunliu becomes a deputy director of the logistics department.
