
CHINA'S sweeping economic reforms of the last few years had raised hopes that political liberalization would follow. 
For some Chinese, the hopes were personified by Hu Yaobang, the General Secretary of the Communist Party, who was expected to succeed Deng Xiaoping.
Last spring Mr. Hu, arguing that modernization of the economy could not proceed without loosening the party's tight control, began a debate on the need for greater democracy. 
''Let a hundred flowers bloom,'' he said, pledging there would be no reprisals against those who spoke out, as there had been two decades earlier, when Mao Zedong issued a similar call.
But Mr. Hu angered hardliners, and his call sparked demonstrations by students who wanted greater freedom.
Last week he paid the price. 
In a stunning move, Mr. Hu was forced to resign by the party's ruling Politburo and was replaced as acting General Secretary by Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang, a 67-year-old technocrat who has been in charge of the recent economic changes.
Despite assurances last week by both Mr. Deng, who is 82 years old, and Mr. Zhao that the economic overhaul would continue, Mr. Hu's ouster raised a series of troublesome questions.
Did it mean that Mr. Deng had lost power to the conservatives?
How far would Beijing now go in rooting out allies of Mr. Hu who espoused what was being derided as ''bourgeois liberalism''?
Already there were unconfirmed reports that Deng Liqun, a hardliner, had been named head of the Party Propaganda Department.
Alternatively, did Mr. Deng decide that Mr. Hu was not good enough to succeed him and return to a more active role?
Mao did this several times, removing his choices as successor and throwing China into turmoil.
Whatever the answer, Mr. Deng seems to have undone his own most important achievement - arranging for an orderly succession - and to have sent a chilling message to intellectuals on whom the country's modernization depends. 
''I think this shows it's very hard to reform a Communist state,'' said Merle Goldman, a professor of Chinese history at Boston University. 
''You can only go so far, and then they stop you.''
