
China has dismissed the Communist Party leader in Tibet and tightened security to prevent monks from staging new anti-Chinese protests, Westerners in the autonomous region said today.
Speaking from Lhasa, the Tibetan capital, the Westerners said that monks and hundreds of pilgrims filled the main square outside the Buddhist shrine Saturday night and chanted the Prayer of Truth.
They said police officers patrolling nearby did not intervene, although the prayer contained lines entreating the ''protectors of Tibet to drive the barbarians of the east from the land of the snows.''
The Westerners said the police began a crackdown on Nov. 
23 during a festival for Lhasa's goddess, the symbol for many Tibetans of their desire for independence from China.
The Communist Party leader, Wu Jinghua, a Chinese, was recalled to Beijing and dismissed for failing to stop a simmering revolt, the Westerners said.
A Communist Party spokeswoman in Beijing confirmed that Tibet had a new party general secretary as of Dec. 
1. She identified him as Hu Jintao, former party leader in Guizhou province. 
And she refused to comment on what had happened to Mr. Wu, who led the party in Tibet since 1985.
 
No Longer Separate
The Communist Government in Beijing took over Tibet in 1959 and forcibly incorporated it into China. 
Protests against Beijing's rule over the Himalayan region erupted periodically and notably in October 1987, in perhaps the bloodiest riots since the Dalai Lama, Tibet's Buddhist spiritual leader, to flee across the border to India.
Last March, monks again clashed with the police, and an unknown number were shot or beaten.
Residents in Lhasa said the city is tense with armed police circling the Johkang Temple, questioning people and checking identity papers. 
Foreign tourists had their passports checked and hotel rooms searched, the Westerners said.
The Westerners quoted informed Tibetans as saying more than 100 political prisoners, including at least 30 monks and nuns, had been transferred to other areas of China, perhaps to re-education centers.
Western diplomats were unsure what policy changes the new party leader would bring. 
But they noted that Mr. Hu was relatively young at 46 and had experience in Guizhou and Gansu provinces, both poor areas inhabited by minority people.
