
The 83-year-old Chinese prelate recognized by the Vatican as Bishop of Shanghai, the Rev. Ignatius Kung, was released from prison on parole today after spending nearly 30 years in jail, the New China News Agency announced.
Bishop Kung, whose Chinese name is Gong Pinmei, is the best-known of the hundreds of Chinese clerics who were persecuted by the Communists in the 1950's for their refusal to bow to a movement that severed ties between the Roman Catholic Church in China and the Vatican.
The movement, in effect, placed the church under Communist control. 
Despite the recent liberalizing of many aspects of Chinese life, that control is still in effect.
Rev Ignatius Kung, 83-year-old Chinese prelate recognized by Vatican as Bishop of Shanghai, is released from prison on parole after spending nearly 30 years in jail; Bishop Kung is best-known of hundreds of Chinese clerics who were persecuted by Communists in 1950's for their refusal to bow to movement that severed ties between Roman Catholic Church in China and Vatican (M)Life Term for Treason
The press agency said the Shanghai Higher People's Court made the decision to release the Bishop at a session today. 
It said that in setting aside the life term imposed on him in 1960 for treason, the court found that he had ''admitted his crime and showed repentance during the time he was serving his sentence.''
The agency added that the bishop ''said at the court that he would abide by the law and pledged allegiance to the country.''
The wording seemed to have been carefully chosen to imply that to gain his freedom Bishop Kung had foresworn the authority of the Pope and recognized the legitimacy of the ''self-governing'' Chinese Church, something he had repeatedly refused to do. 
But the ambiguous wording and the absence from the agency's account of any direct statement to that effect by the Bishop suggested that the authorities, not the Bishop, might have relented.
 
Diplomats Assess Release
The Bishop's continuing imprisonment has been a standing reminder of the realities of religion in China at a time when the Government here has fostered the notion that all faiths have been released from Communist Party control. 
Western diplomats said the leaders in Peking might have decided that keeping the Bishop in jail was too damaging to their credibility.
Although the official rejection of the Pope's authority over Catholics in China has not changed, recent years have seen a new recognition by senior Chinese officials of the diplomatic power of the Vatican and of the affront that Chinese attitudes have given to Catholics in other countries. 
There have been a number of indirect moves toward improving matters, including the invitation earlier this year to Mother Teresa, the nun who won the Nobel Peace Prize for her work in the Calcutta slums.
Mother Teresa met with high-ranking Vatican officials before coming to China, and while here spent time with Deng Pufang, head of the Chinese Handicapped Association, who is the handicapped son of Deng Xiaoping, China's pre-eminent leader.
Under the revival of the ''indigenous'' Catholic Church in recent years, several hundred churches that had been closed have been reopened, some of them by priests who spent long terms in jail. 
But all are under tight control by the Catholic Patriotic Association, the organization created by the party in 1957 to supplant the Vatican as the church's controlling body.
The Patriotic Association declared some years ago that the position of Bishop of Shanghai was vacant, and it appointed its own man to the post.
 
No Reversal of Verdict
Although Mr. Deng has acted to clear the names of party figures who were purged under Mao Zedong, it was evident from the wording of the news article on Bishop Kung that there is to be no reversal of verdict for him. 
The report carefully restated the reasons for his imprisonment, saying ''he was sentenced by the Shanghai Intermediate People's Court as a traitor who used religion as a cloak.''
According to records compiled by Amnesty International and other organizations monitoring human rights in China, as many as 10 other priests are still in jail here, including some who were released and rearrested after Mr. Deng took power in 1978. 
Several of those imprisoned in the 1950's, including at least one bishop, died in prison or labor camp.
Mr. Deng's attitude toward religion is a matter of debate. 
While some diplomats have suggested he might be edging toward an accommodation with the Vatican, others consider it highly improbable that he would tolerate any alternative focus of loyalty to the party.
Although he has instituted sweeping relaxation in many spheres, he has been quick to crack down on any challenge to the party's power.
 
Bishop Seized in 1955
It is estimated that two million Catholics live in China, and thousands of them have long regarded the Bishop as a martyr. 
Appointed Bishop of the Shanghai diocese in 1950, he remained staunchly loyal to the Vatican at a time when many Chinese priests were being arrested - and some executed - for doing the same. 
In September 1955, he was seized during a nationwide campaign against ''counter-revolutionaries.''
Five years later, without being released, he was tried along with 13 other priests, who received terms ranging from 5 to 20 years.
Another cleric who suffered a similar fate, Bishop Dominic Tang of Canton, fell sick and was released in 1980 after serving 22 years in prison. 
He was allowed to go to Hong Kong. 
At about the same time, reports from prisoners who had met Bishop Kung in a labor camp and at the central prison in Shanghai, where he has been held in recent years, said he had continued to reject release in return for abjuring the Vatican.
One account was relayed by Yi Lifa, an Iowa University professor who spent 16 years as a prisoner here for purported spying. 
After his release in 1979, Mr. Yi said he had encoutered Bishop Kung at a labor camp in Anhui Province and described him as having defied his jailers by continuing to pray, ''morning and evening, while working with the water buffaloes.''
Mr. Yi said that when he despaired of his own plight, the Bishop persuaded him not to commit suicide.
