
The Chinese Defense Minister, Zhang Aiping, left here today without reaching formal agreement with Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger on United States military sales and assistance to China, according to Defense Department officials.
The chief Pentagon spokesman, Michael I. Burch, issued a statement saying discussions would continue on a technical level toward ''the possibility of agreements being reached in the future.''
Defense Department officials said Mr. Zhang and Mr. Weinberger had ''agreed in principle'' to the potential United States sale of antiaircraft missiles and antitank weapons to China. 
They also said China might buy military technology and possibly set up plants to produce weapons under license from American companies.
The officials cautioned, however, that no specific sales had been decided. 
The expression ''to agree in principle'' is often used in Asia to avoid specific or formal agreements but expressing a willingness to continue negotiations.
 
No Arms Sales Since '49
The United States has not sold weapons to China since the Communists took power in 1949. 
After that China and the United States were enemies in the Korean War, and formal diplomatic relations were established by President Carter only in 1979.
On Monday Mr. Burch said Mr. Weinberger and Mr. Zhang had ''reached agreement on a number of important matters'' but declined to say what they were. 
He suggested then that an announcement would be made before Mr. Zhang left Washington.
The Chinese asked for a news blackout over the negotiations because, officials said, they did not want to appear to be moving closer to to the United States. 
Mr. Burch said Monday that the Chinese had asked that the meetings be considered ''private'' and that Mr. Weinberger had agreed.
The officials said that a Chinese delegation of technicians and military officials had been in Washington since March and that several officials who came with Mr. Zhang had remained behind after he left. 
Mr. Zhang is continuing his visit with tours of United States military bases and visits to military contractors.
Officials said no specific agreements had been reached because the Chinese had not decided what arms they want and were exploring all possibilities. 
Mr. Zhang is expected to continue that search as he visits General Dynamics, Boeing and other arms contractors.
 
Interested in High Tech
In addition, officials said that the Chinese had been more interested in high technology but that the Americans had sought to steer them toward weapons more in keeping with the relatively rudimentary nature of the Chinese military forces.
The Chinese, who have limited amounts to spend, have long said they are more interested in buying technology than in arms themselves, but the Administration wants to sell weapons, the officials said. 
A compromise between those two positions has still not been achieved.
The initiative in forming a military relationship between the United States and China has largely come from the United States, both in the Carter and Reagan Administrations. 
Mr. Weinberger, in his public statements during a visit to China last fall, made clear that the Administration would welcome an anti-Soviet posture by China.
The Chinese, however, have made equally clear that they are not interested in allying themselves with the United States against the Soviet Union, with which they share a 5,000-mile border. 
Soviet military power along that border is much greater than China's.
The Nationalist Government in Taiwan has vigorously objected to possible United States arms sales to China. 
The Government in Peking, in turn, has strenuously objected to continued American arms sales to Taiwan. 
The Reagan Administration has slowed the sales to Taiwan but has refused to stop them.
 
'When They're Ready'
After Mr. Zhang left today for the remainder of his visit to the United States, one official said: ''We think they'll go back home and look over all their notes and then make a presentation to us. 
Maybe it will be just one system at a time, when they're ready.''
Officials said the Chinese evidently had a long list of weapons in which they appear interested but had not given the list to American officials. 
They also said that arms sales to China would be subject to Congressional approval and that a formal announcement might not made until it was time to notify Congress.
Among the weapons apparently high on the list of potential sales, the officials said, were Hawk antiaircraft missiles, which are supersonic, can reach to 60,000 feet and have a range of 25 miles.
