
China said today that the visit of Secretary of State George P. Shultz had clarified relations with the United States ''to some extent'' but that longstanding differences remained over Taiwan and other issues.
A report by the New China News Agency, quoting unnamed Chinese ''informed sources,'' offered Peking's version of the talks only hours after Mr. Shultz departed this morning for South Korea.
The official press agency reiterated virtually all of China's complaints about the United States, including its unhappiness with American support for Taiwan and with what were termed ''discriminatory and restrictive policies'' in Chinese-American trade.
 
U.S. Mideast Policy Assailed
Paraphrasing the remarks of Chinese officials at the talks with Mr. Shultz, the press agency said Washington and Peking held similar views on the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan, the Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia and arms control. 
But it said China held the United States responsible for Israel's ''aggression and expansion'' in the Middle East and was critical of American support for South Africa's policy toward South-West Africa.
PEKING, Feb. 
6 - China said today that the visit of Secretary of State George P. Shultz had clarified relations with the United States ''to some extent'' but that longstanding differences remained over Taiwan and other issues.
The New China News Agency did not challenge anything Mr. Shultz said at his news conference here Saturday night, when he repeatedly emphasized the need for ''mutual trust and confidence'' between China and the United States. 
But it painted a somewhat more pessimistic picture of Chinese-American relations than Mr. Shultz had given during his four days of talks in Peking.
The Secretary of State, on his first visit to China, met with the pre-eminent leader Deng Xiaoping, Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang, Foreign Minister Wu Xueqian and Defense Minister Zhang Aip@ing. 
The official press agency referred only to ''Chinese leaders'' in giving its account of the discussions.
''They told Shultz that an overriding issue now is the establishment of mutual trust and that actual deeds rather than empty words and promises are essential if relations are to be developed and mutual trust and confidence established,'' the New China News Agency said.
It indirectly quoted the Chinese leadership as admonishing Mr. Shultz that the United States had not strictly observed the provisions of the communique signed last Aug. 
17, in which the United States agreed to scale down its commitment to Taiwan.
The Chinese complained to Mr. Shultz that United States officials had ''made distortions'' in interpreting the communique, and that ''senior U.S. officials'' had attended the Nationalist regime's national day celebration in Washington, the press agency reported. 
It cited further complaints that the United States had let the Taiwan regime set up an unofficial office in Boston and that actual United States arms sales to Taiwan had far exceeded the maximum annual figures published by Washington.
The press agency said: ''Chinese leaders told Shultz that China attaches importance to Sino-U.S. relations. 
But, they said, to improve these relations, it is imperative to remove the obstacles in their way, chiefly the Taiwan question and especially U.S. arms sales to Taiwan.''
''Unless this problem is resolved,'' the agency added, ''mutual trust between China and the U.S. is out of the question and bilateral relations cannot possibly develop on a sound basis, Chinese leaders said.''
 
'Serious Stumbling Block'
The agency reported that Mr. Shultz had argued that the United States military sales to Taiwan were consistent with the Taiwan Relations Act, legislation governing Washington's informal relationship with the Nationalist Government on Taiwan. 
But, it said, the Chinese leaders told him the act should be annulled because it was a ''serious stumbling block in the way of Sino-U.S. relations.''
Peking has also been unhappy with the Reagan Administration's controls on the export of advanced American technology and with its unilateral curbs on the imports of Chinese textiles after the failure of the two sides to reach a new textile agreement last month.
The New China News Agency tacitly confirmed that both of these issues had been raised with Mr. Shultz when it said ''the Chinese leaders pointed out that the discriminatory and restrictive policies followed by the United States in economic, trade, cultural and technical exchanges with China are also detrimental to Sino-U.S. relations.''
Mr. Shultz's visit to China ''has helped Sino-U.S. relations to some extent in that it provided an opportunity for a full exchange of ideas and understanding of each other's positions and views,'' the press agency acknowledged. 
''But,'' it added, ''their differences over Taiwan and other bilateral issues still remain.''
