
China disclosed today that it had jailed a Hong Hong newspaper editor for 10 years on charges of spying for the United States.
The announcement, which came amid increasing strains in Chinese-American relations, marked the first time since diplomatic relations were established at the beginning of 1979 that China has implicitly accused the United States of spying.
The editor, Lo Chengxun, who was in charge of a pro-Communist daily in Hong Kong, The New Evening Post, was arrested after being summoned back to Peking a year ago. 
Mr. Lo, who was commonly known in Hong Kong as Lo Fu, had edited the newspaper since 1951. 
He is a Chinese citizen and reportedly a Communist Party member.
PEKING, May 15 - China disclosed today that it had jailed a Hong Hong newspaper editor for 10 years on charges of spying for the United States.Said to Refuse to Appeal
The official New China News Agency, in announcing his prison sentence today, said Mr. Lo ''was arrested on charges of spying for U.S. intelligence'' and had pleaded guilty and declined to appeal the court verdict.
''The judgment handed down by the court,'' the agency went on, ''says Mr. Lo became a spy several years ago for an American intelligence agency, for which he provided important secret information about China's political, diplomatic and military affairs and from which he received regular subsidies.''
The press agency did not specify what information the 62-year-old editor had purportedly passed on to the United States. 
In China, all information is regarded as secret until the party and the Government leadership authorizes its disclosure. 
Many secrets in China would be unclassified in Western countries.
Late last May Lisa Wichser, an American graduate student and teacher, was accused of stealing state secrets and was detained for nearly a week after unreleased agricultural information for her doctoral thesis was found in her room in Peking. 
Miss Wichser was deported, but the Chinese Government never actually accused her of acting on behalf of the United States.
Chinese citizens were often charged with spying for the United States during the rule of Mao Zedong. 
But those more recently arrested as spies are usually accused of working for the Nationalist Government in Taiwan, as happened during a roundup in the industrial city of Tianjin earlier this spring.
Last year Wang Renzhong, then chief of the Communist Party's propaganda department, warned Chinese in the ideological journal Red Flag that some foreigners in China were undoubtedly spies and might try to recruit them, but he named no nationalities.
Consequently, the announcement that Mr. Lo had been found guilty of spying for American intelligence was interpreted by diplomats in China as a measure of Peking's low opinion of its current relations with Washington. 
Those relations, already affected by United States arms sales to Taiwan, hit their lowest point last month after Washington granted political asylum to a Chinese tennis player, Hu Na.
Mr. Lo's detention became common knowledge in Hong Kong last summer. 
There was speculation he had become a victim of a power struggle within the Chinese Government, though no evidence has surfaced to support this.
Chinese have been increasingly warned against fraternizing with foreigners, both at home and abroad, and Mr. Lo's arrest may also have been a warning to Chinese not to have unauthorized contacts with Westerners.
Mr. Lo's newspaper was affiliated with Ta Kung Pao, a Hong Kong daily that reflects the Chinese party line. 
Its publisher, Fei Yiming, has been a delegate to the National People's Congress, China's nominal Parliament. 
Mr. Lo reportedly also held an editorial post on Ta Kung Pao.
Mr. Lo, however, was regarded as somewhat more liberal in his daily column than Mr. Fei. Mr. Lo wrote his column under the pen name of Yang Zhu. 
He was well known in Hong Kong and his commentaries, including those on Chinese-American relations, were read locally for nuances that might suggest a change in Peking's attitudes.
The press agency did not explain how Mr. Lo had supposedly been recruited by United States intelligence agents. 
He was known to have had contacts in Hong Kong with American officials, something that would not have been unusual in that cosmopolitan city.
Washington had invited Mr. Lo to travel to the United States under an international visitors program, but he never took up the invitation.
While his recall indicates the extent to which China retains a hold over the pro-Communist press in Hong Kong, it was not clear why Mr. Lo would have agreed to return to Peking if he were spying for the Untied States.
As a result, his subsequent detention was seen by some in Hong Kong as an example of ''killing the chicken to frighten the monkey,'' as a popular Chinese proverb puts it, or using his case as a warning about the poor state of Chinese-American relations.
The New China News Agency reported today that the Peking Intermediate People's Court had found Mr. Lo guilty of spying on April 29 under Article 97 of the Chinese Criminal Code. 
This suggested that Mr. Lo had been under house arrest and pretrial detention for nearly a year.
The press agency said the written verdict was delivered to him on May 4 and that Mr. Lo had declined to appeal to a higher court, which Chinese law allows in theory. 
His 10-year prison term is to be followed by deprivation of political rights for another three years.
 
----
 
State Dept. 
Following Case
 
Special to the New York Times
WASHINGTON, May 15 - State Department officials had no immediate comment on the report from Peking. 
They said that they had been following Mr. Lo's case, but that, as a matter of policy, they generally did not comment on allegations of spying.
