
Once it was called Dai Sun and it was the biggest, most lavish department store in Shanghai, and therefore in China, rising 10 stories above Nanking Road, Shanghai's busiest, most Westernized shopping street.
The quality of its goods was impressive, its counters piled high with cigarettes from all over the world, Cuban cigars, American made cotton shirts, Swiss watches and German fountain pens. 
Its all-Cantonese staff, by all accounts, would have done Gucci proud with its studied haughtiness.
Today its name is No. 1 Shanghai Department Store. 
It is one of a postrevolution collection of 10 stores scattered throughout the city of 11 million and the closet thing in China to Bloomingdale's. 
In prerevolutionary days, Dai Sun was perhaps the most famous of four Shanghai department stores operated by the Cantonese-owned Sun Company. 
Today the others are the Numbers 2 through 4 Shanghai Department Stores.
Profile of China's No. 1 Shanghai Department Store
The giant rooftop red calligraphic neon sign reading, "Shanghai First Store," can be seen from most parts of the city, and the imposing granite building dominates the avenue of 300 shops, many of them Western feeling.
Though the store's most avidly watched attraction might be a collection of Sony television sets, radios and stereo equipment in a display window at the intersection of Nanjing (as Nanking is now spelled) and Zhejiang Roads, it carries few imports except Japanese radios, appliances and watches. 
Instead its five selling floors are stacked with Chinese-made goods ranging form kitchen hardware and ready-to-wear clothing to bicycles and sewing machines. 
The store is a one-stop introduction to one aspect of Chinese urban life because of its concentration of thousands of goods and thousands of people in a limited space.
On our trip to China, we had, in several cities, sought in vain for small, child-size versions of dark blue, quilted Mao jackets and for children's blouses. 
They were difficult to get, we were told. 
Sold out, we were also told. 
But Mrs. Ying Lai-Chu, our China International Travel Service guide, told us, "If you cannot buy it in peking, wait until Shanghai."
She was right. 
We bought blue cotton Mao jackets for our children for about $10 each and other items as well, including beautiful bolts of silk and embroidered silk scarves that would have been $50 or more each in the United States. 
We paid less than $10 and enjoyed walking around the cavernous place, which is open seven days a week form 8 A.M. to 8 P.M. It employs 2,200 salespeople and serves an estimated 100,000 customers a day, 200,000 on Sunday and national holidays.
The No. 1 Department Store has a cosmetics counter on the first floor where lipsticks in a variety of colors are displayed, and there is a Chinese-made brand of perfume called Butterfly. 
That first floor, or street floor, is the busiest, and it teems with customers everywhere. 
Some push, some wait patiently. 
Some shout. 
But the clerks are unfailingly courteous and helpful, and it is almost always possible to find somebody who speaks English.
 
* * *
Also on te first floor are T-shirts and jogging outfits with "Shangahi" printed in English across them, not very stylish ready-to-wear clothing, bed lines and blankets, sweaters and children's clothing, plain shirts, trousers and hats of what appear to be good quality cotton. 
The souvenir shirts and athletic outfits cost about $2 to $4 each, and souvenir duffel bags are about $5.
In the basement are bicycles. 
There seems to be a steady demand for the black-painted basic bicycles of China in Shanghai, which has three bicycle factories and two million bikes on the road. 
There are also sewing machines, radios, television sets and wristwatches hard by rows of decorvative thermos bottles and white enameled chamber pots. 
Most of the appliances are inexpensive by American standards, but, being in the $50-to$100 range, they are something the Chinese have to save for. 
They are intriguing to look at but not to buy. 
Chinese elcetrical current is not compatible with ours, and on a more esthetic level the appliances are a bit rudimentary.
Back on the first floor is the food, generally canned and dried items, favorit eChinese teas such as green Dragon Well, balck Bo Lei and lichee, Jasmine along with candies, biscuits and cookies. 
There is liquor such as Ng Gah Pei, a potent rice-based drink and the equally strong grain-based Mao Tai as well as Shao Shing wine and various brands of plum wine. 
United States customs rules forbid importing foodstuffs, but many Chinese products are available in the United States today, so if you must take home a culinary souvenir, try a tine of tea for under $1.
In the old Dai Sum there were elevators and escalators, as well as stairs, but the escalators were not working when we were there.
The store's second floor is stacked with bolts of cloth, brightly colored cottons, some of those lovely silks we bought and samples of the growing women's ready-to-wear clothing.
Men's clothing is on the next floor, along with women's overcoats and shoes for both. 
Most Americans, I would think, would reject most of the clothing on stylistic grounds, but women might have some interest in high, stiff-collared blouses of cotton or silk. 
There are no changing rooms for trying on clothes, but we noticed sales clerks carefully measuring customers before selling them garments.
The fourth floor is a vast housewares center with stacks of aluminum cookware, rice cookers and services of porcelain in various patterns including reproductions of such export-ware, the originals of which are much in favor among antiques collectors. 
There are also individual cups, bowls, dishes and platters and glassware.
 
* * *
When we inquired we were told it would be no trouble to pack dinner sets for shipment to the United States. 
Though much of this ware would be tempting to people interested in Chinese cuisine, the idea of carrying home a cast-iron wok from Shanghai just to save a few pennies does not make much sense. 
My wife did, however, find some decorative vegetable cutters that are not available in the United States. 
They cost about $2 each.
The price for a Canton ware look-alike 192-piece service for 10 was a bit more than $300, which we thought rather inexpensive, considering the number of pieces, We were told that the same porcelains were available in the tourists-only Friendhsip Stores at slightly higher prices.
The top selling floor, the fifth (the upper five floors are offices and storage space), was our favorite. 
It is the sports department. 
There are basketballs and soccer balls, sweatsuits and colorfully trimmed athletic clothing. 
This floor also contains the stationery department, with paper, inks and brushes used in calligraphy work, and there were children's toys, which are becoming increasely available in China.
The fifth is also the place for crafts. 
There are carved wood statues, jade and other stone carvings, decorative silk screens and wall hangings and examples of carved blackwood furniture. 
The furniture pieces are generally poor copies of antiques, but the painted silk screens are nice and range in price from $35 to $400.
We were told that prices are the same for identical items throughout China. 
This is not always so. 
Duplicates of a small pair of tables, which we had bought in Suzhou, were arrayed along the top of a display case and were more expensive than those we had bought. 
But generally the prices were about the same for the usual tourist purchases of such items as new cloisonne enamels, souvenir small-size hooked rugs and carved figurines. 
So comparison shopping should not be a major exercise, but it would not hurt to compare.
It is easy to buy. 
All items are marked with prices. 
You decide what you wish and notify a sales clerk. 
They roam about the store, write an invoice, take your money, deliver a copy of the invoice to a clerk who gets the merchandise, wraps it and delivers it to you - all rather quickly.
The No. 1 Department Store is always crowded - with customers, with gawkers, with foreign tourists - which is what makes it so interesting. 
Even for those who are just gawkers.
