
China has hardened its public opposition to United States arms sales to Taiwan, warning before the arrival tomorrow of Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. that the development of strategic relations between Washington and Peking could not progress if the sales continued.
A strongly worded commentary, issued by the official New China News Agency and published yesterday by China's Government-controlled newspapers, said that Reagan Administration attempts to ''sell arms to China in exchange for China's consent to U.S. arms sales to Taiwan'' were ''doomed to failure.''
Written by an unnamed senior Chinese official under the pseudonym Hua Xiu, the commentary was the strongest denunciation of arms aid to Taiwan since China and the United States normalized diplomatic relations two-and-a-half years ago. 
It implied a new inflexibility on the Taiwan arms sale issue that some foreign analysts said might divert the emphasis of Mr. Haig's mission from global cooperation against Soviet expansionism to the Taiwan issue.
China denounces US proposal for arms sales to TaiwanThe Chinese Invoke Linkage
The commentary's hard line contrasted sharply with conciliatory statements made in recent weeks by some Foreign Ministry officials and it linked, for the first time, Chinese-American progress in other fields with the Taiwan arms dispute. 
With Mr. Haig clearly in mind, it said:
''Of late, some high-ranking U.S. 
Government officials have repeatedly called attention to China's strategic position and role, and hope to further strategic relations with it through the opening up of certain areas where the two countries are yet to establish links, and other steps. 
Public opinion in China has given enough attention to this and expressed appreciation of this good intention.''
But it then added: ''Hovever, the crux to further strategic relations between the two countries remains that the United States stop developing all contacts with Taiwan that go beyond nongovernmental relations in keeping with the principles laid down in the China-U.S. joint communique on the establishment of diplomatic relations. 
For the moment, the outstanding issue is about the U.S. arms sales to Taiwan.''
 
China Willing to Forego Contracts
The Foreign Ministry issued a statement Wednesday saying that China would rather forgo receiving United States arms than accept ''continued U.S. interference in our internal affairs,'' involving arms sales to Taiwan. 
The statement was in response to reports from Washington on the eve of Mr. Haig's departure that the United States wanted to facilitate the sale of military technology to China while continuing to provide defensive military hardware to Taiwan.
The linking of these two aims in press reports, according to Western diplomats, appears to have touched a raw nerve in Peking, whose leaders only a few weeks ago seemed to be willing to go along with the quiet replenishment of military stocks to Taiwan if the United States would postpone a decision on selling an advanced jet fighter known as the FX to that island's military.
The commentary published yesterday said: ''China has made it explicitly clear that it would rather refuse U.S. arms than consent to U.S. arms sales to Taiwan, an interference in China's internal affairs, and that any arms sales to Taiwan by any country will certainly draw strong reactions from China, because this is a principled issue and China will not barter away principles.''
 
Issue Arose During U.S. 
Campaign
The Taiwan Relations Act, passed by Congress in March 1979 as a vehicle for maintaining unofficial links with Taiwan, has never been accepted by Peking. 
However, China's leaders did not make a major issue of it beyond official protests until Ronald Reagan, as the Republican Presidential candidate last year, called it ''the law of the land'' and argued that American relations with Taiwan be made ''official.''
The Chinese press accused him then of having ''insulted 1 billion Chinese people,'' and China's leadership has since reacted quickly and negatively to all Reagan Administration statements favoring Taiwan as if they were a betrayal of American commitments under the Shanghai Communique, signed by President Nixon in 1972, and the normalization agreements approved by President Carter in December 1979.
Western diplomats are debating whether Peking's statements before Mr. Haig's arrival reflect genuine anger with Washington or whether leaders were attempting to create a position from which they could claim victory if the United States conceded that sales of advanced fighters or other military equipment to Taiwan was not necessary.
In any case, China's huge but antiquated peasant army is in no position to absorb sophisticated American weapons. 
It cannot afford more than a few bits of military know-how. 
And it is in no position to threaten Taiwan.
 
No Dependence on Foreign Arms
''As a country with a population of 1 billion, China has never thought of depending on foreign arms for military buildup,'' the commentary yesterday said. 
''It only tried to import some foreign military know-how to help build up a modern defense system.''
China is now portraying the Taiwan Relations Act as an American effort to create instability in Asia. 
Referring to proposals for arms sales on both sides of the Formosa Strait, the commentary said it was ''nothing but superpower logic to split China.''
China's newspaper for intellectuals, Guangming Daily, published a long denunciation of the Taiwan Relations Act two weeks ago in which it asked:
''Is it possible for some foreign legislation to provide what kind of economic system Hawaii should adopt and what relations it should have with the mainland of the United States?''
