
Some China watchers based in Hong Kong have concluded that Deng Xiaoping, China's senior leader, has been severely weakened in the recent political turmoil in Beijing and may no longer exercise real power.
Mr. Deng, who twice rose from political oblivion in the 1970's, has been the principal force behind the economic restructuring that China has undergone since 1979.
The sweeping changes were introduced to free the country's lethargic economy from strong central control, with innovative management in some areas, a reliance on market forces for some products, and private control of most farm production.
The opinion of the China watchers aside, diplomatic analysts in Beijing and Washington say they generally believe that despite the political and ideological upheaval, Mr. Deng remains firmly in charge.
Innovators Seen as Isolated
The analysts interviewed here, some of whom began watching China when it was closed to Western journalists, navigate partly by a careful scrutiny of the Chinese press, examining nuances and reading between the lines as the mainland Chinese do. 
They are not diplomats and sometimes take issue with diplomats posted in Beijing, but they have proven astute on past factional struggles inside China.
The Chinese and Western analysts interviewed in Hong Kong said Mr. Deng and the innovators he brought to power in the last decade had been isolated and forced from the center of power.
''I think he is now a lame duck,'' said a Hong Kong Chinese who has followed the situation on the mainland for several decades. 
''Deng rested on two legs, Hu Yaobang and Zhao Ziyang. 
One of those legs has been cut from under him.''
On Jan. 
16, Mr. Hu was stripped of his title as General Secretary of the Communist Party, which has 44 million members, after a month of student demonstrations calling for democracy. 
Mr. Zhao, who is Prime Minister, was named Acting General Secretary.
Another analyst here who has studied China since the Communists took over in 1949 took an equally negative view of Mr. Deng's situation.
''Some observers still imagine that he is in the saddle, as the most devastating articles written against 'bourgeois liberalism' cite his words,'' the analyst said. 
''They really make fun of him, quoting his words pronounced at moments when he temporarily adopted words of his enemies.''
 
Criticism From the Press
Since the student protests ended early this year, the Chinese press has railed against what it calls ''bourgeois liberalization.''
The phrase is meant to encompass all views that advocate the introduction of Western ideas and values into China.
One analyst pointed to the abrupt manner in which Mr. Hu was removed as evidence of both Mr. Deng's weakened position and the declining power of the Politburo, which is in theory the most powerful body in China.
''They held an enlarged meeting of the Politburo to get rid of Hu,'' the analyst said. 
''The majority at the meeting was non-Politburo members. 
Why did they do this?
The answer is the Politburo is not strong; the power was elsewhere.''
China watchers in Hong Kong cited these developments, among others, to support their view that Mr. Deng was under attack:
* The call last summer for political change, which was identified with Mr. Deng and Mr. Hu, was discussed in September at a preparatory meeting before a plenary session of the Central Committee, but no action was taken.
* China's newspapers carried a previously unpublished speech last week that Mr. Deng delivered in 1962 at a conference to criticize the policies of the Great Leap Forward in 1958 and 1959. 
Mr. Deng attacked the misguided economic policies of Mao Zedong and called for collective leadership in the party. 
''They are using his words against him,'' a Chinese analyst said. 
''By choosing this speech to publish, they are attacking his economic policies the way he attacked Mao's policies.''
* The official Chinese press has sounded a clarion call for China to produce more grain. 
Analysts in Hong Kong saw this as an implicit attack on Mr. Deng's rural policies because it would mean a strengthening of central planning in state agriculture. 
''Grain, grain, grain. 
That means an attack on the peasants in the countryside who are growing other things so they make more money,'' one analyst said.
* Despite the assurance from Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang, the acting party leader, that the campaign against ''bourgeois liberalization'' would be confined to the party, the Chinese military declared that the campaign would permeate the armed forces, the analysts said. 
Publishers, theaters, film studios and artists have also been admonished to watch the political soundness of their work.
One Hong Kong analyst traced the rise of hard-liners - defined by their insistence on party supremacy and a strong distaste for Western ideas in politics, art and literature - to 1984, when Peng Zhen transformed the National People's Congress.
 
Congress Makes Real Decisions
Under Mr. Peng's direction, the analysts said, the congress, which had been a powerless quasi legislature that approved decisions by the party's Central Committee, began to make real decisions. 
Mr. Peng and the standing committee have sent delegations abroad; have publicly called for the rule of law, which some observers here view as an attack on party privilege; and have passed major legislation, apparently independent of the party, the most recent example being a bankruptcy law for companies.
An analyst described Mr. Peng as the ''leading voice'' of the hard-liners and the man directing Chinese policy at the moment. 
The People's Congress, led by Mr. Peng, is scheduled to meet in late March, and analysts here believe that a new prime minister will be chosen then. 
Many of the analysts say they expect Li Peng, a Soviet-trained engineer, to be the choice.
The China watchers said the way that the hard-liners marshaled their power remained obscure. 
''We still do not know what really happened,'' one analyst said. 
''But it is clear that a new period has started.''
