
China accused Vietnam today of trying to encroach on its territory by claiming vast areas of the Tonkin Gulf and two disputed island groups.
''The Vietnamese authorities must bear full responsibility for all the serious consequences that may arise therefrom,'' a Foreign Ministry spokesman said.
PEKING, Nov. 
28 (AP) - China accused Vietnam today of trying to encroach on its territory by claiming vast areas of the Tonkin Gulf and two disputed island groups.''The so-called boundary line in the Beibu Gulf as asserted by the Vietnamese Government is illegal and null and void.''
The Chinese call Tonkin the Beibu Gulf.
He also said the Paracel and Spratly Islands, claimed by both Vietnam and China, ''are an inalienable part of China's sacred territory.''
The Paracels, which China calls the Xisha islands, are about 135 miles southeast of China's Hainan Island and 215 miles east of Vietnam. 
The Spratly group, which China calls the Nansha islands, is about 215 miles southeast of Vietnam and 560 miles southeast of Hainan.
The spokesman charged that on Nov. 
12, ''The Vietnamese Government groundlessly declared that the boundary delimitation convention signed between China and France in 1887 'had defined' the maritime boundary line in the Beibu Gulf, and even described China's Xisha and Nansha Islands as Vietnam's islands, announcing that base lines would be drawn for their territorial sea.''
But the spokesman contended the 1887 agreement did not delimit the maritime area in the gulf. 
He claimed Vietnam had acknowledged this in the past.
The spokesman charged that Vietnam's Nov. 
12 statement ''has fully revealed the expansionist designs of the Vietnamese authorities. 
It is also a deliberate new step to further aggravate Sino-Vietnamese relations.''
China and North Vietnam were allies against United States and South Vietnamese forces during the Indochina War. 
After the Communist north took over all of Vietnam in 1975, relations cooled in disputes over Chinese aid to Vietnam and Vietnamese treatment of Chinese living in Vietnam.
