
In an unusual alliance of a world power and a university, Chinese officials signed a contract over the weekend that establishes Hofstra University as a deal maker for China.
The agreement calls on Hofstra to form a corporation, headed by its top academic dean, to seek companies who want to market products or enter joint ventures in China. 
Chinese officials, 15 of whom were in New York, said yesterday that they planned to negotiate this week with several companies in the region that could help revitalize China's aging industries.
Hofstra officials likened their role to that of investment brokers, and said the university would receive a commission for each agreement it negotiated between China and a United States business.
Chinese officials sign contract with Hofstra University that calls on Hofstra to form corporation to seek companies that want to market products or enter joint ventures in China; Hofstra officials say university will receive commission for each agreement it negotiates between China and a United States business (M)
''I admit that it sounds like an unusual role for a university,'' said James M. Shuart, president of the university, in Hempstead, L.I. 
''But our academic goal is to make direct contact with the intellectual circles in China, and this facilitates the effort.''
In time, he said, Hofstra's new International Trade Development Corporation, run from the dean's office on campus, ''should also produce us some significant revenues'' that ultimately could total several million dollars.
 
Aid to Other Nation Unusual
The agreement appears to add a new, international twist to the growing links between universities and businesses. 
While several major universities have signed agreements with corporations, including foreign concerns, to sponsor campus research, academic officials at several schools said they knew of no other university that was helping a foreign nation import technology.
''It's a very unusual activity, as far as I can see,'' said Gerald Lieberman, vice provost and dean of research at Stanford University, which has had extensive ties with Chinese scholars. 
''All universities are seeking means of finding new sources of funds, but this is an unusual technique.''
The Hofstra agreement was negotiated with the China Association of Science and Technologies, an organization representing hundreds of professional, scientific and engineering groups in each of China's provinces. 
It was the second time in two months that the association had signed agreements with an American university: In September, the group agreed to a joint research-and-development effort with the Georgia Institute of Technology.
Yesterday in New York, the vice chairman of the China Association, Wang Shuntong, said he did not know whether the group would pursue agreements with other universities.
 
Two Agreements Reached
''In China, we have a series of interests,'' Mr. Wang said through a translator, ''in electronics, biotechnology, new materials and some conventional technologies. 
We are trying to develop mutually beneficial arrangements that will be helpful in the technological renovation of existing industry in China.''
Mr. Wang would not specify the technologies most sought after by the Chinese Government. 
But Robert C. Vogt, dean of the College of Liberal Arts and Sciences at Hofstra and president of the university's new corporation, said agreements have already been reached with two New York companies. 
One is Vicon Industries Inc., a maker of closed- circuit television surveillance equipment, and the other is Cayron Corporation, a maker of computer equipment used in the broadcasting industry. 
Negotiations are under way with a hearing-aid manufacturer and with numerous electronics and computer technology companies, he said.
''What we have discovered is that a lot of the stuff that China wants is not on the cutting edge of technology,'' Mr. Vogt said. 
But the Chinese, he said, have had difficulty finding and negotiating with the many small and medium-size advanced-technology companies here.
''The large, visible companies like I.B.M. and A.T.&T. have offices in China, and the ties are strong,'' Mr. Vogt said. 
''But the rest of American industry is more of a mystery, and our job is to put people together.''
Hofstra's agreement, signed Saturday before a dinner on the campus for the Chinese delegation and Long Island executives, grew out of a five-year exchange program. 
In addition to traditional exchanges of faculty and students, Hofstra placed several Chinese engineers - all fluent in English and trained before the Cultural Revolution of the 1960's, which destroyed much of China's science training - in Long Island businesses.
''We think it is time to extend our efforts,'' said Yu Qiyu, director of the New Technology Development Center, the arm of the China Association that is acting as the liaison with Hofstra. 
''We have a new policy of openness,'' he said, which has made 14 coastal cities and four economic trade zones accessible to foreign businesses.
 
Special Licenses May Be Needed
 
 
 
But that accessibility comes at a time when the Reagan Administration, through export- control legislation, has been cracking down on the shipment of high-technology goods and knowledge to Communist countries. 
Mr. Vogt acknowledged that some of the technology sought by the Chinese, such as earth satellite stations, could require specialized export licenses, but said ''the majority should sail through.''
The Hofstra agreement appears to differ from corporation-university arrangements that have prompted debate about conflict-of- interest problems on other campuses in recent years. 
Neither the Chinese Government nor outside companies are sponsoring research at Hofstra, for example, so there are no fears that scholars concentrating on basic research could face pressure to focus their efforts on the development of products.
At the same time, Hofstra has said that it plans to use some of its own faculty members as paid consultants to the new Hofstra-owned corporation. 
A similar plan, involving faculty specialists in biotechnology, was rejected at Harvard University in 1980. 
Officials on that campus determined, after heated debate, that it would be inappropriate for the university to have a profit-oriented business relationship with faculty members whom it was evaluating for their teaching and research skills.
''I really don't see that as a problem here,'' said Mr. Shuart, the Hofstra president. 
''This is basically an academic enterprise, and I am sure we can control it.''
