
With what appears to be a sense of discovery, officials and industrial and farming-commune managers here laud the virtues of a market-oriented economy and of private agriculture. 
At the same time, they denounce the restrictiveness of the highly centralized and planned economy that prevailed in China through the first three decades of Communism.
The officials interviewed in and around this capital of Sichuan Province defend central planning when asked to do so. 
But they preferred to concentrate in long discussions on what they described as the important place being given to individual initiative and the need to expand it.
Chinese authorities use incentives to spur production of factory and farm workers
In 1979, this province, then led by the present Prime Minister, Zhao Ziyang, as chief of the provincial Communist Party, sought to revitalize its sluggish agriculture and industry by giving enterprises a measure of autonomy in production and marketing, increasing the scope of private plots on collective farms and providing material incentives to workers and communal farmers.
Many Chinese provinces have been undertaking experimental programs since the party's Central Committee called for such moves in December 1978. 
But Sichuan, the native province of the principal Communist leader, Deng Xiaoping, began earlier and made the boldest advances under Mr. Zhao's leadership. 
These advances are continuing.
As a result of the changes, said Deputy Governor Mou Haixiu in an interview, agricultural production and farmers' income have risen dramatically, and industrial output has doubled since 1977.
At the Tian Yuan People's Commune, an hour's drive from here, the first secretary of the party organization, Dai Suihua, said the collective of 21,200 members, growing mainly rice and wheat, had raised its grain output from 8,500 tons in 1977 to 9,800 tons last year. 
This has raised each member's ration from 448 pounds a year to 616 and his money income from 110 yuan ($68) to 142 ($88).
But, the party official said, this is only from the grain derived from the collective enterprise; it does not include the sizable profits from the increase in private plots, first authorized in 1976, to 7 percent of the commune's total area of almost 3,000 acres.
Not only are private plots bigger, Mr. Dai said, but members are free to grow what they want and market it freely. 
''In the slack season, when state stores often run out of fresh vegetables, the private market supplies them,'' said Mr. Dai. Officials interviewed often remarked that present policies represent a rejection of the Soviet model China adopted at the outset. 
They appear unaware that Soviet agriculture many years ago adopted similar changes and greatly increased the availability of produce.
''Before, there were no private plots; that was considered capitalism,'' said the party leader. 
''This was wrong. 
There should be private plots. 
There are two different economies in China, state and private. 
The private is supplementary. 
It is better to have two.''
The change in collective farming is based on setting production quotas not for the commune as a whole but for separate work brigades and sub-units and allowing the commune to retain a significant share of the value of production above the quota. 
Since the shift, Mr. Dai said, every house on the commune has received electric power. 
The number of bicycles, sewing machines, radios and even television sets has increased and the commune now has 11 trucks, where it had none before.
The changes in the industrial sphere have given enterprises autonomy to produce, beyond the centrally set quota, goods of their choice and market them where they can find a market.
