
While Chinese-American relations remain strained over the prospect of United States military sales to Taiwan, China has become apprehensive that the Nationalist regime on Taiwan may be quietly trying to improve its position with other countries that formally recognize the Peking Government.
The Chinese Foreign Ministry sent a note this week to all diplomatic missions in Peking, asking them to tell their governments not to enter into any sem@iofficial contacts with Taiwan under the guise of nondiplomatic exchanges.
The note, which has not been made public here, accused Taiwan of trying ''by every possible means'' to entice countries with diplomatic links to China to set up ''contacts which are actually official in nature but conducted in the name of economic, cultural and technological exchanges.''
''Obviously, these acts of the Taiwan authorities are designed to undermine the normal relations between China and those countries,'' the message stated.
While Chinese-American relations remain strained over the prospect of United States military sales to Taiwan, China has become apprehensive that the Nationalist regime on Taiwan may be quietly trying to improve its position with other countries that formally recognize the Peking Government.Some Confusion Arises
The note, dated March 15, was received by more than 100 embassies and missions here on Monday and Tuesday. 
More than a few diplomats were confused over its purpose, particularly since it came from the Foreign Ministry's Department of American and Oceanic Affairs, which is responsible for dealings with North and South America and such Pacific countries as Australia and New Zealand.
''Well, it isn't meant for us,'' said one relieved Asian diplomat whose country has no links with Taiwan. 
Another Asian diplomat wondered if the Chinese warning applied to airline offices in Taiwan, which Thailand and Malaysia both have.
Yet another senior Asian diplomat said he understood that the Chinese were primarily concerned about reports that some Western European countries were considering setting up trade offices in Taiwan.
An experienced West European diplomat said that businessmen back home were interested in expanding their profitable trade with Taiwan but that his Government had at least resisted the pressure to establish a commercial office.
 
Campaign by Nationalists Seen
A senior Chinese official told one European diplomat today that the move was meant to head off an apparent campaign by Taiwan to buttress its image as a sovereign nation by building up commercial and other nongovernmental ties with other countries.
The note circulated to embassies reit@erated Peking's contention that ''Taiwan is an inalienable part of Chinese territory, and the Government of the People's Republic of China is the sole legal Government of China.''
The Chinese Government has always been firmly opposed to any country's permitting Taiwan to establish representative offices of an official nature on its territory and, in return, establishing such representative offices in Taiwan and conducting exchanges of an official nature with Taiwan.
In other words, the Chinese Government is firmly opposed to any activity that, the note said, may lead to the creation of ''two Chinas'' or ''one China, one Taiwan,'' or is tantamount to treating Taiwan as an independent political entity. 
The note asked the diplomatic missions to report this view to their respective governments.
Several diplomats felt that the message was vaguely worded because the Chinese themselves were uncertain what activities should be specifically discouraged. 
One diplomat recalled that when an Australian Chamber of Commerce was set up in Taiwan last year, China asked Australia whether it was officially sanctioned and was told it was not. 
The new Chinese note did not indicate whether cultural centers, such as the Goethe Institute supported by the West German Government, came within the scope of Peking's warning.
The Chinese Government's concern about semiofficial contacts with Taiwan parallels its current objections to American arms sales to the Nationalists. 
Both are viewed as tacit endorsement of Taiwan that enables the Nationalist leaders to keep postponing any consideration of the proposals for peaceful reunification that the Chinese Communist leadership floated last September and October.
 
Some Indirect Trade Carried On
While China itself trades with Taiwan on a modest scale through middlemen in Hong Kong and elsewhere, it regards the island as an unrecovered province and is angered when others treat it as a sovereign state.
This was shown most recently in a dispute that has developed over the women's world softball championships that are scheduled to be played in Taipei in July. 
China has said that it wants to send a team, but it has objected to plans for Taiwan, as host country, to fly the Chinese Nationalist flag and play the Nationalist anthem at the opening and closing ceremonies. 
Tuesday, the Chinese Softball Association made public an exchange of cablegrams in which it demanded that the International Softball Federation declare the invitations sent out last weekend ''null and void'' because they referred to Taiwan as the Republic of China.
 
'Sheer Deception' Charged
When the American president of the federation, Don Porter, dispatched a subsequent cablegram asking members to disregard the reference to the Republic of China as inadvertent, the Chinese called this explanation ''sheer deception,'' contending that the reference was ''a premeditated plot'' and ''another political trick'' employed by Mr. Porter.
China has maintained that the softball federation approved a resolution last year identifying Taiwan as merely the ''Taipei Softball Association of China'' and not as a national team. 
The official People's Daily last week called the treatment of Taiwan as host country a ''vicious attempt'' to recreate a two-Chinas policy.
The strain between the United States and China has been eased somewhat by confidential talks that are continuing between the two countries at embassy level here on the issue of arms sales to Taiwan.
The last authoritative Chinese statement on the matter was issued on March 1 by the New China News Agency, which said that ''if the United States insists on a long-term policy of selling arms to Taiwan, Sino-U.S. relations will retrogress.''
It contended that China could get along without the United States if it had to.
