
China, embarrassed by the first successful hijacking of one of its civil airliners, today dispatched an official delegation for discussions with authorities in South Korea on the return of the hijackers as well as the plane, its crew and passengers.
Shen Tu, the director of the China's Civil Aviation Administration, left for Seoul with the delegation at 8 A.M. aboard a special plane. 
It will be the first such face-to-face meeting between the Chinese and the South Koreans, who were enemies in the Korean War. 
The two countries still do not have diplomatic relations, since Peking recognizes only North Korea, but they have quietly conducted trade through Hong Kong and other Asian countries.
PEKING, Saturday, May 7 - China, embarrassed by the first successful hijacking of one of its civil airliners, today dispatched an official delegation for discussions with authorities in South Korea on the return of the hijackers as well as the plane, its crew and passengers.105 People on Plane
The British-made Trident jet was on a domestic flight from Shenyang in Manchuria to Shanghai Thursday when it was seized by the Chinese hijackers. 
They shot and wounded two of the crew before forcing the plane, with 105 people on board, to land at a military airfield in South Korea.
Mr. Shen sent a telegram on Friday to Chol Yong Kim, director of the South Korean Civil Aviation Bureau, expressing ''deep concern'' for the passengers and crew.
''In order to deal with this matter,'' the telegram said, ''I will go to Seoul personally as quickly as possible. 
I earnestly hope you agree and will give assistance.''
The text of the telegram was released by the New China News Agency.
The Chinese aviation agency had announced that Mr. Shen would hold a news conference for foreign journalists Friday afternoon, but the session was canceled less than an hour before it was to have started. 
The agency would not explain the cancellation, though it appeared the Chinese had not expected the South Koreans to be ready to cooperate.
 
Foreign Ministry Statement
The Chinese aviation agency said details of the discussions would have to come from South Korea. 
China's intentions, however, were spelled out in a statement issued Friday by the Foreign Ministry.
The statement said, ''The Chinese side requests the South Korean authorities immediately return the aircraft together with all the crew members and passengers and hand over the criminals that hijacked the airliner to the Chinese side in accordance with related articles of international civil aviation conventions.''
The New China News Agency identified the leader of the ''group of armed thugs'' as An Weijian, but gave no other details. 
One unofficial theory was that the hijackers were the children of senior Communist officials. 
Ordinary Chinese cannot get airline tickets for domestic travel unless they are authorized by their work unit.
If the hijackers are returned to China, they are virtually certain to be tried, sentenced and shot, as happened to five hijackers who tried to divert an Ilyushin-18 airliner from Shanghai to Taiwan last August. 
They were overpowered and beaten up by the crew members and passengers. 
At least nine other Chinese have been sent to prison for complicity in that attempt.
 
Strict Security Measures
China, which joined the international antihijacking convention in early 1979, has set up tough security measures at its airports, including body searches and luggage inspection. 
As a result, there was amazement among some Chinese that the hijackers managed to smuggle weapons on board.
Chinese officials have denied or refused to confirm stories of other unsuccessful hijackings here, some of which have been reported in the Hong Kong press. 
These include purported attempts from Canton in October 1981, from Shanghai in July 1982 and from Hangzhou in January of this year. 
The destination of all previous hijacking attempts has been Taiwan.
China's discreet trade with South Korea through Hong Kong has been sharply cut back, possibly under pressure from North Korea, after South Korean exports alone, mostly of industrial goods, approached $140 million in 1981. 
But it is thought that some commerce continues through Hong Kong, Japan and other Asian middlemen.
There has also been occasional unofficial travel between China and South Korea involving businessmen, athletes and relatives.
 
----
 
Seoul to 'Abide' by Agreements
 
Special to the New York Times
SEOUL, South Korea, May 6 - South Korean Government officials said today that they would ''abide'' by international agreements on air piracy, but it was not clear if that meant they would give up the hijackers to Chinese authorities or put them on trial here.
Newspapers in Seoul that tend to reflect official thinking described the hijackers - five men and a woman in their 20's and 30's - as ''seekers of freedom.''
For the Seoul Government, the incident was regarded as a potential, if unexpected, political boon. 
Strongly anti-Communist, it has no diplomatic ties with Peking, but it has long been interested in a friendlier relationship, more than once seeking direct talks on a range of issues.
One possibility, foreign officials said, was that the South Koreans would use the hijacking talks as a wedge to open the discussion to other topics.
