
In a city bustling with high finance and low intrigue, Wang Guangying has drawn more than the usual curiosity. 
He heads the new Everbright Industrial Corporation, which is taking over a highrise floor in Hong Kong's gold-colored Far East Finance Center.
Mr. Wang, the brother-in-law of China's late President Liu Shaoqi, has described himself modestly as chairman of a private corporation set up to import millions of dollars of Western technology for China's modernization.
His genial refusal to disclose details about Everbright's assets and backers prompts an assumption that Mr. Wang is Peking's newest man of significance in town. 
His operation appears to be part of the latest Chinese strategy to keep Hong Kong prosperous by investing in its future.
China, alarmed by financial jitters that its claim to sovereignty over Hong Kong has touched off, is diversifying its economic presence in the city.
China, alarmed by the financial jitters that its claim to sovereignty over Hong Kong has touched off, is diversifying its economic presence while soft-pedaling its old threat to move in by 1997, when Britain's lease over most of the crown colony expires.
 
Mounting Indications Noted
''Infiltration has been heavy in recent years, but now it's coming to the surface,'' said one Hong Kong Chinese analyst.
''They're stepping it up, no doubt about it,'' a Western diplomat agreed. 
Mr. Wang, who brought some employees along from Peking, has said he also plans to hire Hong Kong Chinese for some jobs at Everbright. 
There have been other signs of increased activity besides the arrival of Everbright. 
China has spent $10 million to open another department store, in addition to several that already sell Chinesemade merchandise in Hong Kong. 
Kao Yunshan, chairman of the China Products Company, explained that the newest store was opened because ''it is China's wish to keep Hong Kong prosperous and stable.''
Wang Jianghua, who manages a textile subsidiary of the China Resources Company, a commercial concern run from Peking, said China was investing in the Hong Kong textile industry. 
Other Chinese officials said China might supply raw materials for a Hong Kong cement plant.
 
Visit From Shanghai Mayor
Wang Daohan, the Mayor of Shanghai, visited Hong Kong recently and paid a courtesy call on Sir Edward Youde, the crown colony's British Governor. 
Mr. Wang earlier had assured some Hong Kong journalists visiting Shanghai that their city could keep its market economy after China took over.
A Hong Kong newspaper, Ming Pao, reported from Shanghai that a trade official there had implied that China intended to encourage Hong Kong's prosperity by making investments and setting up factories in the colony.
China has long maintained a visible presence in Hong Kong. 
The Bank of China has a prominent building in downtown Hong Kong. 
The Hong Kong office of the New China News Agency operates like a Chinese consulate, representing mainland interests and issuing visas. 
Xu Jiatun, the former Communist Party chief of Jiansu province, was appointed director of the agency's office here last month, thus becoming China's ranking envoy in Hong Kong.
 
An Emphasis on Prosperity
In a panel discussion at the recent session of China's nominal parliament in Peking, Mr. Xu said, ''Both before and after the recovery of Chinese sovereignty over Hong Kong, appropriate measures will be taken to maintain its prosperity.''
The China Resources Company has handled deals in Hong Kong with mixed results. 
Last summer it became overextended in a major real estate project and had to sell the land back to the colony's government. 
Some Chinese provinces such as Guangdong and Fujian maintain their own trade offices in Hong Kong.
Hong Kong's economic stabilityII is important to China, which gets more than 30 percent of its foreign-exchange earnings through the colony. 
Each pronouncement from Peking on Hong Kong's future has set off financial tremors, eroding its profits.
The Hong Kong dollar has declined since last fall's Chinese-British talks on Hong Kong. 
The colony's currency plummeted 24 percent in relation to the United States dollar by early June, before staging a modest recovery.
 
Currency Accusations Made
Some Hong Kong economists accused the Bank of China of contributing to the slump by unloading local currency to buy United States dollars.
The bank's Hong Kong director, Jiang Wengui, denied speculating and complained that the Hong Kong government did not intervene in the currency market to stop the slide. 
He said that China's exports to Hong Kong, which exceed $5 billion a year, had lost 20 to 30 percent of their value.
Mr. Jiang's advice to shore up the Hong Kong dollar by dropping a withholding tax on local bank accounts was ignored by the Hong Kong authorities and was resented by some residents as interference.
Peking has avoided giving a timeta@ble for its takeover of Hong Kong. 
Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang said recently that the colony would be recovered ''at an opportune moment.''
A Chinese journalist in Hong Kong hinted privately that this could mean a delay until after 1997.
A dozen young Hong Kong professional people visiting Peking in May issued a statement to Chinese officials warning that, if China intended to take control in 1997, ''Hong Kong will lose its prosperity in a very short time.''
