
Chinese leaders apparently decided late last fall to deliberately understate the dimensions of China's drought and flood calamities in making their first appeal for international relief aid in more than 30 years. 
They are reported to have acted out of fear of alarming donor nations, antagonizing other third world disaster victims and damaging domestic political stabilityI.
According to Chinese officials, Western diplomats and relief workers here, the Peking leadership decided after ''sensitive'' debates to limit their aid appeal to apply only to hard-hit provinces containing about 21 million seriously affected victims of drought and flood because the dimensions of the overall problems were ''too big.''
International relief officials and some Western diplomats estimate that more than 130 million people are facing varying degrees of food shortages in at least nine provinces. 
But they are quick to stress that people are not starving and that the Government's own relief effort is well under way and seems fairly well organized.
Chinese leaders make first appeal for international relief aid in 30 years following country's severe drought and flood disastersNot Like Africans' Plight
''While we are talking about enormous areas and enormous numbers of affected people, China's problems should in no way be compared to the death and starvation among refugees in Africa,'' said a relief worker with experience in both places. 
''There is malnutrition, and some of it is serious and getting more serious. 
There are diseases growing out of it. 
But there is food to guarantee survival, and the Chinese are handling the bulk of the problems themselves with varying degrees of effectiveness.''
Perhaps to underscore the contrast with Africa, earlier this month at a Geneva conference China pledged $1 million to the relief effort for African refugees. 
The pledge was made despite an estimate by a United Nations survey team in March that China would need $700 million in food and other aid for disaster victims in Hebei and Hubei Provinces alone.
Hebei Province encircles Peking and is centered in the north China plain, which Chinese officials have said is into its second year with little or no rain. 
They said the drought is the region's worst in 38 years. 
Parts of at least seven provinces are affected: Liaoning, Hebei, Shanxi, Shaanxi, Ningxia, Gansu and Inner Mongolia.
The meterological bureau reported that between .12 and .8 of an inch of rain fell on parts of this region on April l3 and 14, helping the winter wheat crop planted last fall, but not by much.
Hubei Province in central China was the most seriously hit by torrential rains and subsequent flooding of the Yangtze River last summer. 
The Yangtze crested at its highest level in 26 years. 
To protect cities along the river, including Wuhan, Nanjing and Shanghai, workers hastily broke dozens of embankments along feeder rivers. 
Other burst themselves, inundating rural but heavily populated areas in Hubei and Anhui Provinces.
Chinese officials told the United Nations survey team that 550 people had died in the flooding and that about 41,000 had been injured. 
Whole villages were swept away, as were grain and vegetable crops and farm animals. 
Much land is too waterlogged to grow anything this year, they said.
 
Grain Stockpiles Dwindling
Relief officials said the drought in the north was most worrisome because no end to it is in sight and communal and district stockpiles of grain and other food harvested in previous years are rapidly dwindling. 
Reservoirs and rivers have dried up, and the water table in some areas has dropped to the point where villagers cannot dig emergency wells without modern deep-drilling equipment, which is in short supply.
Emergency rations of coarse grains, mainly ground corn, are being distributed, along with some dried cabbage and radishes. 
These provide between 1,200 and l,500 calories per day per person, several hundred calories short of minimum daily requirements of sustenance and child growth. 
Relatives living outside affected regions have been sending or bringing food in as well.
Before quietly approaching the United Nations last November, Chinese officials carefully weighed both the international and domestic political consequences of seeking foreign relief aid. 
Their decision to go ahead involved reversing to some extent a policy of self-reliance that has been a source of propaganda and pride since 1949.
 
Self-Reliance Still Stressed
When the United Nations disaster relief co-ordinator announced on March 12 that his organization would open an international appeal on behalf of China, he noted Peking's declaration that self-reliance continues to be a ''basic principle.''
At a news conference on March 31, Du Runsheng, deputy minister in the State Agricultural Commission, said that ''China has always undertaken our obligations'' financially to international organizations such as the United Nations but that in the past China had ''waived its right to benefit.''
He said China viewed its participation as a ''two-way street'' and ''strictly a question of mutual help.''
Mr. Du said the international aid China was seeking was small compared with the country's needs and that the domestic relief effort ''far exceeds'' whatever outside donors will contribute.
 
Possibilities for Aid Limited
Some Western diplomats interpreted China's limited request for aid as an effort not to scare away donor nations that might view the dimensions of China's needs as overwhelming. 
They also say that China does not want to antagonize its political friends in the third world that are suffering from their own disasters and are highly conscious that the amount of international relief aid is limited.
While the numbers of people affected seem enormous and while there are ample cases of serious malnutrition and disease, relief officials point out that all numbers in China seem enormous and that distinguishing victims of natural disaster from people affected by the poverty stemming from what the Chinese call man-made disasters is often difficult.
Relief workers believe that one reason the Chinese Government limited their inspections to two provinces is that the officials are loath to allow foreigners to document the effect of the admittedly disastrous consequences of China's agricultural policies over the last quarter-century.
Heavy commune building, central planning that ignored local conditions, tree-cutting and subsequent erosion, misguided irrigation projects causing saline buildup in soil and other policies that are now discredited left hundreds of millions of Chinese peasants with nothing to show for 25 years of toil.
Statistics compiled in the February issue of the magazine Economic Management imply that there were millions of unaccounted-for deaths between 1957, the beginning of the Great Leap Forward, and 1960, which began a period of famine.
 
Millions Lack Enough to Eat
At a Communist Party work conference in April 1979, Deputy Chairman Li Xiannian was reliably reported to have said that about 100 million people in China did not have enough to eat. 
That was before the current droughts and last year's floods.
Foreign pledges of aid for China have been trickling in. 
Emergency United Nations shipments of vitamins have arrived and are being distributed to supplement emergency grain rations. 
The European Common Market pledged $6.2 million worth of powdered milk and rapeseed oil along with other food supplies. 
Japan has pledged powdered milk as well.
The Peking leadership, meanwhile, faces a double-edged domestic sword as a consequence of its appeal for outside aid. 
Diplomats say if China discloses the full extent of its needs, it faces domestic criticism for failing at self-reliance. 
If it does not, foreign responses might be embarrassingly small and Mr. Deng's critics could use that as another example of the failure of his cooperation with non-Communist countries.
