
China ordered a Japanese journalist to leave the country within 10 days today, after accusing him of stealing information related to national security.
The expulsion order marked the third time in 10 months that China had forced a foreign journalist to leave the country and came at a time of mounting tension between China and Japan.
The reporter, Shuitsu Henmi, a correspondent for Kyodo News Service of Japan, said he was informed by officials from the Ministry of State Security that he would have to leave China because he had collected information that was regarded as intelligence. 
Mr. Henmi said he was not told the nature of that information.
In the last week, Chinese officials have heightened their verbal attacks on Japan over a range of issues, including accusations of growing Japanese militarism, complaints about a continuing trade deficit with Japan and an adverse ruling by a Japanese court that gave a contested parcel of real estate to Taiwan.
Mr. Henmi's expulsion order comes after the deportation of a journalist for Agence France-Presse in February on charges of receiving restricted internal documents, and the arrest and expulsion of a correspondent for The New York Times last July for entering a restricted area.
 
No Response to Queries
Someone who answered the phone at the Ministry of Public Security told a caller to phone again Saturday, and the telephone at the information office of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs was not answered this evening.
Mr. Henmi, who spoke Chinese fluently and who is well-regarded among foreign journalists here, is known for his extensive contacts with Chinese officials. 
His reports in recent months have focused on the tensions within the leadership of the Chinese Communist Party since the dismissal of Hu Yaobang as Party leader in January. 
He has also written extensively about internal Party documents that criticized Mr. Hu and that outlined the campaign against Western ideas.
 
He Denies Impropriety
Mr. Henmi, who has been in China since June, tonight denied any impropriety in his news gathering. 
''I absolutely did not use any irregular means,'' he said, referring to his acquisition of documents from the Central Committee of the Communist Party. 
''Even some Chinese officials of the information department of the Foreign Ministry said they were not national intelligence because some parts of them were published.''
