
A senior Chinese economic official said here today that Peking intended to sign contracts this year to import $1 billion worth of advanced Western technology and equipment.
The official, Yuan Baohua, deputy chairman of the State Economic Commission and president of the China Enterprise Management Association, said that 1,000 contracts were involved. 
He spoke at a gathering of businessmen and bankers organized by the European Management Forum, a Geneva- based business advisory body.
''The imports of foreign capital and foreign technology are now major policies for China's economic construction,'' Mr. Yuan said, speaking through an interpreter.
Chinese official Yuan Baohua says China will sign '84 contracts to imprort $1 billion in advanced Western technology and equipment to help modernize economy, speech to European Management Forum, Switzerland; reports China will seek loans from IBRD and private Western banks and hopes to cut taxes and bureaucratic delays to encourage foreign business ventures (M)
Part of Modernization Effort
He said the plan was part of China's effort to modernize its economy.
Mr. Yuan said that to finance these imports of Western technology and machinery, China would increase its foreign borrowing this year, seeking loans both from the World Bank and from private Western bankers. 
But he declined to disclose the amount of money Peking plans to raise.
The Chinese official also said his Government intended to introduce new administrative procedures, including tax cuts and reduction of bureaucratic delays, to encourage foreign companies to do business with China and to invest there, either in partnership with Chinese companies or on their own.
He said the 1,000 contracts with Western concerns would represent an increase over 1983, when 700 were signed. 
And he predicted that in 1985 China would sign even more for up-to-date technology and equipment. 
Peking's aim, he said, is to sign a total of 3,000 with foreign companies from 1983 through 1985.
Pan Chenglie, deputy general sec retary of the Chinese Enterprise Management Association, said here that the priority areas in which China was seeking the help of Western businessmen to develop its economy included farming, energy and transportation, communications, textiles, pharmaceuticals and the manufacture of construction machinery.
Diplomats at the meeting here said China's growing demands for modern Western technology raised strategic problems for the Western countries.
At talks now going on in Paris, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization countries are trying to update the list of militarily useful technology whose export to the Soviet Union, its East European allies or China is banned. 
For several years now, however, the NATO allies have treated China more leniently than the Soviet Union and the East European bloc, believing that by helping build up the Chinese economy they are also strengthening a major rival of the Soviet Union.
European diplomats say the United States has now proposed still more lenient treatment for China, apparently in the belief that American companies stand to profit from China's plans to increase substantially its imports of advanced technology.
France and West Germany, in particular, are reluctant to approve new rules favoring China, especially at a time when the Reagan Administration is seeking much tighter curbs on sales of Western technology to the Eastern bloc countries, which the French and West Germans do not consider fully justified.
The Reagan Administration has sought to promote closer commercial ties with China by easing its ban on high technology exports and negotiating agreements on industrial cooperation, investment rights and nuclear power generation.
Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang and President Reagan signed an industrial cooperation agreement during the Chinese leader's visit to Washington three weeks ago. 
American and Chinese officials expressed the hope that both the nuclear and investment accords could be signed in April when President Reagan goes to Peking. 
Progress was made on both agreements during Mr. Zhao's visit to Washington, according to American officials.
The Commerce Department last year shifted China into the ''friendly but nonaligned'' category in export controls, giving China access to more American high technology. 
Under the relaxed restraints General Electric recently won a contract to provide diesel locomotives and Honeywell has sold the Chinese personal computers.
Mr. Yuan, discussing the administrative changes planned by his Government, said that in the future foreign companies would be encouraged to set up fully owned plants in China if they wished instead of being asked to go into partnership with Chinese companies. 
A new packaging plant opened two months ago in Shanghai by the Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Company represents a precedent for 100 percent foreign- owned companies, Mr. Yuan said.
Foreign companies investing in China will also be allowed to sell more to local Chinese consumers in the future, instead of often being forced to buy much of their plants' output for sale abroad. 
This ''buy back'' approach has hindered foreign investment in China, Mr. Yuan acknowledged.
In addition, he said the Chinese Government had decided ''to ease tax policy.''
Income and corporate taxes will be reduced or abolished for foreign companies, he said, and Peking is negotiating ''with many countries'' to avoid double taxation of concerns operating in China.
Mr. Yuan also announced that the local authorities in Shanghai and Tianjin would be given the right to negotiate investment deals directly with foreign companies.
