
In his first public political remarks to students since his expulsion from the Communist Party, China's most prominent dissident spoke to a gathering of 300 students today about democracy and modernization.
The speaker, Fang Lizhi, derided the idea that China could develop economically in its own way, a central thesis of current Chinese Communist ideology.
''There's no such thing as physics with Chinese characteristics,'' Professor Fang said as the students crowded in around him. 
''The same goes for modernization. 
Modernization is modernization.''
''First we must recognize the concept of human rights above all,'' he continued. 
''And we must use democratic means. 
For human rights, all the people must have freedom of thought and freedom of speech.''
After an address to university students in Hefei 18 months ago, Professor Fang, an astrophysicist and vice president of the University of Science and Technology there, was expelled from the Communist Party and dismissed from his post. 
Party leaders accused Mr. Fang of instigating the protests by encouraging students to speak out on political and intellectual concerns.
 
Anniversary of Student Movement
The occasion today was the 90th anniversary of the founding of Beijing University, one of China's most prestigious institutions, and the 69th anniversary of a student movement that catapulted China into the modern era. 
On May 4, 1919, students from the university marched in Beijing to protest the ceding to Japan of Germany's rights to Shandong Province. 
They were beaten by the police, and subsequent demonstrations exploded into nationalist and reformist sentiment that gave birth first to an intellectual iconoclasm and later to the Communist Party.
Professor Fang was not included in the official anniversary festivities, in which Li Tieying, a Politburo member and the chairman of the State Education Commission, addressed 25,000 alumni, faculty and students.
As Mr. Li urged students ''to carry forward the good tradition of diligence, rigor, honesty and creativeness,'' hisses were heard from students listening on outdoor speakers.
Almost since its inception, Beijing University, which now has 25,000 students, has been at the heart of China's intellectual and political life. 
In December 1986, Beijing University students tramped through the snow to demand greater freedom of expression. 
Protests there and in other cities led to the dismissal of Hu Yaobang as Communist Party leader and six months of intellectual repression.
 
Students Offer Their Views
At about 3:30 this afternoon, Professor Fang arrived at a locust grove on his bicycle to the cheers of students who were seated in a circle. 
The students offered their views on China's political organization and future. 
Some urged collective action, others reflected on the country's complexities.
''There's a long tradition of intellectuals sacrificing themselves passively,'' a young man said, his hand jabbing the air. 
''I think we should change methods. 
We should be more inflammatory. 
One can sacrifice oneself passivley, or make a splash in the process.''
Another student rose. 
''A revolution in thought must come first,'' he said.
A third stood up. 
''Democracy in China must have Chinese characteristics,'' he said, adding, ''Do you really think that you would be able to import American democracy wholesale into China?
Much progress has been made over the past decade, but progress has to be made step by step.''
Later, when asked whether the students should take to the streets to press their views, as they did more than a year ago, Mr. Fang replied, ''Maybe they should keep quiet for a period.''
