
Yang Xiaoyun, an industrious young peasant in Hubei Province, turned a sizable profit last summer by selling more than five tons of grain to the state. 
But when he set out to treat himself to a new bicycle, he could not find one.
The 25-year-old farmer received some front-page sympathy in the official party newspaper, People's Daily, which noted that he was typical of peasants who have begun to prosper under the agricultural policies of Deng Xiaoping, the Chinese leader.
Such tales do not appear in the Chinese press by accident. 
With a good autumn harvest expected, the newspaper was warning both factories and local officials to do more to meet rising consumer demand from farms.
Chinese farmers begin profiting from agricultural policies of Deng Ziaoping but find spending the money difficult due to shortage of goods
The agricultural policies begun nearly three years ago have made it worthwhile for the Chinese peasant to work harder. 
Instead of earning work points for time on the job, most peasants are now being paid for what they produce.
 
Other New Rules
About four-fifths of China's 800 million peasants are said to be tilling the land of their communes under the latest system of greater responsibility. 
More than a fourth of the country's farmers, generally in the poorer regions, have returned to working like tenant farmers under a system in which they are allowed to keep whatever they earn above their quota.
Other measures have included increasing private plots to a maximum of 15 percent of a farm's cultivated land and encouraging individual farmers' markets, which now account for a quarter of the poultry, eggs and fish bought in the cities. 
As a consequence, by one official reckoning, incomes rose 81 percent in rural areas from 1977 to 1980 as against 38.5 percent in urban areas. 
The Government has had problems filling the demand for consumer goods that the rise in incomes has created.
Two years ago, the new policies were adopted at the Yanghe commune in Yingcheng County, where Mr. Yang was a production team leader. 
His family of six set to work raising grain, rice, pigs, chicken and fish. 
The five tons of grain he sold to the Government last summer provided enough to feed 50 people for a year, People's Daily said.
The family received 4,600 yuan, about $2,800, which made their per-capita income more than four times the national average.
 
No Bicycles Found
But a bicycle was not to be found at the local stores. 
The newspaper said that at least 110 bicycles were to be sent from Shanghai to Yingcheng County every year but in fact most if not all were sold before ever reaching the county.
In response, local authorities in Yingcheng County have promised that any peasant who exceeds a quota for produce - for example, twoand-a-half tons of grain or four pigs - will be entitled to buy a rationed item, such as a Shanghai bicycle or a sewing machine or building lumber and tiles. 
The press is encouraging other local governments to make similar offers.
In the meantime, many farmers will have to be content with saving their money. 
The Agricultural Bank of China disclosed in June that total savings on communes had risen to 14.4 billion yuan, about $8.6 billion.
 
A Shift in Emphasis
The shortage of goods seems unlikely to be resolved soon. 
Red Flag, the Peking party journal, reported last spring: ''There is such a great demand among the 800 million peasants for light industrial products that it is far from being satisfied. 
It is obvious that the development of light industry is not good enough; what is more, it is far from being good.''
Peking has tried to emphasize the production of consumer and light industrial goods over heavy industrial products such as steel. 
As a result, production in heavy industry this year is running behind last year's rate, while light industrial production has increased 12 percent in the first eight months over the same period in 1980.
In the end, Mr. Yang got a bicycle. 
A factory in Shanghai was alerted to the problem and sent him one.
