
China's new era of orderly development and modernization will stress the role of competent managers and be guided by a team of leaders instead of a single all-powerful ruler like Mao Zedong, the new chairman of the Chinese Communist Party said today.
In his first speech since assuming China's most important office on Monday, the party chairman, Hu Yaobang, said the ''liquidation'' of leftist ideology that nearly destroyed China during the Cultural Revolution of 1966-76 ''is under way.''
The 66-year-old protege of Deng Xiaoping, the senior deputy chairman who is the country's principal leader, called for strict obedience and discipline within the party to help restore its ''greviously damaged'' prestige. 
The leftist radicals most responsible for the damage, including Jiang Qing, Mao's widow, he said, have been ''swept into the garbage bin of history.''
Hu Yaobang discusses plans for China's new era of orderly development and modernization
Mr. Hu spoke at a televised rally of 10,000 people gathered at the Great Hall of the People to celebrate the 60th anniversary of the party's founding in 1921.
 
Flanked on Dais by Deng and Zhao
Mr. Hu was flanked on the dais by Mr. Deng and Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang, who is also a newly named deputy chairman of the party. 
Hua Guofeng, who is now a junior deputy chairman, sat three seats away.
Mr. Hu described Mao as ''the greatest national hero in Chinese history,'' adding that ''his immense contributions are immortal.''
But he said Mao had made ''grave mistakes'' that the party, because of the personality cult around Mao, failed to prevent.
In a 35,000-word assessment of its 32 years in power, the party yesterday formally criticized Mao's errors. 
The critical assessment and Mr. Hu's assumption of the party chairmanship, replacing Mr. Hua, Mao's handpicked successor, were regarded here as the formal closing of the era of Maoist rule and an attempt to unify the party behind Mr. Deng's brand of pragmatism.
Whether these moves did so is not clear. 
There have been continuing reports from Chinese sources of deep continuing division within the party leadership.
 
Need for Obedience Stressed
Perhaps for that reason, Mr. Hu stressed the need for obedience in his speech. 
''Comrades at a lower level must respect and obey the leadership of comrades at a higher level,'' he said. 
It was something Mao would not have had to mention, but Mr. Hu raised his medium-pitched voice several times to the level of shrillness in making his point.
''They must not feign compliance while actually violating or resisting instructions from the high level,'' he said. 
Earlier this year, when Mr. Hu was serving as the party's secretary general, he was reported by knowledgeable Chinese to have been shocked that the documents for study and speeches he carefully composed and sent down to provincial and district leaders, had not been read. 
As a result, a propaganda campaign was launched on the need to study documents from party headquarters.
Mr. Hu stressed in his speech the need for collective decisionmaking at all levels, saying ''no one individual is allowed to have the final say.''
Criticism, he said, is welcome and ''retaliation is impermissible.''
 
Individual Initiative Welcomed
Individual initiative in party matters is welcome, he said, ''but no party member is allowdd to impair the party's interest and the common goal by turning the department or unit entrusted to him by the party into his own independent kingdom.''
Just because the Communist Party, with 39 million members, is in power, he said, ''some of our comrades feel conceited and succumb to bureaucratic practices.''
Mr. Hu was as adamant as other party officials have been in eschewing competition for the party.
He said the party's most serious task was to develop a new generation of younger leaders to replace old revolutionaries who should step out from day-to-day party matters and think about longrange problems.
Mr. Hu challenged reports of disunity within the party and said only ''a handful of people '' were sowing disunity. 
Then, shaking his fist as his voice cracked, he added:
''Now, reality has given them a clear answer: no force on earth can break the Chinese Communist Party's strong unity based on Marxist principles.''
