
The pro-democracy demonstrations by university students over the last several weeks have revealed a depth of discontent among the elite of China's youth that was unsuspected until now.
That university students, the chosen young, should demonstrate in such numbers in favor of political principles closely associated in the minds of Chinese with the non-Communist West, particularly the United States, has raised disturbing questions among many here about the direction of economic and political change in China.
The largest rallies were in Shanghai last weekend, where close to 50,000 people were estimated to have gathered on Sunday alone. 
But they also occurred in Beijing and about half a dozen other cities. 
Today there were reports that 3,000 students demonstrated in the port city of Tianjin to show their solidarity with the Shanghai protests.
Marches in Province Capitals
In the provincial capitals of Hefei and Wuhan, several thousand students marched under banners calling for greater democracy and freedom. 
They also protested university living conditions, which are primitive by Western standards.
Students in Hefei in particular derided the elections to the local legislative people's congress as a sham, saying they did not even know the candidates they were supposed to vote for as student representatives. 
As the protests continued, local leaders agreed to postpone the elections to give the students an opportunity to run their own candidates.
But it was the five days of demonstrations in Shanghai that were the most visible sign of widespread student discontent. 
Even in the beginning, the demonstrations were large, with more than 10,000 students marching. 
Quickly, the protests grew until more than 50,000 students were packed into People's Square in downtown Shanghai.
Students carried banners with the words ''Freedom'' and ''Democracy'' in passionate red brush strokes.
Many of the students interviewed during the Shanghai protests, while unable to describe in any sustained fashion what they meant by greater democracy, fervently argued that they had no control over their lives and that the Chinese people had no say in how their country was run.
Repeatedly over the last year, China's top leaders, including Deng Xiaoping, the senior leader, have said political ''reform'' would accompany China's economic restructuring, a process that has drawn much of its character from Western economic and financial models. 
But, uneasy about the implications of political reform - a widely used but only vaguely defined term that seems to embrace some form of decentralization in economic and adminstrative decision-making -the leadership has stressed that real political change will take two or three decades to achieve.
 
Economic Controls Loosened
The economic liberalization, a loosening of central controls over the economy so that individual enterprises are free to prosper or flounder on their own without state support, is intended to envigorate an economy that functioned in only the most rudimentary sense in the three decades until 1980. 
Now, companies go bankrupt, raise money through stock issues and dismiss workers for incompetence, practices inconceivable just a few years ago.
Even the party theoretical journal, Hongqi, has urged that the work of John Maynard Keynes be explored. 
''Whether one is a Marxist or a non-Marxist,'' the journal said, ''and whether one is a supporter of Keynsianism or its opponent, one needs to study the doctrine of Keynsianism.''
But with this shifting economic orientation, many intellectuals have insisted that responsibility in the workplace must be accompanied by rights in the political sphere. 
If people are allowed to take individual risks for economic gain, they should also be able to express their views individually, and collectively through some form of electoral system, on the country's political direction.
In 1979, when a hint of intellectual liberalization surfaced, there was a brief explosion of free political expression that became known as the Democracy Wall Movement, named for wall posters calling for democratic rights that were plastered on a wall in downtown Beijing. 
Although at first endorsing the movement, Mr. Deng quickly reversed himself and ruthlessly suppressed it, jailing its leaders for ''counterrevolutionary acts.''
That crackdown, while firmly consolidating Mr. Deng's power over the party ideological apparatus, succeeded in cowing China's intellectuals.
 
Easing Controls on Intellectuals
But Mr. Deng was aware that he could not successfully increase China's openness to the West while intimidating the country's intellectuals, the very people needed to propel the country out of its economic backwardness. 
So in the last five years he has gradually eased controls on intellectuals. 
Indeed, there is now virtually nothing that cannot be discussed in academic journals, according to many intellectuals.
''Nothing is taboo,'' said a young graduate student at Beijing University who is a regular contributor to the journal Reading Books.
But even as this intellectual liberalization proceeds in the highest reaches of university life, the absence of substantive liberalization in the daily lives of Chinese has become increasingly apparent to students on Chinese campuses. 
Students have no decision in who their representatives to student councils are, have no role in picking student candidates to local people's congresses, a sort of local legislature, and no freedom to chose where they will work after graduation.
A professor at Beijing University said the Government could not react harshly against the students.
''What can they do?'' he asked. 
''If they attack the students, no one will ever trust them again. 
They cannot be committed to intellectual freedom on the one hand and attack students calling for democracy on the other.''
At the same time, many students realize the fragility of their positions, that university administrators can ruin their lives through bad job assignments upon graduation. 
As the demonstrations petered out, many students explained the calm by citing such pragmatic considerations over their future.
 
A Warning in Editorials
For the Government, of course, those concerns and the threats it can make to enhance those concerns are its best hope for containing future protests.
Today, for instance, China's leading newspaper, People's Daily, and other major newspapers warned in front-page editorials that those who deviated from Communist Party policies would ''have to eat their own bitter fruit.''
People's Daily noted Mr. Deng's efforts this year to ''invigorate party and state organs, bring into play the initiative of grassroots units and the masses, overcome bureaucracy and increase efficiency.''
