
China said today that over the last week its artillery killed or wounded several hundred Vietnamese soldiers and destroyed guns and vehicles along its border with Vietnam.
The Chinese report, which was carried by the official New China News Agency, said Chinese frontier guards were retaliating against ''new'' armed provocations ''by the Vietnamese that wounded 12 Chinese.''
The report came a day after Vietnam's Foreign Minister, Nguyen Co Thach, told journalists in Hanoi that the level of clashes, which were first reported early this month, had remained about the same over the last two weeks.
China says that over last week its artillery killed or wounded several hundred Vietnamese soldiers and destroyed guns and vehicles along Vietnam-China border; says Chinese frontier guards retaliated against 'new' armed provocations by Vietnamese that wounded 12 Chinese (S)
Each side has blamed the other for starting the latest clashes, and the veracity of the conflicting accounts or even the extent of fighting could not be confirmed from here.
Today's claim of new artillery duels raised the possibility that the border conflict could drag on during President Reagan's visit to China, which begins next Thursday.
 
330,000 Chinese Troops
But the reported fighting has been confined to the frontiers of Yunnan Province and the Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region of southern China and seemed likely to have little or no impact on Mr. Reagan's trip.
Western diplomats said earlier this week that they saw no signs of major Chinese troop movements to reinforce the border areas, such as happened before Chinese infantry and tanks swept into Vietnam for a short war in February 1979.
According to diplomatic estimates, China has about 330,000 soldiers stationed in its three southernmost provinces. 
They confront some 600,000 Vietnamese soldiers in northern Vietnam.
The reports of fighting have coincided with Vietnam's military campaign against Cambodian guerrillas along the Thai-Cambodian border, prompting speculation that China, which supports the resistance groups there, may be shelling Vietnam to tie down Vietnamese troops who might otherwise be sent to fight in Cambodia.
 
'Fog of Invective'
China and Vietnam reported similar fighting a year ago. 
Those reports later proved to be exaggerated, which has made diplomats here more cautious about assessing rival claims through what one diplomat called the ''fog of invective.''
Today's report by the New China News Agency said ''Chinese frontier guards in Guangxi and Yunnan continued to hit back with artillery fire against armed provocations by Vietnamese troops between April 12 and 19.''
''Several hundred Vietnamese soldiers were killed or wounded, a number of Vietnamese field pieces and military vehicles destroyed or seriously damaged, in addition to dozens of military installations,'' the press agency said.
The reported fighting appears to involve Chinese frontier guards, who were detached from the army and given a separate designation, and Vietnamese militia forces.
