
A law intended to strip grass-roots Communist Party committees in state enterprises of much of their power and concentrate decision-making in the hands of technocratic managers was approved by China's legislature at its closing session today.
In the last year an intense debate, sometimes spilling into the public press, has raged over how much authority should be given to managers and how much power should be relinquished by the party. 
Although the text of the new law has not yet been made public, a paraphrased version released by the official New China News Agency suggested that party bureaucrats have not been completely frozen out.
The action was taken on the closing day of the National People's Congress, whose 2,970 delegates met here for 20 days in their annual session. 
The congress earlier confirmed Li Peng as Prime Minister and ratified the composition of a new Cabinet.
Late this afternoon, the 59-year-old Mr. Li answered questions from foreign and Chinese reporters for nearly two hours at his first news conference since he assumed his post. 
The Prime Minister has been portrayed by many diplomats and Western scholars as more cautious in his economic views than Zhao Ziyang, the party leader.But Mr. Li disparaged suggestions of disagreement between the two men.
''Now there is some comment in the foreign press that Zhao Ziyang is in favor of reform and opening to the outside world, while I'm in favor of stabilizing the economy,'' the Prime Minister said. 
''They somehow pit these two views against one another. 
As a matter of fact there is a misunderstanding involved. 
The two aspects form an integral whole and cannot be separated from each other.''
He also ridiculed suggestions that he was pro-Soviet because of his extensive education in the Soviet Union or that the new members of the Cabinet, many of whom also studied either in the Soviet Union or Eastern Europe in the 1950's, were sympathetic to Moscow.
''If you follow that kind of logic,'' Mr. Li said, ''you may think that China will have a pro-United States government in 20 or 30 years because it now has some 20,000 students in the United States.''
The 20-day congress confirmed a series of laws and constitutional amendments intended to formalize further China's decadelong effort to embrace a more Western-style economic structure, one less constrained by Soviet-style socialism. 
Among the actions taken included formal constitutional approval for private enterprise and the right to sell land-use rights. 
In what has the potential to be equally significant, Western diplomats said, is the law approved today on the authority of enterprise directors.
Until now, nearly all state industrial enterprises, which account for 70 percent of industrial output, were managed by committees of managers and party bureaucrats, with the party exercising the final say in all decisions.
 
Greater Control for Managers
Under the new law, factory directors are to assume principal control for the performance of their industry. 
Broadly, the law will allow enterprises to determine their own management structure, grant greater leeway to industries to negotiate contracts with foreign partners, permit factories to change their products in response to market demand and make it easier for workers to be hired and dismissed.
It also declares that a manager who causes an enterprise to suffer heavy losses ''shall be dealt with for criminal responsibilities,'' the news agency said.
It is unclear precisely what role the Communist Party will now have in newly organized industries. 
But the news agency said the party would ''guarantee and supervise the implementation of the guiding principles and policies of the party and the state.''
The congress also approved a plan today to establish the southern island of Hainan as an independent province with broad autonomy to encourage foreign investment and rapid economic development. 
Foreigners will be able to visit there without a visa and many Chinese laws governing the import and export of goods and services will not apply to the island.
