
Mao Zedong's chosen successor, Hua Guofeng, was dropped from the Chinese leadership today. 
Most of the older Communist Party veterans remained in their posts.
There had been expectations among Chinese officials as well as foreign diplomats here that Ye Jianying, now 85 years old, and his elderly colleagues on the Politburo would have been encouraged to retire.
The fact that they did not was seen by some diplomats here as evidence that Deng Xiaoping, China's dominant leader, had failed to push through a planned rejuvenation of the party's leadership to make way for younger, more moderate talent.
PEKING, Sept. 
12 - Mao Zedong's chosen successor, Hua Guofeng, was dropped from the Chinese leadership today.
Mr. Hua's name was conspicuously missing from the lists of members of both the new Politburo and its Standing Committee, or inner circle, who were elected today at the first session of the new Central Committee.
The omission means the conclusion of a declining political career by the man who followed Mao as China's Prime Minister and party chairman, only to lose both jobs in a power struggle with
 
Mr. Deng.Kept
Mr. Hua, regarded as still relatively young at 61, was left with only a token seat on the new Central Committee, whose composition was announced before the 12th Communist Party Congress ended on Saturday.
Mr. Deng was apparently unable to get Mr. Ye and other Politburo members like Nie Rongzhen, 83, and Xu Xiangqian, 80, to step down. 
But there was speculation that after failing to budge the elders, Mr. Deng had taken another tack that could prove as successful. 
He has packed half a dozen more of his supporters into the new Politburo, which is now expanded from 22 to 25 members.
There have been rumors that Mr. Deng also planned to diminish the Politburo's power by transferring much of its authority to the Secretariat, which handles the party's daily business. 
He has already turned over more than half the seats on the new Central Committee, with a greater emphasis on technical competence.
Hu Yaobang, one of Mr. Deng's proteges, was named the party's general secretary today as expected. 
His other title of party chairman, which he took from Mr. Hua just over 14 months ago, was abolished by the party congress because it had become too closely identified with Mao's personality cult. 
The posts of deputy chairman, which both Mr. Deng and Mr. Hua held, were also eliminated.
Mr. Hu and Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang, who jointly presided over today's Central Committee meeting, are now expected to enjoy a freer hand in carrying out Mr. Deng's pragmatic policies, with Mr. Zhao in charge of the economic side and Mr. Hu the ideological and political.
 
Deng Heads Military Commission
Significantly, Mr. Deng was re-elected today to the chairmanship of the party's military commission, which gives him control over the armed forces. 
He is also expected to become chairman of a new Central Advisory Commission, from which he can continue his influence over the party.
Mr. Deng was joined on the advisory commission by only two of the previous members of the Politburo, Defense Minister Geng Biao, 73, and another old military man, Xu Shiyou, 76.
The advisory commission was created at the party congress to provide honorable semiretirement for overage ranking party officials. 
There had been speculation that Li Xiannian and Chen Yun, both 77, as well as Mr. Ye, might step down from the Standing Committee.
But with Mr. Hua out, Mr. Deng and his disciples, Mr. Zhao and Mr. Hu, should be able to carry any crucial vote in the committee. 
Mr. Chen, who will probably continue to head the party's watchdog Discipline Inspection Commission, is considered sympathetic to their policies, while Mr. Ye and Mr. Li have been more hard-line.
 
New Members of Politburo
The new Politburo members include Deputy Prime Minister Wan Li; the armed forces chief of staff, Yang Dezhi; Hu Qiaomu, an academician who is Mr. Deng's ideologist; Liao Chengzhi, who is in charge of China's relations with overseas Chinese; Xi Zhongxun and Yang Shangkun, who hold leading posts in the nominal parliament, and Song Renqiong, who has headed the party's organizational department. 
All are expected to keep nonparty jobs.
Mr. Hua, Mr. Geng and Mr. Xu lost their Politburo seats, though the latter two have stepped back to posts on the advisory commission. 
Peng Chong, a former party secretary and mayor of Shanghai, was also removed.
Mr. Hua, a former Minister of Public Security, had been accused previously of perpetuating ''leftist errors,'' though he was instrumental in having Mao's widow, Jiang Qing, and other radicals of the so-called Gang of Four arrested. 
He was also charged with trying to create his own personality cult.
His authority was undercut at a party meeting in December 1978 when Mr. Deng had marshaled enough support to challenge him. 
Mr. Hua was forced to yield the post of Prime Minister to Mr. Zhao in September 1980 and his job as party chairman to Mr. Hu in June 1981.
 
Decline Was Expected
His continuing decline was expected at the current party congress, when he was publicly criticized by Mr. Deng and Mr. Hu and the television cameras accorded him minimum exposure.
The extent of his fall became clear when he was re-elected to the Central Committee as a compromise or consolation, but was not named to Mr. Deng's new advisory commission. 
He is likely to finish out his career on the fringes of party activity.
The seven new members of the Politburo average more than 70 years in age, roughly the same as the average of the previous Politburo. 
By comparison, the new 210-member Central Committee has only 16 members over 70, according to the congress spokesman, Zhu Muzhi.
The new members of the Secretariat also appear younger and better educated. 
They include Deng Liqun, who recently took over the party's propaganda department; Hu Qili, who earned a reputation for dynamism as mayor of Tianjin, and Chen Pixian, the party chief in central Hubei Province.
