
After being piled in warehouses around the capital for nearly two decades, many of the looted antiques lining the tables and walls are dusty and scuffed, and some are badly damaged and have hardly any value at all.
Yet each day they come, men in fraying wool overcoats and ladies in jackets of padded cotton, searching the chilly classrooms of the Guangming Primary School for heirlooms they had assumed to be permanently lost.
Now and then somebody finds a cherished inkstand or a scroll, and others cluster around to share their moment of pleasure.
At the outset of the Cultural Revolution in 1966, Mao Zedong unleashed the youthful fanatics known as Red Guards on a house-to-house rampage against ''feudal dregs'' from China's past, and anybody with antiques or valuables was deemed fair game.
'Reclaiming exhibition' is being held at Guangming Primary School in Peking's Chongwen district; consists of more than 30,000 objects, including scroll paintings, calligraphy, cloisonne, lacquerware and books that were confiscated from homes in 1966 under Cultural Revolution of Mao Zedong; although Revolution ended in 1976, it is only now that Communist Party's decrees on returning confiscated property are beginning to take hold (M)
Now, the looting and the smashing are officially condemned, and a vast haul of property has been put on display.
The ''reclaiming exhibition'' in Peking's Chongwen district consists of more than 30,000 objects, including scroll paintings, calligraphy, cloisonne, lacquerware and books.
Some scrolls date to the Song Dynasty, more than 700 years ago, and would fetch handsome prices at auctions in the West. 
Other items include vanity boxes, bird cages, bamboo bracelets, water pipes and incense burners of the kind that accumulated in even modest Chinese homes.
 
'Calamity' Ended in 1976
Although the Cultural Revolution officially ended in 1976 and has been officially proclaimed a ''calamity,'' it is only now that the Communist Party's decrees on returning confiscated property are beginning to take hold. 
The exhibition at the school is the first of its scale to be held in the capital since a detailed Government directive on the matter was issued last year.
Since the early 1980's, families have been able to visit old temples and other places used as warehouses to inquire after lost belongings. 
But because the Red Guards destroyed much of what they took and kept scant records, recoveries were few.
Last spring, officials in Peking, Hangzhou, Tianjin and other major cities began inventorying millions of items for public showings.
At the Guangming school, room after room has been draped with a forest of scrolls. 
Some have been slashed, others torn or crumpled. 
But even for some of these there have been claimants.
''This is definitely mine!'' one man wrote on a ticket attached to a calligraphy scroll that looked as though it had been driven over by a muddy car tire.
One of the most beautiful scrolls could stand as a memorial to the terror of the Red Guards. 
At least two centuries old, it is a delicate silk embroidery in blues and browns showing the last of the Ming emperors about to hang himself from a locust tree overlooking the Forbidden City as peasant rebels overran the imperial stronghold in 1644.
Across the top half of the scroll, the owner scrawled a legend in thick black ink, ''I'm waiting to surrender this work for smashing by the respected Red Guard comrades, because it is nothing but a poisonous weed.''
By defacing the scroll, he apparently hoped to avoid the beating that the Red Guards frequently meted out to the ''bourgeois remnants'' made targets by Mao.
The tactic rarely worked. 
A visitor to the exhibition today, Fu Zhibin, 75 years old, who bicycled miles across the city to look for furniture looted from his home, recalled how he sent a message to the Red Guards inviting them to his 12-room house at 34 Donghuashi Street. 
By showing good will, he said, he thought he could curb their more destructive passions.
 
'They Beat Me Anyway'
''It didn't work,'' he said, with a wistful chuckle. 
''They beat me anyway, ransacked my belongings and threw me and my family out of my home.''
Last year, under another aspect of the restitution policies, Mr. Fu received a certificate formally restoring the title to his house. 
He has collected small amounts of rent, but he and his wife must remain in their two-room flat across town until new accommodations are found for the six families who supplanted them in their home. 
Today, the old man had another disappointment when officials at the exhibition told him they had no record of his missing tables and chairs.
The political message of the antiques display is spelled out in a red banner atop the school entrance. 
''Thoroughly negate the Cultural Revolution!'' it says.
Inside, Gao Yushan, the official in charge, invites claimants to read a notice describing the exhibition as a product of the party's policy of ''thoroughly removing the vicious influence of the Cultural Revolution, protecting citizens' property rights and as far as possible solving the problems left over by history.''
The display represents the part of the warehouse haul that officials thought likely to have come from the Chongwen district, a sprawling section to the south of the Forbidden City that has a population of about a million people. 
Chongwen was home to thousands of old bourgeois families, members of the old merchant class and descendants of the imperial mandarinate, many with large collections of antiques.
Claimants must first fill out a form detailing the circumstances of their loss. 
Once Mr. Gao and his assistants are satisfied that they have come in good faith, they are escorted through the exhibits.
If they spot something they believe is theirs, details are written on a white ticket and attached to the item. 
Minor pieces can be picked up after a few days, and more valuable ones must await possible counterclaims.
With only two days of the two-week exhibition to run, 8,000 items have been claimed. 
Among the more valuable scrolls double claims are common, and some articles have attracted three white tickets.
