
China today criticized a speech in Moscow by Konstantin U. Chernenko, saying that the remarks by the new Soviet leader had ignored Peking's conditions for improved ties.
The official New China News Agency, in its report of Mr. Chernenko's speech, gave an account of the Soviet leader's remarks during which he proclaimed Moscow's desire for peace and nuclear disarmament and called for better relations with the United States and China.
The agency reported that Mr. Chernenko said the Soviet Union ''is a consistent proponent of normalization of relations with the People's Republic of China.''
New China News Agency, reporting call by new Soviet leader Konstantin U Chernenko for better ties with China, says he ignored China's conditions for improving ties (S)
''However,'' the agency quoted Mr. Chernenko as saying, ''political consultations show there remain differences on a number of questions of principle.''
 
China's Three Demands
''Eluding China's proposal for removing barriers to normalization of relations between the two countries,'' the agency said, ''Chernenko went so far as to say that the Soviet Union 'cannot make any agreements to the prejudice of the interests of third countries.'
''
China has said relations with the Soviet Union cannot improve until Moscow quits Afghanistan, stops supporting Vietnam's occupation of Cambodia and withdraws its troops and weapons from the Chinese border.
The criticism of Mr. Chernenko's speech came one day after China's senior Deputy Prime Minister, Wan Li, confirmed that the Chinese had invited Moscow's First Deputy Prime Minister, Ivan V. Arkhipov, for talks. 
He would be the highest-ranking Kremlin official to visit China in 15 years.
In an interview with Japanese journalists carried by the agency, Mr. Wan indicated that Mr. Arkhipov's visit would focus on trade rather than political issues.
Mr. Wan did not say when Mr. Arkhipov would come, but Soviet sources have said he is expected in May. 
They said the exact date would probably be settled at the March 12 round of Chinese-Soviet discussions in Moscow.
China sent Mr. Wan to the funeral of Mr. Chernenko's predecessor, Yuri V. Andropov, last month in Moscow. 
Though Mr. Wan was the highest-ranking Chinese to visit the Kremlin in two decades, Mr. Chernenko did not meet with him.
The two nations were friendly in the 1950's but relations deteriorated in the 1960's over ideological and territorial disputes.
 
Mongolia Rejects Peking Demand
MOSCOW, March 3 (Reuters) - Mongolia today rejected a Chinese demand that the Soviet Union withdraw its troops from Mongolian territory to improve Chinese-Soviet relations.
A statement by the Ulan Bator Government, carried by the Soviet press agency Tass, said the question of Soviet troops on its territory was a domestic matter. 
''The allegation that their stay poses a threat to China's security is absolutely groundless,'' it said.
The statement said Mongolia attached great importance to Chinese- Soviet consultations aimed at improving ties. 
But, the statement added, the Mongolian Government rejects the troop-withdrawal demand.
There are an estimated 25,000 Soviet troops in Mongolia under a 1966 20-year friendship treaty. 
Ulan Bator told Peking in 1978 that they would remain there until China ''abandoned forever its policies of annexation regarding Mongolia.''
