
Chinese maps still show a single Korea, with its capital in the north. 
But these days map-makers and nearly everyone else in China are very conscious of Seoul and the rest of South Korea.
China and South Korea do not have diplomatic relations, but their informal relations are growing rapidly, even though such ties are largely unacknowledged. 
Trade is booming, and investment is beginning to rise sharply. 
Ships are moving cargoes between the two countries, and business executives and economists are exchanging visits.
Trade between China and South Korea will total $3 billion to $4 billion this year, about double last year's level and far more than the $513 million in 1987 trade between China and North Korea, economists have estimated.
 
Some Goods Move Directly
Most of the trade between China and South Korea is indirect, through Hong Kong and Japan, but Korean and Chinese sources say some South Korean ships flying Panamanian or Liberian flags go directly from the Korean ports of Pusan or Inchon to the Chinese ports of Tianjin, Lianyungang or Dalian.
Yet the relationships remain notably unofficial.
Behind an unmarked door in Beijing's Jianguo Hotel, for example, South Korea's Daewoo Group has been operating an unofficial office since July. 
It was set up as a vanguard for an operation that could include substantial investments in Chinese industry.
This summer Daewoo opened a factory in Fujian Province that is turning out 100,000 refrigerators a year, with output scheduled to double next year.
 
More Factories Proposed
Daewoo also is considering another refrigerator factory of the same size in Shandong Province, as well as two large factories that would make refrigerator compressors.
Daewoo would also like to invest at least $1 billion in a plant that would produce more than 300,000 automobiles a year, said Willie K. Park, who runs the Daewoo office here. 
Among the other projects Daewoo is considering, he said, are a giant petrochemical plant and a personal computer factory. 
The company is also studying the use of Chinese labor for construction projects abroad.
''We Koreans understand China,'' Mr. Park said. 
''You Americans come here, and you don't understand this stage of China's development, because it occurred a long time ago in your history. 
But when I was in high school in Korea, the situation then was like China is today.''
Two miles away, at the Beijing Hotel, a South Korean rival, the Samsung Group, has opened its unofficial outpost. 
Both companies' offices are staffed by Korean-Americans who use United States passports and nominally represent Hong Kong companies - actually subsidiaries of Daewoo or Samsung. 
Investments are also made in the name of Hong Kong or American subsidiaries.
More companies could follow. 
A survey by the Federation of Korean Industries suggests that 75 percent of South Korea's large companies might like to invest in China.
 
Embarrassment for Beijing
The blossoming relationships are something of an embarrassment for the Chinese Government, which refuses to recognize South Korea and speaks glowingly of its friendship with Communist North Korea. 
But North Korea has been closer to the Soviet Union than to China, and in the last decade China has appeared exasperated by North Korea's reluctance to liberalize its economic system as well as its foreign relations.
In April, on the birthday of the North Korean leader, Kim Il Sung, the Soviet Union gave him a new limousine. 
China was more frugal: its Communist Party leader, Zhao Ziyang, is said to have sent flowers.
Nevertheless, China is clearly trying to play down its economic dealings with South Korea and to keep them on an unofficial basis.
Ambivalence was shown when China allowed South Korean airliners to fly over China during the Olympics, extended the privilege to Oct. 
31 and ended it in November.
''The Chinese-South Korean relationship is developing very rapidly, especially in trade and maybe in sports and academic exchanges,'' said a Japanese diplomat in Beijing. 
''But in politics I think China will continue to pursue this very prudently.''
Although China has refused to let South Korea open a trade office in Beijing, it has proposed that South Korea and the nearby Chinese province of Shandong open reciprocal trade offices. 
The Koreans have not yet formally accepted this idea.
 
Provinces Pursuing Action
So far China has designated only Shandong Province to do business with South Korea, but Chinese and Korean sources say northeastern Liaoning Province may also have been quietly allowed to do so.
Other provinces are going ahead without Beijing's formal approval.
In addition to the refrigerator factory in Fujian Province, a South Korean-financed $10 million pharmaceutical plant is being built near Beijing. 
A delegation from Hubei Province visited South Korea this month to consider opening a trade office, and a delegation from the Chinese coastal city of Lianyungang is now in Korea for the same reason.
A Chinese official said some provinces had not been authorized to open trade offices and would be reprimanded if they did. 
The central Government has been trying to regain authority from local and regional authorities, which might make it harder for some of the provinces to advance their projects with South Korea.
But Shandong and Liaoning Provinces are likely to open offices in Seoul within a year, the official said.
China and South Korea ''would make a good fit,'' said Christine Wong, an economist at the University of California at Santa Cruz who specializes in China. 
As wages rise in Korea, she said, companies there are considering shifting some processing to lower-wage countries, including China. 
Also South Korean prices are lower than those in Japan or the United States, she noted, and the Koreans have international connections and marketing experience that the Chinese could find useful.
 
A Big Market but Difficult
South Korean business executives seem torn between awe at the magnitude of the potential Chinese market and apprehension about the difficulties of doing business in China.
''I was very happy as a tourist, but as a business investor I would be very cautious,'' said Kim Hiyong, the president of Tong-Yang Mool-San Inc., a Korean company that produces metal products from cutlery to farm machinery. 
Mr. Kim spent 25 days in China last month as part of a delegation looking for business opportunities. 
Chinese workers are not well motivated, he said, and there is a shortage of skilled labor.
Many South Koreans seem to hope for political as well as economic advantages from relations with China.
''In general, it is not wise to be hasty,'' Kim Young Sam, a Korean opposition leader, said in a telephone interview. 
''But improving relations with China and also the U.S.S.R. would simultaneously improve relations and dialogue with North Korea.''
Moscow is also establishing trade relations with South Korea.
Growing links between South Korea and China could also encourage further study of Seoul's economic strategy, which has some appeal in Beijing because of its mix of central planning and market incentives. 
Many Chinese officials and academics have visited South Korea recently. 
One of China's most influential economists, Wu Jinglian, was there.
One economist recently wrote in a South Korean magazine, ''This was my first trip to South Korea, and it impressed me in ways that will live with me for a long time.''
