
Hao Jianxiu is a success story by any criterion. 
As a teen-aged textile worker in Qindao, she devised a spinning method that bears her name. 
Eleven years later, she graduated as a textile engineer and swiftly became deputy director of a factory. 
She also rose to prominence in the trade union apparatus, the Women's Federation and the Communist Party. 
Yet what surprises Chinese is not these accomplishments in themselves, nor even her positions as minister of China's textile industry and new alternate member of the Communist Party secretariat. 
It is that Hao Jianxiu has come so far so young. 
She is 47 years old. 
At such an age, many American executives and officials approach the top of the ladder, but not in China.
Some shifts have been detected in the makeup of China's new Central Committee but average age of members of ruling political bureau still remains above 70
The 12th party congress last month endorsed the need for younger and more vigorous talent, but the followup was less than sweeping. 
Ye Jianying, the chairman of China's nominal parliament, quoted Tang poetry in praise of youth. 
Then he hung on to his party posts, a doddering 85-year-old soldier who did not fade away. 
And the average age of members of the new ruling political bureau still is above 70. 
Normally, Mr. Ye, as de facto head of state, would play host to West Germany's President, Karl Carstens, who was scheduled to arrive in Peking today on an official visit. 
But because Mr. Ye is too frail for even this ceremonial role, the duties are being taken by his deputy Peng Zhen, who is only 80 years old.
China's gerontocracy has presented its pragmatic new leaders with a problem not so much of age as of outlook. 
The upper ranks of party and government remain clogged with old revolutionary veterans, intolerant of change and suspicious of technical advances. 
A plan to limit the tenure of ''leading party comrades'' was scrapped at the congress. 
Hu Qiaomu, a party theoretician, reported that after ''repeated deliberation'' it was decided not to set any strict age limit, ostensibly to ensure a stable transition to younger leaders.
Those who can offer most in China's industrialization drive, usually called intellectuals because they went beyond high school, have yet to recover fully from the persecution of the Cultural Revolution, when higher education was proof that the offender had cut himself off from the masses. 
The Guangming Daily recently revealed that less than 16 percent of the party's nearly 40 million members had more than secondary schooling. 
Discrimination against such people, it added, remained so strong that some intellectuals had waited up to 20 years for membership and it was not unusual for people to be admitted only after they were dead.
New Central Committee Members
Yet some shifts have been detected in the makeup of the new Central Committee, which functions as a sort of parliament. 
Well over half of its 210 full members, and 80 percent of its 138 alternate members, are newcomers. 
Professional expertise and relative youth are most apparent among the alternates. 
Li Bing is a top cancer researcher. 
Another woman, Ding Fengying, who is 39 years old, is a Deputy Governor of Hubei province in central China. 
Qian Xuesen is a specialist in rockets. 
Han Xu is a new Deputy Foreign Minister who negotiated the recent communique on Taiwan with the United States. 
Jiang Xinxiong is a 51-year-old expert in nuclear fuel and Deputy Minister of Nuclear Industry. 
Wang Meng, a respected writer, is hardly young but he has courted controversy with his literary outspokenness. 
Their prominence symbolizes a shift in priorities, but it does not necessarily follow that they will move up later. 
Only 15 of the new full members had been alternates.
Among full members, who wield more political weight, change is less apparent. 
At least 40 still came in uniform from the armed forces, while 35 others came from the policymaking state council. 
Of 29 provincial party secretaries, 21 are on the Central Committee. 
Nonetheless, the Minister of Culture, Zhu Muzhi, called the new Central Committee ''more revolutionary, younger, better educated and more professional.''
Two-thirds were under 60 years old, and only 16 were over 70, he said.
Predicting China's future leadership is risky, not only because of the system's secretiveness but also because the Cultural Revolution shattered so many rising careers. 
When Mao Zedong died six years ago, Deng Xiaoping was still in disgrace for having advocated the kind of pragmatism that is dominant now. 
Still, some new faces in the party's upper ranks are being taken seriously. 
One is Hu Quli, 53, who earned a reputation for vigor as the mayor of the industrial city of Tianjin. 
Mr. Hu now directs the Central Committee's general office, the party's administrative arm.
Another recent arrival, Qiao Shi, 58, held prominent jobs in the state-run iron and steel industry and is now director of the Central Committee's liaison department,
dealing with foreign Communist parties. 
Both came up through the Communist Youth League once headed by Hu Yaobang, the party general secretary.
But China has a long way to go in promoting its best and brightest into positions of influence. 
Chen Yun, a Politburo economic planner, warned the congress that unless the age gap was narrowed, ''the cause of communism may suffer a setback in China.''
But after urging promotion of more young and middle-aged functionaries, the 77-yearold Mr. Chen added a significant caveat. 
If it came to a choice between political reliability and professional competence, he said, ''we should pay more attention to the former.''
