
In a courtroom in northeastern Shanghai, the defendant stood accused of embezzling three tons of steel plate from his factory by diverting it to a commune's agricultural machinery plant under a false bill of lading.
The defendant, Luo Yuansheng, had confessed during the meticulous police investigation preceding the trial. 
Even before his arrest, he had turned in a television set and $375 given to him by his accomplice at the commune in his home province of Jiangsu.
But Judge Xing Wenhua, flanked on the bench by two people's assessors, or jurors, sternly led him through a recitation of his crime.
 
Suspended One-Year Sentence
Mr. Luo, head lowered, told how he had sent the steel to the commune because his daughter worked there and he hoped "the leaders would look after my daughter better."
China moves to resurrect a credible legal system
Judge Xing pronounced the sentence: one year's imprisonment, suspended on condition of good behavior, while Mr. Luo worked at his factory. 
Mr. Luo thanked the court for showing him the error of his ways and was led away.
The trial would have seemed odd in an American courtroom, witht the judge more outspoken than the prosecutor and the defense counsel stressing the defendant's guilt. 
Yet it is part of a major effort since 1979 to resurrect the rule of law in China after its virtual extinction during the Cultural Revolution, when Maoist radicals imposed their own arbitrary notions of right and wrong.
 
A Stress on Rights and Duties
The Peking leadership conceded the need for a credible legal system when it promulgated a new state constitution with greater stress on the basic rights and duties of Chinese citizens. 
(Parliament ratified the constitution Saturday. 
Page 22.)
"No citizen is allowed to enjoy privileges that transcend the Constitution and the law," Peng Zhen, a senior official who helped draft the document, told the congress.
The revival of legal justice represents more than an attempt to prevent a recurrence of the anarchy now blamed on Chairman Mao Zedong's widow, Jiang Qing, and the other radicals lumped together as the Gang of Four.
 
'A Lot Has Happened'
As China opens to foreign trade and investment, it must provide civil and commercial codes for Western oil companies and other business concerns. 
News laws have already been promulgated on joint ventures and taxation, among other legislation.
"You can alway sget the perspective that not much progress is being made, but in a larger perspective, a lot has happened," said Jerome Alan Cohen, an American lawyer who is a leading authority on Chinese law.
The legal system introduced after the Communist takeover in 1949 borrowed heavily from the Soviet model. 
Work on an indegenous criminal and civil code continued until 1957, when Chairman Mao's "antirightist" campaign circumvented the system to persecute critics and law became increasingly irrelevant. 
The Ministry of Justice closed down in 1959, not to reopen for two decades. 
The Cultural Revolution from 1966 to 1976 trampled what law still survived.
 
'We Were Forced Out'
"The whole legal system was completely damaged," Dai Hanming, a Shanghai attorney, recalled in an interview. 
"There was no question of lawyers' organizations during the Cultural Revolution. 
Even a defendant had no right to get someone to defend him."
Mr. Dai's colleague, Fu Xuanjie, said that "under the Gang of Four, people like us had nothing to do. 
We were forced out into other jobs, to enterprises, factories, the countryside and other parts of the country."
Mr. Dai and Mr. Fu now practice in a Government-run legal advisory office. 
They are among 200 full-time lawyers working with 40 part-time lawyers in Shanghai, a metropolis of 11.8 million people.
Last January it was disclosed that China had 5,500 full-time lawyers and 1,300 part-time ones in a nation of 1 billion people. 
By comparison, the United States, with 231 million people, has 565,000 lawyers, with 42,000 in New York City alone.
 
A Target of 2 Million
"We are still understaffed," Mr. Dai said. 
"The demand from the masses is more than we can meet."
The Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping once set a target of 2 million legal workers by the end of the century. 
The Deputy Minister of Justice, Wang Yeuchen, has since announced a more modest goal of one lawyer for every 10,000 urban inhabitants or every 50,000 rural dwellers.
Last month the Ministry of Justice reported that 10,000 students were enrolled in regular law courses at 22 universities and institutes around China and the 4,000 legal workers were studying law at institutes in their spare time. 
The People's Daily newspaper reported last autumn that demobilized army offcers were getting a six-month course in law before being assigned legal duties, which might include judgeships.
Lawyers in China earn $30 to $40 a month, Mr. Dai said, though the most experienced might earn up to $90 a month. 
Legal fees average from 25 cents to $2 per consultation. 
Lawyers in Shanghai spend increasing time on more profitable cases, advising local industries and banks on foreign trade negotiations and contracts.
 
Rights of the State
People's Daily reported early this year that many people still confuse Chinese lawyers with those of the capitalist West. 
In China, it said, lawyers are "an important force for upholding the legal system of the state."
Mr. Dai said adversary tactics were alien to China, explaining, "The lawyer's regulations stipulate that our task is first to protect the rights of the state, the collective and the individual and to safeguard the implementation of laws."
While a defendant is entitled to a defense counsel, there is no legal presumption of innocene until proved guilty. 
Trials almost never take place until the defendant has confessed under pretrial interrogation.
Huang Huoqing, China's chief procurator, a position equivalent to that of the United States Attorney General, told the National People's Congress last December that 99.97 percent of the criminals prosecuted during the first nine months of 1981 were found guilty.
A defense lawyer's task is not to suggest that his client is innocent but to protect his legal rights and look for extenuating circumstances that might merit a lighter sentence. 
To visit his client, he needs the Government's permission.
 
'There Was No Need to Talk'
Mr. Ni, the lawyer for Mr. Luo, said that he had talked to his client three times before the trial. 
Ma Rongjie, the lawyer assigned to defend the Gang of Four at their trial two years ago, said later that he never met them because "there was no need to talk to them."
Defendants may appeal their conviction to a higher court, but only once. 
"If we followed the system of the court of thrid instance as the final instance and set no deadline, as is done in Japan and many European and American countries, many cases may drag on for years," explained Chen Yison, a prominent jurist.
In addition, a Chinese lawyer is not permitted to seek extensions for his client.
While Mr. Dai estimated that a major trial might last up to two and a half months, the wheels of justice can move at dizzying speeds. 
Five young men who tried to hijack an airliner to Taiwan last July were caught in Shanghai, interrogated, tried, convicted and shot in less than four weeks.
 
Sentencing to Cheers of a Crowd
Trials are sometimes made public to show that justice is being served and to warn against lawless behavior. 
The televised trial of the Gang of Four gave millions of Chinese their first look at how the legal system worked.
Jiang Hua, the president of the Supreme People's Court, has said that "in some cases of edcational significance, sentences were passed at mass meetings."
This may be a rally in a sports stadium, where the defendent is sentenced as the crowd cheers and is then led off for execution - with a bullet in the back of the head.
There is still no judicial precedent, according to a Peking legal scholar.
