
If China's rhetoric can be believed, two of its fondest friends are the North Korean President, Kim Il Sung, and the ousted Cambodian guerrilla leader Pol Pot, whose notoriety has isolated them elsewhere. 
By contrast, the United States gets lumped with the Soviet Union as hegemonistic superpowers who pose the real threat to the peaceloving world.
But an old Chinese proverb counsels: ''Listen to what a person says and then watch what he does.''
This week Chinese Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang visits the United States as head of a Government that has distanced itself from Washington since diplomatic relations were established on Jan. 
1, 1979, but that nonetheless retains common interest on a range of issues.
In the last five years, perceptions on both sides have matured, sometimes painfully, into a more sober realism about the limitations as well as the potential of the relationship. 
Antagonisms persist over the future of Taiwan and lesser problems, even as interdependence increases on other fronts. 
Mr. Zhao, who is expected in Washington tomorrow and will see Mr. Reagan Wednesday, set a conciliatory tone for the visit last week when he spoke at a news conference of ''great progress'' in relations between the two countries.
For complex reasons, China welcomed strategic cooperation with the United States in 1979. 
The Vietnamese had invaded Cambodia, ousting Pol Pot's regime. 
Before retaliating with a punitive invasion of Vietnam, China wanted a link with the United States to discourage a comparable Soviet response on its northern border. 
The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan that year confirmed the value of such an alliance for Peking. 
The Chinese and American outlooks still coincide on the Cambodian and Afghanistan invasions, and converge on some other areas threatened by the Kremlin's ambitions. 
But the bilateral relationship suffered from an American failure to live up to China's grand expectations. 
Peking hoped that the severing of official ties between the United States and Taiwan would demoralize the nationalist regime there and force it to negotiate with the mainland. 
Instead, Taiwan has prospered, while enjoying new infusions of American military aid. 
Mr. Zhao said last week he would not press for an immediate end to arms shipments to Taiwan but indicated he would remind Washington of its pledge to phase the sales out. 
Peking also expected its friendship with the United States to produce a cornucopia of capital and technology for China's modernization. 
This was obstructed by high interest rates and tight controls on the export of computers and other sophisticated hardware. 
The lack of a quick technological fix from the United States was interpreted by China as a deliberate slight. 
Coziness with the United States also hurt China's standing with other developing countries, where American policies are not popular. 
This discovery produced a shift in late 1981 toward conspicuous nonalignment. 
China shelved strategic cooperation and revived its superpower label for the United States - a change owing in large part to the election of Ronald Reagan, whose campaign remarks in support of Taiwan upset the Chinese. 
Mr. Reagan's tough approach to Moscow also left China freer to moderate its hostility toward the Soviet Union and agree to talk about improving strained relations. 
The Chinese-American communique of August 1982 clarified the Reagan Administration's position on Taiwan but fell short of dissipating the ill will. 
By last winter, the Chinese seemed to see little prospect of getting along with Mr. Reagan. They were consequently surprised by his decision to relax substantially controls on technology exports, which involved reclassifying China from a potential adversary to friendly nonaligned country. 
This week, an accord on industrial cooperation by which both sides would facilitate private investment in China is due to be signed during Mr. Zhao's stay in Washington. 
A treaty defining investors' rights may be ready when Mr. Reagan visits Peking, probably in April.
Other aspects of the relationship have also expanded. 
Although bilateral trade declined in 1983 because the Chinese stopped buying grain to protest a temporary imposition of import quotas on its textiles, total trade is still expected to exceed $4.2 billion. 
That is four times the figure for 1978, before diplomatic ties were established. 
United States officials estimate that at least 120,000 Americans visited China in 1983, compared with fewer than 10,000 in 1978. 
Some 13,000 Chinese students and scholars are studying in the United States, up from virtually zero five years ago. 
Chinese delegations are visiting the United States at the rate of 200 a month, a tenfold rise over five years ago. 
China remains beholden to its self-image as a revolutionary nation. 
''The Chinese want to think of themselves as Communists,'' said an Eastern European diplomat. 
This may help explain why they claim to feel more comfortable with Kim Il Sung or Pol Pot than with President Reagan. 
But when Mr. Zhao comes to Washington this week, his baggage will be lighter with the absence of the old illusions about Chinese-American relations.
