
Late last month, a Polish trade delegation concluded an agreement here with the Chinese providing for a 25 percent rise in trade between the countries in 1982.
The agreement might have suggested that China was siding with the new military regime in Warsaw, for two weeks earlier Chinese officials had rebuffed an American suggestion that Peking join Washington in criticizing the Soviet Union for its role in the Polish crisis.
But the trade agreement seems to have little bearing on the policy of the Chinese, who have been careful to remain aloof from the events taking place in Poland.
There are two interrelated reasons why the Chinese have chosen not to get involved in the political turmoil over Poland, in the view of Western, Communist and third-world diplomats here.
Poland concludes trade agreement with China providing for 25 percent rise in trade between the countries in 1982
The first is that unless the Soviet Union decides to intervene militarily in Poland, the Peking leadership sees no advantage in siding with the United States in what has developed into another superpower confrontation. 
Several diplomats here expressed surprise that the Reagan Administration thought that the Chinese could summon up common cause on the issue.
 
Influenced by Internal Factors
''The United States seems to forget that China still considers itself a Communist country,'' a third-world diplomat said. 
The second and possibly more cogent reason is that the rise of an independent trade union in Poland and the consequent liberalization represents an ominous tendency that the Peking leadership does not want to see imitated here, particularly when China is undergoing a delicate transition after the demythification of Mao Zedong.
An East European diplomat agreed that China's view of the Polish situation was influenced ''not only by international factors but also by internal factors.''
The Chinese have stuck to the cautious position spelled out just after martial law was declared in Poland last Dec. 
13. A Foreign Ministry spokesman told reporters on Dec. 
14 that China ''consistently maintained that Polish affairs should be settled by the Polish people themselves.''
Since then, the leadership has reiterated its objection to any outside interference. 
Li Xiannian, a Deputy Chairman of the Chinese Communist Party, told the Italian Communist Party newspaper L'Unita last month that in addition to the Sov iet Uni on, ''the United States also practices hegemonism'' - China's code wo rd f or expans ionist aims.
 
Irritated by Deal With Taiwan
When John H. Holdridge, the United States Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern and Pacific Affairs, visited Peking last month, the Chinese rejected a request to cooperate in assailing the Soviet Union on Poland. 
The Chinese appeared irritated by the Reagan Administration's bid partly because Peking contends that the continuing sale of American arms to Taiwan is interference in China's internal affairs.
The new trade agreement just concluded between China and Poland is a barter deal valued at 255 million Swiss francs, or about $135.4 million. 
The trade surplus runs in China's favor, with 154 million francs, or about $81 million, worth of Chinese exports and 101 million francs, or about $53 million, worth of Polish exports. 
The two-way trade reportedly involves mostly consumer goods.
East European sources say this is 25 percent higher than the level of Chinese-Polish trade last year. 
But they acknowledge that this rise follows a sharp drop last year, when China cut back on its expenditures in the drive to modernize the country, and trade suffered with Japan as well as Eastern Europe.
The 1982 level is still only 70 percent of the 1980 peak, when Chinese-Polish trade exceeded 400 million Swiss francs, or about $210.6 million, in value.
Even so, said an East European diplomat, ''the Chinese were rather cooperative.''
A Western diplomat said that if the Chinese had postponed the agreement, it might have been interpreted as a political gesture of disapproval at events in Poland.
 
Selling Pork to Poland
In a separate deal, China has also agreed to sell Poland 50,000 tons of pork, with payment deferred for 10 years. 
However, this contract was signed last October.
The Chinese press has continued to criticize the Soviet Union on other issues and has given particular prominence to the latest rift between the Soviet and Italian Communist parties. 
But since December, the press has refrained from mentioning that the point of contention is the situation in Poland.
Events in Poland are usually reported here by quoting the official Polish press agency, but without the additional editorializing that the Chinese press often tucks into its foreign news reports.
After its ideological break with the Soviet Union, China no longer has party-to-party relations with most countries in the Soviet bloc, including Poland, though they maintain diplomatic ties and large embassies. 
An East European journalist noted that China still has such ties with parties in Rumania, Yugoslavia and North Korea. 
The Chinese have also cultivated links with the Italian and Spanish parties and sent their ambassador in Paris to the recent congress of the French Communist Party.
