
Beijing may be a long way from River City, but on May 8 the members of an all-Chinese cast are to buckle their tap shoes, uncrate the trombones and mount a full-scale production of ''The Music Man.''
In what are to be the first performances of an American musical in China by a Chinese cast, the ''Music Man'' is to be done in Beijing simultaneously with the run of another well-known American musical, ''The Fantasticks.''
Both productions are to be directed by Americans, and are to be performed in Mandarin in a collaboration by the Eugene O'Neill Theater Center of Waterford, Conn., the Chinese Theater Association, the Central Opera Theater of Beijing and the Center for U.S.-China Arts Exchange. 
The production of ''The Fantasticks'' is eventually to tour China's provinces.
''The Chinese have a great desire to learn about the form,'' said Chou Wen-Chung, director of the Center for U.S.-China Arts Exchange, a nonprofit organization established in 1978 at Columbia University. 
''The Chinese are keen to learn modern techniques of lighting, set design and stagecraft. 
They're also looking for freer manners of expression.''
The founder and chairman of the Eugene O'Neill Theater Center, George C. White, is to direct the production of ''The Music Man,'' Meredith Willson's 1957 hit musical, which features such tunes as ''76 Trombones'' and ''Trouble in River City.''
In 1984, Mr. White staged and directed a Chinese cast in O'Neill's ''Anna Christie'' in China.
 
'Fantasticks' Will Tour
An associate artistic director of the Circle Repertory Company in New York, Rodney Marriott, is to direct the production of ''Fantasticks,'' the long-running musical by Tom Jones and Harvey Schmidt. 
After an initial run in Beijing, it will go on to Nanjing with hopes of eventual performances in Shanghai, Canton and Hong Kong.
Susan Rose of the arts exchange, which helped arrange the venture, said that it was exciting for the Chinese performers to have to work in an entirely inhabitual manner.
Performances in China usually contain only one discipline, according to Ms. Rose. An opera singer sings opera, a ballet dancer dances ballet, an actor acts and so on.
''The American musical forces all three to collaborate,'' Ms. Rose said.
The project, which is being produced by Edward Corn and Gayle Ritchie, is being partially financed by the American Express Company, which will provide all expenses for the American professionals traveling to China, as well as royalties and nominal fees for the small group of Americans supervising the undertaking. 
The Central Opera Theater is paying for the sets, costumes, Chinese performers and scenery. 
The Chinese Theater Association is paying for the Americans' housing, meals and local transportation in China.
 
Lessons in Marketing
Mr. Corn said he had been asked to conduct workshops in China about marketing and promotion -areas, he said, in which the Chinese have become increasingly interested. 
Printed posters are to be displayed around Beijing to advertise the musical - a totally novel practice for the Chinese. 
Usually in China, where cultural events are almost always sold out, performances are not advertised, but merely mentioned in local newspapers.
There are no playbills in China; only mimeographed lists of performers. 
For the production of ''The Music Man,'' a program is being prepared. 
Usually it costs one yuan (about 27 cents) to attend a production. 
''The Music Man'' will cost the Chinese, who take home anywhere from 70 to 90 yuan a month, slightly more than two yuan, Mr. Corn said.
Mr. White, who cast the productions in China last October, said that he had initially wanted to do ''Oklahoma!'' but that the Chinese thought their performers would be unable to dance to Agnes de Mille's choreography and sing simultaneously.
The Chinese, he said, countered his proposal with ''Fiddler on the Roof.''
Mr. White said he resisted, because he thought it was not typically American. 
He then briefly considered ''Man of La Mancha,'' but decided the rape scene in the play would be deemed inappropriate for Chinese audiences. 
It was then that ''The Music Man'' came to mind.
''Once I thought about it,'' said Mr. White of the show, which is set in Iowa in 1912, ''it was obvious.''
Mr. White said the Chinese at first wanted to know if they needed 76 trombones to mount the production. 
Mr. White told them they did not. 
Then they began to worry whether Prof. Harold Hill, the play's protagonist, was a bad man.
''I told them that love makes him a good man,'' Mr. White said.
 
Retaining American Aspect
The next decision was whether the cast should appear Chinese or American. 
Unlike his production of ''Anna Christie,'' in which Mr. White tried to tap the universality of the play and to set it in China, he decided that the performers should try to match the classically American content.
''It's no different than Renata Scotto wearing a Kabuki wig,'' Mr. White said.
The 32-member chorus, 24-member ballet, 17 principals, a children's brass band of 15 and an orchestra of 60 are to begin rehearsing on Monday, with the artistic director of the annual O'Neill Music Theater, Paulette Haupt, conducting. 
The choreographer is Lynn Britt, also of the O'Neill. 
Pearl Somner has designed the costumes, and the scenery is based on original designs by Howard Bay, who died in November shortly before a planned trip to China to supervise initial work.
Mr. White said he did not foresee any problems with the translation. 
Musically, he said, he thought the Chinese would be totally at home with the piece, given their training in Western opera. 
The only new undertaking, he said, was the jazz and tap dancing, but he said their training in classical ballet should adequately prepare them.
''What I really want to do is teach the Chinese the basic form,'' Mr. White said. 
''What I would love is for the Chinese eventually to do to us what the British have been doing: come over here with their own style of musical that will knock our socks off.''
