
China said today that the agreement with the United States on limiting arms sales to Taiwan was only the first step toward solving the dispute over the island.
China warned that the American law providing for continuance of unofficial relations with Taiwan could lead to ''another grave crisis.''
China's Foreign Ministry said the new agreement indicated that the United States would eventually end arms sales to Taiwan, but it added that the accord ''only marks a beginning of the settlement of this issue.''
PEKING, Aug. 
17 (AP) - China said today that the agreement with the United States on limiting arms sales to Taiwan was only the first step toward solving the dispute over the island.
The Communist Party newspaper People's Daily declared that the Taiwan Relations Act remained the chief obstacle to United States-Chinese relations by treating Taiwan as an independent political entity.
After the United States recognized Peking as China's sole legitimate government and broke official ties with Taiwan, Congress passed the Taiwan Relations Act, which provides for American weapons sales to the island.
 
'Served to Break the Stalemate'
''Should the policy makers in Washington insist on handling the relations between the two countries according to this internal law, Chinese-United States relations, instead of being further developed, will certainly face yet another grave crisis,'' the paper said in an editorial to appear in Wednesday's issue.
It said the new communique ''has served to break the stalemate between the two countries on the issue of United States arms sales to Taiwan, but this does not mean that the issue has been completely settled.
''The clouds hanging over Chinese-United States relations have not been completely cleared away,'' it said. 
Reached after months of delicate negotiations, the agreement came two weeks before an important congress of China's Communist Party and is regarded as a victory for Deputy Chairman Deng Xiaoping, China's most powerful leader.
Mr. Deng led efforts to establish full diplomatic relations with the United States in 1979. 
There had been speculation that Mr. Deng's critics in the party might use the Taiwan issue against him at the congress.
China's state-run domestic news programs dwelled on the Taiwan issue tonight, carrying reports on the communique, the Chinese Foreign Ministry statement and the People's Daily editorial.
 
Taiwan Relations Act Denounced
In a statement issued in Washington, President Reagan said the accord was ''fully consistent with the Taiwan Relations Act.''
But the Chinese Foreign Ministry said it ''has nothing to do with the 'Taiwan Relations Act' formulated unilaterally by the United States.''
It said that China had consistently opposed that law and that all interpretations linking it to the Chinese-American communique ''are in violation of the spirit and substance of this communique and are thus unacceptable.''
China's policy is to strive for peaceful reunification with Taiwan, the Foreign Ministry said, and this ''is purely China's internal affair.''
Last September, China told Taiwan that under reunification it could keep its own armed forces and run its affairs without being forced to adopt Communism. 
Taiwan has repeatedly rejected that overture as ''sugar-coated poison.''
