
The leadership of China's officially sanctioned Catholic Church has denounced Pope John Paul II, accusing him of slander and blasphemy for asserting that Chinese Catholics were being persecuted.
The attack, which was circulated as a statement today by the New China News Agency, was intended to counter the Pope's request that Roman Catholics around the world pray this Sunday for persecuted Chinese Catholics.
''This is a vicious slander based on false testimonies, and to 'pray' for such a fabrication constitutes an insult to God,'' the Church leaders said in the statement. 
''The Chinese Catholics will never tolerate this. 
Honest Catholics in other countries who know the facts will not allow themselves to be hoodwinked by this little trick of Pope John Paul II.''
The leadership of China's officially sanctioned Catholic Church has denounced Pope John Paul II, accusing him of slander and blasphemy for asserting that Chinese Catholics were being persecuted.
The statement threatened unspecified retaliation if the Pope continued to talk about religious persecution in China: ''The Chinese Catholics want to make it clear that there is a limit to their patience. 
We will launch a counterattack if Pope John Paul II does not call a halt to his false testimonies and accusations.''
 
Church Groups Back Peking
The New China News Agency reported that a leading Chinese bishop, Yang Gaojian, issued the statement Friday on behalf of three organizations that enjoy the recognition of China's Communist Party, which espouses atheism. 
These are the Administrative Commission of the Catholic Church in China, the Bishops' Conference of the Chinese Catholic Church and the Chinese Catholics' Patriotic Association.
Their statement purported to represent the views of all Chinese Catholics, but it could not have been published without the approval of the Government, which objects to any suggestion of religious intolerance in China. 
The official press agency called the statement an expression of Chinese Catholic ''indignation'' over a series of ''extremely unfriendly moves'' by the Pope.
The local Chinese church has refused to submit to the authority of the Vatican since it broke away during the 1950's. 
Other differences have since deepened the schism: mass, for example, is still said in Latin.
The local church also backs Peking's birth-control policies, which disapprove of more than one child per family. 
The local church further supports the Government in its objections to the diplomatic ties that the Vatican has with Taiwan.
 
Underground Movement
Dissident Catholics loyal to the Vatican have in turn splintered off to form an underground movement of worshippers. 
Their number is unknown, although it is evidently larger than the handful whose existence has been acknowledged by the Government.
The latest confrontation started last November when the police in Shanghai arrested the Rev. Zhu Hongshen and several other elderly Jesuit priests who had served long sentences in labor camps for trying to maintain links to the Vatican. 
The Jesuit order in Rome has since put the number of those arrested at about a dozen. 
The priests are still apparently in jail.
Alluding to the crackdown last autumn, the statement by the Chinese Catholic leadership said that ''not long ago, the Chinese Government arrested Zhu Hongshen and other counterrevolutionaries in religious clothing according to law. 
We deem it a good thing to bring these Pharisees to justice to purify the church. 
The Chinese Catholics support this measure by their Government.
''If Pope John Paul II terms this as 'persecution of the church,' '' the statement continued, ''it shows that his expressions of 'friendship' and 'concern' are nothing but deception.''
Attempts by the Vatican at reconciliation have been rebuffed by Peking, which does not want religious believers accepting any primacy but its own. 
Last year, it rejected the Pope's appointment of Deng Yiming, a recently freed Jesuit known in the West as Dominic Tang, as the new Archbishop of Guangdong Province on grounds that this interfered with the independence of the Chinese Catholic Church.
 
Peking Admits Past Abuses
The Government has admitted that Christians were persecuted by radicals during the Cultural Revolution. 
In the last few years, more freedom of worship has been given Chinese Catholics, whose number has been estimated at up to several million. 
Many Chinese Catholics are nervous that this could be jeopardized if the Vatican presses too hard.
The statement today reported that ''more than 200 churches have been repaired and are open for holy mass and thousands of faithful Catholics attend church services.''
A dozen new Chinese bishops were consecrated last year without Vatican approval. 
The Government has also promised to allow a new Catholic seminary, similar to the Protestant seminary that opened a year ago in Nanjing.
The New China News Agency statement said, ''All these show a new atmosphere has been emerging in the Chinese Catholic Church.''
The statement contended that the Pope was acting ''contrary to the Gospel teaching'' when he ignored this and instead compared the situation of Chinese Catholics to the persecution of the early Christians.
China's Protestants have had somewhat smoother relations with the Government after they broke their Western denominational ties and formed a ''three-self patriotic movement'' - self-sustaining, selfadministering and self-propagating.
