
A Chinese student educated in the United States has been identified by his wife as one of the demonstrators detained in China's crackdown on political dissent.
The student, Yang Wei, returned to China after receiving a masters degree in molecular biology last year from the University of Arizona. 
He was arrested on Jan. 
11 in Shanghai after taking part in the student demonstrations there for freer speech and democracy last December.
His wife, Che Shaoli, said the family's request to visit her husband in prison was denied and ''we do not even know where he is.''
She asked that Chinese authorities release him or ''try him according to legal procedure.''
Ms. Che, who is still in the United States, said in an interview Friday that ''this kind of treatment to a returned student is frightening to all students now studying in the West.''
In particular, she noted, it was ''a dangerous sign'' for more than 1,000 Chinese students in American universities and colleges who have signed an open letter to the leadership in Beijing, expressing concern over the dismissal of the party chief, Hu Yaobang, and the disciplining of Chinese intellectuals.
The 31-year-old Mr. Yang was detained in his parents' home in Shanghai on Jan. 
11, Ms. Che said, relating the events as told by friends and relatives. 
The police found papers linking him to student protesters and warned his parents not to disclose his arrest.
Ms. Che stressed that Mr. Yang's father and mother were both senior members of the Chinese Communist Party.
''The old generation believed in the party but the young generation doesn't believe in the way Communism is practiced in China,'' Ms. Che said. 
Neither she nor her husband were party members, she said, but they were not against the party and supported its reform.
Dr. Wang Bingzhang, a former Chinese student who founded the Chinese Alliance for Democracy here in 1982, said Mr. Yang was the first student returnee from the United States known to be arrested in the current crackdown. 
Sources in the Shanghai Public Security Department confirmed that he was put under arrest and charged with ''counter-revolutionary activities,'' he said.
Chinese authorities have not disclosed how many people were arrested in the wake of four weeks of student protest that ended early this year.
The Chinese Alliance for Democracy has received reports of the arrest of 3 students and 11 young workers in the last 10 days in Shanghai, Canton and Tianjin, according to Dr. Wang. These arrests also seem related to the recent demonstrations.
Ms. Che said her husband had written her about taking part in the Shanghai student demonstrations. 
She said that Mr. Yang's position was difficult because he was not currently enrolled in a Chinese university but planning to return to get his Ph.D in the United States.
Mr. Yang, a graduate of Fudan University in Shanghai, came to the University of Arizona in 1983 for graduate work. 
He returned to China last May to marry Ms. Che.
