
About 100 Chinese students at the State University campus here are learning accounting, organizational behavior and the intricacies of the free market system in a new experiment in the compatibility of Marxist economics and Western-style management.
The performers in this delicate balancing act are participants in a program that last December graduated China's first 39 American-accredited M.B.A.'s. 
The intent, its founders say, is not to preach capitalist ideology, but to improve Chinese management skills and, in the process, make China more productive.
''We are not teaching capitalism,'' said Frank C. Jen, a management professor at Buffalo who was born in China and is a founder of the program, part of the science and technology exchange that began in 1980. 
''We are teaching them a series of management techniques that will help them raise their standard of living.''
The idea for the Buffalo program, with courses in English and similar to most M.B.A. programs, grew out of shorter courses offered by a joint United States-China project, the National Center for Industrial Science and Technology Management in Dalian, a major seaport on the Bay of Korea.
 
Conflict in China Noted
Previously the Chinese had offered their students short courses in the Western style of management. 
But under the new program - three semesters in China and an intensive final semester of study here - the students return to their homeland with the equivalent of two years of Western training and extensive knowledge of the free market system. 
Awaiting them is an industrial system that is largely state-owned and that, despite some reforms, remains closely tied to the Communist Party.
University officials acknowledge the push and pull between reformists and hard-liners in China. 
Last year's pro-democracy demonstrations there and the Government's ensuing campaign against capitalism were ample evidence of the political conflicts.
''We want to allow the students to function as China exists today,'' said Joseph A. Alutto, dean of the university's School of Management. 
''We also want them to be able to adjust as China changes.''
Mr. Alutto said the Chinese Government had given every indication that it was happy with the M.B.A. program and that it intended to renew its contract with the university. 
Two more classes of students are expected to graduate before the current contract expires in 1989.
 
Western Techniques in China
From the outset, the primary concern among program supporters has been the sharing of power. 
They question the willingness of Chinese leaders to institute Western management techniques, even when they proved effective.
But Mr. Alutto, citing the advancement of earlier Dalian graduates, expects success from the M.B.A. program. 
In the short term, he said, graduates should advance rapidly as managers. 
The long-term outcome, he said, should be an increase in Chinese-American joint business ventures and greater interest in trade between the two countries.
Eager to capitalize on the potential for additional trade, the university has established a China Trade Center. 
Raymond G. Hunt, director of the center and associate director of the China M.B.A. program, said the center relied on the growing trust between the university and China and served as a conduit for companies that want to trade with China, and Chinese enterprises anxious to enter the United States market.
 
Obstacles and Frustration
''By providing China with proper management, we will help them to re-industrialize and in the long run promote bilateral trade,'' said Richard W. H. Lee, the United States Commerce Department's director of science and technology for East Asia and the Pacific.
The program has not been without obstacles and frustration. 
In addition to the loss of a student who chose to remain in the United States, there has been political resistance in China.
Mr. Alutto said the economic reforms adopted by the Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping had been supported by top managers and younger workers. 
The resistance has come from middle managers, the sector of management most heavily infiltrated with untrained people, many of whom are rewarded for service to the Communist Party.
Mr. Jen said he had told the Chinese at the program's outset: ''You can run a very good economic system. 
But if you want to reward Communist Party members who fought the long war, send them to management school.''
Mr. Jen and Mr. Alutto both agree that Marxism and Western management are not totally incompatible.
''China has to find her own destiny,'' Mr. Alutto said. 
''All we can do is provide the technology.''
