
A Chinese company appears to be aiming to become the first to be publicly traded on an international stock exchange, through a listing in Hong Kong later this year.
Public trading of stock in Guandong Enterprises, which now is owned by the Guandong Provincial Government in southern China, apparently would mark the first time since the Communists came to power in China in 1949 that a Chinese company turned to a foreign stock market to raise capital.
Another China-controlled concern, Tian An Development Company, also is hoping to go public soon, according to a company official and market sources. 
K. C. Tan, an executive of Tian An Development, said that a planned issue of shares - to take effect after the stock becomes publicly listed - was 100 percent subscribed.
William Phillips, managing director of Baring Securities in Hong Kong, said that the primary reason for seeking new listings seemed to be that the two companies regarded Hong Kong as an efficient place to raise capital. 
But he added that the effort to be listed might contain a larger lesson as well, particularly after the recent turbulence in Beijing.
''It does appear that China means to carry on with economic reforms, albeit in a lower profile,'' Mr. Phillips said. 
''I think these two public listings are evidence of this.''
Chinese companies in recent years have experimented with issuing stock inside China, but the financial instruments often do not resemble shares elsewhere and do not carry with them the regulatory burdens that a publicly listed company must bear in foreign markets.
China already controls some companies that are publicly traded on the Hong Kong Exchange. 
But these companies, such as Ka Wah Bank and Union Bank, are longtime Hong Kong institutions that were recently acquired by Chinese interests, rather than Chinese companies that decided to go public.
Guandong Enterprises declined to comment. 
But K. K. Leung, a Hong Kong financier, said that Guandong Enterprises had purchased a company he owns, which in turn is in the process of buying Union Globe Development, a property company listed on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange. 
Analysts said the result of the transactions, if regulators permit, would be that Guandong would inject some of its nearly $1 billion in assets into Union Globe and then sell shares in exchange for new capital.
Mr. Tan of Tian An Development could not say when the public listing of his company might occur. 
He said the issue of shares would take place through the vehicle of a related company, the Tian An China Investment Company, which would invest primarily in China.
A fund manager who has agreed to purchase Tian An shares said he understood that a Tian An listing -whether in the form of a new listing or acquisition of an existing publicly held concern - had been delayed by cautious regulators.
Tian An, for example, is less than two years old, while Hong Kong Stock Exchange rules normally require a publicly traded company to have a five-year financial track record.
E. R. Astin, Hong Kong's Commissioner for Securities, declined to discuss particular companies. 
But he said that in principle the same rules must be applied to companies of any national origin and that rules should not be relaxed when a company gains a listing by going through the ''back door,'' by buying a defunct company with a stock listing.
Mr. Astin said, however, that it would be ''highly material'' if a company was backed by the creditworthiness of a sovereign government, as Chinese companies appear to be.
''I don't think it's all political,'' said Teresa Ma, an analyst at Jardine Flemming Securities in Hong Kong, ''but there is an element of giving confidence to people in Hong Kong. 
People would say that at least China isn't against capitalist investment.''
