
A British diplomat newly arrived in Peking went to the hospital for the physical examination needed to obtain a Chinese driver's license. 
All went well until the diplomat put on his glasses to complete the eye examination.
The doctor pointed out that the diplomat's photo on his British driver's license showed no glasses. 
How could he be issued a Chinese license that didn't match his British one?
Together they pondered the impasse. 
Then the doctor proposed, ''You may drive in China, but you must never wear your glasses.''
Such is the ''banfa,'' a key to circumnavigating China's formidable bureaucratism. 
In Chinese, ''banfa'' means a way or means, usually out of a problem, but this trivializes it. 
A Chinese writer, asked for a better definition, ventured that ''to have a 'banfa' means to have resourcefulness.''
Consider, for example, a ''banfa'' of nationwide proportion. 
Deng Xiaoping, the man who runs China, has tried to get overage officials to step down in favor of younger, better educated talent. 
At first, Mr. Deng was not successful.
 
No Formal Retirement Age
China sets no formal retirement age for its party and Government functionaries. 
Those who retire give up not only their posts but also perquisites from comfortable apartments to chauffered cars and, not least, the ''guanxi'' or pull, that finagled higher education or good jobs for their children.
Under Mr. Deng's ''banfa,'' old officials who retire may now keep their salaries and fringe benefits. 
They also become eligible for extra pensions and retain their right to read official documents and sit in on meetings. 
They even get certificates of honor.
Such concessions cost plenty, but Mr. Deng's ''banfa'' may be working. 
Over 470,000 veteran officials, one-sixth of those who held posts before the Communist takeover 34 years ago, have retired. 
Most of the rest are presumably thinking it over.
The ''banfa'' is an antidote to a system choked with petty, conflicting and secret regulations. 
One ministry alone reportedly issued 1,000 new laws last year. 
In the 1966-76 Cultural Revolution, the Government stopped keeping track. 
As a result, said Wang Jiafu, an expert on civil law, ''many regulations and decrees are not known to the people.''
 
Legalistic Nitpicking
Ordinary Chinese must live with legalistic nitpicking. 
A translator in Peking heard that his wife was coming on vacation from her job in Shanghai. 
Couples are not infrequently assigned to different parts of the country. 
But he could not rent a hotel room for their reunion because his residence permit listed him as living in a dormitory. 
His employer arranged a ''banfa'' that sent him on temporary assignment to Shanghai to see his wife.
A Chinese who wants to change jobs needs the permission of his old ''danwei,'' or work unit, to join a new one. 
But his unit may not let him go for fear that he will embarrass it by doing better in his new job. 
One broadcasting station employee was refused permission to quit. 
But neither could he go on working after having appeared disloyal to his organization. 
The outcome is that he now stays home and goes to the office only to collect his monthly salary.
Some foreign expatriates need ''banfa'' too. 
An American student at Peking University was moving to a better room, but she could not get the new key until she had handed in her old one; she couldn't give up the old key before she moved her things out. 
An intricate solution was worked out that let her retain the old key temporarily while she got the new one.
To be sure, some ''banfas'' border on the inane. 
Some weeks ago, three fire engines were lined up outside the entrance to one of the residential areas set aside for foreigners living in Peking. 
The Government does not let Chinese into the compounds without permission, so the fireman, who were responding to a fire, had to wait until the armed sentry at the gate telephoned for clearance. 
By then, the fire fortunately had burned itself out.
One nervous European diplomat inquired later about how to get a fire engine into the foreigners-only compound in case of fire. 
A Chinese official explained that the ''banfa'' was quite simple. 
After reporting a fire in his apartment, the foreigner should walk out to the gate and invite the fire crew in as his guests. 
If he vouched for the firemen's character, there should be no problem.
 
Some Sinister Turns
In another case, an American teaching English at Peking's Iron and Steel Institute applied to bring his fiancee to China to get married. 
The authorities at the institute were reluctant because he had been seen earlier in the company of a young Englishwoman and therefore might already be married. 
As a ''banfa,'' they had him sign a statement saying that if he had ever been married before, he would have gotten a divorce.
But some ''banfas'' can turn sinister. 
Another young American working as a polisher of English-language articles at the New China News Agency visited Tibet with his wife last spring after getting the necessary travel permit from the police in neighboring Xinjiang. 
Since few foreigners are allowed into Tibet, his superiors decided that someone in the agency must have provided him with a letter to arrange his trip.
His denial of any such letter was ignored. 
For a week, the couple were refused an exit permit to leave China until they signed a statement acknowledging the existence of the fictitious letter.
When they reached the border, there was an added twist.
The security police boarded their train and confiscated a year's worth of undeveloped color film. 
As the American told it later, they explained that ''normally foreign friends don't visit Tibet and we have to see what you photographed to make sure you didn't take any pictures of anything you shouldn't have.''
