
For the second time in two days, China has deleted portions of remarks made by President Reagan on prime time Chinese television.
A significant part was deleted from an interview that Mr. Reagan gave Saturday with the Chinese television network. 
In it, he asserted that ''Americans are people of peace'' who did not threaten China or any other nation and had ''no troops massed on your border.''
This latter part alluded to the heavy concentration of Soviet troops and missiles on China's northern frontiers.
China, for second time in two days, has deleted portions of remarks made by Pres Reagan on prime time Chinese TV; significant part is deleted from interview in which Reagan said that Americans are people of peace who do not threaten China or any other nation and have 'no troops massed on your border;' latter part alludes to heavy concentration of Soviet troops and missiles on China's northern frontiers; photo (M)
On Friday, Chinese television omitted passages of a speech that Mr. Reagan gave to a select Chinese audience in the Great Hall of the People that were even more explicitly critical of the Soviet Union.
 
Allusion to Airliner's Downing
In that speech, Mr. Reagan also said that ''American troops are not massed on China's borders'' and occupied no lands. 
''Nor do we commit wanton acts such as shooting 269 innocent people out of the sky for the so-called cause of sacred airspace,'' Mr. Reagan said, alluding to the shooting down of a South Korean airliner by a Soviet jet fighter last September. 
Both cases of deletion reflected Chinese sensitivity over criticism that Mr. Reagan has leveled against the Soviet Union during his visit here. 
Peking has entered into talks with Moscow aimed at normalizing relations, though Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang told Mr. Reagan that there had been no substantive progress. 
It has also invited a Soviet First Deputy Prime Minister, Ivan V. Arkhipov, to visit China in mid-May.
While Chinese-Soviet relations are still cool, China evidently does not want to appear to be returning to the doctrine of strategic cooperation with the United States, which it shelved two and a half years ago in favor of greater identification with the third world.
On Saturday, the Presidential party brushed off the significance of the earlier deletion of Mr. Reagan's remarks.
 
President Is Queried
When the President stopped before television cameras during his sightseeing at the Great Wall Saturday afternoon, one television reporter asked him, ''What did you think about your speech being censored?''
Mr. Reagan said he was not upset. 
''You fellas do it all the time,'' he said.
''We don't cut out all the best parts,'' another television reporter said. 
''Yes, you do,'' Mr. Reagan replied,
The Chinese Foreign Ministry's information director, Qi Huaiyuan, when asked about the editing of the videotape of Mr. Reagan's speech Friday, indicated that his Government did not want to let the leader of one country publicly attack another country while in China.
''I have no more comment than that it is inappropriate for the Chinese media to publicize the comments by President Reagan on a third country,'' Mr. Qi told reporters at a news briefing. 
Larry Speakes, the White House spokesman, gave reporters a statement Saturday expressing ''regret'' that the statements in Mr. Reagan's Friday speech that ''would have given the Chinese people a better understanding of our country and its people'' had been cut out of the later rebroadcast.
 
U.S. Said to Have Been Told
But Mr. Qi said he had informed the White House office of the deletions before Friday's broadcast. 
''I said some paragraphs that concern a third country, and so forth, will be left out,' the official said. 
Mr. Speakes had said earlier that the speech would be transmitted in its entirety.
In the parts of the interview deleted Saturday, Mr. Reagan also said that ''economic growth and human progress make their greatest strides when people are secure and free to think, speak, worship, choose their own way and reach for the stars.'
In a subsequent passage that was omitted, he asked the Chinese rhetorically to ''resolve that communication, not confrontation, and commerce, not conflict, will always govern Chinese- American relations.'
However, Chinese authorities allowed Mr. Reagan's defense of continuing United States support for Taiwan. 
He said that ''we don't believe it would be right to cast aside longtime old friends in order to make new friends,'' but added that ''we will do anything we can to encourage the peaceful solution of this problem by the peoples of China'' on both sides of the Formosa Strait.
 
'Faith and Freedom' Stressed
In the passages that the Chinese removed Friday, Mr. Reagan went even further, asserting that Americans ''have drawn tremendous power from two great forces - faith and freedom.''
The President went on to speak of the importance of belief in God and American-style democracy.
A senior Chinese journalist played down the omission of these latter sections, contending that they might have been left intact if Mr. Reagan had not so conspicuously attacked the Soviet Union, even though he did not mention it by name.
However, some authorities here noted that Mr. Reagan's comments were in conflict with the Communist Government's four ''cardinal principles.''
These are adherence to the leadership of the Communist Party, the Socialist road, the people's democratic dictatorship and the official ideology of Marxism, Leninism and Mao Zedong thought.
Although China has in recent years tolerated a supervised resurgence of religious belief, the Government formally professes atheism and does not allow public proselytizing of belief in God.
Chinese officials, while defending the censorship, complained today that too much attention was being given it by Western reporters. 
Mr Qi asserted that his Government was not being ''petty'' or ''unfair'' by refusing to air all of Mr. Reagan's convictions.
 
U.S. Coverage of Zhao Cited
''I think we have given a lot of coverage to the visit and I think during Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang's visit to the United States, there wasn't so much coverage on Prime Minister Zhao's speech,'' the spokesman said in response to questions.
When an American reporter reminded him that Mr. Zhao's speech in the United States last January had been transmitted in full by the Cable News Network, Mr. Qi replied that China had only one television network while the United States had five.
By China's standards, heavy coverage has been given to Mr. Reagan's visit this week. 
Today's issue of People's Daily, the Communist Party newspaper, carried 11 articles and commentaries on Mr. Reagan's activities here, including a lengthy transcript of his speech Friday that nonetheless omitted the passages left out on television.
 
'Americans Are People of Peace'
In the more significant passage deleted Saturday by Chinese television, Mr. Reagan told his interviewer:
''Americans are people of peace. 
It's important you know that. 
We pose no threat to China or any nation. 
We have no troops massed on your borders. 
We occupy no lands. 
After World War II, we were the only undamaged industrial power, the only nation to harness the atom and the only people with the power to conquer the world. 
But we didn't conquer anybody.
''We used our power to write a new chapter in history by helping rebuild the war-ravaged economies of both friends and foes. 
We love peace and we cherish freedom because we've learned time and again in place after place that economic growth and human progress make their greatest strides when people are secure and free to think, speak, worship, choose their own way and reach for the stars.''
