
President Reagan's visit to China represents a ''significant step forward'' in relations between the two countries, but Taiwan remains a major obstacle, the official New China News Agency said today.
''Reagan's six-day state visit to China is viewed by observers here as having broken ground for an enduring and steady growth of Chinese-U.S. relations,'' the press agency said in an analysis issued hours after Mr. Reagan left China.
The agency said the visit produced concrete results, ''the most important of which, as both sides noted repeatedly, was the direct contact and dialogue between leaders of the two countries.''
New China News agency reports Pres Reagan's visit to China represents 'significant step forward' in relations between two countries, but Taiwan remains major obstacle; agency analysis says visit is viewed in China as having broken ground for 'enduring and steady growth of Chinese-US relations' (M)
It said both countries demanded that Vietnamese and Soviet occupation forces in Cambodia and Afghanistan be withdrawn.
But China took exception to the stationing of United States troops in South Korea and asked Mr. Reagan to take measures to relax tensions on the peninsula, the agency said.
''Reagan explained the U.S. position on nuclear disarmament, while the Chinese leaders called on both the U.S. and the Soviet Union to resume their negotiations and reach agreement as soon as possible on taking the lead in halving their present nuclear arsenals,'' it said.
 
Mideast Policy Assailed
Chinese leaders also called on Mr. Reagan to ''stop backing Israel's expansionist and aggressive'' policies and demanded that the United States ''refrain from meddling in the internal affairs of Central American countries.''
''During his China visit, Reagan stated repeatedly that he hoped to see the establishment of an enduring partnership of mutual trust between the U.S. and China,'' the agency said.
''This fine sentiment was naturally welcomed by the Chinese side. 
But Chinese leaders made it clear time and again that the major barrier to further growth of Chinese-U.S. relations remained the Taiwan question.
''Unless this question was resolved, no relationship of mutual trust could be formed on a solid foundation.''
The commentary said Mr. Reagan has not taken ''effective measures'' to cut United States arms sales to Taiwan as required under a 1982 joint communique.
''On the contrary, he repeated his earlier statement that 'we don't believe that it would be right to cast aside long- time old friends in order to make new friends.'
''
''In a word, President Reagan's trip to China and his reiteration here of his commitment to abide by the Chinese- U.S. joint communiques represented a significant step forward,'' the agency said.
