
After the replacement of Hu Yaobang as Communist Party leader, China's intellectuals were warned today that the recent atmosphere of freer expression and discussion would be sharply curtailed.
A long report in China's major newspapers quoted several leading officials in the Academy of Social Sciences as saying all debate among intellectuals must take place under ''Marxist guidance.''
[About 400 Chinese students in the United States were said to have risked the wrath of the Beijing Government by signing a statement condemning the dismissal of Mr. Hu.
Page A9.]
A report today by the New China News Agency quoted Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang, who has replaced Mr. Hu as party leader, as saying the new leadership would leave China's basic policies unchanged.
''The personnel change will not affect our line and policies, but will enable us to implement them more correctly,'' Mr. Zhao reportedly said today in a meeting with Havasi Ferenz, a member of the Hungarian Politburo.
''We will continue the policy of opening to the outside world,'' the report continued. 
''We will expand, not reduce, our cooperation with foreign countries in trade, economic, technical, monetary and other fields.''
Mr. Zhao was quoted as saying the relentless attacks on intellectuals in the press in the last three weeks would not mushroom into a destructive campaign of political retribution such as China has seen many times in the past.
But in today's newspaper reports, Hu Sheng, the chairman of the Academy of Social Sciences, said, ''Some people have used the open policy and the situation of letting 'one hundred schools contend' to preach bourgeois liberalism, refute socialism, advocate total Westernization and lash out at party leadership.''
 
'Hundred Flowers' Revived
Last summer, as economic initiatives promoted by Mr. Deng seemed to begin bogging down, Communist Party leaders revived a 30-year-old slogan -''Let a hundred flowers bloom, let a hundred schools of thought contend'' -in an effort to loosen the ideological bonds that hobbled intellectual and artistic expression.
The slogan, first made by Mao in 1956, bore with it for intellectuals the memory of the subsequent harsh retaliation against those who questioned party rule. 
But the latest appeal was answered with a flood of articles discussing alternative political ideas, Western economic theory, experimental drama and fiction that portrayed the starkness and anguish of modern life. 
For a time, there seemed little that could not be discussed openly.
Mr. Hu, who was abruptly replaced as the party's General Secretary on Friday, was regarded as a principal defender of the freer intellectual climate.
Since the student demonstrations that swept China over the last two months, the official press has lashed out at intellectuals who advocated ''bourgeois liberalization,'' a pejorative phrase for any statements regarded as critical of the state or the Communist Party.
 
Dissident Ideas Intolerable
Today's newspapers made it clear that dissident ideas were intolerable.
Jia Lin, a philosopher at the academy, was quoted as saying: ''Some people take letting 'one hundred schools contend' as meaning that Marxism is just one of the contending schools. 
This denies Marxism as the theoretical basis for guiding our thought.''
