
A few colored windows cast glowing rainbows across the bare stone floor of the Xujiahui Catholic Cathedral in southwestern Shanghai. 
The windows look like traditional stained glass, but their panes have been fashioned from plastic by Catholic priests who made plastic umbrella handles during the grim years of the Cultural Revolution.
Militant Red Guards smashed the original windows. 
They pulled down the twin spires, too, destroyed the bells, burned the wooden altar and turned the Gothic-style cathedral into a food warehouse.
SHANGHAI - A few colored windows cast glowing rainbows across the bare stone floor of the Xujiahui Catholic Cathedral in southwestern Shanghai.
After official tolerance for religion was revived, repairs got under way in 1980 and services resumed. 
This Christmas bells chimed out from the restored 170-foot towers for the first time in 16 years as worshipers packed into the cathedral for mass.
 
Chinese Tradition Put First
The plastic windows, rebuilt from the materials at hand to evoke a more eternal beauty, are symbolic of the Catholic Church that has survived in China today.
''China's Catholic Church is working according to Chinese tradition first, then according to Catholic doctrine and to the Scripture,'' said the Rev. Shen Baozhi, a 57-year-old priest at the cathedral who also serves as secretary to Shanghai's 90-year-old bishop, Louis Zhang Jiasu.
To survive under Communism, the Chinese church broke with the Vatican in 1957 and since then has rebuffed overtures for a reconciliation. 
It functions under state auspices as the Patriotic Catholic Association, having consecrated over 60 of its own bishops without Rome's permission.
The State Council's Administration of Religious Affairs, which watches religion for the Peking Government, estimated that there were as many as three million Catholics and 700,000 Protestants in China, as many as when the Communists took over in 1949. 
This would still amount to little more than a third of 1 percent of the population.
 
Support for the Communists
Michael Fu @Tieshan, who was consecrated as Bishop of Peking three years ago, described his church's position of accommodation with the state in a recent interview.
''We believe in God but at the same time we are citizens of the republic,'' Bishop Fu said. 
''We support the Communist Party but of course we don't believe in atheism. 
We love the socialist motherland and our faithful contribute to the socialist construction of the country.''
In return for such loyalty, the regime of Deng Xiaoping has permitted 11 Catholic churches to open in the Shanghai area alone, where Father Shen says there are 100,000 practicing Catholics and 45 working priests. 
Two Catholic cathedrals draw worshipers in Peking. 
A 92-year-old cathedral in Canton that was also severely damaged by militants has just reopened.
In October the first Catholic seminary was set up at @Sheshan, outside Shanghai, with 36 young seminarians who needed parental permission to enroll. 
At a suburban commune near Peking six other student priests have been taking courses that include the Bible, Latin, English language, basic theology, liturgy - and politics.
 
Some Sympathy From West
Such freedom has been earned by rejecting allegiance to Rome. 
A new Constitution adopted by China's nominal Parliament this month reasserted the right of Chinese to ''enjoy freedom of religious belief'' but forbade its use for ''counterrevolutionary activities'' and, with the Vatican in mind, declared that ''no religious affairs may be dominated by any foreign country.''
Similar independence by China's Protestants has met some sympathy from Western Protestant churchmen like the Archbishop of Canterbury, who visited a Protestant seminary in Nanjing last January. 
But the schism between the Chinese Catholic Church and the Vatican seems, if anything, to have widened.
In June 1981, when Pope John Paul II appointed the Rev. Dominic Tang, a Jesuit who spent 22 years in Chinese jails, to the vacant post of Archbishop of Canton, the Catholic Patriotic Association rejected the move as interference in China's internal affairs. 
Last March it denounced the Pope for comparing the lot of Chinese Catholics with the persecution of the early Christians, with Bishop Michael Yang @Gaojin accusing the Pope personally of ''vicious slanders.''
An appeal by the Pope last month for a resumption of contacts between the Holy See and the Chinese church went ignored, as was a similar appeal last February.
 
Political Differences With Rome
Father Shen, talking in his cathedral study, mentioned the political differences with the Vatican. 
He noted that the Vatican still had diplomatic links with the Nationalist regime on Taiwan, though these are reduced to the level of charge d'affaires.
''After liberation,'' he contended, ''the Vatican ordered our Chinese Catholic Church not to love our country. 
According to the conscience of Chinese Catholicism and the spirit of God we cannot submit to the control of the Vatican.''
Chinese Catholic officials play down reports of an underground church maintaining allegiance to Rome. 
In an interview last year Bishop Ye @Yinyou of Canton conceded that one existed but that it was unimportant. 
Bishop Fu told a visitor this month that ''of course, there are a few people who are not clear about the relationship between the Vatican and themselves.''
But a middle-aged worker encountered near Shanghai suggested that a shadow church did exist. 
He was educated in a Catholic mission school, he said, and would not attend the Shanghai cathedral ''because it is against the Pope.''
Instead, he said, he and his Catholic friends held their own services at home. 
As for the religious climate, the man said: ''It is better now, but not entirely. 
I hope some day the church will be as free as in the United States.''
Father Shen, who was ordained in 1953, recalled what he and his colleagues endured in the Cultural Revolution. 
''Apart from our own suffering, the church was also damaged and the glass windows were broken,'' he said. 
''The Bibles and missals were taken out and burned.''
 
Priests Restored After '79
''With the beginning of the Cultural Revolution we were forced to stop holding services,'' Father Shen said. 
''Five of us priests got together and ran a small factory, producing Plexiglas umbrella handles to support ourselves. 
After 1979 we priests were restored to our original positions. 
So now we feel very happy and so do the other Catholics.''
Father Shen felt that it would be insulting to seek help from abroad, now that the Chinese church had severed its links with the Vatican.
''Catholicism came to China through the spirit of God,'' Father Shen said. 
''We don't agree with the idea that Christianity was brought in by foreign countries. 
It came not by the grace of foreigners, but by the grace of God.''
