
In the strongest language to date, China has described its relations with the United States as potentially unstable and attacked what it said was interference in its internal affairs.
''Over the past year or so a succession of unpleasant incidents has led to disputes which have introduced some instability in Sino-U.S. relations,'' said Huan Xiang, the director of the Center for International Studies, writing in the authoritative Beijing Review.
''The influence of destabilizing factors on the development of relations between China and the United States may haunt us for the next decade or more,'' Mr. Huan said. 
He outlined six problems in relations between the two nations, among them American sanctions for what the Reagan Administration has charged were Chinese arms sales to Iran; Congressional displeasure over China's record on human rights; Washington's continued arms sales to Taiwan and the Administration's continuing criticism of China's family planning programs. 
He also cited Congressional resolutions that criticized China's handling of demonstrations in Tibet and - in the one area where he conceded some unhappiness might be warranted - impatience with the pace of China's ''opening up to the outside world.''
'Political Blackmail' Charged
''The six problems,'' Mr. Huan said, ''amount to nothing short of interference in China's internal affairs and political blackmail. 
They are a blatant demonstration of hegemonism and represent a threat to stable Sino-U.S. relations.''
Insisting that China has not ''directly sold weapons to Iran,'' Mr. Huan lashed out at the Administration's decision to suspend consideration of further high-technology exports to China.
''This is purely political blackmail, and by no means conforms with the principle of equality in international relations,'' Mr. Huan said. 
''It is both damaging to the future of bilateral relations, as well as to the image of the United States.''
Mr. Huan also assailed the Congressional resolutions dealing with China's handling of pro-independence demonstrations in Tibet late last year, during which at least a dozen Tibetan Buddhist monks and civilians were killed.
 
Different Views of Human Rights
''Regarding American attacks on China under the guise of safeguarding human rights,'' Mr. Huan wrote, ''I must say that we define the term 'human rights' differently, according to our value concepts. 
Neither of us should force his views on the other.''
''The U.S. 
Congress is the legislative body of the United States, not of China, nor the world. 
Neither the Chinese nor the American people have authorized it to administer Chinese affairs,'' wrote Mr. Huan, a member of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress, the country's legislature.
Chinese officials and the Government-controlled press have criticized American policy toward China repeatedly in recent months. 
But Mr. Huan's essay is by far the longest and most severe assessment of the state of relations between the two countries and it employed a harshness of language not seen in some time.
In the one instance in which Mr. Huan suggested that United States criticism of China might be warranted, he wrote: ''The United States has leveled criticisms at China's bureaucracy and inadequate legislation in its work of opening up to the outside world and especially on the issue of foreign investment. 
Some of the criticisms are reasonable and China has accepted them and is ready to make further efforts to improve its work.''
