
A Chinese Army Marshal has given the first detailed account of China's abortive efforts to obtain Soviet help in developing its atomic arsenal in the 1950's and 1960's. 
In it he implies that a Chinese missile with an atomic warhead was launched and successfully detonated at a test range in Western China in 1966.
Excerpts from the autobiography of the Marshal, Nie Rongzhen, who directed China's nuclear weapons program for a decade after its inception in the 1950's, are being published in the current issue of the weekly Beijing Review.
Although the article does not specify the launching site, target site, or the distance between them, it appears to be the first authoritative account of a test in which a nuclear-armed missile was launched to detonate on a distant target.
Test missiles for other countries, including the United States, have carried nuclear weapons for detonation at high altitudes, but not to explode above targets far from the launching site.
Autobiography of Marshall Nie Rangzhen, who directed China's nuclear weapons program for decade after its inception in 1950's, offers startling account of China's first test of nuclear missile, in 1966, and appears to be first authoritative account of test in which nuclear-armed missile was launched to detonate on distant target rather than at high altitudes; Nie confirms that Moscow first agreed to transfer nuclear weapons technology, then dragged its feet and ultimately reneged (M)
The article offers a startling account of China's first test of a nuclear missile, on Oct. 
25, 1966.
 
Account of Missile Test
''I was on the scene for the first time to direct a nuclear misile test,'' the Marshal recalled. 
''It was a somewhat risky assignment because if by any chance the nuclear warhead exploded prematurely, fell after it was launched or went beyond the designated target area, the consequences would be too ghastly to contemplate.''
The Marshal said that ''to encourage confidence,'' as well as to oversee safety aspects of the test, he visited the launching site. 
''After the launch, I went to the atom bomb test base to see the results of the explosion at the designated target. 
The missile was deadly accurate. 
I was proud of our country, which had long been backward but now had its own sophisticated weapons.''
The Marshal, still a member of the ruling Politburo, did not say where the missile test occurred. 
The autobiography said that the first Chinese atomic explosion in 1964 occurred in the Gobi Desert, which, strictly speaking, would put it somewhere in Inner Mongolia. 
Chinese nuclear explosions have been reported from Lop Nor in Xinjiang, which was presumably the target site. 
[Officials in Washington say they are not aware of any live nuclear missile test by the Chinese in 1966. 
The officials said it was well known that the Chinese tested in the atmosphere for years, althought they are not conducting such tests now.] In a disclosure of interest to Western governments pondering the question of how much weaponry and other high technology to sell to China, the Marshal also revealed a directive he received from Prime Minister Zhou Enlai in 1960 saying that China should speed its nuclear weapons program by purchasing Western technology ''by all possible means,'' a term implying a readiness to evade Western export controls.
Much of the article in The Beijing Review is taken up with descriptions of the negotiations between China and the Soviet Union in 1956, when the two Communist powers were still allied. 
The 85-year-old Marshal, a veteran of the Long March of 1934 and 1935 who commanded the Communist army that took the surrender of Peking in 1949, confirmed that Moscow first agreed to transfer nuclear weapons technology, then dragged its feet and ultimately reneged.
On this point, the Chinese and Soviet versions agree. 
The best Soviet account was given by Nikita S. Khrushchev in his autobiography, ''Khrushchev Remembers,'' published in the West in 1974. 
The former Soviet leader said that Soviet engineers and scientists got to the point of packing up a prototype atomic weapon for shipment to China, but that the Soviet Politburo met and decided to withhold the weapon. 
''We didn't want them to get the idea that we were their obedient slaves who would give them whatever they wanted,'' Khrushchev wrote. 
The agreement on atomic cooperation between the two countries was rescinded by Moscow in 1959, a move that hastened the deterioration in relations that led to an open break the next year.
Marshal Nie, as China's Deputy Prime Minister for science and technology, dealt directly with Khrushchev. 
The Marshal recalled Mao Zedong saying after the agreement was broken that Khrushchev ''should get a one-ton medal'' for having forced China to go it alone as a nuclear power. 
That approach produced the first Chinese atomic explosion on Oct. 
16, 1964.
The Chinese leaders' eagerness to join the nuclear club is evident in several anecdotes included in Marshal Nie's article. 
He said that Chen Yi, an Army Marshal who became Foreign Minister in 1958, argued after the Soviet pullout that ''even if we had to pawn our pants,'' China should develop a nuclear arsenal so it could stand on equal terms with other nuclear powers.
Marshal Chen's arguments were made at a time of a double blow to the nuclear program. 
When the Russians abrogated their aid agreements, China was in the midst of a famine that fell on the country in the wake of Mao's ''great leap forward,'' an economic program that ended in disaster. 
Marshal Nie said that some members of the leadership, whom he did not identify, argued that the costly nuclear weapons program should be abandoned.
''In the light of these problems, we were not sure if we should continue our scientific research projects and try to manufacture sophisticated weapons, especially missiles and atomic bombs,'' the Marshall said. 
''It was a difficult decision. 
As for me, my opinion was always clear. 
To get rid of imperialist bullying, which China had suffered for more than a century, we had to develop these sophisticated weapons.''
Marshal Nie recalled hearing from Marshal Chen that, as Foreign Minister, he felt he lacked weight in international forums without nuclear weapons. 
''He told me humorously many times that as Foreign Minister he felt he couldn't straighten his back,'' Marshal Nie said.
According to Marshal Nie's account, the first Chinese approach to Moscow in 1956 was met with demurral. 
After a Deputy Prime Minister, Li Fuchun, visited Moscow and requested aid, the Russians agreed to train a maximum of 50 Chinese technical personnel, but withheld any commitment to help build weapons. 
Marshal Nie said this was a blow to China's hopes.
''We were really in a quandary,'' he said. 
''According to the experts, it was no problem for Chinese engineers to design the propulsion systems and aeromechanics of a rocket like the U.S. 
Honest John. 
The problem lay in the complicated electronics, precision instruments and sensitive meters.''
China responded to the Soviet rebuff by launching its own program. 
But Marshal Nie said the Russian attitude began to change after October 1956. 
Although he did not mention it, this was the time of the 20th Congress of the Soviet Communist Party at which Khrushchev denounced Stalin and began putting policies of his own into effect. 
The result was a 1957 meeting in Moscow at which Marshal Nie secured a Soviet agreement to assist in developing Chinese nuclear missiles.
 
Limited Aid From Russians
The Marshal said that the Russians were poor partners from the start, limiting their assistance to ''a few outdated missiles'' and other equipment that helped China but fell far short of a whole-hearted effort to pull Peking into the nuclear club. 
Moreover, the Marshal said, ''even this help didn't last long,'' and collapsed completely when the broader relationship between the two nations foundered amid ideological hostility in 1960.
''The Soviets wanted to leave China at a stage where we could only replicate what they made, keeping us dependent and several steps behind their own development,'' the Marshal said.
In the wake of the Soviet pullout and the food shortages of 1960, the Marshal said, the Politburo decided to cut back on other research programs and on conventional weapons spending to push the nuclear program.
The Marshal makes much of the speed with which Chinese scientists developed and tested the first atomic bomb, only eight years after first envisioning a nuclear program and four years after embarking on a all-out effort of their own. 
The explosion of a hydrogen bomb on June 14, 1967, meant that China had moved to the more powerful type of weapon in only three years, compared to the 10 years taken by the United States and the Soviet Union, he said.
