
China today moved closer to becoming a mixed economy by formally acknowledging a need for more private enterprise to alleviate its chronic unemployment problem.
The country's two top policy-making bodies, the Communist Party Central Committee and the Government, proposed in a joint decision that new jobs be created increasingly by private businesses as well as by collective, or cooperative, enterprises.
The decision, reached Oct. 
17 but made public only today, signaled a change in the Communist Chinese position of the last three decades that the state owes every able-bodied adult a job.
''Under the state's overall planning and guidance,'' the joint decision said, ''people get jobs arranged by labor departments or get organized on a voluntary basis or find jobs themselves.''
China's Communist Party Central Committee and Government acknowledges need for more private enterprise to relieve nation's unemployment problemsDetails of New Program
In the decision, China's leadership asserted that the state-run and cooperative sectors would still constitute the basic form of economic activity in the nation but said they needed to be supplemented by self-employment ''within a certain limit.''
To encourage private enterprise, every self-employed person in China will now be permitted to have two helpers and five apprentices, according to today's announcement.
Originally, upon the Communists' takeover of China in 1949, private enterprise was permitted on a very small scale. 
An entrepreneur was allowed to employ only members of his family. 
About a year and a half ago, an entrepreneur was permitted to add two apprentices and later five apprentices in certain trades. 
The new decision, by allowing a total of seven employees, will help Chinese to set up larger retail businesses.
''Private business has resumed and expanded, but it still does not meet the needs of the country's national economy,'' said the decision, which was circulated today by The People's Daily and the New China News Agency.
 
Extent of Unemployment
Although the precise extent of urban unemployment is unclear, previous articles in the ideological journal Red Flag and elsewhere have suggested that about 10 million Chinese were unemployed at the end of last year, out of an urban work force of approximately 115 million.
The Chinese authorities had hoped to find 10 million new jobs this year, which would still leave about 4 million unemployed because that many people are expected to finish school and seek jobs. 
But indications are that there will be no more than 7 million new jobs.
Only 10 of China's 29 provinces, municipalities and autonomous regions have managed to find jobs for all those who left high school before 1979. 
Of the remaining 19, there are 14 that hope to reach that target by the end of the year, according to a report last month.
Facing a wait of several years for jobs, some young people have started devising their own work, initially by repairing bicycles, tailoring, taking photographs and other relatively simple neighborhood trades.
 
Preference for State Jobs
At the end of last March, more than 1.26 million Chinese had registered as self-employed, according to the General Administration for Industry and Commerce. 
Just over half of these were in the major cities. 
Canton, for example, has reported having 14,000 self-employed persons, 48 percent of them youths.
But more young Chinese seem to prefer jobs in the state sector, where they are guaranteed a job for life without having to work very hard. 
Recognizing this preference for what is nicknamed the ''iron rice bowl,'' the decision that was announced today urged that the new approval of private enterprise be widely publicized ''to allay people's misgivings.''
Private businesses have proved useful for China's leaders because they not only reduce the pool of unemployed but also provide services that state-owned businesses have been too inept or unwilling to provide.
The new decision also envisions a ''significant expansion'' in the number of cooperatives, in which workers form an enterprise and split the profits. 
These function much like cooperatives in freeenterprise countries. 
But young Chinese have sometimes been wary of joining cooperatives because their job tenure and pension benefits are not assured.
 
Helping People Find Work
According to the State Bureau of Labor, there are now 2,300 labor service companies helping young people in China to find temporary jobs in state factories or to set up their own cooperative enterprises. 
The new decision today proposes that more of these offices be encouraged.
A Chinese labor specialist, Kang Yonghe, reported last month that the labor service companies had found jobs for 2.35 million Chinese in more than 32,000 cooperatives.
In the joint decision, the Government and Communist Party leadership said that restrictions on private and cooperative enterprise should be changed and that self-employed people should be treated with as much political respect as workers in state enterprises.
But the decision added that self-employed and cooperative workers should accept state supervision and abide by the state's policies and laws. 
There was no mention of whether such workers would be included in the social welfare benefits that state-employed workers enjoy.
 
Peasants' Separate Status
The announcement does not appear to affect China's 800 million peasants, who live on communes and state farms, although Peking has also encouraged them to take more responsibility in the last few years.
China's leadership has attributed the unemployment problem to the radical leftist rule of the Cultural Revolution. 
During this period, from 1966 to 1976, schools were closed and millions of young people were sent off to work in rural areas. 
This created a tremendous labor surplus when they later returned home to the cities, and some have been sent back to the countryside.
In the last three years, Peking says it has found jobs for 20 million people.
