
China's participation in a world's fair for the first time since 1904 has produced a dramatic exhibit that grew out of difficult negotiations that came within a breath of failure.
Visitors to the China pavilion at the World's Fair here seem unanimously fascinated with the artifacts and handicrafts, the hundreds of elaborate carvings in jade and ivory, the hand-painted porcelain, the tapestries and silks and carpets.
In the views both of the Chinese and world's fair officials, it is just that fascination that placed paramount importance on China's participation in the 1982 international exposition.
''What the presence of the People's Republic of China did was to position us as a world class event,'' S.H. 
Roberts Jr., the president of the fair, said in an interview today.
KNOXVILLE, Tenn., May 4 -China's participation in a world's fair for the first time since 1904 has produced a dramatic exhibit that grew out of difficult negotiations that came within a breath of failure.
The pavilion is easily the most heavily visited one at the fair. 
The Chinese estimate that at least half of the quarter-million people who have turned out for the first four days of the fair have been through the China pavilion.
Virtually everything inside the pavilion is available for purchase, even the most intricate and expensive objets d'art. 
''That Chinese exhibit is fantastic,'' said Ed Shoch, a 72-year-old Pennsylvanian. 
''It's beautiful and the prices are very reasonable.''
Rhonda Higgins, of Three Rivers Mich, said, ''I was interested because they have people doing the Chinese needlework without a pattern. 
I couldn't believe it.''
Mr. Roberts and other fair officials decided at least four years ago that the involvement of either China or the Soviet Union was crucial to the fair's success. 
Although the Soviet Union was invited, it chose not to participate.
 
Need for Major Exhibition
In a report on the financial feasibility of the fair, Economics Research Corportion, a consulting concern, had concluded that ''a major exhibition provided by a foreign world power,'' was crucial to the fair's success.The consultants said attendance would be greatly enhanced ''if the exhibition is from a nation with which we have only limited cultural exchange,'' and added, ''The U.@S.@S.@R. and the People's Republic of China fit this description.''
For China's part, said Lu Fengchun, commissioner general of the pavilion, the exposition was an opportunity for his country to expand its ''policy of open-door economics'' that began in 1979 when diplomatic relations with the United States were established after 30 years without such ties.
''We need to have many experiences from foreign countries,'' he said through an interpreter in an interview. 
''We have much to learn from other countries, especially in economic matters.''
He stressed the ''progress of relations'' between China and the United States since the initiation of friendship in 1972, and said, ''This world's fair is a good place to introduce China to the American people.''
 
Hope for Future Exchanges
''A bridge of friendship between China and the United States was connected in 1979,'' he said, ''and we hope that through this bridge the two countries will strengthen the friendship and continue to have an exchange of economics, technology, culture and trade.''
A bridge to other nations is also on the minds of the Chinese. 
''This fair is called a world's fair, so a lot of countries are participating,'' Mr. Lu said. 
''They will display their contributions and technologies here and we would like to share ours for the benefit of mankind.''
Apparently, it was a fear that their exhibit might not compare favorably with those of other nations that caused the Chinese almost to reject the invitation to participate.
According to Mr. Roberts, the initial video presentation to the officials in Peking in the fall of 1980 led them to say that ''it involved more than they had thought and that they would need help in order to participate.''
 
'Negative Signs' From Chinese
What Mr. Roberts described as ''difficulties in communication'' plagued the prospect of Chinese participation for much of last year. 
Not only did the fair send a team to Peking a second time, but the Chinese sent a delegation to Knoxville in February 1981 to review the fair site. 
Still, for much of the year, ''we would get negative signs from time to time,'' Mr. Roberts said.
President Carter brought up the subject of the fair with Chinese officials on his visit to China after his election defeat. 
Howard H.Baker Jr. of Tennessee, the Senate majority leader, discussed the subject repeatedly with officials in the Chinese Embassy in Washington.
One fair official said that the Chinese three times declined the offer to participate in the fair, but Mr. Roberts disagreed. 
''We got awfully close to being turned down a few times, but it never got to be official,'' he said. 
''One time, Senator Baker had a meeting with the Chinese Ambassador and prevailed on him to hold off a denial.''
 
Agreement Is Reached
Finally, after three days of negotiations again in Peking, the Chinese agreed to come to Knoxville. 
The fair officials agreed to pay for shipping the large exhibit to the fair, to pay for some basic construction changes in the pavilion and to provide technical assistance in preparing the exhibit. 
The cost to the fair was more than $1 million.
''They had concerns about how they would present themselves in a show this large and lasting this long,'' Mr. Roberts said of the Chinese officials. 
''We think we made a great investment.''
