
For all the controversy over the earlier censorship of some of his televised remarks, President Reagan appears to have created a positive impression among many Chinese.
An educated young man who watched a broadcast of President Reagan's speech on domestic television Friday night remarked how much more confident he seemed than the Chinese leadership.
''Reagan looks up and talks to his audience,'' the young man said. 
''He is not like our leaders, who look down and just read from their papers.''
President Reagan, visiting China, appears to have created positive impression among many Chinese; interviews with Chinese people indicate his skill as great communicator has served him well in China; photo (M)Thousands Line the Streets
Monday, hundreds of thousands of curious Chinese lined the streets of Shanghai to watch his motorcade go by, and the turnout testified to the interest that has been generated by the first visit of an incumbent United States President since Chinese- American relations were established more than five years ago.
But interviews with more than two dozen Chinese in Peking and Shanghai suggest that many people have been interested not only in what he had to say but how he said it. 
Indeed, President Reagan has shown that his skill as a great communicator at home has served him as well here in China.None of those interviewed seemed aware that Mr. Reagan's implicit criticisms of the Soviet Union and his affirmations of God, capitalism and Western-style freedoms had been deleted from his remarks that were subsequently televised to an audience estimated at more than one million people on Friday and Saturday nights. 
A student said he thought one speech had been abridged but had not wondered what was in the missing parts.
 
Looking for Practical Results
The students at Fudan University who listened to Mr. Reagan Monday seemed to be mainly interested in the practical ramifications of closer cooperation between China and the United States. 
Many educated Chinese hope that increased contacts will accelerate the infusion of United States technology that China wants for its modernization drive.
''We think Reagan's visit is good because it will help develop economic relations on both sides,'' said a science undergraduate who was one of 700 students, mostly from the Communist Youth League, who were selected to attend Mr. Reagan's university speech. 
''It will be beneficial and open more opportunities for Chinese students to go and study in the United States.''
A couple of other Fudan University students said Mr. Reagan's visit had produced some immediate dividends: the university authorities had allocated money to renovate the auditorium where the President spoke Monday and to spruce up the campus.
 
Limited Exposure to China
Just as Mr. Reagan's brief sojourn of six days has given him a limited exposure to China, not unlike that of any tourist, so the issues that Mr. Reagan discussed with the Chinese leadership have been filtered through the official press, giving Chinese a selective acquaintance with his views.
The press has reported Mr. Reagan's pledge that the United States would adhere to its commitments in the three joint communiques that recognize a one-China policy. 
A Chinese journalist said Mr. Reagan's visit, for all its glamour, would have to be measured in retrospect by progress on the Taiwan question.
Most of the Chinese interviewed answered questions on such political issues as if they were being tested on their knowledge of People's Daily. 
''The Chinese people warmly welcome his visit to China,'' recited a telecommunications engineer. 
''It will play an important role in relations between our two peoples.''
 
Flattered by Use of Proverbs
Several Chinese said they were flattered by Mr. Reagan's frequent use of Chinese proverbs, which were supplied by United States specialists on China and subsequently put back into Chinese by the translators.
''It seems that he understands China very well,'' said a cheerful clerk sitting behind the counter of one bookstore. 
''He quotes our proverbs very well.''
Despite the substantial publicity given to Mr. Reagan's visit in the press, some people paid it little or no attention. 
A grizzled peasant visiting from the countryside acted startled to discover that President Reagan was indeed in China. 
And an army officer used the conversation to reminisce about the ''excellent performance'' that he had seen an American basketball team give in China.
Though Mr. Reagan clearly generated good will among the Chinese, several of those interviewed indicated that they were waiting to see what emerged from his visit.
''I think that Reagan understands the situation in China better now,'' said a woman who is a coal industry technician.
''The visit is successful, but some things that Reagan has said should be realized through his actions,'' her husband added. 
''
