
China's Foreign Minister indicated today after a week of talks with the Soviet Union that Soviet military forces on China's frontiers were still ''subjects of major disagreement.''
The Foreign Minster, Wu Xueqian, also said he was planning to meet in New York with Foreign Minister Andrei A. Gromyko of the Soviet Union during the session of the United Nations General Assembly. 
Mr. Wu, who spoke before it was announced that Mr. Gromyko would not go to New York, will himself be leaving for the United Nations on Tuesday. 
He is scheduled to meet with Secretary of State George P. Shultz.
Chinese Foreign Min Wu Xueqian, commenting after week of talks with USSR Min Mikhail S Kapitsa, reports major disagreement persists concerning USSR forces along Chinese frontier; also notes issues of USSR intervention in Afghanistan and support for Vietnamese intervention in Cambodia; sees some improvement in US relations but warns US must cut Taiwan arms sales (S)
Mr. Wu spoke at a news conference for American and Canadian reporters the day after the departure of a Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister, Mikhail S. Kapitsa.
The talks Mr. Kapitsa had with Mr. Wu and with Deputy Foreign Minister Qian Qichen were seen by foreign diplomats as evidence of China's interest, despite its distrust of Soviet military strategy, in seeker better relations.
The Foreign Minister responded to one of several written questions at the news conference by saying that he saw ''signs of some improvement'' in relations with the United States. 
But he added that all the hopeful communiques would ''amount only to scraps of paper'' if the United States did not act on its stated intention of reducing arms sales to Taiwan.
The Chinese Foreign Minister said one sign of better relations with the United States was that Washington had been willing to improve the terms of trade between the two countries.
Mr. Wu sidestepped questions on what China expected to result from the visit here next week of Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger. He said the question of arms purchases from the United States was for China's Defense Minister to comment on.
Foreign diplomats said the talks with Mr. Kapitsa, who is one of the Soviet Union's specialists on Chinese affairs, had focused on what China considered to be ''obstacles'' to a normalization of relations.
People's Daily, the principal Chinese newspaper, said in an editorial that Soviet SS-20 nuclear missiles stationed along China's northern border were among the unacceptable threats that the Soviet Union still posed to China's security.
The paper urged the Soviet Union to ''considerably reduce its missiles deployed in Asia.''
''China has asked the Soviet Union to remove three hurdles in the way of developing relations between the two countries,'' the editorial said. 
''One of the hurdles is the Soviet armed forces in the Chinese-Soviet and the Chinese- Mongolian border areas, and that naturally includes the missiles.''
Mr. Wu identified the three obstacles as the Soviet military presence along China's northern frontier, the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan and Soviet support for Vietnam's intervention in Cambodia.
Mr. Wu also mentioned the SS-20 missiles. 
Without linking their reduction specifically to an improvement in relations, he said the numbers of these missiles should be ''drastically'' reduced or ''destroyed on site.''
A senior Chinese journalist, Wang Fei, said, ''The Soviet Union is still considered the first threat to the security of China.''
Mr. Wang said there seemed to be some difference of opinion within the Soviet leadership about the importance of maintaining large forces along China's northern border while at the same time supporting Vietnam in its intervention in Cambodia.
In China's view, Mr. Wang said, the Soviet military supports such deployment, while Yuri V. Andropov, the Soviet leader, has yet to make up his mind.
Mr. Wang is head of the international section of the Journalists Association and a former Washington correspondent of People's Daily.
