
Raw opium grown for medical purposes in China is being stolen and smuggled out of the country to dealers in Hong Kong and Taiwan, according to a senior Chinese judicial official.
Xin Deli, deputy head of the judicial office of the Shanghai municipality, said the traffic had been discovered after the capture of some Hong Kong smugglers in possession of the drug, which is the base for morphine and heroin.
''They confessed the raw opium came from China,'' he said. 
Mr. Xin said the opium poppy was planted in some parts of China for medical use. 
''Some people get it and sell it to people from Zhejiang and Guangdong for high prices and then it is resold outside China,'' Mr. Xin said.
Chinese official reports opium grown in China is being smuggled to Hong Kong and Taiwan'Limited Quantities' of Opium
He added that ''limited quantities'' appeared to be involved and that the stolen opium was believed to come from the southern province of Yunnan, a traditional opium-growing area bordering Vietnam, Laos and Burma that has illegally exported it in past years.
Zhejiang lies just south of Shanghai and is reported to have a flourishing smuggling trade with Taiwan, while Guangdong borders the British colony of Hong Kong.
Hong Kong's Narcotics Commissioner, Peter Lee, recently expressed fear that a bumper opium harvest in the area where Burma, Laos and Thailand meet, known as the Golden Triangle, would result in more drugs in the colony.
Although the authorities virtually eliminated drug use in China after the Communist victory in 1949, visitors to Yunnan report that opium smoking is still practiced to a limited extent among hill tribes in isolated parts of the rugged province but that it does not appear to be a serious problem.
 
No Reports in Press
The Shanghai official said there was no drug problem in his city, China's largest, although some unofficial sources have spoken of drug use by young people in some urban areas.
The unofficial sources added that there were heavy penalties for drug use. 
The fact that there have been no reports of a drug problem in the Chinese press, which usually publicizes antisocial activites as a warning, indicates that there is not a serious problem.
Mr. Xin said the main smuggling trade along the South China coast was in commodities such as tape recorders, watches and other consumer goods that are scarce on the mainland.
The Chinese usually exchange gold and precious objects for the goods, with fishermen from Taiwan and the mainland the main intermediaries along the coast.
Smugglers using high-speed boats have also been reported in waters around Hong Kong and the mainland. 
The People's Daily reported in January that Chinese customs officials along the south and southeast coastlines seized goods worth $16 million last year, a threefold increase over 1979.
