
China has issued unusually sharp criticism of Japan, saying through its official press agency that Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone's official visit last week to a shrine for Japanese war dead ''pandered'' to those who wanted to expunge Japan's war guilt.
The statement, published Thursday by the New China News Agency, came a week after Mr. Nakasone and most members of his Cabinet made the first official visit by Japanese Government leaders to the Yasukuni Shrine in Tokyo. 
The visit coincided with the 40th anniversary of Japan's surrender in World War II, a war in which China has put its dead at more than 20 million.
The visit had been criticized in much milder terms by a Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman on the day before it occurred. 
There was speculation here that the Peking authorities had held off for a week with the stronger criticism so as not to obtrude on the grief in Japan last week over the crash of a Japan Air Lines airliner. 
But the delay appeared to have done little to blunt Chinese feelings.
China's official press agency says Prime Min Yasuhiro Nakasone's official visit to shrine for Japanese war dead 'pandered' to those who want to expunge Japan's war guilt; says Japanese official statements on visit sought to 'obscure' war that was 'unleashed by the Japanese militarists' (M)
''The Chinese people and Government have cherished the hope that the Japanese Government will bow to the historical facts and take an unequivocal stand on that appalling war of aggression and on where the guilt and responsibility lie,'' the press agency said. 
''To their deepest disappointment and regret, the Japanese Government decided, for the first time since the end of the war, to pay an official visit to the shrine.''
 
'Mockery' of Asian Sentiments
The commentary said Japanese official statements on the visit ''impress one with the intention to obscure more or less the wicked nature of the war of aggression unleashed by the Japanese militarists - an intention that makes a mockery of the sentiments and aspirations of the Chinese and other Asian peoples.''
It added, ''In making the decision, the Japanese Government has pandered to and has actually emboldened those in Japan who have always wanted to deny the aggressive nature of the war and to reverse the verdict on Japanese militarism long condemned to the dustbin of history.''
Although commentaries by the New China News Agency lack the authority of an official Government statement, the wording left no doubt that the agency spoke for the leadership, whose principal members, including Deng Xiaoping, the paramount leader, fought as guerrillas against the Japanese occupation forces in China. 
The Chinese leaders are planning their commemoration of the war's end at a mass rally in Peking on Sept. 
3.
To some, the criticism of Japan Thursday was reminiscent of a dispute three years ago when China angrily objected to what it called distortions and euphemisms in new Japanese textbooks about the wartime occupation of China. 
Japan promised that changes would be made in the new books.
Before the visit last week to the shrine, official commentaries on the war anniversary here had angled toward China's concern for a friendly relationship with contemporary Japan.
 
Tojo and Nanking Massacre
That the visit had touched a raw nerve was still more evident in a commentary published Thursday in the official English-language newspaper, China Daily. 
A regular contributor to the paper, who uses the pseudonym Tong Gang, took a strongly emotional line, saying the visit outraged people of his parents' generation, who still ''curse the war, the Japanese invaders and their leaders, such as Hideki Tojo.''
In the Foreign Ministry statement last week, and again in the New China News Agency article Thursday, the Chinese said General Tojo was among those whom Mr. Nakasone was honoring by visiting the shrine. 
General Tojo, who was Prime Minister at the time of the Pearl Harbor attack, resigned in 1944, was later tried as a war criminal by the Allies and was executed in 1948. 
China Daily linked him to the ''Nanjing massacre'' of December 1937, in which China says the Japanese killed 300,000 people.
