
China is displaying fresh irritation with the United States over what Peking feels is Washington's failure to bring about a quicker resolution of their longstanding differences on Taiwan.
Peking appears concerned that the abrupt resignation of Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. and Washington's preoccupation with the Lebanon crisis may be undercutting its efforts to get the Reagan Administration to end the delivery of aircraft and other weapons to Taiwan.
This unhappiness has become apparent in prominent articles in the Chinese press over the last week. 
The Chinese leadership also seems worried that conservatives in the United States are exploiting the vacuum created by Mr. Haig's departure to revive support for the Nationalist regime on Taiwan. 
Peking insists that Taiwan is a part of its territory and that the United States accepted this when it established diplomatic relations with China.
PEKING, July 13 - China is displaying fresh irritation with the United States over what Peking feels is Washington's failure to bring about a quicker resolution of their longstanding differences on Taiwan.U.S. 
Blamed for Strains
The recent articles, which appeared in People's Daily, Beijing Review, the magazine Fortnightly Talk and the Journal of International Studies, all blamed the United States for the strains in relations over Taiwan.
Taken together, they amount to the harshest criticism of the United States since before the visit of Vice President Bush early in May. 
Today, People's Daily devoted a full page to reprinting the 10,000-character article that appeared in the Journal of International Studies. 
The article ostensibly reviews American attitudes toward Taiwan over the last 140 years.
The article was also circulated in full by the New China News Agency, complete with 43 footnotes. 
It had already been excerpted in the last two issues of Beijing Review. 
Such historical scholarship is employed in the official press to give more weight to the leadership's views.
 
No Direct Comment on Haig
Though Peking has not commented directly on Mr. Haig's resignation, there has been apparent unease over the departure of a man whom one Chinese editor characterized earlier as China's best friend in the Reagan Administration.
The evident fear is that his successor, George P. Shultz, will concentrate on the crisis in Lebanon and other immediate problems, while neglecting the negotiations over the Taiwan arms issue that have gone on quietly through the United States Embassy here.
On Monday, People's Daily accused American conservative ''diehards'' of trying to undermine the talks and resurrect the old two-Chinas policy. 
The New China News Agency leveled similar accusations against the conservatives on Sunday.
Several Western diplomats here have noted that with a crucial Communist Party congress planned this autumn, China's foremost leader, Deng Xiaoping, may feel he is under mounting pressure from his own conservative critics to explain why his overtures to the United States have not halted its military sales to Taiwan.
 
Deng Could Force a Showdown
This could prompt Mr. Deng to force a showdown with Washington on the Taiwan issue, the diplomats speculate, to protect other vulnerable aspects of his foreign and domestic policies.
Today's article in People's Daily, as reprinted from the Journal of International Studies, charged that the United States had coveted Taiwan since the 1840's but had been too busy expanding across the American continent.
Japan's seizure of Taiwan in 1895 frustrated American designs and set the stage for the eventual conflict between the United States and Japan in Asia, the article said.
While the United States agreed that Taiwan would revert to China after World War II, it later began looking for ploys to control the island, the article went on. 
It charged that President Harry S. Truman used the Korean War as a pretext to send a fleet into the Taiwan Strait to prevent the island's reunification with China.
 
Taiwan Relations Act
With American influence declining in the world, the article explained, ''realistic United States statesmen'' changed their policy and acknowledged that there was only one China and that Taiwan belonged to it.
''It took the United States rather long to recognize such an obvious fact,'' the article said. 
''Nevertheless, better late than never. 
It is precisely on this point that China and the United States established diplomatic relations.''
However, it complained, some American politicians pushed through the Taiwan Relations Act, under which the United States kept supplying military arms, ''which means that it is unwilling to stop its interference in China's internal affairs.''
In a conclusion that capsuled the message, the article remarked: ''It is inconceivable that the Chinese people, who have paid such high prices for the ending of national humiliation, would tolerate for long the continuation of such a state. 
But it is conceivable what a difficult situation the United States will find itself in if it clings to its policy, which was already discarded in its heyday.''
 
Little Room to Maneuver
The future of Chinese-American relations depends on whether American policy makers are ready ''to learn from history, throw off their heavy burden and catch up with the tide of the times,'' the article ended.
Another commentary in Fortnightly Talk maintained that the visits of Vice President Bush and Senator Howard H. Baker Jr. of Tennessee, the majority leader, had produced no breakthrough on the Taiwan issue. 
It reiterated a contention made earlier by Chinese officials that ''there is not much room left for China to maneuver'' on a principle affecting its sovereignty.
While the Chinese hinted last spring that they might agree to seeing American arms deliveries to Taiwan phased out, the latest round of articles has not suggested any flexibility. 
China had formally protested the Reagan Administration's decision earlier this year to sell military spare parts to Taiwan but did not move to retaliate by downgrading diplomatic ties.
Peking has also signaled a chill in relations by reverting to its old characterization of the United States as a superpower together with the Soviet Union.
