
China has decided to link production and possibly prices of a wide range of goods to market demand in a major capitalistic reform that will partially dismantle its system of centralized planning, reports said today.
The state-run China Daily said state production quotas will be removed next year for more than half of the nation's agricultural and industrial goods, and instead production would be determined wholly or partially by market demand.
''Industrial products under centralized state planning will be reduced from 120 to 60 and agricultural and sideline products from 29 to 10,'' the English-language newspaper said.
''The freed enterprises will set production according to general guidelines or market demand instead of state quotas as at present,'' the article said. 
China Daily said the measures were announced during the weekend.
It said those products which remained under centralized state control would be sold at prices fixed by the Government.
Chinese officials have hinted that this month's Communist Party Central Committee plenum is likely to approve a major overhaul of the pricing system to ease the heavy burden of state subsidies.
Western diplomats said the announcement represented a major capitalistic shift.
''When they start talking about relying on market forces, they're talking about price reform,'' one Western diplomat said. 
''But what we don't know is how much they will allow prices to rise. 
I don't think they would allow more than a 10 percent hike.''
He said allowing individual enterprises to set production totals was something of a gamble in a country where all such policy decisions have been made by the state.
''Most of these factories haven't got a clue about what the market will bear,'' he said. 
''Maybe five percent of the people in this country have even a rudimentary knowledge of market research. 
It's going to be hit and miss for awhile, that's for sure.''
China Daily said the state would continue to set production quotas for several industrial items, including coal, oil, rolled steel, non-ferrous metals, timber, cement, chemical fertilizers, synthetic fibers and cigarettes. 
In agriculture, the state would continue to set quotas for cereals, cotton, edible oils, tobacco, jute, pigs and some aquatic products.
