
China has adopted a wide-ranging package of educational policy changes designed to bring schooling more into line with the country's pragmatic economic goals.
The move was seen as a further downgrading of the educational system developed under Mao Zedong.
A party directive published Wednesday provides more autonomy for colleges and universities, expansion of technical and vocational training and more leeway for private schools.
Universities and colleges will be encouraged to develop academic exchanges with foreign countries with money raised on their own. 
Nearly 30,000 students are now abroad.
China adopts wide-ranging package of educational policy changes designed to bring schooling more into line with country's pragmatic economic goals; directs that secondary education be made universal throughout country by 1995; Deng Xiaoping, country's leader, has repeatedly called for improvements in technical and scientific education (M)
Although the directive credited Communist rule since 1949 with ''unprecedented achievements,'' it also veered further away from the ideological and egalitarian system that was developed under Mao toward an approach that has been influenced by Western precepts.
Deng Xiaoping, the country's leader, has repeatedly said that improvements in education, particularly in technical and scientific education, are indispensable if China is to achieve his goal of catching up with the economic standards of the West by the middle of the 21st century.
The party directive said the educational changes were intended to train millions of ''independent thinkers and bold trailblazers'' to push the modernization program. 
It cited the need for a new generation of industrial managers, engineers, agronomists, accountants, scientists, educators, doctors, journalists, lawyers and diplomats, as well as ''party and government personnel.''
The party document made little of the aspects that Mao considered fundamental. 
Carried to extremes in the Cultural Revolution from 1966 to 1976, these precepts virtually destroyed China's educational system, with the result that millions of young people now in their 20's and 30's lost most or all of their schooling.
The pragmatic tone of the directive was evident in the approach to secondary education. 
Although 95 percent of the children now attend six-year primary schools, only two-thirds go on to the additional three years of secondary education. 
The total nine years of schooling is now to be made universal in large cities and in coastal areas by 1990, and elsewhere in China proper by 1995. 
Officials at a news conference said remote areas in the west would have to work toward that goal in accordance with ''their own conditions.''
These phases conform to the policy of giving priority to economic growth in coastal areas and other parts of China proper rather than to the undeveloped western regions. 
They also depart from the Maoist principle of giving at least equal treatment to rural areas. 
The pattern of allowing some elements of society to advance more rapidly than others has been a common thread in Mr. Deng's stewardship since 1978.
Another Deng theme, the need to ease the bureaucracy's grip on Chinese life, found its echo in the educational package. 
The document said that ''over-strict control has stunted the vigor'' of education, particularly at the college level. 
Accordingly, it gave greater autonomy to the 900 universities and colleges in admissions, curriculum, administrative appointments and scientific research.
Another break with Maoist policies was that all but a few exempt categories of students will have to pay for tuition. 
The previous free tuition is to be replaced by a system of stipends and scholarships, and students are to be encouraged to take part-time jobs.
Exceptions will be made for those in teacher training, those volunteering for hardship posts in remote areas after graduation and those from exceptionally poor families.
At the secondary level, the biggest change is to come in the shift toward more vocational and technical training. 
According to officials, this will mean increasing the proportion of students in the vocational stream to 50 percent by 1990, from 32 percent at present. 
Part of the burden will be absorbed by a new generation of private vocational schools that have sprung up under Mr. Deng.
