
With a major Communist Party congress scheduled for autumn, the Chinese leadership has been swinging the country back toward its old orthodoxy, with new constraints on foreign contacts and study abroad and a revival of ideological attacks on Western values.
The sour mood developing over the last few months evokes the xenophobia that existed in China before Peking opened its doors to Western influences in the mid-1970's. 
Some diplomats are finding unofficial access to the Chinese people increasingly difficult. 
One European journalist with several tours in China calls the climate the tightest he has seen since before the death of Mao Zedong in 1976.
PEKING, July 30 - With a major Communist Party congress scheduled for autumn, the Chinese leadership has been swinging the country back toward its old orthodoxy, with new constraints on foreign contacts and study abroad and a revival of ideological attacks on Western values.
This all seems to be linked to the 12th Party Congress, at which Deng Xiaoping, China's foremost leader, is expected to try to purge the policy-making bodies of Maoists and supporters of Hua Guofeng, whom he ousted as party chairman last summer. 
Chinese sources expect the congress to begin sometime in September.
 
A Protective Maneuver?
Consequently, some Western diplomats speculate that Mr. Deng is using the crackdown to protect his agricultural and economic programs from criticism, since ideological hard-liners fear that his open-door policy of trade with the West is letting in bourgeois ideas that will corrupt the Chinese people.
''The influence of decadent capitalist ideology on certain people, the ideological poisoning it causes and the pollution it produces in the social mood are now much greater and more serious than in any previous period,'' the Weekly Digest said last month.
Such statements in the official press, which inveighs against what the ideological journal Red Flag called ''the corrosive influence of capitalist ideas,'' suggests that positions are already being staked out before the congress.
One Western European diplomat also views such ideological attacks as a ramification of an anticorruption campaign that was begun earlier this year and now appears to have bogged down.
 
Foreigners as Scapegoat
The campaign against economic crime never reached the higher echelons of the party and the Government, despite public expectations, and the diplomat said he believed foreigners were now being made a scapegoat because of internal resistance.
''The argument is that corruption isn't basically Chinese and wouldn't exist but for foreign influence,'' the diplomat said. 
''They don't admit that it takes two to make a bribe.''
The most visible sign of the times here has been what another Western diplomat called ''a fairly extensive clampdown'' on unauthorized contacts between Chinese and foreigners. 
Circulars have gone out warning Chinese not to mix socially with foreigners. 
Some Chinese who have Western friends have been summoned for police interrogation, according to the friends.
Foreigners teaching English at some institutes in Peking have been shifted out of communal dormitories into segregated quarters where their students need written permission to visit them.
 
Warnings to Schoolchildren
The warnings against foreigners have extended to schoolchildren. 
Ideological guidelines recently promulgated for primary schools by the Ministry of Education instruct third-graders to be wary of foreigners and not to follow them about or accept presents readily.
The case of Lisa Wichser, an American teacher detained and expelled early last month for allegedly stealing state secrets, has been introduced in political study sessions, according to a Chinese student, with an implication that all foreign teachers are possible spies.
Miss Wichser's ''state secrets'' were unpublished economic and agricultural statistics that she had collected for a doctoral thesis. 
Her friend, Yi Xigong, is now in jail here.
Since April 1, the children of high-level Government and party officials have been effectively barred from going abroad to study. 
The unpublished directive, which is understood to apply generally to the children of officials with the rank of deputy minister and above, has reportedly engendered resentment because Mr. Deng and other leaders sent their children abroad before it went into effect. 
Mr. Deng's son is studying at the University of Rochester.
Other Chinese graduates wishing to study abroad must now work for a year before applying, when they will presumably be more ideologically mature. 
In another indication of concern about Western influence, some returning students are being sent through ''reorientation'' courses lasting up to eight weeks, according to a Peking source.
 
No Effect on Delegations
The latest prohibitions on foreign travel do not seem to affect official delegations visiting the West. 
A United States Embassy spokesman said the number of Chinese going to the United States on official business rose 54 percent in the first six months of this year over the same period last year.
But delegations are evidently being told to stick together to avoid bourgeois contamination. 
The Workers Daily earlier this month severely criticized several members of a Chinese delegation who split off to enjoy the seamier sights of Hong Kong.
A renewed obsession about state secrets, which in China means whatever the Government chooses not to publish, was evident in an interview with Deng Yingchao, the widow of Prime Minister Zhou Enlai, which Peking newspapers published on July 1, the 61st anniversary of the Chinese Communist Party.
Miss Deng was quoted as saying that she and her husband never discussed classified information with each other and that Mr. Zhou never let relatives and friends into his private office. 
One Western diplomat inferred from this that some other officials probably do, to show off their status.
 
'The Sacred Duty'
''Keeping party and state secrets is the sacred duty of every Communist Party member, especially of middle-level and senior officials,'' Miss Deng was quoted as saying.
There has also been a campaign against so-called Western ''pornography,'' which includes rock music tapes as well as racier videotapes and books. 
According to news reports, some young people in Peking and Shanghai were punished for dancing at ''obscene'' private disco parties earlier this year. 
And Canton residents last month were ordered to pull down thousands of ''fishtail'' antennas, which let them watch Hong Kong television.
Such bans reflect a fear within the Chinese leadership that exposure to the West will undercut the appeal of the Communist Party, which already suffers from credibility problems with youth.
The Weekly Digest, a sister publication of The People's Daily, warned in an article last month that ''external reactionary forces'' were waging a campaign of ''peaceful evolution'' to blur the distinctions between capitalism and Marxism and that Chinese students abroad were a main target.
The article went on to label as ''sinister'' such Western ploys as academic and scientific exchanges, foreign radio broadcasts and publications aimed at ''shaking the faith of our younger generation in the party's leadership and the socialist system.''
It remains unclear how long the crackdown will prevail. 
''I don't think it will last beyond the party congress,'' a Western diplomat said. 
But another took the crackdown as proof that the headier days of post-Mao liberalization were over.
The crackdown seems bound to discourage news leaks at the congress, which should be preceded by a closed meeting of the Central Committee. 
Earlier this year, a Chinese editor, Li Guanyi, was sent to prison for five years for divulging details of last summer's session to a foreign journalist.
