
Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang told the Chinese people today that his Government's economic initiatives would continue. 
But he denounced ''pernicious'' Western ideas and demanded a tight rein on intellectual and artistic expression.
In the opening address to the National People's Congress, the country's legislature, Mr. Zhao acknowledged serious economic problems, including low productivity, widespread inefficiency, trade and budget deficits and runaway spending on construction projects.
The speech offered the first broad insight into both the Government's economic plans and the political temperament since the ouster of Hu Yaobang as leader of the Communist Party in mid-January in a campaign against Western ideas and values.
The 2,719 delegates to the People's Congress, gathered in the Great Hall of the People for a 16-day session, applauded as Mr. Hu strode onto the stage in his first public appearance in three months. 
On Tuesday a spokesman for the National Peoples Congress said Mr. Hu had been re-elected to the 157-member presidium.
The spokesman, Zeng Tao, also said the assembly would not name a new Prime Minister despite the fact that Mr. Zhao holds both the senior Government and senior party posts. 
Mr. Zeng said there would be no major changes in China's leadership at least until September, when a Communist Party congress is scheduled.
 
Many Difficulties Remain
Prime Minister Zhao, in his nationally televised address, said, ''We must be keenly aware that we still face many difficulties in our advance and that our work is not free from mistakes and problems.''
In addressing those difficulties, Mr. Zhao said, the nation must dramatically increase agricultural and industrial output, stem the increase in consumer spending and maintain Marxist political orthodoxy.
He said Government spending will be cut by 10 percent from last year's expenditures and investment in projects like hotels and office buildings will be reduced.
Nonetheless, Mr. Zhao insisted that China's economic initiatives, intended to infuse the economy with Western management techniques and market mechanisms, would continue, although he acknowledged that some would be slowed.
Since January, a group of hard-line party leaders, represented most prominently by the chairman of the National People's Congress, Peng Zhen, have spoken repeatedly about the need for caution in pursuing the economic program and have urged a reassertion of some traditional socialist economic practices, such as a renewed emphasis on central planning.
 
A Sartorial Contrast
Mr. Zhao, in a light gray suit, blue shirt and dark tie, provided a sartorial contrast to Mr. Peng, seated on his right in a dark blue, high-collared Mao jacket.
The Prime Minister urged the fulfillment of what he called the ''two major tasks'' for the coming year: to ''increase production and practice economy'' and to ''combat bourgeois liberalization,'' the catch phrase for Western political and ethical ideas.
In outlining the economic program, Mr. Zhao stressed the need to increase agricultural output, particularly grain production. 
Hard-line leaders have expressed dissatisfaction with with the growing number of peasants who, instead of rice and wheat, are growing vegetables or other crops that can be sold on the free market at higher prices.
Mr. Zhao devoted a significant portion of his speech to ideological questions and repeatedly denounced the intrusion of Western ideas into China. 
''Immense efforts must be made to eliminate the pernicious influence of this erroneous ideological trend,'' he said.
