
For nearly a decade the United States and some of its principal NATO allies have sought to sell arms to China. 
Recently they have been joined by Japan.
Success in the form of large, long-term contracts has proved elusive; of 25 major negotiations since 1972, only nine have resulted in sales.
Drew Middleton's news analysis of arms sales to China by U S and NATO allies notes Soviet protest to Britain on proposed Britain- China arms sale
Intelligence agencies in the West say that the Chinese need modern arms and have needed them since the late 1960's, when the last weapons delivered by the Soviet Union moved toward obsolescence. 
But two American scholars, Dr. William T. Tow and Dr. Douglas T. Stuart, concluded in a recent study that although in this decade China can be expected to acquire NATO and Japanese weapons systems gradually to maintain ''a minimum defense posture,'' the shopping list will be limited by ''overall economic constraints and by the low priority accorded to defense by the current Peking leadership.''
In addition to a scarcity of foreign exchange, a serious obstacle to modernization is resistance in the Communist Party and the army to the acquisition of new equipment. 
Many senior officers and party officials, it is said, are convinced that if the Russians invade they will only be ''drowned in the human sea'' of a billion Chinese.
 
Inspection Teams Sent
Peking's practice has been to send inspection teams to the United States, Western Europe and Japan to study the weapons systems most appropriate to Chinese needs. 
A small quantity of weapons or of dualpurpose equipment such as Boeing 747 jet transport planes is then purchased so that the Chinese can develop their own models.
The study reported that in some instances Peking used a so-called reverse engineering method, buying, for example, 10 Boeing 707 jets, stripping them down and building its own versions, meeting particular needs and responding to production limitations.
Arms transfers from the West have been almost negligible when China's requirements and the scale of Soviet forces on its frontier are considered. 
In 1978 it bought 600 antitank missiles from West Germany, about two days' supply for a division in modern war. 
Two years later Marconi, a British company, sold it five sets of fieldartillery-control equipment.
Chinese military doctrine holds that a large helicopter force would be essential in meeting Soviet forces invading along a number of routes, but the number purchased would hardly suffice. 
So far the Chinese have bought 80 French helicopters, 8 American helicopters and an undisclosed number of West German craft.
 
Soviet Protest to Britain
The Soviet Union has been highly sensitive to the development of arms deals between members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and China. 
When Britain and China were conducting negotiations on the Harrier jet fighter, Leonid I. Brezhnev, the Soviet leader, wrote to Prime Minister James Callaghan and other NATO heads of government warning that sales of such weapons would harm relations with the Soviet Union.
West Germany has been the most wary of offending the Russians in this area, probably because of the thriving West German-Soviet trade. 
China's interest shifted from the Harrier to the Tornado supersonic fighter co-produced by Britain, West Germany and Italy, but the TowStuart study expressed doubt that Bonn would agree to a sale to Peking ''because of its determination to avoid the wrath of Moscow.''
An interesting aspect of China's reluctance or inability to ''buy big,'' in the view of Western analysts, is that its need for advanced weapons has increased since it reopened trade with the West.
