
A Communist Party official in Guangdong Province was dismissed from his job at a petroleum plant and expelled from the party recently for ''feudal thinking'' after he and his wife - they already had six daughters -tried once more to produce a son.
Elsewhere in this coastal province, two women were locked up for 15 days as ''sorceresses'' for inciting pregnant women at their farm commune to flee from family-planning workers. 
All but 9 of the 325 women with unauthorized pregnancies were later given abortions and intrauterine devices.
Those incidents, reported by the Canton radio, are but two skirmishes in a desperate battle that the provincial authorities have been waging over birth control. 
Harsher reports reaching Hong Kong last summer charged that thousands of pregnant women in eastern Guangdong were rounded up and forced to have abortions.
China's birth control goals are meeting stubborn regional resistance
Family planning officials deny that such Draconian tactics are being used. 
But they acknowledge that there is stubborn resistance among Guangdong's 58.8 million inhabitants to the national goal of a one-child family.
An expanding population is the biggest obstacle that China confronts in its push to modernize itself. 
With close to one billion people, China accounts for 23 percent of the world's population but has only 7 percent of its arable land. 
It is estimated that 30 percent of China's national income has been spent raising those born since the Communist takeover in 1949. 
China has adopted a stringent birth control policy. 
Yet a baby is born in China every two seconds.
With half of the population still under 21 years old, a worrisome new baby boom looms as more Chinese approach marriageable age. 
China hopes to hold its population to 1.2 billion by the year 2000, but national family planning officials like Chen Muhua have expressed apprehension over whether this target can be met.
Graced with a lush terrain and warm climate, Guangdong Province is one of China's three most densely populated provinces. 
Its population exceeds that of France, though it is little more than a third as large.
After Mao Zedong's assurance that a large population was ''a good thing,'' Guangdong reached a staggering 4.4 percent annual growth in 1962. 
This has since been brought down, but it still failed to hold to last year's goal of 1.3 percent, instead exceeding 1.5 percent.
Compared with a growth of 1.4 percent in all of China last year, the population of the United States rose by less than 1 percent and that of the Soviet Union by eight-tenths of 1 percent. 
The populations of all three countries have roughly doubled over the last 60 years, but only in China, because of the large number of people involved, has birth control been adopted as an official policy.
The population of China grew from an estimated 476 million in 1920 to 971 million in 1980, in an area of 3.8 million square miles. 
In comparison, the United States, with an area of 3.02 million square miles, had a population of 227 million in 1980. 
The Soviet Union, with an area of 8.6 million square miles, had a population of 265 million that year.
 
Incentives and Penalties
Discussing the continuing increase in population in China, Li Hanbo, the deputy director of Guangdong's family planning program, said:
''One of the reasons for a high growth rate is that we have too many families having three or more children.''
Last year, he said, only 27 percent of families took the pledge to have just one child, while 24 percent already had three children or more.
Local legislation augmenting the national family planning directives has given Guangdong some of the strongest incentives and penalties in China. 
Late marriages are encouraged, for example, and students who marry face expulsion from school.
Counties and municipalities set annual quotas for the number of babies who may be born. 
A couple wanting a child must apply for an allotment, with women who marry late getting first priority.
Couples taking the pledge to have just one child are issued pocket-size plastic-bound certificates entitling them to priority for housing and medical care and their child to free kindergarten, schooling and health care. 
If they have a second child, they must reimburse the Government for all the benefits and bonuses.
The system works best in the overcrowded city of Canton, where, Mr. Li said, ''90 percent of families have just one child and very few have three children.''
 
Mobilizing the Whole Family
In Canton's downtown district of Yuexiu, Huang Pei, the local family planning director, said that nearly 94 percent of the women of childbearing age were limiting themselves to one child. 
Consulting her small blue notebook, she noted that her district recorded 951 abortions last year, of which at least 80 were beyond the fourth month of pregnancy. 
Asked whether abortions were allowed even in the final month of pregnancy, she said, ''It happens.''
Miss Huang said her teams ''conduct painstaking and careful ideological work 10 or even 20 times on a person'' to dissuade a mother from having another child. 
''We mobilize everyone in the family, not just mothers and fathers but also brothers, sisters and so forth,'' the district director said.
Zhang Zhi, director of the Wuyang Electric Fan Factory, said his 263 employees of childbearing age had been allocated the right to have 18 babies this year. 
''We've had two so far, and five more women are pregnant,'' Mr. Zhang said. 
Among its other incentives, he said, the factory rewarded single children of employees with cash presents on holidays.
''In the countryside, the situation is just the other way around,'' sighed Mr. Li. Peasants have clung to a tradition of having large families to help them in the fields and to support them in old age. 
''The biggest problem is the old habits and customs of 7,000 years,'' explained Miss Huang. 
''They put too much emphasis on having sons.''
 
Undercut by Recent Policies
Mr. Li conceded that family planning had been undercut by recent changes in agricultural policy that paid farmers more if they produced more. 
In Guangdong, as elsewhere in China, this has made having children profitable again. 
Without the former policy of work points, Mr. Li said, ''production brigades and teams have no way to punish them if they have more children.''
He added, ''Farmers feel that the land belongs to them and children belong to them too, so they can have as many as they want.''
Peasants are tacitly allowed to have two children but not three. 
''Many families in the countryside want a second child if the first is a girl,'' Mr. Li explained. 
''Our provincial office shows great sympathy because they do have a practical problem. 
It is difficult for the family to manage if there is only one girl. 
We have not proclaimed this as a policy, but if it happens in the grass roots, we would not object. 
But if the second child is also a girl, they have to accept it.''
Mr. Li said family planning workers commonly spent three or four months persuading a couple not to have more children. 
''On the average, each person takes 10 times to be persuaded,'' Mr. Li said. 
''The most difficult person can take up to 100 times.''
On their visits, he said, some workers were cursed or even beaten up by peasants.
The authorities have been accused of playing rough in return. 
Last July, Zhengming, a Hong Kong publication sympathetic to the Peking Government, gave what it said were details of a ''ruthless struggle'' under way in Guangdong's Huiyang prefecture to cut the number of expected babies by 47,000.
 
Zeal of Local Officials
A reporter from Zhengming who visited eastern Guangdong reported how vigilantes abducted pregnant women on the streets and hauled them off, sometimes handcuffed or trussed, to abortion clinics. 
Other women, he said, were locked in detention cells or hauled before mass rallies and harangued into consenting to abortions. 
The reporter referred to ''aborted babies which were actually crying when they were born.''
Zhengming attributed such coercion to the zeal of local officials pushing to meet their quotas rather than to explicit directives from above. 
It noted that the ''desired results'' of achieving 47,000 fewer births went conspicuously unreported by Southern Daily, Canton's party newspaper.
Mr. Li said enemies of family planning had exaggerated or distorted the facts. 
He cited a case in Enping county in which two policemen hitched a ride with a truck carrying women off to a clinic to get contraceptives and this was ''misunderstood'' by spectators. 
In Dongguan county, he said, a young man, seeing pregnant women going off for abortions, had tugged at the arm of a plump friend, though she wasn't pregnant, and this joke started ''rumors.''
''There is no question of forcing pregnant women to have an abortion,'' Mr. Li said. 
''We first persuade them to take contraceptive measures so they will not produce more children. 
If they have just one child after marriage, it's reasonable. 
We deal mostly with couples having two children. 
After three children, we demand that they take sterilization measures. 
If they refuse, we must devote more time and more people to come to them.''
 
'A Few Stubborn People'
Mr. Li referred to ''a few stubborn people refusing to do what should be done, adding, ''If we don't take harsh measures, the majority would not be happy about it.''
Those with one or two children can have their wages cut 10 percent or more if they keep having children. 
There have been reports of recalcitrant couples having their electricity and water cut off. 
The authorities are even empowered to seize the family television set, bicycle or sewing machine.
''We set a time limit,'' Mr. Li said. 
''If they fail, the punishment will be upgraded. 
If some families can't afford cash, we will take away their property, because if we are not severe on these people, the majority will not be satisfied.''
Even so, he said, some peasants feel that the potential earning power of sons could offset any financial penalties.
Of some 7 million women of childbearing age in Guangdong, 600,000 had reported abortions last year. 
Unofficial estimates indicate that abortions exceeded the number of live births. 
A Canton physician told a foreigner of abortions being performed on the delivery table.
But a single or double intrauterine coil of stainless steel wire is the most prevalent birth control device. 
After being fitted at local clinics, some women have tried to take the coils out. 
In Longchuan county, Mr. Li said, one woman's husband tried to remove the device, and she began hemorrhaging so badly that she had to be rushed to the hospital. 
''We deliberately publicized the incident to warn other people,'' he said.
 
Sterilization Is Promoted
Attempts to promote sterilization have been more successful with women than with men. 
At the Daxin Handicrafts Factory in Canton, Zhang Yunfang, head of the local women's organization, said the factory director and the party secretary, both women, ''set a very fine example'' for the employees by undergoing sterilization. 
They were followed by 29 other women and one man.
''In the feudal system of imperial China, they had eunuchs in the courts,'' Mr. Li said. 
''So some men feel that sterilization will affect their sex life. 
The women also worry that their man's physical health will be affected.''
This year, the growth target for Guangdong is again 1.3 percent, slightly higher than the 1.2 percent national rate, and officials will feel even more pressure to meet it by whatever means. 
The alternative, officials like Li Hanbo point out, is a runaway population subsisting on resources insufficient to maintain, let alone improve, the living standard.
Mr. Li observed that it cost more to prevent a birth in Guangdong than to raise a rural child to the age of 15, an expense reckoned at about $865. 
The hope in the countryside, he said, is to get half of the families to have only one child and the rest not to have three or more.
''Though that's the case, the ideological work is still hard,'' Mr. Li said. 
''There are still cases of some families having four, five, six children and even more.''
Some party workers, he reported, ''say that we have had many difficult things since liberation, but this is the most difficult.''
