
China appears likely to default for a second year running on its commitment to buy at least six million tons of American grain under a 1980 agreement, according to Western diplomats here.
As it did last year, China is blaming United States textile policies that it contends are discriminatory, though the 1980 treaty contains no linkage between grain and other products.
This time, the Chinese Government is angry about new United States regulations that textile imports must come under the quota of the country where they originate and not an intermediate country where the imports are processed. 
It has demanded compensation for losses incurred by not being able to have Chinese-made apparel finished in Hong Kong.
The United States Government has agreed to consult with China on its complaint after the November elections, according to the Western diplomats, who declined to be further identified. 
The new rules, which were sought by United States manufacturers, have drawn protests from other exporters besides China, as well as American retailers.
(In Washington, an Administration trade official confirmed that discussions with the Chinese were planned.)
 
No Sanctions in Treaty
So far this year, China has bought only half as much United States grain as it promised to purchase and has shipped even less. 
The Chinese-American agreement, which was signed in October 1980, commits the United States to sell, and China to buy, six to eight million tons of wheat and corn annually through 1984. 
It does not, however, provide for sanctions in case of violations.
China bought only 3.8 million tons of grain last year, but promised to make up the shortfall this year. 
This adds up to an obligation to buy and ship more than eight million tons of grain in 1984.
According to United States Department of Agriculture statistics, China had bought 4,196,700 tons of wheat as of Sept. 
20 and shipped only 3.16 million tons. 
To meet its pledge, the Chinese Government would have to ship nearly five million tons more within the next three months.
It has shown no sign of doing so and economic analysts here believe such a task would now be impossible.
 
Different Motives Seen
Some diplomats in Peking are skeptical about China's declarations that its purchases of United States grain are being reduced to retaliate against the textile import policies.
They believe that China has cut down its purchases at least in part because recent bumper harvests, caused by rural reforms that reward peasant productivity, are meeting more of its domestic needs.
''It has nothing to do with textiles,'' one Western diplomat insisted. 
''The Chinese don't shoot themselves in the foot if they can help it.''
A front page article in the People's Daily newspaper today reported that the harvest of summer grain, mainly wheat, would rise by four million tons in 1984 because of good conditions.
This tallies with Western estimates that China's wheat production would increase from 81.4 million tons last year to about 85 million this year.
China has also diversified its imports by buying cheaper grain from Australia, Argentina and Canada. 
Western diplomats say that the Chinese have ignored a provision of the Chinese-American grain treaty obligating them to scale down purchases proportionately from other countries if they buy less American grain.
A Host of ComplaintsChina has regularly faulted United States trade restrictions for its failure to buy all the grain that it promised. 
Last year, it held back until the two had reached a new treaty on textile quotas more favorable to Peking.
Earlier this year, Chinese officials attributed the slow rate of grain purchases to the lack of a new maritime agreement giving Chinese ships greater access to American ports. 
In fact, vessels under third-country flags have carried much of the grain.
The Chinese also complained about reports that United States grain was tainted with harmful pesticides. 
American officials visited Peking to assure the Government that none of the grain being sent was infected.
Most recently, China protested about the country-of-origin regulations, which went into effect earlier this month. 
They would prevent Chinese factories from sending half-finished apparel to Hong Kong for completion so that it could enter the United States under Hong Kong's textile quotas.
 
No New Negotiations
The United States is not in a position to retaliate against the Chinese shortfall in purchases because the grain agreement contains no sanctions to punish violations by either side. 
Nor can Washington threaten to hold back future deliveries, because there is a glut of grain on the world market.
(Grain trade analysts in Washington said that the drop in China's purchases of American grain would probably be offset somewhat by an increase in grain sales to the Soviet Union, which has maintained an unusually strong buying pace in the last three months. 
But with large supplies of wheat already in storage in this country and another large corn crop expected, any decline in foreign purchases will be felt in this country's grain markets, they said.)
The Western diplomats said that no efforts had been made to negotiate another Chinese-American grain pact after the current one expires at the end of December.
China has canceled orders for 675,000 tons of United States grain in the last four months, according to the Agriculture Department figures. 
It has further canceled orders for 150,000 tons of American grain to be shipped in 1985, after the current four-year treaty expires.
Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang told American correspondents here before he visited the United States last January that China was willing to buy six million tons of grain this year if no other problems arose in the future. 
Chen Muhua, China's Minister for Foreign Trade and Economic Relations, reportedly gave similar assurances when she went to Washington in May.
As a result of China's failure to buy American grain, estimates of the trade turnover this year between the two nations may be revised downward from $5.5 billion to $5 billion. 
In 1983, such trade amounted to $4.4 billion.
U.S. Agrees to Talks
WASHINGTON, Sept. 
28 - The Reagan Administration has agreed to sit down with the Chinese and listen to their complaints about American restrictions on imports of textiles sometime after the elections, a trade official said today.
