
An American-educated student was convicted in Shanghai today of conducting ''demagogical propaganda for counterrevolutionary ends,'' the Government-controlled New China News Agency announced.
The student, Yang Wei, a 32-year-old molecular biologist, is the first person to be tried for counterrevolutionary acts supposedly committed in the protests a year ago.
Foreign observers were banned from observing the trial.
In recent months, the case has become a source of friction between China and the United States because of a Senate resolution calling on the Chinese Government to release him. 
In addition, a group of Chinese students in the United States signed a petition to Zhao Ziyang, the Communist Party leader, urging that Mr. Yang not be prosecuted.
 
Arrested in January
Mr. Yang, who studied at the University of Arizona, was arrested Jan. 
11 and has been detained since. 
Senior officials from the United States Government have repeatedly sought to obtain an explanation for Mr. Yang's arrest from the Chinese but have been rebuffed, according to American diplomats here.
Mr. Yang's wife is a doctoral candidate at the Baylor College of Medicine in Houston and a physician, Officials at the Shanghai intermediate court and the city's foreign affairs bureau both confirmed earlier in the day that Mr. Yang had gone on trial, but they refused to say what the charges against him were, how long the trial would last or where it was being held. 
They also refused to say when they would provide information about Mr. Yang's fate. 
But late this evening, the New China News Agency announced Mr. Yang's conviction. 
[In New York, the head of a Chinese dissident group said Mr. Yang was sentenced to two years in prison, The Associated Press reported. 
The official, Wang Bingzhang, president of the New York-based Chinese Alliance for Democracy, said he had learned of the sentenced from Mr. Yang's relatives. 
Mr. Wang called the sentence light and credited pressure from the United States.] 'Changing the System in China'
The New China News Agency said that Mr. Yang joined the Chinese Alliance of Democracy while was in the United States. 
The agency contended the group's aim was ''fundamentally changing the autocratic system in China.''
Mr. Yang was said to have written articles for the magazine China Spring, a banned publication that often attacks the suppression of human and democratic rights in China.
''After he returned to Shanghai in May 1986, the court was told,'' according to the press agency report, ''Yang was active in collecting information about students' unrest at the end of 1986 and secretly sent materials back to the headquarters of the alliance. 
He was found to have put up reactionary slogans on the campus of Fudan University on Dec. 
22, 1986.''
Last December, tens of thousands of students marched through the streets of Shanghai waving banners and calling for greater democracy in China.
