
China today issued a draft of a constitution for Hong Kong that would grant considerable autonomy in economic, trade, cultural and political affairs for 50 years after British rule ends in 1997.
''The region shall not practice the socialist system and policies, and will maintain the current capitalist system and life style for 50 years,'' the official New China News Agency said of the provisions of the draft law.
But critics of the draft said it would give China veto power over laws passed by the Hong Kong legislative body. 
They also said the draft could effectively outlaw some forms of political dissent.
The draft is the product of a three-year effort by a committee selected by China's legislators.
Despite China's assurances of autonomy, however, there is tremendous uncertainty among Hong Kong residents about China's intentions toward the regions. 
Already, thousands of middle- and upper-class Hong Kong residents have applied for immigration visas to Canada and Australia.
 
Growing Exodus of Residents
Many banks and businesses in Hong Kong are reporting difficulty in finding qualified employees to fill jobs because of the growing exodus of talented and educated young Hong Kong citizens.
The draft, officially called the Basic Law, was drawn up by a 58-member committee, including 23 representatives from Hong Kong. 
Even though all 23 Hong Kong members were selected by China, there is vociferous opposition to the current draft from some Hong Kong representatives.
Chief among the dissenters is Martin Lee, a member of Hong Kong's Legislative Council, the colony's lawmaking body.
''It's supposed to be a mini-constitution for the new administrative district of Hong Kong,'' Mr. Lee said. 
''I'm not happy with it at the moment. 
A great majority of the articles are all right, but about 10 percent are not all right.''
 
Wording of Draft Assailed
''But you're not marking an examination paper, so that 90 percent means high marks,'' he said. 
''If you're doing a constitution, if you get one thing wrong you can make the whole thing unworkable.''
Mr. Lee lashed out at provisions of the draft law that would give China the right to revise and interpret the basic law and to change or revoke laws passed by the Hong Kong legislative body. 
In addition, Mr. Lee said the wording of the current draft could effectively outlaw some forms of political dissent against Chinese policy.
''In the years to come it is possible that the central Government may push some unpopular laws into Hong Kong which should really have no place in Hong Kong,'' Mr. Lee said.
China's press agency made no reference to the views of dissenters from the draft. 
Rather, it emphasized the freedoms being granted Hong Kong in the post-colonial era. 
Chinese officials here in Beijing refused to provide a copy of the law to foreign journalists today.
 
Dealings With Other Nations
One provision of the draft that would set Hong Kong apart from the rest of China is a guarantee that Hong Kong will exist as an independent financial region.
Hong Kong is also to be allowed to set its own policies on international trade and commerce and aviation and to enter into agreements with other countries in matters of finance, shipping, communications, tourism and sports. 
The former colony will be allowed to display its own flag and seal for these purposes.
In domestic affairs, Hong Kong is to set its own educational, cultural and labor policies without interference from China.
But Mr. Lee pointed to what he said was the relatively weak set of powers to be accorded the post-colonial legislative body in Hong Kong. 
''We pass laws, but don't control polices,'' Mr. Lee said. 
''The result is that such a legislature will be unable to exercise sufficient checks and balances.''
 
A Distrust of China
Mr. Lee said the recent surge of emigrating Hong Kong residents reflected distrust of how China would treat the colony after it assumes sovereignty.
''I'm afraid this will add to the sense of unease,'' he said. 
''People go away because they don't see any possible future in Hong Kong.
''Under the formula advocated by the People's Republic itself, it is one country two systems. 
That means Hong Kong people ruling Hong Kong. 
Beijing should not send its people down to rule because they don't know anything about Hong Kong.''
