
Five masses were celebrated this morning in Holy Mary, Mother of God Cathedral, as has happened every Sunday since it reopened in November 1979. 
Hundreds of Catholics attended each mass, and many remained for religious instruction,
But the Catholicism that has come into the open again, after 13 years in the wilderness created by the Cultural Revolution and the ''Gang of Four,'' as the long historic period is called here for short, is no longer Roman.
Its priests, the youngest of whom are in their 50's, regard themselves as having been rejected by the Vatican and go their own way in a schism that the Vatican has preferred not to discuss in public. 
The Catholic Church in China no longer recognizes the authority of Rome and the Pope; Chinese priests regard themselves as ''holier'' than the Pope in ignoring the teaching of the Second Vatican Council (1962-65) and continue to sing the mass in Latin.
Article discusses Catholicism in Shanghai'Nothing Against the Doctrine'
''We do everything according to the spirit of the church and the Gospel,'' said the Rev. J. Berchmanns Sheng Pao-tse, speaking the now rusty French that all four of the cathedral's parish priests learned from their French Jesuit teachers.
Father Sheng, like the other priests here, is traditionalist not only in the language of the church but even in Chinese. 
The priests do not favor the Pinyin style of transliteration, which the Government has made official.
''We do nothing against the doctrine and ecclesiastical tradition,.''
Father Sheng said. 
''But the Vatican does not allow us to love our country,''
''Even before the liberation,'' he said, referring to the Communist victory in 1949, ''the Vatican said Catholics were not allowed to read our newspapers and Catholics should not go to work with the Government. 
The church teaches that you must love your fatherland and family.''
 
Pope's Speech Disparaged
The Vatican maintains diplomatic relations with the Nationalist Government in Taiwan, Father Sheng explained, and ordered priests here not to cooperate with their Government. 
He said he had heard about the speech of Pope John Paul II in Manila last month inviting a dialogue with China but added disparagingly: ''The Vatican speaks well, but we do not see real facts. 
The tongue is one thing, facts another.''
Despite the nationalism of the Catholic hierarchy, led by a conference of about 30 bishops under the direction of Bishop Aloysius Chang Kia-shu of Shanghai, who is 89 years old, the church suffered heavily during the Cultural Revolution and ceased to function. 
Bishop Chang, who was appointed after the break, is not recognized as a bishop by Rome, and the December 1979 consecration of the Bishop of Peking, Michael Fu Tieshan, was held invalid by the Vatican because the prelate was elected by parishioners.
Red Guards ransacked all churches, destroyed missals and priests' vestments, broke stained-glass windows and profaned the buildings by other uses. 
The 40 priests of the city and the nuns were driven from their parish houses and convents and put to work making umbrellas from 1966 until 1977. 
The missals, vestments and other religious objects that priests use today were hidden by parishioners; the clerical collars they wear are of soft cloth because the usual material is no longer available.
The priests said that the Government had made complete amends. 
''All churches are really free in China,'' Father Sheng said. 
Some of those attending mass today, including a small child, were wearing crosses. 
Last Christmas season, said the Rev. Joachim Lie, 17 people in their 20's received long-delayed baptism and about 20 children first communion.
 
Some Priests Are Jailed
A seminary is being prepared in Peking, the priests said, and for the first time priests not to be ordained by the Roman church will be trained. 
Not all Chinese priests accepted disobedience to Rome, Father Sheng conceded.
''After the liberation a few priests were against the Government and the country,'' he said. 
''They were put in prison, but after their release they were still against Government and country. 
I knew some of them, bit I don't know where they are now.''
Asked whether he appproved of the jailing of priests, Father Sheng said: ''These people stood against the law and the doctrine of the church, so they were punished and should have been. 
But we are Catholics, so we pray that God will help them repent for their sins.''
Father Sheng asserted that last year a French priest from Hong Kong visited and circulated a printed letter in Latin and Chinese signed by Agnelo Cardinal Rossi, prefect of the Sacred Congregation for the Propagation of the Faith, calling on priests and laymen not to attend church but to worship in secret.
 
Church Still Owns Properties
''The responsibility for the complicated situation is the Vatican's, not ours,'' said Father Sheng. 
He estimated the number of Catholics in China at three million. 
The church still owns extensive properties here, he said, and recently received from the Government full payment for arrears in rent accumulated during the Cultural Revolution and the ''Gang of Four,'' which are being used to pay for the renovation of the cathedral and other churches.
Protestant churches are also returning to life. 
A West German tourist reported that he was so jammed into a tightly packed, fervently singing flock of thousands this morning that he could not leave when he discovered that he, a Catholic, had entered a Protestant church by error. 
But the houses of worship whose congregations have disappeared, probably forever, serve other purposes. 
The many domes of the Russian Orthodox Church bear the wounds of crosses broken off, and the synagogue is a music conservatory.
Asked whether he thought Catholicism and Communism were compatible, Father Sheng shook his head and said: ''In China, we Catholics are not Communists. 
They are atheists.''
