
The Peking bureau chief of The New York Times was expelled from China today after being detained for nearly six days on suspicion of espionage.
The correspondent, John F. Burns, was ousted from the country for ''activities incompatible with his status as a journalist.''
The official New China News Agency said he had been involved in ''deliberately breaking into Chinese areas closed to aliens, thereby violating the law governing aliens' entry into and exit from the People's Republic of China.''
In a statement issued in New York last night, Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, publisher of The Times, said, ''We are grateful for the prompt resolution of the problem facing John Burns, though we regret his expulsion from China after so many years of distinguished reporting for The New York Times.''
Accused of 'Act of Spying'
The Chinese authorities told A. M. Rosenthal, executive editor of The Times, that they considered Mr. Burns guilty of an ''act of spying and intelligence gathering which will not be tolerated by a sovereign state.''
Mr. Rosenthal, who arrived in Peking on Saturday with the newspaper's foreign editor, Warren Hoge, said of Mr. Burns: ''I believe in his innocence of any espionage and intelligence gathering.''
The Times editors were told by the Chinese authorities today that Mr. Burns and an American traveling companion had broken into ''a military restricted zone of our country'' and had taken ''numerous photographs of classified objects.''
Mr. Burns arrived in Hong Kong after being put aboard a flight of the Chinese state airline that left Peking at 9:30 A.M. (8:30 P.M. yesterday, New York time). 
His wife, Jane Scott-Long, and their two children, Jamie, 5, and Emily, 2, were allowed to remain in Peking for the time being.
Mr. Burns said by telephone from Hong Kong that he had been taken from his cell to another area of the prison where a brief deportation order was read to him in Chinese and English. 
He said the statement asserted that he had ''engaged in espionage'' and had ''endangered the security of the People's Republic of China.''
Mr. Burns said the trip out of which the charges grew had been ''a legitimate journalistic venture.''
 
First Accusations
Until today, Mr. Burns, who spent most of his incarceration incommunicado in a small cell, had not been accused of any offense. 
On Monday he was allowed to see his family, British and American Embassy officials and his editors.
Mr. Rosenthal voiced regret over Mr. Burns's expulsion, adding, ''We'll soon be asking the Foreign Ministry to accredit another New York Times correspondent to China.''
He said he had been assured by the authorities that the newspaper would be allowed to replace Mr. Burns.
The last Western journalist ordered out of China was Tiziano Terzani, an Italian reporter for the West German magazine Der Spiegel who was ordered to leave in 1984 for purportedly trying to smuggle artifacts out of the country, a charge that he denied.
 
Tour of Central China
The case against Mr. Burns arose from a motorcycle tour of central China that began late last month. 
He was accompanied by Edward McNally, a lawyer on leave from the United States Justice Department to teach constitutional law at Peking University, and Zhang Daxing, who had recently returned to China after studying in the United States.
During their trip, the three were stopped by the police near the border of Shaanxi and Sichuan provinces and told they were in a restricted area. 
They were held for two days but were allowed to return to Peking after writing long ''self-criticisms.''
Mr. Burns, who said he had thought the matter had been resolved, was taken into custody for a second time on Thursday at the Peking airport as he and his family prepared to leave China on vacation. 
He was questioned at the airport for 15 hours, his home was searched and he was taken to a detention center early Friday morning.
Photographs taken on the trip were confiscated, and Chinese officials told the Times editors this morning that the materials would not be returned.
Mr. McNally had left China to attend to business in Hong Kong before Mr. Burns was detained. 
Mr. Zhang was reported to have been questioned for a day and ordered to write a second self-criticism. 
His whereabouts were not known.
Mr. Burns, who is 41 years old, was born in Britain and travels on a British passport. 
He became The Times's Peking bureau chief in 1984.
He reported from China for The Globe and Mail of Toronto from 1971 to 1975, when he joined The Times. 
He has also served as The Times's bureau chief in Johannesburg and Moscow.
Mr. Rosenthal and Mr. Hoge were informed of the correspondent's expulsion by an official named Xu Hui, who identified himself as ''the responsible official'' of the State Security Bureau. 
Mr. Xu informed them that Mr. Burns had been put on a plane to Hong Kong.
Referring to ''the Burns-McNally case,'' Mr. Xu said his Government considered the matter ''a grave one.''
He said there had been ''no action taken yet'' regarding Mr. McNally.
 
Ministry Summons Envoys
The meeting between the Chinese official and the Times editors came after earlier summonses from the Chinese Foreign Ministry to the British Ambassador, Sir Richard Evans, and the United States Ambassador, Winston Lord, as well as Mr. Rosenthal and Mr. Hoge. Three vice ministers met separately with the envoys and the Times editors.
Mr. Lord was notified by one of the ministers, Zhu Qizhen, of Mr. Burns's impending ouster. 
Mr. Lord reported the development to Washington, where a spokesman for the State Department, Deborah Cavin, issued a one-sentence statement: ''We are grateful that the incident has been resolved.''
Another official, Qi Huai Yuan, told the Times editors that he understood they had been trying to see him for several days. 
He now wanted to tell them, he went on, that they had to understand that Mr. Burns had broken the law and that the matter had to be handled according to legal procedure.
Mr. Qi said he was convinced that the case would not damage ties between China and the United States nor the relationship of The Times with his country.
In reply, Mr. Rosenthal said: ''I've said it before: I know that Mr. Burns is a newspaperman and only a newspaperman. 
He also is a good friend of China, and so is The New York Times.''
Mr. Rosenthal had previously stated that Mr. Burns had gone on his 1,000-mile journey, from June 29 to July 7, to gather material for several articles, including one for The New York Times Magazine.
