
Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang will disclose a new five-year economic plan Tuesday that is intended to increase efficiency in China's outmoded industries at least partly by increasing management initiative.
China's sixth five-year plan, whichshould have been completed last year but was delayed by policy changes, is expected to detail the nation's development priorities up to 1985.
PEKING, Nov. 
29 (Reuters) -Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang will disclose a new five-year economic plan Tuesday that is intended to increase efficiency in China's outmoded industries at least partly by increasing management initiative.
Mr. Zhao will describe the plan, aimed at quadrupling China's output by the turn of the century, in an oral report to the National People's Congress, China's parliament, which began its current annual session last Friday.
Prof. Xiang Qiyuan, deputy chief of a Government economic group, said most of China's enterprises were not run properly, largely because the management system had been borrowed wholesale from the Soviet Union.
''We are now discovering more and more that this kind of management system is not suited in many ways to our country's special conditions,'' he said in an interview. 
''This shows most clearly in the biggest sickness of our enterprises - they have no managerial initiative.''
Professor Xiang said that under the old system, successful enterprises turned all profits over to the state, receiving no direct benefit. 
This stifled management efforts to improve performance.
More than 6,000 state-run companies are now allowed to keep some profits for their own development. 
The official New China News Agency said about 3,100 delegates to the congress continued group discussions today on a new draft constitution, expected to be adopted Saturday.
The new draft reinstates clauses of a constitution promulgated in 1954 but later scrapped, saying all citizens are equal before the law. 
It guarantees religious freedom and the right to criticize Government officials or organizations.
