
Sitting at a card table in the back room of an apartment in Flushing, Queens, Wang Bingzhang does not seem a likely figure to be plotting the introduction of democracy to China.
His manner is bland, his speech quiet, even hesitant. 
But the words that mark his conversation and fill his magazine, China Spring, directly challenge the Government in Beijing.
''The Chinese leaders should remove the obstacles to political reform,'' said Dr. Wang, a 38-year-old former surgeon who defected in 1982 to found the magazine and a group called the Chinese Alliance for Democracy. 
''If they do not do it, they will fail.''
Compared with exiles who crusade against the Soviet Union's treatment of dissidents and attempts to crush intellectual debate, Dr. Wang and the others working in the Flushing office have labored in relative anonymity.
But five years after China Spring, a monthly collection of political analysis, profiles, documents and commentary, first caused a stir among Chinese scholars and students in the United States, that anonymity is being shed.
 
Denounced by Deng
In the recent crackdown on some Chinese intellectuals, Deng Xiaoping, China's paramount leader, named Mr. Wang as one of those enemies seeking to promote capitalism.
Now China Spring, which Beijing has denounced as ''politically, economically, culturally, morally and hygenically detrimental to China,'' has started publishing an English version every other month. 
The magazine's name deliberately evokes that of Peking Spring, a dissident journal that surfaced briefly in China in 1979.
With its third issue about to appear in English, China Spring has already had a ''very profound impact,'' according to Merle Goldman, a professor of Chinese history at Boston University.
Mrs. Goldman said that by publishing translations of the speeches of Fang Lizhi, a Chinese astrophysicist recently expelled from the Communist Party for advocating sweeping political changes, China Spring had helped focus attention on issues that were previously unknown or ignored.
''I've always felt that the literate public in American knows what's going on in Soviet intellectual life,'' Mrs. Goldman said. 
''When some Soviet intellectual is criticized or purged, we get all excited. 
When that happens in China, it just doesn't get the same coverage.''
About 25,000 copies of the Chinese version of China Spring are circulated outside China, according to Dr. Wang, with 1,000 more smuggled into the People's Republic. 
He counts among his writers and supporters a network of scholars, students and children of officials who supply information ''faster than you can get it from Beijing.''
He reported receiving a tape recording of a speech by Mr. Fang a week after students in Shanghai heard it.
 
Called Sensational by Some
Dr. Wang's harsh criticism of China's leaders and his publication of articles with titles like ''Massacre of the Innocents,'' referring to birth control in China, have earned the magazine some detractors outside Beijing.
Some Chinese opposed to the Communist Party have split with Dr. Wang, arguing it is better to maintain some ties to Beijing. 
And some experts have criticized the magazine's political analysis as sensational compared with older Hong Kong-based journals.
China Spring has refrained from outright editorials, but its viewpoint emerges from the articles selected: excerpts from a manuscript by an imprisoned dissident, Xu Wenli; a harsh assessment of the suicide of a Chinese geophysicist studying in Canada, strongly hinting that official pressure for her to return to China contributed to her decision; selections from student wall posters lambasting the country's leaders.
Dr. Wang has denied reports that the Taiwan Government helps finance the magazine, although he said Taiwan businessmen had been among the contributors to his group.
He said his group's ultimate goal was to form a ''third force,'' a party separate from the Communists and Taiwan's ruling Kuomintang, and then to use nonviolent means to transform the ''totalitarian system.''
Like other Chinese of his generation, Dr. Wang traces his disillusionment with the Communist regime to the Cultural Revolution. 
It crystallized, he said, during the so-called Democracy Wall movement of 1979, when public calls for democracy and freedom were briefly tolerated.
At the time, he recalled, he was studying English in Beijing, preparing to go to McGill University in Montreal for graduate work at the Chinese Government's expense.
 
Predicts More Student Protest
At first he worked underground for the democracy movement, he said. 
But after earning his Ph.D., he decided to give up medicine, came to New York and broke with the Government, becoming one of the first of thousands of Chinese students who have since elected to stay abroad.
Dr. Wang predicted that students in China, who in December and January staged anti-Government demonstrations that brought about crackdowns on dissent, were ''just waiting for another chance.''
China, he said, has become an ''ideological desert,'' ripe for turmoil once Mr. Deng leaves the scene.
''Water is accumulating in the reservoir,'' he said. 
''Either you can release the water or you can build up the dam wall. 
The conservative leaders are building the wall. 
Eventually it will collapse.''
