
The Chinese Government asked South Korea today to return its torpedo boat and its crew ''as soon as possible.''
Meanwhile, negotiations were reported to be in progress through officials that the two Governments maintain in Hong Kong.
The diplomats said the talks involved officials of the South Korean Consulate and Chinese representatives in the colony, who are headed by Xu Jiatun, director of the local office of the New China News Agency.
Chinese Government asks South Korea to return its torpedo boat 'as soon as possible'; in apparent attempt to defuse aspect that angers South Korea, Chinese Foreign Ministry acknowledges that other Chinese naval vessels had 'inadvertently' entered South Korean waters during affair (M)
Although he is not a diplomat, Mr. Xu is regarded as a powerful figure. 
He is a member of the Communist Party Central Committee and is a former party leader in Jiangxi, one of the most populous provinces in China.
The Chinese position on the return of the boat was made public after a day of diplomatic activity and appeared to have been worded to minimize potential friction. 
In an apparent attempt to defuse an aspect that angered South Korea, the Foreign Ministry here acknowledged that other Chinese naval vessels had ''inadvertently'' entered South Korean waters during the affair.
 
U.S. Attitude Is Cited
An additional indication of a concern not to allow the incident to assume wider significance was the attitude of the United States Embassy here. 
Western diplomats with knowledge of the matter said the embassy had turned down a South Korean suggestion that it play the role of ''fair broker'' because it did not wish to become involved.
The Foreign Ministry responded to initial inquiries from Western reporters here by saying that a torpedo boat on exercises in the Yellow Sea had been lost ''and we are looking for it.''
This was at about 1 P.M. (midnight, New York time), when the diplomatic contacts in Hong Kong had been under way for hours. 
More than five hours later the ministry issued an elaboration in English and Chinese that was circulated by the official press agency.
A hint of the Chinese concern to play down the incident came in the format chosen by the ministry. 
In place of an official statement like those issued on such matters in the past, it released ''remarks'' attributed to an unnamed spokesman.
Although both sides appeared eager to contain the repercussions, diplomats said it would not be easy to resolve the matter. 
They said two factors - the military aspect and the killings - made the issue considerably more complex than the hijacking of the Chinese airliner to South Korea in 1983.
Diplomats said Peking would strongly resist any settlement that did not return the entire crew to China. 
With many Chinese soldiers and seamen operating in coastal areas not far from South Korea and Taiwan, they said, the Peking leadership would be determined not to encourage other such incidents.
Furthermore, the diplomats said, the incident is likely to have a deeper effect on China's domestic politics than did the 1983 hijacking because of tensions between the party leadership and elements of the armed forces. 
Under Deng Xiaoping, the country's pre-eminent leader, the budget and influence of the military have been curbed and ideology has been downgraded in favor of military professionalism.
