
It is 5 o'clock on a misty, dewy and unusually placid August morning. 
Old men in shorts are filtering into city parks to walk their birds and young boys are crouching in the first high grass in decades in search of crickets.
As the old men walk, they swing hooded bamboo cages back and forth, left and right, simulating for their imprisoned songbirds the effect of the wind on a branch of a tree. 
To keep its balance, a bird must flex its muscles as its cage swings, thus getting exercise for singing.
James Sterba comment discusses return of leisure activities in China after Government authorized recreational pursuits for people
The boys part the grass in search of brownish-black crickets which will, when properly stimulated, fight one another. 
The proper stimulation, the old men tell the youngers, is a single mouse whisker carefully fitted into a shaved end of a chopstick.
These are traditional pursuits of leisure in China, and this summer they are the sunrise preoccupation in thousands of cities and villages across a land which, once again, has authorized leisure pursuits. 
After 32 years of what can only be called deep seriousness, a certain frolicsome spirit has returned.
With the Gang of Four dispatched to prisons for their heinous rule during the Cultural Revolution, with Mao Zedong relegated to a revised role as fallible mortal, and with Deng Xiaoping's subordinates in firm, if not entrenched control, the relaxation might seem logical.
It does not, however, seem permanent. 
There is already talk of repression of writers and artists, a renewed assault against recalcitrant Communist Party hacks and a revised campaign against a basket of evils, which will include anything the senior party leadership feels threatened by or simply does not like. 
In short, a crackdown by the party - whose 39 million dues-paying members make up a 4 percent minority of the population - looks inevitable.
But meanwhile, there is a marvelous new sensation in China of people goofing off instead of secretly loafing. 
Instead of hiding in back corridors and snoozing during lunch hours, workers are organizing card games and basketball games.
Theories about Chinese workers lacking energy are being quickly revised. 
In some city jobs, at least, workers do what they wish in their time off without fear of punishment. 
They are capable of enormous bursts of energy and enthusiasm. 
The animation and muscle used to slap a lunch-hour ace down on a card table - no gambling, of course, is allowed, wink wink - suggests that after 32 years of communization and force-fed dogma, there is still a lot of Chinese left in China's population.
A scientist walked into his office a few weeks ago and was told that he and his wife were going on a 10-day vacation at the nearby ocean resort city of Beidaihe. 
He is in his 50's and had never taken a vacation - unless, he jokes bitterly, one counts the 10 years he was forced to work as a peasant. 
His wife, from Shaanzi Province, had never seen the ocean. 
They had a wonderful time, and when they came back, he volunteered the following about China's current leaders: ''They're about the best we can expect. 
They're our best hope right now. 
I can't think of anybody who would not be worse.''
A bitter skeptic had become hopeful and grateful. 
He says he expects the party will resort to its methods of using fear to run his life, but this summer, at least, he is not so sure.
Listening to the old men who hang around the free markets where eggplants are sold and in the shade of the new highway underpasses where stories are swapped, one can learn a lot of cricket lore. 
Although revisionists say that two crickets can be provoked to fight each other by tingling their antennas with a mere feather, old connoisseurs of cricket fights contend that a mouse whisker is the only proper instrument of provocation.
Because most people could not afford the luxury of a mousetrap 30 years ago, getting a mouse whisker was not easy. 
A man who now works in a profession says that as a boy he lured an occasional foolish mouse under an old powdered milk can propped up by the end of a shoetree and baited with meat. 
He and his friends would quickly turn the can right side up and half fill it with water so the mouse couldn't jump out. 
They grasped the mouse with two sets of chopsticks, holding it up, and attempting to pluck out one or two whiskers.
The old men insist that cat whiskers are too stiff to work on cricket antennae. 
But youngsters won't listen, then and now, so there are a lot of stories about children trying to pluck a whisker from the family cat and ending up scratched.
Neither the keepers of crickets nor the keepers of birds would think of opening the cages and letting their prize pets scurry or fly away. 
The Communist Party, likewise, however loose and secure it feels this summer, is not likely to let its charges out of control. 
But in the summer of 1981, the cages at least seem to be getting larger.
