
A most unsettling thing happened one night while Shen Shiao-ming was studying at her carrel at the law library of Southern Methodist University.
''Someone knocked on my door with a long terrible white face, and long white hair,'' she recalled, ''So white, so long, it scared me. 
I thought it must be a poor American person. 
I thought I didn't get in touch with the poor people here, and now they are coming here for me.''
Shen Shiao-ming becomes first person from People's Republic of China to receive law degree from US law school
Only after she fled in horror did she learn that the ogre was a Halloween prankster, celebrating a holiday that she did not know existed. 
But keeping up with American holidays was the least of the adjustments in the last year for Miss Shen, who this month became the first person from the People's Republic of China to receive a degree from an American law school.
 
Awarded Masters Degree
For Miss Shen, law school in America meant coping with a new language, a different legal tradition and a different academic world. 
But in her 10 months here, she completed 11 courses worth 24 hours of credit to earn her master's degree in comparative laws.
Miss Shen, a 33-year-old specialist in China's new law on joint business ventures with foreign countries, also published a study on that law in the university's law journal.
Among the joint ventures between China and foreign companies that have been authorized by China's Foreign Investment Commission are an airline, several hotels and a textile corporation.
Miss Shen now plans to work with the New York law firm of Sherman & Sterling before returning to China sometime next year.
 
Education in China
Miss Shen grew up in Hangzhou, a cultural and university center of about one million people. 
She received her first degree from the Peking Institute of Political Science and Law in 1964 and completed graduate work, specializing in civil law, at the Law Institute at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences in 1967.
Her law career was interrupted for almost 10 years by China's Cultural Revolution, which virtually closed down research at the Law Institute. 
From 1970 to 1972, she and her colleagues spent their time in the countryside working with farmers, but by 1975 she was able to resume her studies in law and foreign languages.
She is now associated with the Law Institute, which is instrumental in drafting China's legislation. 
Miss Shen was involved in various projects, including research in the areas of admiralty law, trademarks and investments, and in 1978 met a delegation from the American Bar Association traveling in China.
Among the group was Beverly May Carl, a law professor at Southern Methodist University, who suggested that Miss Shen study at the university here. 
Four corporate sponsors, Hunt Oil Company, Ensearch Company, Mobil Oil and LTV Corporation, paid her expenses, and Miss Shen spent the last year specializing in law that will facilitate trade between the United States and China.
 
Differences Are Noted
''It is very different here,'' Miss Shen said. 
''Ours is civil law; yours is case law. 
And the law courses are very different here. 
Law students here study very hard. 
Every day undergraduates here have a party as if it is always someone's birthday. 
I don't think law students have so much fun. 
Maybe Friday night, they have a drink or go to a party or something, but everyone mostly just studies.''
She is also aware that lawyers here seem to be viewed with a good deal more suspicion than those in China. 
''Here someone said: 'They don't like the lawyers, but they need them. 
Everywhere they need them.'
In China, there is not such a strong feeling toward lawyers.''
Miss Shen's year at the university here has been marked by a steady stream of businesses and law firms seeking to consult with her about Chinese trade. 
Most are interested in China's trade laws, particularly its joint venture law.
