
China's highest- ranking officer was quoted today as saying that that there would be new manpower cuts in the armed forces.
The reductions, according to Yang Dezhi, Chief of the General Staff, are aimed at cutting military outlays and enhancing the economic program put into effect by the Government of the country's pre-eminent leader, Deng Xiaoping.
The planned reductions would come atop earlier personnel cuts that provoked resistance within senior ranks of the army. 
Western experts have estimated that in the late 1970's, China's armed forces had a total manpower of about 4.5 million. 
More recent calculations have placed the figure at several hundred thousand less.
Yang Dezhi, China's highest-ranking officer, says that there will be more manpower cuts in armed forces; says reductions are aimed at cutting military outlays and enhancing economic program of Deng Xiaoping (M)
Earlier this week, the authorities disclosed the retirement of 40 high-ranking general staff officers, the largest such departure in many years. 
The retirements followed insistent demands from Mr. Deng that older officers give way to ''younger and more competent'' men. 
Before that, there had been many forced retirements at middle and lower levels of the officer corps.
 
To Cut Noncombat Personnel
The additional reductions were foreshadowed by the Chief of the General Staff in a front-page interview in today's issue of the official English-language newspaper, China Daily. 
He said the armed forces should ''further streamline'' and ''reduce noncombatant personnel'' to ease the burden on the state budget and to free men for the civilian economy.
The announcement was one of a series in recent weeks that have indicated an increasing momentum behind efforts to revitalize the economy and other sectors. 
Despite resistance within the Communist Party and at upper levels of the army, Mr. Deng and his associates have pressed radical changes in industrial policy, challenged the universal validity of Marxist ideology and promised new freedoms to writers.
The moves have posed a major challenge to a military hierarchy composed mainly of officers who served in the Communist guerrilla armies before 1949. 
By reducing the manpower levels, pensioning off many of the more old-guard officers and insisting that priority be given to the modernization of weapons and battle training, Mr. Deng has reduced the enormous political influence military commanders wielded under Mao Zedong.
Mr. Deng, who holds ultimate authority over the military through his chairmanship of the military commissions of the party and the Government, has also insisted that the military budget be held down. 
The official figure rose to more than 22 billion yuan in 1979, the year of China's brief war with Vietnam, but has slipped back since then to under 18 billion yuan, about $6.4 billion at current rates of exchange. 
With important costs hidden in nonmilitary appropriations, real expenditures are be much higher.
 
Long-Term Growth Seen
Mr. Yang, the general staff chief, seemed to acknowledge the discontent that further manpower and budget reductions were likely to cause by saying the cuts would serve the military's long-term interests in economic growth, which in turn would make more money available for military modernization.
Mr. Yang, who is 74 years old, is a former infantry commander who was chief of the Wuhan military region in central China when Mr. Deng, then Chief of the General Staff, appointed a successor in 1980. 
Other Deng proteges have been moved into key positions alongside Mr. Yang, but holdovers from the Mao era remain in positions of crucial importance. 
Among these is Li Desheng, commander of the powerful northeastern military region, who has retained full membership in the party Politburo even though he advanced rapidly during the Cultural Revolution, when Mr. Deng and many of his current associates were purged.
Under Mao, the military became a semiautonomous political and economic force. 
It ran its own schools, farms, factories and hospitals, and had effective control of vast areas of the country. 
During the Cultural Revolution beginning in the late 1960's its officers left their barracks to take control of wide areas of civil administration.
Under Mr. Deng, extension of military influence over civilian life has been reversed. 
Important sections of the armed forces have been disbanded. 
A powerful guard force has been turned into an arm of the police, and the army railway corps has been handed over to the civilian rail network. 
Other parts of the military have been pushed into more participation in civilian projects.
 
Cites 1,100 Civilian Projects
Mr. Yang gave several examples in the interview. 
He said the 1,100 civilian projects in which the military took part last year included construction of a port and airfield at Shengli, site of a major oilfield. 
He said the engineer corps had helped build civilian airfields at Dalian and Haikou, two major ports.
Troops had been assigned, he said, to help in the expansion of the country's tourist amenities. 
There has also been extensive military assistance in the development of agriculture.
There have been signs in recent months that not all members of the high command are enthusiastic about such tasks. 
Speeches by senior generals have spoken of the importance of giving ''careful consideration'' to any reforms that undermine the country's defense and especially to measures that reduce the number of men available for purely military tasks.
