
Cao Xianzhuo is worried.
Despite his efforts, the efforts of bureaucrats who preceded him and perhaps because of the weight of 3,000 years of history, people in China refuse to write Chinese all the same way.
Street signs, billboards, newspapers, books and the signs over shop windows sometimes use forms of Chinese characters that are irregular, obscure or downright wrong.
Last month Peking Daily published two pages of Chinese characters, the ideograms that make up the written Chinese language, and declared that once and for all this was the way Chinese should be written. 
It was at least the sixth time in the last 25 years that such a list has been published. 
A Posse of Schoolchildren?
Earlier this year exasperation with the spread of irregular written characters seemed to reach a fever pitch, and schoolchildren were urged to patrol the streets looking for public signs with incorrectly written Chinese as part of a campaign dubbed ''Let the spring wind drive away wrong characters.''
Thousands of signs were repainted but now, six months later, a short stroll down any street in Peking will uncover dozens of miswritten characters.
''In our society, people use many different ways of writing,'' said Mr. Cao, the secretary general of the State Language Commission, an agency created to try to lend some unity to the written language. 
''It's not very good.''
Throughout its history, China has endured a lack of uniformity in its written language. 
Over the centuries Chinese characters have changed their appearance. 
In some cases, two or three ways of writing a single character emerged, each correct and each commonly recognized by China's tiny literate population.
 
Characters With Fewer Strokes
When Mao Zedong took power in 1949, the cultural officials within the Communist Party's bureaucracy set out to simplify radically the way Chinese was written. 
The goal of total adult literacy meant that characters, some with more than 30 individual strokes, needed to be redesigned with fewer strokes so they would be easier to remember and write.
Since then, batches of these ''simplified characters'' have been published as the new standard. 
But disagreements among cultural officials, grumbling by scholars and confusion among the people led to the recalling of some lists, which created further disarray in the written language.
Even People's Daily, the official newspaper of the Communist Party, entered the fray. 
In a long editorial, the paper wrote, ''At present, the indiscriminate use of the original complex form of Chinese characters, the indiscriminate creation of new simplified characters, and wrongly written characters are quite common.''
The paper wryly observed, ''The standardization of a written language usually reflects the extent of the civilization of a country, nation or region.''
 
Faux Pas on Sunny Street
In one block along Chaoyang, or Sunny, Street in Peking, more than a dozen shops and businesses advertise their presence with a melange of incorrect or miswritten characters. 
On the eave of a tire-repair shop, the proprietor wrote one character in the old style and then painted the next one incorrectly.
Down the block, a shop that sells false teeth proclaimed its wares with a simplified, but officially disapproved, version of a character. 
And even the city street sign used a supposedly irregular simplified version of the word for ''street.''
The spread of multiple written forms of the language has been accompanied by a misleading official description of how the standardizing has been carried out. 
It has also been accompanied by a popular stubborness that resists, however subtly, arbitrary decisions by an invisible bureaucracy.
In explaining the choice of several characters with a greatly reduced number of pen strokes compared with the original versions, Mr. Cao said that some of the new characters had been used by ''the ordinary people'' during the Song and Yuan Dynasties, or from the 10th to the 14th centuries.
 
The Real Story: Illiteracy
''This is one way the new characters are chosen,'' he said, in what is now a politically acceptable recourse to history. 
''The other way is often to ask for the opinion from society. 
Simple words were obtained from the people.''
But in reality, when most of the decisions were made to simplify the written language, very few Chinese could read at all, much less offer a view on the constitution of the written aspect of their tongue. 
The most recent national census taken in 1982 disclosed that 23.5 percent of China's citizens remained illiterate.
Despite the repeated efforts to simplify the written language, remedial literacy requires the memorization of 4,000 or more individual characters, a number that makes typing, computer entry and telegraphy nightmarish.
In 1958 the Government adopted a plan to use the Roman alphabet to spell phonetically the northern Chinese dialect known in the west as Mandarin. 
More than half of China's one billion people speak other dialects or languages as their first language, a fact that has impeded broader acceptance of an alphabetized Chinese. 
Because the characters are ideograms, they convey the same meaning among China's dialects, although the words themselves may be pronounced quite differently.
 
Pinyin Is Growing Slowly
Nonetheless, schoolchildren across the country can receive newspapers printed in a combination of Chinese characters and Pinyin, the name of the Romanization system devised by the Government.
Still, the Pinyin system is not used extensively. 
''We may use Pinyin in telegrams,'' said Mr. Cao. ''Some dictionaries are now organized this way. 
There is some thinking now to expand the use of Pinyin.''
But, he said, ''the development of Pinyin is very slow now.''
''At the moment,'' he said, ''scholars have different opinions. 
Some think Chinese should be alphabetized. 
Some scholars think it should not. 
Chinese characters are considered traditional things by old people.''
The major problem, he said, is not how to induce people to switch to an alphabet, but how to settle upon a single written form of the language.
''The most important thing is to make the form of Chinese characters stable and regular,'' he said. 
''I myself see many characters that are wrong. 
We have decided on regulations to correct characters.''
With the new list just published, Mr. Cao said, there will be no further changes in the Chinese written language.
Even with regulations, Mr. Cao said, complete standardization will remain elusive. 
''It's no problem if signs still are not correct,'' he said. 
''We can't force them to correct the characters. 
If the problem is solved in the big places, in books, in business, that is important.''
