
In the highest-level shake-up since the resignation of the Communist Party leader three months ago, China today announced the replacement of its Public Security Minister, who directed the country's main police force during student demonstrations last year.
The announcement, the latest of several personnel changes since the demonstrations prompted a backlash against social and economic changes, was approved amid the pageantry of the close of the annual National People's Congress in the Great Hall of the People.
The Communist Party leader who resigned, Hu Yaobang, attended the opening session on March 25 but his seat on the stage was vacant today. 
There have been suggestions that the Minister of Public Security, Ruan Chongwu, was close to Mr. Hu.
In addition to Mr. Hu, prominent casualties of the current campaign against ''bourgeois liberalization'' have included Liu Binyan, a maverick journalist for People's Daily; Zhu Houze, the propaganda chief of the Communist Party, and Fang Lizhi, vice president of the University of Science and Technology in Hefei.
 
Sign of Token Opposition
The new minister named today is Wang Fang, the Communist Party Secretary for the last four years in eastern Zhejiang Province.
In a sign of token opposition, two of the 2,674 delegates to the People's Congress raised their hands to vote against Mr. Wang's appointment. 
A handful of delegates also prevented unanimity on other matters, provoking a stir in the cavernous hall and reflecting the growing assertiveness of delegates to the meeting.
The assembly also approved new ministers of Public Health and Light Industry, as well as a new head of the Commission for Economic Restructuring. 
The commission had been headed by the Prime Minister, Zhao Ziyang, who now also serves as party leader. 
It was not clear whether these changes were politically significant. 
The official New China News Agency said all the changes were made at Mr. Zhao's suggestion.
As Police Minister, Mr. Ruan tried to improve the agency's public image by cracking down on police officers who mistreated people they arrested. 
His relative restraint in handling the student demonstrations may have been his downfall, some analysts say.
His successor, Mr. Wang, directed the police in the city of Hangzhou and in Zhejiang Province before becoming vice governor of the province and then the provincial party secretary. 
Mr. Wang, who was purged in 1967 during the Cultural Revolution, is also a member of the Central Committee of the Communist Party.
 
Zhao Address Is Endorsed
The People's Congress, which has gained considerably in influence recently, endorsed an address by Mr. Zhao. In it, he warned of the dangers of ''bourgeois liberalization'' but also stressed the need to continue economic advances.
The session also passed a resolution calling on the Government to ''resolutely correct unhealthy tendencies, oppose extravagance and waste, overcome bureaucracy and uphold the principles of hard struggle, self-reliance and building up the country and doing things thriftily.''
The prescriptions seemed to reflect the views of Peng Zhen, 85 years old, the chairman of the National People's Congress Standing Committee. 
He has increased the body's authority and used it as a brake on change.
