
When even the banana sellers take a break the fever of the Lunar New Year has indubitably gripped Peking.
As the festivities celebrated by Chinese throughout the world began here Tuesday amid a blowing snowstorm, young merchants with bicycles were missing from their usual stations outside foreigners' compounds and hotels. 
The bananas are a cover for black- market currency dealings, which have boomed along with the rest of the economy here in recent years.
The closing of the ''banana bank'' was one measure of how the Lunar New Year has changed. 
A decade ago it was deemed reactionary to call it by its traditional name, so it was called the Spring Festival. 
Workers got three days off, as now, but they were well advised to keep their revelries away from neighbors' prying eyes.
Lunar New Year festivities celebrated by Chinese throughout world begin in Peking; workers get three days off to hail year of the ox (M)
Now, Maoist austerity is treated as a bad memory, and the traditional festivities are back in vogue. 
For weeks people have been hanging silk lanterns and laying in food, firecrackers and gifts. 
By 3 P.M. Tuesday, nine hours before the Year of the Rat gave way to the Year of the Ox, everybody who could was slipping out of the plant or office and pointing his bicycle toward home.
 
Snow Slows the Traffic
It was a murky day, made duller by an unusually heavy snowstorm. 
By afternoon the sun was a limpid orange ball amid the smog, and the Forbidden City's fluted roofs hung mysteriously in the gloom. 
Everywhere bicyclists were skidding on the snow, and motorized traffic slowed to a crawl. 
Yet through it all there was a zest unmatched here at this season in years.
While Mao Zedong was alive the new year stole in silently, but at midnight all Peking and the region beyond, home to nine million people, erupted in a joyous cacophony. 
As the year 4683 on the old Chinese calendar began, spectators in a high-rise building looking toward the imperial palaces were treated to half an hour of booming firecrackers that lit up the maze of hutungs, or alleyways, that make up much of the city.
The official New China News Agency called it ''the most prosperous New Year ever.''
Along the city's main shopping street of Wangfujing, always crowded, sidewalks were thicker still with urban couples and peasants in from the country struggling out of stores with ''the four new big things'' - color television sets, washing machines, refrigerators and stereos.
Years ago, it was the ''eight treasures,'' less expensive things such as sewing machines and radios, that were most eagerly sought. 
But incomes have risen sharply under market-oriented economic changes, and the problem for many is not cash but supply.
At the One Hundred Varieties Big Building, Peking's principal department store, the newly appointed manager said recently that he could sell 10 times his quota of Japanese television sets, at $650 each, 18 months' income for a factory worker.
 
Leader Shuns the Limelight
On the whole the man behind the changes, Deng Xiaoping, has inverted the old personality cult, preferring to shun the limelight. 
But as the holiday began the association between Mr. Deng and the new prosperity showed through in some official quarters. 
A typical New China News Agency dispatch quoted a peasant woman aboard a train outside Peking as having credited Mr. Deng's ''flexible economic policy'' for her holiday well-being.
The woman was one of 600 million travelers expected to take advantage of the break, more than half the population. 
At Peking station, where officials were reprimanded for unannounced train cancellations that stranded 10,000 passengers overnight on Jan. 
1, workers were bracing for a surge of six million holidaymakers. 
Many of these will be peasants heading into town for festivities that have been revived for the first time in several decades.
Officials are expecting 800,000 people at an open-air ''temple fair'' at Ditan Park, site of the Ming dynasty's Temple of the Earth. 
The centerpiece of the Lunar New Year for centuries, temple fairs were proscribed in the 1950's. 
This year, the park has been opened to hundreds of merchants and entertainers offering things not seen in the lifetimes of the majority of people now living.
There are bird-singing contests and fashion shows and beauty parlors and stalls selling ingeniously fashioned paper windmills and kites. 
There are consultants to advise on medical problems, traffic regulations and family planning, and magicians, comedians, wrestlers and bare-chested men competing in a nearly forgotten sport that involves tossing and catching a 30-foot bamboo pole topped with lanterns and bells.
 
Sales of Firecrackers Up
As always in China, food is at the heart of the celebrations. 
At the temple fair and from stalls all over Peking, entrepreneurs taking advantage of Mr. Deng's encouragement of private enterprise are hawking dishes of baodu, a delicacy made from sheep's stomachs, as well as sweet potatoes roasted on coal-fired braziers and sticks with hawthorn berries dipped in sugar.
At 1.3 billion, sales of firecrackers in the city have been up 75 percent on last year and it has sounded like it. 
For a few cents children can buy rockets with such innocent-sounding names as ''Heavenly Maiden Walking Through Flowers'' that have a report like a three-inch mortar. 
Among Chinese the bang counts for more than an array of color in the sky, so there have been several noisy nights. 
Fires set by the embers last year caused damage estimated at $25 million and wounded 27 people, three of whom were permanently blinded. 
The country's top leaders saw in the New Year in a hectic round of factory visits and receptions. 
Mr. Deng, who is 80 years old, was at a hotel in the southern city of Canton, where he attended a party with the widow of Prime Minister Zhou Enlai, Deng Yingchao, and with the armed forces' commander, Yang Dezhi.
As with other aspects of Mr. Deng's policies of relaxation, quite a number of people have taken the revival of the old traditions as an excuse for ''dipping into the big pot,'' using public funds for private gratification. 
The Communist Party's principal newspaper, People's Daily, hit out last week at officials in various regions who have taken advantage of the festivities to give lavish banquets, accept gifts and pass out unearned bonuses.
In one case chronicled by Economic Daily, managers of a glass factory in the northern province of Liaoning spent 4,400 yuan - $1,565 - on a 16-course feast of chicken, prawns, fish and sea slugs, ''creating a bad impact on the masses.''
People's Daily demanded that the culprits ''study the three do- nots: do not stretch out your hands for gifts, do not accept them and do not use public money for big banquets.''
Exceptions have been permitted for Government officials in Peking, who have held a series of receptions. 
When foreign reporters took the floor at one with a satirical song poking fun at the Foreign Ministry, officials joined in the laughter with everyone else.
American diplomats went one better, offering their Foreign Ministry hosts instruction in disco dancing. 
Some of the senior Chinese diplomats responded enthusiastically, doffing their Mao tunics and taking the floor.
