
Harbin, Manchuria, is an unlikely place to spend a Christmas vacation.
An industrial city of 2.5 million people in northeastern China, Harbin is also China's winter-sports capital. 
The Brown University hockey team spent its Christmas vacation there, playing five games in nine days. 
The last game signaled the formal opening of China's National Ice Festival.
Brown had accepted the invitation extended by the New York-based People to People Organization on behalf of the Chinese Government. 
China has a national hockey team, which has had limited international exposure to date, and is looking for more.
 
Captain Lost to Injury
Brown won 2, lost 2 and tied 1 game during the team's stay. 
Two of the games, a 7-6 loss and a 3-3 tie with the Chinese national team, were televised throughout China. 
Three others were against club teams, sprinkled with players from the national squad. 
Brown also lost its captain, Tom Wallack, for the rest of the season with a knee injury suffered during one of the games.
Coach Herb Hammond, now in his fourth year at the Providence school, compared both the city and the hockey to his visit to Moscow in 1972.
''They've had 25 years of hockey in China, but only recently have they gone in an Olympics direction,'' he said. 
''They have a couple of coaches from Czechoslovakia in to help out. 
They want to go to Calgary in 1988 and play in the B or C pool.
''The Chinese play a noncontact type of hockey. 
They were very impressed by our desire to win. 
They called a lot of penalties, and we played short-handed almost all the time just because they haven't been exposed to our kind of play.
''Their equipment was really inferior, too, much like the Russians had 10 or 15 years ago. 
But they'll improve. 
They were all interested in trading pieces of equipment with us.''
 
Impressed by a Goalie
The Chinese national team was roughly comparable to a mediocre major United States college team, according to Hammond. 
Four or five of its players, including one of the goalies, would be capable of playing at that level, he said.
The cultural differences were striking and unforgettable. 
''We all lost weight,'' joked Hammond, recalling banquet dishes such as bear claw, sea slug and moose nose. 
As the only Westerners in the city, team members drew curious onlookers wherever they went. 
The Chinese were particularly intrigued by the Western modes of dress of Hammond's and the wife of an assistant coach, Mark Trivett.
Hammond said the crowds were quiet. 
''There was no emotion, no cheering at our games, even though there were 6,600 fans at each one,'' he said.
