
A flood of immigrants from Hong Kong has pushed commercial rents in New York's Chinatown up to the levels of midtown, making the real estate in one untidy corner of Manhattan among the most expensive in the United States.
The demand for space is so strong, local real estate brokers say, that the operators of vegetable stalls near the bustling intersection of Catherine and Division Streets pay more rent per square foot than the owners of Tiffany & Company at Fifth Avenue and 57th Street. 
City officials describe the frenzy in the Chinatown real estate market as ''hysteria.''
''Everytime you turn around the prices have shot up again,'' said Michael Dirzulaitis, an assistant commissioner in the city's Division of Real Property, which has been involved in several development projects in Chinatown this year. 
''It's hard to believe that there is enough money around to keep it going, but there is.''
The pressures on Chinatown have been building for some time. 
But they have been given added urgency by the exodus of people and capital from Hong Kong in advance of the 1997 deadline for Britain to turn the colony over to China.
New York's Chinatown is not big enough to absorb much of Hong Kong's wealth. 
The largest real estate deal in the works in the neighborhood is about $18 million, tiny by Manhattan standards and modest even by those of other cities.
The money coming in from Hong Kong, however, is not the big fortunes, counted in millions of dollars, but nest eggs measured in the thousands - just enough money to stake a newcomer in business. 
In Chinatown, where newcomers are isolated from the outside world by language and culture and where severe zoning restrictions prevent the addition of space to accommodate a larger population, these sums are enough to run up the bids for every available nook.
Two decades ago, Chinatown was a neighborhood of 20,000 people, most of them men and most of them of Cantonese extraction, squeezed into about 35 square blocks at the foot of the Manhattan Bridge in the shadow of City Hall. 
The population is estimated now at 100,000 or more and is growing geometrically. 
If Chinatown were an independent municipality, it would rank as one of the fastest-growing communities in the United States.
With new arrivals squeezing in at a rate at nearly 2,000 a month, the district spread north through what was once a Jewish section on the Lower East Side and west across Little Italy, turning Yiddish into Mandarin and fettucine into won tons. 
The frontier of Chinatown has crossed into TriBeCa and SoHo, and new Chinatowns have blossomed in Queens and Brooklyn, bringing the total Chinese population in the city to about 300,000.
 
Hundreds of Entrepreneurs
Wherever they live, the immigrants are drawn back to downtown Chinatown to work and shop, creating an atmosphere of an old city market, with hundreds of entrepreneurs tending their own stalls or shops.
Bushels of live blue crabs, crates of bok choy and hordes of intense shoppers crowd the sidewalks of Canal Street, the central business district of Chinatown. 
Shopkeepers hawk wares from every available nook: batteries and audio tapes, scarves, T-shirts, jewelry and food of every description, from lobsters to doughnuts.
''We Chinese are very independent people,'' said Danny Li, owner of a chain of bakery shops and an investor in real estate and restaurants. 
''The first ambition for a Chinese person is to have his own business. 
It gives jobs to everyone in the family.''
On East Broadway, a new arrival sublets enough space under the awning of a fish store for a dozen open crates of vegetables. 
''He might pay the owner of the fish market $1,500 a month for a place to stand in front of the store window,'' said Kwok Ming Chan, a restaurant owner and real estate investor. 
(He describes the lease as if it were hypothetical. 
In the intimate, small-town atmosphere of Chinatown, where neighbors and partners often know each other's business, no one admits to knowing details.) Mr. Chan said that, to obtain the lease in the first place, a lease that might run for as little as two years or as long as five, he might pay $20,000 or more in ''key money,'' an illegal but universal - and universally acknowledged - fee assessed everytime a tenant moves in or renews his lease.
When the key money is amortized over the life of the lease, the operator of the vegetable stand might pay the equivalent of $275 a square foot a year for the privilege of selling his apples, snow peas and mushrooms. 
Some of the shops in the atrium of Trump Tower on Fifth Avenue, among the most expensive retail space in the city, pay little more than that.
Yet the competition is so fierce that retail prices at many of the stalls are considerably lower than those uptown. 
Apples that sell for 89 cents a pound on the upper West Side go for 33 cents on Henry Street. 
Snow peas cost a third of what they bring at greengroceries in other parts of the city.
''They can make a living only by working 14 hours every day,'' Mr. Chan said. 
''And everyone in the family must work, too.''
Despite the drab exterior of the neighborhood, Chinatown is not poor. 
''People have plenty of money,'' Mr. Li said. 
''If they do not have enough to open their own business, they work as waiters in the Chinese restaurants. 
You can put aside a lot when you work as a waiter. 
You have no time off to spend what you earn.''
The drabness comes in part from the compulsion to do business. 
''A few years ago, a group of us convinced the city to commit several million dollars to rebuilding the sidewalks and planting trees and shrubbery in the area,'' Tieh Chi Ho, an architect and developer, said. 
''But the merchants objected. 
They said the construction would drive away customers.''
When the Golden Pacific National Bank, one of the many banks in Chinatown, failed last year, Federal regulators who examined the books were surprised to find so many waiters with savings accounts of $20,000 or more, Mr. Chan said. 
He pointed to a vendor selling hot noodles from an aluminum pushcart on the corner of East Broadway and Pike Street. 
''He takes in $500 a day,'' Mr. Chan said. 
''One day soon he will have enough to lease a stall.''
Those who lack the capital for a pushcart settle for a cardboard box on which they spread a half-dozen mackerel or a dozen scarves.
 
Restaurants and Curio Shops
The customers who support this multitude of merchants come not only from Chinatown but also from the Chinese communities in Queens, the non-Chinese residents of the lower part of Manhattan and the tourists drawn to the hundreds of inexepensive restaurants and curio shops.
''With so many people passing by, the owner of a small stall can sell a lot of merchandise,'' Mr. Chan said. 
''You can watch him in the morning unload a truckload of goods to sell, maybe $2,000 worth, and by the end of the day it is all gone.''
But the day does not end until late at night, he added.
Mr. Chan and nine other stockholders hope to take advantage of the demand for space with a new shopping center they are building on East Broadway underneath the Manhattan Bridge on land leased from the city. 
It is one of the few sites available for new construction.
''Most of the real estate in Chinatown is owned by family associations with many members,'' said Irwin Liu, an American-born lawyer who with several partners founded a title insurance company on Pell Street in Chinatown. 
''It is very hard to get so many different people to agree on a plan for development.''
 
Density Limited by Zoning
When sites do become available, the new buildings that rise on them are limited to some of the lowest density zoning in Manhattan, in most cases reaching no more than six stories. 
One of the few projects planned to exceed that limit was derailed last month when the state's highest court, the Court of Appeals, halted a 21-story condominium project on Henry Street at Market Street. 
The court ruled that the city had failed to conduct thorough environmental impact studies.
The caps on new development have helped make every inch of existing space more valuable. 
The shopping center designed by Mr. Ho, to be known as East Broadway Mall, would house 101 shops and restaurants. 
The center would be far larger than any other shopping area in the neighborhood. 
''We have about 33 tenants so far,'' Mr. Ho said. 
''The store owners will pay a fixture fee to cover the cost of improvements in their space, and they will receive a lease of up to 25 years, which is unheard of in Chinatown.''
Mr. Chan said he expected the mall to touch off other development along East Broadway and nearby. 
''You won't recognize this area in two years,'' he said.
MANHATTAN RENTS
Typical rents per square foot for the most expensive retail space in Manhattan's most active markets.
Fifth Avenue
$400
(Above 51st Street)
Chinatown*
275
(Canal Street)
Madison Avenue
255
Above 42nd Street)
Columbus Avenue
175
(67th to 82d Street)
Lower Manhattan
125
(Fulton, Nassau Streets)
*Note: Estimate for Chinatown rents includes illegal fees paid at beginning or renewal of a lease to secure space. 
(Source: Real Estate Board of New York)
