
Little new information was available yesterday about the situation in Tibet as telephone and telex communications were interrupted and travel there by foreigners was banned.
A State Department spokeswoman in Washington said ''everything is calm'' in Lhasa, the capital, as Tibetans marked the 37th anniversary of China's takeover of Tibet, but she acknowledged that reports from the area were ''fragmentary.''
The latest communication with an American consular officer visiting Lhasa occurred on Saturday, she said.
A Chinese airline official said a 10-day ban has been imposed on foreigners' travel to Tibet from Chengdu, the principal gateway to Lhasa, The Associated Press reported. 
Western travelers arriving in Chengdu from Lhasa yesterday said the Tibetan capital was quiet.
In Beijing, a Foreign Ministry spokeswoman said foreigners were being advised not to go to Tibet at this time ''because Lhasa has a special situation.''
At least 14 people have been reported killed in clashes between Tibetan nationalists and Chinese security forces in Tibet in the last two weeks.
 
Lhasa Is Virtually Sealed Off
It could not be confirmed that the communications blackout was ordered by the Chinese Government. 
A spokesman for the Chinese Embassy in Washington, Wu Zurong, would say only that the way to contact Lhasa was through the telecommunications bureau in Beijing.
The New York Times was unable Tuesday and yesterday to contact its correspondent, Edward A. Gargan, who reported from Lhasa on Monday. 
Mr. Gargan is chief of the Times bureau in Beijing.
A Washington Post correspondent, Daniel Southerland, who left Tibet late Monday to send an article from Chengdu, tried unsucessfully to return to Lhasa Tuesday and yesterday.
The Associated Press said its correspondent had been able to telephone reports from Lhasa on Tuesday but had not been heard from since shortly after midnight yesterday, New York time. 
United Press International received the last 10-minute telex message from its staff correspondent at 4 A.M.
 
Second-Hand Reports
The Associated Press and Reuters filed reports yesterday based on interviews with travelers arriving from Lhasa in Chengdu, who . told journalists that security officers visited several hotels in Lhasa around midnight Tuesday night and checked guests' passports. 
They said there were three roadblocks on the way to the airport.
The major American television networks said they did not have crews in the Tibetan capital. 
''They're making things very difficult,'' said Elizabeth Eynon, press representative for the ''CBS Evening News.''
ABC News said a producer and correspondent, Todd Carrel, left Lhasa on Tuesday.
