
THE president of the Farmstead Telephone Group might be based in Glastonbury, but he is doing a lot of business in Beijing.
The Farmstead president, David M. Jastrembski, is overseeing the fulfillment of a telecommunications contract that is expected to bring his company $100 million. 
No one is more surprised by all this than Mr. Jastrembski, who a few years ago did not expect to be doing business in China at all.
Mr. Jastrembski is one of a growing number of Connecticut business executives who find that their overseas itineraries include China.
For years, major Connecticut companies like the United Technologies Corporation have had their own business dealings with China, but over the last few years, smaller companies have been getting involved, many through the efforts of the State Economic Development Department, which has made trade with China a priority.
There are about 200 Connecticut companies doing business with China, and about 20 of those in Shandong Province, with which Connecticut has a sister-city relationship. 
It is estimated that business with China represents about $150 million of the $6 billion that Connecticut does in export business annually, said the director of marketing for the State Department of Economic Development, David C. Driver.
The state's role in fostering such relationships dates back to 1980, after the normalization of trade relationships between the United States and China. 
State Economic Development Commissioner John J. Carson was the deputy commissioner then, and he recalls being skeptical when his boss, Edward J. Stockton, went to China and returned brimming with enthuasiasm. 
Since then, Mr. Carson has become a believer.
''The China relationship nicely combines two strategic market segments that Governor O'Neill has encouraged us to be involved with: small business and exporting,'' Commissioner Carson said. 
''That's one of the fundamental reasons why we are both excited about it and fairly active in the China trade business right now.''
He acknowledged that not all Connecticut businesses could benefit. 
The Chinese know precisely what they are looking for, he said, and are most keenly interested in companies that combine high techology with such industries as transportation equipment, including aviation; electronics; machine tooling, and instrumentation.
Until recently, the Economic Development Department functioned as a matchmaker, providing Connecticut companies with free consulting services to help them find the right market for their goods. 
But in the last legislative session, the General Assembly passed the Financial Capital Act, which will provide companies doing business overseas with low-interest loans, said Mr. Driver.
China is not the only country with which Connecticut deals. 
The Economic Development Department also oversees offices in Japan to aid Connecticut companies doing business in the Far East, as well as in West Germany, for European trade. 
The legislature has also passed a bill to establish the Connecticut Israel Exchange Commission, to encourage more commercial and cultural exchange with that country, he said.
In doing business with China, personal contact is key. 
To this end, the department has organized several trips to China, including an important mission last September led by Governor O'Neill. 
This was the first official visit by a Connecticut governor to the Far East, and in a country like China where government is all important, Mr. Driver said, his presence lent an invaluable stamp of prestige.
But, even when businesses cannot visit China directly, state officials take along brochures from Connecticut companies. 
This led to the $100 million contract for the Farmstead Telephone Group.
Mr. Jastrembski laughed when he recalled rebuffing repeated assertions by state economic development officials that the Chinese were very interested in buying the refurbished telecommunications equipment his company specializes in. 
In fact, it was not until he learned that the Chinese were ready to sign a contract that he became interested at all. 
Now, he plans to spend about 11 months a year in China.
Farmstead will be in charge of modernizing China's telephone system, a system that ''is about what ours was like in the 1930's and 40's,'' Mr. Jastrembski said. 
The agreement with China is expected to bring Farmstead, a company with fewer than 50 employees, about $100 million over the next decade. 
Also, through a joint corporation set up with China, Farmstead expects to do business with other countries as well, such as Australia and India.
''If it all comes to fruition, this will overshadow our operation here,'' said Mr. Jastrembski, conservatively enough, Farmstead had about $3.5 million in sales last year.
When he thinks about it all, Mr. Jastrembski still marvels.
''I think we've moved so fast not because of any brilliance on our part but because we happen to deal with a product China is interested in,'' he said. 
''China is trying to develop its infrastructure and a key element is telecommunications, so they are buying it now. 
We have the right product at the right price. 
That's the key to our success.''
Usually, Connecticut businesses dealing in China have to be prepared for delays that drag on for months, or even years.
The president of Bauer Aerospace Inc. in Farmington, Louis J. Auletta Sr., is optimistic that his current negotiations with the Chinese will lead to some lucrative contracts, but he expects it to take a while, he said.
His company, which has about $5 million in sales annually, manufactures test and ground-support equipment for the aircraft industry, and exports account for about 60 percent of its business.
Mr. Auletta is working with members of China's Civil Aviation Authority, which, he said, has a very modern fleet of aircraft, and is now seeking to begin servicing them independently, which is where his company would come in.
''As a result of my trip in September, we've had communications back and forth,'' he said. 
''I do foresee visiting China again in 1989 and '90. 
It is absolutely a long process. 
You have to establish trust and credibility early on. 
Visiting the country, your presence there is important. 
You also need to do good planning, and have patience and persistance to go along with it.''
But doing business with the Chinese is not for everyone. 
Just ask Anne Evans, owner of JAR Trading in Hebron, a tire business.
Ms. Evans, whose company expects to export about $39 million worth of tires this year to Europe, Africa, South America and the Far East, also went along on the Economic Development Department's trip. 
She discovered, though, that adding China to her export business would probably be impractical for a business her size, which has two full-time employees.
A potential for business with China exists if Mrs. Evans wants to become involved in having rubber companies manufacture tires to Chinese specifications. 
That, she said, ''could be enormously profitable if I can be very patient and want to spend an enormous amount of money to make it work.''
''The Chinese, who are so used to working with big companies, think it's easy for you to spend $10,000 to get on a plane and go there,'' she said, ''but I'd have to hire interpreters, technical people. 
And when I look at my time and resources, even though I could do a lot in China in two years, do I stop what I'm doing here?''
Personal preferences play a role too. 
While Mr. Jastrembski found the Chinese people warm and friendly, Ms. Evans said she ''never felt so alone,'' as during some of the time she spent there.
Still, China represents a huge market, and Ms. Evans is trying to see if someone she knows in the tire business, and who is interested in living in China, wants to join her company. 
That, she said, appears to be the only way doing business in China would work for her.
