
When China opened its doors to capitalism several years ago, Western businessmen and financiers seized the opportunity as the opening of a vast new frontier. 
But they have found that the reality is not living up to the promise.
That view has now been buttressed by a leading international lawyer, Jerome A. Cohen, who is an expert on Chinese law and is widely known for his sympathetic attitude toward Chinese business practices. 
In an analysis, he and another lawyer, Stuart J. Valentine, said that foreign investors still confront severe problems in China, including exorbitant costs, unpredictable negotiating practices, unenforceable contracts and an uncertain legal environment.
The two lawyers, members of the New York law firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison, offer a harsh assessment of Chinese attitudes toward international business ventures.
 
The Major Problems
These are among the major difficulties facing foreign investors in China, according to the two lawyers:
* The uncertainty about China's political direction, which will not become clearer until the new leadership is announced this fall.
* The inability of investors to repatriate profits, primarily because of China's low foreign exchange reserves.
* The extraordinary cost of doing business in China and the excess fees and charges on foreign businesses.
* The practice in China of ignoring the language of contracts and of regularly insisting on renegotiations.
* The continual interference of Government officials in foreign ventures.
* The inadequacy of China's laws and the constant recourse by the Chinese to internal rules that are unknown to the foreign investor.
* A hostile tax structure and tax administration that often prevent foreign investors from evaluating the profitability of a proposed project.
 
Businessmen Back Analysis
The analysis by Mr. Cohen and Mr. Valentine was presented at a discussion with Chinese officials last month and later made available to The New York Times by the authors.
Western business executives and diplomats here endorsed the analysis and pointed to the 50 percent drop in foreign investment in China last year as evidence of the harsh environment.
Despite moves by China last fall to address the problem, most foreign business executives say that the inhospitable investment scene has remained unchanged. 
One American diplomat said: ''Two years ago I would have 12 companies a day in my office looking for advice. 
Nowadays, I can go for a week and not see anybody.''
Despite repeated assurances by China's leadership that economic reform and openness to foreign investment will continue, the lawyers say that the threat of political instability overshadows investment decisions.
Even more troubling, according to the authors, is the country's financial limitations, the capriciousness of officials and the arbitrary application of regulations.
Foreign companies will have trouble converting earnings into foreign exchange for the repatriation of profits, according to the lawyers.
 
Discrimination Seen
''Next to foreign exchange problems,'' the authors found, ''perhaps the most widely aired complaint of foreign investors in China is the escalation of costs for the investors and their enterprises. 
Prices and charges often bear no relation to the quality of the goods or services provided. 
Many of the complaints are colored by the personal experience of the expatriate employees of foreign investors in China who feel that they are being consciously and systematically discriminated against.''
The authors cite higher prices paid by foreigners , solely because they are not Chinese, for airplane and rail tickets, for telephone use and at hotels.
''Until now,'' the authors contend, ''there has been a widespread belief in China that a foreign company is fair game for any costs and that no matter how many it is loaded down with it will nevertheless be able to earn a profit and retain its enthusiasm for China.''
That belief, they wrote, is reflected in the refusal of Chinese negotiators to disclose to an investor the true costs of labor, land use fees, utilities and raw materials.
Perhaps more serious for foreign companies, the two lawyers said, is contract negotiation. 
Chinese negotiators, they said, often refuse to permit foreign companies to write detailed contracts to protect their interests. 
And even after contracts are signed, the lawyers added, it is common for the Chinese to insist on renegotiation.
 
'New Rules' Imposed
''Sometimes government agencies will directly interfere with the performance of the contract by imposing new rules, conditions or fees that affect the profitibility of the venture,'' the lawyers said. 
''In practice, contracts concluded with Chinese entities lack legal enforceability.''
For example, a $25 million joint venture with an American company to open a hog farm in Guangdong province ran into trouble when the province's Government, which opened its own hog farm, imposed a quota on the joint venture's exports, It was ''a move that went against the joint venture agreement,'' the American Embassy said.
Similarly, China's tax laws constitute a formidable obstacle to any successful investment, the two lawyers said. 
''Foreign investors coming to China are faced by an increasingly complex web of tax legislation, regulations and rulings that appear to lack consistency in their interpretation and implementation from one locality to another,'' they said, ''and allegedly arbitrary taxation is frequently mentioned as a deterrent to investment.''
