
When the chairmanship of Hutchison Whampoa Ltd. passed quietly into the hands of Li Ka Shing, a powerful developer, on Jan. 
1, it was one more sign that local Chinese investors, many with official connections to the Chinese Communists, are challenging the British for control of Hong Kong's economy.
''What you have here is a new visibility for Chinese money and Chinese control of publicly controlled companies in Hong Kong,'' said William R.A. 
Wyllie, the ousted British chairman of Hutchison Whampoa, a major trading and industrial conglomerate based here. 
''The real wealth in this colony has been in Chinese hands. 
But they've always kept a low profile until just recently.''
Profile of Hutchinson Whampon Ltd (Hong Kong) chairman Li Ka Shing notes growing influence of local Chinese in Hong Kong economy
Mr. Li, the 52-year-old chairman of Cheung Kong Holdings Ltd., had acquired a controlling interest in the British holding company over the previous 15 months, but officially took charge this month. 
Cheung Kong has a market capitalization of about $2 billion and is projecting 1980 profits of about $200 million.
The core of Cheung Kong's activities is property development, one of the most lucrative fields in the 400-square-mile British colony where commercial rents typically are twice those of midtown Manhattan.
 
'A One-Man Organization'
''It is very much a one-man organization in the sense that one man controls it,'' said George C. Magnus, executive director of Cheung Kong. 
''It is kept extremely small and moves extremely fast. 
Because we know which way we want to go, we don't have to waste time with committees and all that.''
Mr. Li, a native of southern China's Chiu Chow region, seems to epitomize the newly aggressive Chinese property and shipping executives who operate out of this British enclave.
Although one of the richest and most powerful men in Hong Kong, Mr. Li has a passion for keeping out of the public eye. 
He has not granted a press interview since claiming the chairmanship of Hutchison Whampoa, saying only through an aide: ''All of what I should say I already have said.''
Associates say that Mr. Li was sent by his family to Hong Kong in 1940 to escape the Japanese invasion of China, and that he had originally hoped to become a scholar. 
But by 1950, he had opened a factory producing plastic flowers, toys and household items, and, in 1958, expanded into real estate.
The purchase of a controlling stake in Hutchison Whampoa represented a major expansion of Mr. Li's influence. 
The company engages in general trading, quarrying, ship repair and a variety of other fields in Britain, Australia, Malaysia, Singapore and the Philippines.
 
Expanding on Other Fronts
Cheung Kong is also expanding on other fronts. 
Mr. Li is using his considerable profits to diversify from residential and commercialproperty development into two major cement plant deals. 
And several other companies, including the most powerful British holding company in the colony, Jardine Matheson and Company, have reportedly been considered by Mr. Li as possible takeover targets.
His success is partially attributable to business connections that allow him to bridge the gulf between established British companies and a China bent on acquiring modern technology and management skills.
Mr. Li sits on the board of directors of the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank, which recently purchased a controlling interest in the Marine Midland Bank in New York State, and derives much of his support from the Hongkong bank. 
When he staged his first assault on Hutchison Whampoa in October 1979, for example, he was able to purchase a 22 percent block of the company's stock from the bank on favorable terms.
At the same time, Mr. Li is one of a handful of Hong Kong Chinese named to the China International Trust and Investment Corporation, an agency of the Chinese Government established in July 1979 to encourage foreign investment.
Although Mr. Li denies that he is acting as an agent for Peking, the so-called China connection is evident in many of his major deals.
 
Links to Chinese Government
Together with the Kiu Kwong Investment Company, a Chinesecontrolled company, Mr. Li formed Yee Pang Realty Ltd., which plans to build several 30-story apartment blocks here as part of a $60 million redevelopment project.
He was also instrumental in setting up what has been described as China's largest outside investment since 1949, a $200 million cement plant for Hong Kong that is to be completed in 1982. 
Kaiser Cement of California will own 40 percent of the new company, to be called China Cement (Hong Kong), with the remainder owned by a consortium led by Cheung Kong. 
The Kiu Yip Investment Corporation, another Chinesecontrolled concern, will have a 20 percent stake in the consortium.
Business associates and competitors alike say that a dominant factor in Mr. Li's success is his own personal business acumen. 
Mr. Magnus calls him ''the most amazing businessman I've ever met,'' with a thirst for hard work, a fast mind for figures and a near photographic memory. 
Even Mr. Wyllie, who was displaced by Mr. Li, calls the Cheung Kong chairman ''a brilliant operator and entrepreneur.''
