
IF everyone from Connecticut is
in China, who is home minding
the store?
This is a question I
have asked since going to Peking several months ago for a year's stay.
Word has it that 200,000 American tourists will visit China this year. 
Some quick arithmetic calculates that Connecticut's proportion of that group should be about 2,000, if one extrapolates directly from the state's proportion of the national population. 
Social scientists may tell us to consider income and other variables when accounting for tourism, so one might even project a larger share of tourists for Connecticut.
A quick, and very unscientific, sample seems to support the larger number.
On a basketball court at Peking University, my son thought he saw on a Chinese student a familiar T-shirt in red and black boldly stating, ''Bob's Surplus.''
Hadn't he seen that around Willimantic?
There was no such a place in Peking, was there?
Not at all. 
The student had been to Wesleyan University and the shirt was from Middletown.
The Columbia Law School graduate, studying Chinese law in preparation for a job with a San Francisco firm that specializes in Far Eastern matters hails from the Fairfield area. 
He speaks Chinese extremely well - and without a Connecticut accent.
When my wife and I, after an evening at the ballet in Peking, hitched a ride on a tourist bus so that we could get to a taxi stand (Pekingtaxis do not cruise), we struck up several conversations. 
Inevitably, I was asked where we were from. 
Connecticut?
The never-before-seen couple I spoke with, as if newly discovered family from home, were from North Haven. 
Oh yes, they used to visit the Coventry Bookstore before it closed and knew my home community well.
When I left the Peking University library one day and mounted my bicycle (there are three million bicycles in Peking), I saw a number of limousines and a reporter interviewing a distinguished, silver-haired gentleman. 
He looked familiar. 
Was it former Senator Ribicoff?
Sure, it was. 
He could not be campaigning for votes in Peking, could he?
No, he had left elective office, but was in China on a mission for a law firm. 
We spoke and shook hands. 
A photographer took photos. 
The scene reminded me of the Coventry Democratic smorgasbord at election time.
Who could be homesick when so many from home seem to be here?
And, I expect, more will come.
Last spring, I read that Connecticut companies were doing about $100 million of business a year in China. 
The State Economic Development Commissioner, John J. Carson, saw the world's most populous country as a golden opportunity for Connecticut companies. 
He remarked, ''China is essentially a new trading frontier. 
And many Connecticut manufacturers, especially in our high-tech industries, are producing just what Chinese industries will be purchasing in coming years.''
With China's current move toward modernization and its new economic reforms under way, it is not unlikely that even more Connecticut residents will find their way to the Orient.
So, the town meeting will convene in Tiananmen Square. 
It holds over a million people. 
While we don't quite have a quorum, it seems like we do.
Bruce M. Stave is professor of history and director of the Center for Oral History at the University of Connecticut. 
He is spending this year as Fulbright Professor of American History at Peking University.
