
If you like alfresco theater, try Shakespeare's ''As You Like It,'' directed by Wendell MacNeal in Danbury's Richter Park. 
Performances are scheduled at 8:45 this evening and Tuesday through next Sunday. 
Staged au naturel, the actors emerge from the woods, illuminated by lights set high in the trees. 
There are hand props but no scenery. 
Traditional 17th-century Elizabethan costumes are worn, custom designed and made by Beverly Langer.
The audience sits on a lawn that covers the swimming pool of the old Richter estate, surrounded by forests. 
The management suggests bringing chairs and blankets as well as picnics to munch and wine to sip, preferably before the play begins.
Connecticut Guide highlights upcoming events in Connecticut
''Some people spread white tablecloths and bring candelabra, champagne and very elaborate picnics,'' said Mr. MacNeal. ''One rather large party arrived last year in Elizabethan costumes that rivaled the actors'.''
Shakespeare Under the Stars is in its fourth year. 
''We are in no way competing with Stratford,'' said Mr. MacNeal, referring to the American Shakespeare Theater. 
''This is a different area, geographically. 
It is not a large production, it is a non-Equity company of about 30, and we are not in a theater.''
The performance area of the park, which is on Mill Plain Road, east of Exit 1 off Interstate 84, opens at 7 P.M. Pre-performance Elizabethan entertainment begins at 7:30 and consists of costumed jugglers, magicians, strolling musicians and madrigal singers. 
Admission is $6.50, students and the elderly pay $4. 
Reservations: 746-9423.
 
TALK ON CHINESE ART
Impressed with what he calls ''the freedom of expression of American artists,'' Mei Chingying, chairman of the ceramics department of the Central Institute of Art in Peking, China, will attempt to introduce some of that freedom to his students when he returns to his post at the end of this year, he said.
Mr. Mei will give a talk on contemporary art in China at 4 P.M. today in the New England Center for Contemporary Art on Route 169, Brooklyn. 
The lecture coincides with an exhibition of his recent paintings. 
Mr. Mei has been in the United States since March 1981, visiting friends made during his student days at Columbia University in the late 1940's.
''Art in China is very traditional,'' he said. 
His own exhibition pieces adhere to the ancient brush and ink style. 
''There is almost no difference in technique between contemporary and ancient art. 
Only the subject matter is different,'' he explained. 
Watercolor is still the prevalent medium and oil paint, predominant in Western painting, is unknown. 
Lacquer, however, is used to decorate wooden objets d'art. 
Ceramics - what we call china - as designed for use in the home by Mr. Mei's pupils ''looks modern,'' he said, ''it does not resemble antique ceramics except in influence.''
There is no admission charge for the lecture or the exhibition. 
Information: 774-8899.
 
YANKEE-SKILLS FAIR
Many of the bucolic accomplishments that draw city-folk to country fairs will be telescoped into a two-hour spectacular from 1 to 3 P.M. today at The Inn on Lake Waramaug, New Preston.
Billed as an ''Old-Time Yankee Skills Jamboree,'' the free event will offer a close-up view of sheep shearing with a running commentary on the technique of separating Poled Dorset sheep from their wool, head to hoof, back to belly. 
Nancy Wetherbee will do the shearing, followed by a spinning wheel demonstration showing how the wool is combed and spun into thread. 
Wool cloth from her sheep will be for sale.
A cow will be milked the old-fashioned way, a pair of yoked oxen weighing one-half ton each will move a seemingly immovable weighted stoneboat (a steelnosed wooden conveyance for stones), Norman Cucil will engrave brass name plates the way they were done in the 18th century, Helen Conck will weave on an antique loom and Ken Anstett will hack a beam out of a tree and shave wood shingles with a drawknife for a perfect fit.
Explaining why he runs so many free old-time events, Richard Combs, owner of The Inn said, ''Most of what we do relates to this area. 
The inn has been here since 1795, my family owned it since 1896. 
We just got interested in this sort of thing.''
Refreshments will be available on the grounds. 
Information: 868-0563.
 
MARK TWAIN DAY CAMP
The people at the Mark Twain Memorial in Hartford have named their one-week day camp after the title character in one of Twain's books. 
The Pudd'nhead Wilson Day Camp will operate from 9 A.M. to 12:30 P.M. July 26 though July 30 out of Immanuel Church, 20 Woodland Street, opposite the meticulously restored Twain home on Farmington Avenue. 
Its purpose will be to expose children from age 8 to 13 to such unaccustomed subjects as museum etiquette, Victorian architecture, playwriting, docentry (the art of being a museum guide,) stencilling, hoop-rolling, and ''tierce,'' an outdoor circle game popular in Victorian times, one of several Victorian games to be learned.
Tuition for a limited number of participants will be $30 and it includes all materials, field trip transportation and snacks. 
The children will make a study of the Twain house, which was constructed and decorated in elaborate Victorian style for the author's family. 
It was open to the public as a museum for decades after Twain's death and restored over a 20-year period.
At the end of the camp week the children will conduct their parents on a tour of the house, pointing out what they have learned. 
They will also visit the state capitol and the restored neighborhood surrounding the Church of the Good Shepherd, a notable Victorian building designed by Edward Tuckerman Potter, who also built the Twain home.
They will learn stencilling from reproductions of Tiffany stencils and decorate T-shirts to take home, and they will write a play from one of the Twain stories to be read. 
Information: 247-0998. 
Eleanor Charles
