
As China moves toward an economy driven more by consumer demand than by central planners, its leaders have begun to recognize that greater consumer choice also requires greater consumer protection.
In what amounts to a crash course in consumer protection, a delegation of four Chinese officials is visiting consumer organizations, businesses and a government agency in the United States - a tour that is exposing them to everything from Ralph Nader's role in this country to a ''sneeze'' machine that tests the strength of paper tissues.
The primary mission of their visit is to gather information about consumer laws and codes, which they plan to translate and consider for use at home, they said.
 
More Goods, More Complaints
While washing machines, refrigerators and television sets are becoming commonplace in urban areas of China, so have consumer complaints about shoddy quality, according to Chinese Government reports.
In addition, consumer prices increased 19 percent last year, prompting panic buying of household goods. 
This summer, Prime Minister Li Peng warned that hoarding and speculation could threaten social stabilityI.
Officials of the China Consumers' Association, a four-year-old, quasi-governmental organization, arrived in New York last Tuesday. 
Their itinerary included visits to New York City's Consumer Affairs Department, the American Express Company, the New York Public Interest Research Group and the Consumers Union, which publishes Consumer Reports.
On Friday they canceled appointments in order to see the Statue of Liberty and other sights before heading to Washington.
The Chinese officials visited Consumers Union in Mount Vernon, N.Y., where they toured product-testing laboratories and marveled at the ''sneeze'' machine as well as another that pummels mattresses with a split bowling ball.
 
'Socialist Commodity Economy'
After a buffet lunch of seafood salad and carrot cake, Li Yanshou, president of the association, passed out a pamphlet about the organization and Li Yuanmin, the delegation's interpreter, read some of it aloud: ''The aim of the association is to protect the consumers' interests, to provide guidance on consumption and to promote the development of a socialist commodity economy.''
Other members of the delegation are the presidents of regional or city affiliates of the association: Xiao Di Sheng, from Beijing; Zhang Ruofeng, from Hebei province, and Zhang Xing Wu, from Heilongjiang province. 
Prior to becoming officials in the association, the men served as managers in Government agencies.
Ms. Yuanmin said the association, which has 865 regional offices, was created to help the billion Chinese consumers register their complaints and product preferences with Government agencies and factories. 
In addition, she said the association has a role in testing products, supervising quality control and developing consumer-protection regulations.
Any questions?
The Consumer Reports staff had many.
What is the association's annual budget?
About $60,000, Mr. Yanshou said, with almost half coming from the Government and the rest from individual contributions and an international grant.
 
Guiding the Consumer
How does the association ''guide consumers in having a correct understanding of the relationship between consumption and production and that between personal consumption and national consumption,'' as its brochure states?
After a prolonged discussion in Chinese, Bu Fanpeng, a vice consul of China's consulate in New York, who accompanied the consumer leaders and helped with translations, summarized their reply. 
''It's like propaganda,'' he said. 
Later, he explained that demand for many products far exceeded production capacity and that the association helps explain this problem to consumers.
How many consumers complain?
About 10,000 since 1984. 
''People are just realizing the importance of making complaints,'' Mr. Fanpeng said.
Are defective products recalled?
Well, not exactly, but individual consumers have the right to obtain repairs, replacements or refunds, Mr. Yanshou said. 
There is no hesitation to criticize Government-controlled factories, he added.
Their opinion of American consumers?
The delegation conferred again. 
''We have learned a lot,'' Mr. Yanshou replied.
 
'Who Is Ralph Nader?'
When it was their turn to pose questions, the Chinese leaders asked about the value of the magazine's product-testing equipment ($5 million), its circulation (3.7 million) and Consumers Union's connection with other consumer organizations (ad hoc).
In the course of the discussion, Rhonda H. Karpatkin, executive director of Consumers Union, mentioned the importance of Ralph Nader and organizations he founded.
The Chinese were puzzled. 
''Who is Ralph Nader?''
Mr. Fanpeng asked.
''You haven't heard of Ralph Nader?''
Mrs. Karpatkin said. 
''That's refreshing.''
