
A United States Senator asserted today that China was still exporting nuclear technology to five countries with ''the most dangerous nuclear programs'' despite Peking's pledge to not help others develop atomic weapons.
The Senator, Alan Cranston of California, the Democratic whip, said that because intelligence information showed China was aiding the five nations he opposed congressional approval of a 1984 nuclear cooperation accord between Peking and the Reagan Adminstration.
Mr. Cranston said the nations were Brazil, Argentina, Pakistan, South Africa and Iran. 
He called them ''nations with both the motives and an occasionally expressed interest in developing nuclear weapons.''
'Nuclear Outlaw' Nations
''My information,'' Mr. Cranston said in a statement issued by his office, ''is that China has either engaged in serious nuclear trade negotiations with or actually has continued a series of nuclear exports to each and every one of these five 'nuclear outlaw' nations.''
He also charged that the information about the Chinese violations had been covered up by the State Department, particularly by Richard T. Kennedy, the department official who negotiated the 1984 accord. 
The Senator said the intelligence information showed that the Chinese actions contradicted Administration assurances that China supported nonproliferation policies.
He said Mr. Kennedy ''has systematically withheld, suppressed and covered up information - known virtually throughout the executive branch -which Congress might find worrisome as it reviewed the draft agreement now before us.''
Mr. Kennedy declined to comment, but late today, Charles E. Redman, a department spokesman, said, ''The State Department firmly denies any allegation that it has not provided timely and accurate information on nonproliferation matters rerlated to the China agreement.''
 
'Every Appropriate Step'
''The department has taken every appropriate step to keep the Senate Foreign Relations Committee and the House Foreign Affairs Committee currently, accurately and fully informed on nonproliferation issues,'' he said. 
''We have provided these two committees with information and have testified before them, including testimony in closed session.''
The agreement, which opens the way for American companies to sell nuclear-powered reactors to China, will go into effect near the end of this year or early next year if neither house of Congress votes to block it.
Mr. Cranston said repeated requests by senators ''for an unfiltered, uncolored briefing on this issue from intelligence analysts still have not been met.''
The nuclear cooperation accord was initialed while President Reagan visited Peking in April 1984. 
It was not signed until July of this year because American intelligence officials questioned China's actions.
 
Intelligence Data Cited
Mr. Cranston said his information came from several executive branch sources. 
Congressional sources said the Defense Department opposed the agreement and that individuals in the Pentagon had given the Senator the intelligence data.
Mr. Cranston acknowledged that the chances of Congress turning back the nuclear accord were slim, but said he would cooperate with efforts to draft legislation that would make it more difficult for China to get nuclear technology from the United States until there were firmer assurances on the nonproliferation policy.
Five nations are known to have nuclear arsenals: the United States, the Soviet Union, Britain, France and China. 
France and China have not signed the global nuclear nonproliferation treaty, under which the signers pledge not to help others build atomic weapons.
 
India Has Tested Atom Bomb
Several other nations, such as Israel and India, are believed capable of assembling nuclear weapons. 
India exploded a nuclear device in 1974.
''Experts identify five additional nations as having the most dangerous nuclear programs - programs that involve secret facilities inaccessible to international inspection,'' Mr. Cranston said.
Mr. Cranston said Peking was continuing exports of water containing heavy isotopes of hydrogen to the ''troublesome Argentine nuclear program.''
The ''heavy water'' is used to moderate the nuclear fission at the core of a reactor. 
It has both weapons and nonmilitary uses.
He said China had also moved to export enriched uranium to South Africa through European middlemen and that it was engaged ''in nuclear commerce'' with Brazil, ''a nation with large nuclear ambitions and aspirations to superpower status.''
He also said China had held talks with Iran on nuclear trade, which did not show ''anywhere near the type of prudence we would expect.''
