
WHETHER New Year's Day is celebrated on Jan. 
1 according to the Gregorian calendar, in September or October as the Jews' Rosh ha-Shanah or in midwinter by Asians, foods serve as edible talismans to assure luck, happiness or prosperity in the coming year.
The notion, for example, that eating gold-colored food will put money in your pocket is common in Peru, where papas a la huancaina, a potato dish tinted with tumeric or with a saffron-colored spice called tadillo, is served on New Year's Eve. 
In China, dumplings made from golden egg pancakes, crisply gilded spring rolls and oranges are the aureate foods appropriate for the Chinese New Year's celebrations in midwinter.
The Chinese also value fish. 
A whole one is preferred, suggesting that prosperity has favored you with more than you can eat.
Pork is on the New Year's table in many cultures, connoting riches because at one time having a pig to slaughter guaranteed food for the coming year.
In Italy and the southern parts of the United States, pork is eaten in the form of sausage, stuffed pig's trotters (zampone), ham hocks or pig's knuckles, invariably accompanied by a dish of dried beans. 
The Italians eat lentils, or lenticchie, which since Roman times have represented coins. 
According to the cookbook author and cooking instructor, Anna Teresa Callen (''Anna Teresa Callen's Menus for Pasta,'' Crown, 1985 ), parsley decorates the dish because it was thought to ward off evil spirits. 
In the American South, greens are added to black-eyed peas or hoppin' John (black-eyed peas with rice). 
The symbolism is straightforward: the greens represented dollars and the black-eyed peas coins. 
Dried beans, garnished or plain, represent the changing over of years, for they can be stored through the winter and then be planted to create the harvest.
Sometimes a silver coin or trinket is buried in a dish of black-eyed peas or hoppin' John, providing an extra measure of good luck to the person finding it. 
The Twelfth Night cake or king's cake served on Epiphany in France will have coins or fava beans tucked inside. 
Similarly, the Spanish roscon de Reyes, a bread, is baked with a coin or small ceramic animal inside for luck. 
The Mexican version, a king's bread with nuts and raisins, is baked with a clay doll inside. 
These breads and cakes are round, symbolizing a whole year, much like the hallah baked for Rosh ha-Shanah.
When it comes time to ring in the New Year, you lift a glass - of Champagne, punch, eggnog or whatever -and propose a toast. 
Why toast?
The tradition in England and Wales was for slices of toasted bread to be soaked in the hot spiced ale called wassail and served with it.
In Spain, according to Penelope Casas, author of ''Tapas'' (Knopf, 1985), 12 grapes are eaten just before midnight on New Year's Eve, one for each chime of the clock. 
Good luck will come to those who finish the grapes before the final stroke.
 
Anna Teresa Callen's Lenticchie in Umido
 
2 cups lentils, picked over and washed
3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil
3 ounces of pancetta (cured sausage made from pigs' stomachs, available at Italian butcher shops), finely diced
1 medium onion, chopped
2 cloves garlic, chopped
2 celery stalks, chopped
1 carrot, chopped
4 to 5 parsley sprigs, minced
1 16-ounce can peeled Italian tomatoes, crushed
2 bay leaves
Salt and freshly ground black pepper to taste
Sprigs of Italian parsley for garnish.
1. Place lentils in a saucepan, cover with water and bring to a boil. 
Simmer 10 minutes, rinse under cold water and allow to stand covered with water for 2 hours.
2. Heat 2 tablespoons of oil in a casserole. 
Add pancetta, onion, garlic, celery, carrot and half the minced parsley. 
Saute 5 to 8 minutes until tender. 
Add tomatoes and bay leaves. 
Bring to a boil. 
Simmer 15 minutes.
3. Drain lentils and add to the pancetta mixture. 
If the lentils are not covered with liquid, add water. 
Bring to a boil and simmer about 30 minutes, until the lentils are tender. 
If necessary add more water during cooking. 
Stir in the remaining oil, season with salt and pepper and add the remaining minced parsley. 
Serve garnished with parsley sprigs.
    Yield: 6 to 8 servings
 
New Year's Eve Cotechino
 
2 cotechini (Italian garlic sausages), about 1 pound each (available at Italian butcher shops)
1 onion, crosscut at the root end
1 celery rib, cut in two
1 parsley sprig
1 carrot cut in two
1 bay leaf
10 to 12 peppercorns
Sprig of fresh thyme or 1/2 teaspoon dried thyme
Minced fresh parsley for garnish.
1. Pierce sausages in several places to prevent them from popping. 
In a large stockpot combine sausages with onion, celery, parsley, carrot, bay leaf, peppercorns and thyme. 
Add water to cover and bring to boil. 
Reduce heat. 
Simmer 1 hour. 
Allow to cool in cooking liquid.
2. Garnish with parsley and serve warm or at room temperature with lentils.
    Yield: 8 or more servings
 
Cafe Marimba King's Bread
 
3 1/2 cups flour, approximately
1 package yeast
1 teaspoon salt
2/3 cup plus 1 tablespoon milk
8 tablespoons butter
2 large eggs
1/2 cup chopped blanched almonds
1/2 cup golden raisins
2 tablespoons sugar
1/2 teaspoon cinnamon
Small clay doll, coin or other good-luck trinket (optional)
2/3 cup confectioners' sugar
1 tablespoon each slivered almonds and golden raisins for garnish.
1. In a bowl, combine 1 1/2 cups of flour with the package of yeast and the salt.
2.Heat to 115 degrees, Z cup milk and 6 tablespoons of the butter in a saucepan. 
Stir this into the flour mixture. 
Beat eggs until well blended and stir into flour mixture. 
Add as much of the remaining flour as needed to make a soft dough, turn out on a floured board and knead for 8 minutes or place in an electric mixer and knead with a dough hook. 
Place the dough in a greased bowl, turn to grease all sides of the dough, then cover loosely to set aside to rise until doubled, about 1 hour.
3. Melt remaining 2 tablespoons of butter. 
Punch dough and roll out to form a rectangle 12-by-20 inches. 
Brush with melted butter.
4. Mix together almonds, raisins, sugar and cinnamon, sprinkle over the dough and place the trinket somewhere along the filling. 
Roll the dough from the long end jellyroll-style. 
Seal the edge by pinching. 
Bring together the two ends of the dough and join by pinching them together, forming a ring. 
Slash top of the dough at 1-inch intervals. 
Cover loosely and allow to rise until doubled, about 45 minutes.
5. Preheat oven to 375 degrees. 
Place the ring on a lightly greased baking sheet and bake for 30 to 45 minutes, until browned.
6. Remove from the oven and allow to cool completely. 
Mix confectioners' sugar and 1 tablespoon of milk to form a glaze with the consistency of thick cream. 
Spread on the top of the bread and scatter slivered almonds and raisins on it.
    Yield: 1 large loaf.
