
The goods ranged from goat-hair scarves (khati) and yak-butter lamps (choekung) to dharma buttons and copies of the official Dalai Lama comic book.
They all sold well as the fourth annual Tibet Fair opened near the United Nations yesterday. 
It attracted those with considerable knowledge of the Himalayan land - a man from Virginia showed up to buy a study book for third-year Tibetan - as well as those with only a passing curiosity about the ''roof of the world.''
Strung along walls and piled on tables in a crowded room in the Eastside International Community Center, at 330 East 45th Street, exotic items beckoned buyers, many of whom said they were looking for Christmas ideas. 
Jewelry, dresses, sweaters, boots, hats, silver teapots, ornamental knives, scrolls, books, Buddha statues and ''I Love Tibet'' T-shirts all vied for a spot under the tree.
Many of the items were made by Tibetans, but many were not.
 
'Hey, Don't Buy That'
''Don't you just love this?'' said Helen Brill, holding up a red scroll with Chinese characters on it. 
''I don't know whether it's Tibetan, but it sure is beautiful.''
''Hey, don't buy that,'' a man whispered conspiratorially to his wife, who was admiring a silk scarf that had a ''Made in Beijing'' tag on the back. 
''The Tibetans don't like the Chinese.''
China annexed Tibet in the early 1950's and has run it as an administrative unit since a crackdown in 1959 that prompted the Dalai Lama - the Tibetan spiritual and temporal leader - to flee on horseback over the Himalayas into India.
The fair involved an odd mix of Tibetan serenity and American hustle. 
''Now wait a minute,'' hissed a woman who believed she had been overcharged. 
''I thought the Dalai Lama postcards were a quarter each and five for a dollar.''
The seller started to explain no, those were 50 cents each.
 
'A Sort of Uneasiness'
Then he shrugged and sold them, placidly, five for a dollar.
''The feeling is something different from a normal feeling for me,'' explained Jigme Sampho, who with his wife, Dechen, was selling hats and boots made by Tibetans living in exile in India. 
''There is a sort of uneasiness.''
But Mr. Sampho, who works for the Parks Department as a maintenance man in Central Park, added that the fair does come only once a year. 
And he said he was glad that people could come and learn something about the land where he was born.
Many said they did appreciate that chance. 
''I'm fascinated about Tibet,'' one woman said, ''but I've pretty well decided I'll never go there because of the altitude.''
Tenzing Chhodak sat selling posters, books and calendars underneath a large print of the Tibetan Wheel of Life, depicting what are believed to be the six stages into which human beings are continually reincarnated and from which, in order to attain enlightenment, they must escape.
These cycles are the realm of false gods; of titans vainly trying to battle their way into heaven; hell dwellers being administered hot-and-cold tortures; preta, or hungry ghosts, that symbolize greedy people; animals, guilty of ignorance, and humans, who alone among those in the six cycles are offered the chance to study and practice religion.
The fair, proceeds of which are contributed to Tibetan refugees in India, continues today from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M., and also Saturday, Dec. 
20.
Tibetans hold the fair both to raise money and to educate people about their land, said Tinley Nyandak, president of the New York-based Tibetan Association.
Mr. Nyandak said the region's Tibetan community, numbering about 160, is one of the smallest ethnic groups in the metropolitan area. 
Not quite the smallest, he noted: ''You know the Manchus?
There are only two Manchus in the whole Northeast, so far as I know.''
