
TUNG'S dances work their way along with a thoughtfulness and conviction that persuade one to follow. 
Such was the case Friday at the La Mama Annex, when Chen & Dancers presented Mr. Chen's new ''Longmen Mountain,'' one in a series of modern-dance pieces on old China.
Set to wonderfully primeval clangor and chants composed by Li Tai-Shaing, ''Longmen Mountain'' takes its title from the name of a Chinese grotto of the fifth century, a cave-temple that served Silk Route travelers and Buddhist pilgrims. 
Mr. Chen blends the elasticity and bold attack of Western modern dance with the flexed fingers and hands, for example, of ancient Chinese dance forms in work that is as much dance as drama.
Jennifer Dunning reviews "Longmen Mountain" by Chen & Dancers at La Mama Annex
A lone pilgrim enters the stage space, which comes to seem remarkably like a cave. 
He pays intent homage to religious hangings along the walls, probing the ground before him with his walking stick. 
Six travelers follow in a group, exploring the cave in an orderly fashion that looks, nonetheless, almost rambunctious beside his stillness.
The dance grows more frenzied as the six young men and women move in juxtaposed groups or break, one at a time, from the crowd. 
But by the end of ''Longmen Mountain,'' they are moving in unison, reverent creatures who have taken on something of the single pilgrim's gravity. 
Changes have occurred inside the cave, for them, at least.
Such changes seem to be a subject of interest to the Shanghai-born choreographer, a product of dance education in Taiwan and at New York's Juilliard School and New York University. 
The previously reviewed ''Voices of Yellow Dust,'' which completed the program, took a group of the dead on their journey into the afterlife, accompanied by a guide from whom life ebbs as they awaken. 
That dance unfolds at as measured a pace as ''Longmen Mountain,'' but is a neater piece of choreography.
The likable company includes Bambi Anderson, Wei Chen, Lynn Frielinghaus, Mr. Chen, Dian Dong, Kristin Jackson and Long Phi Nguyen.
