
IN THE ETHNIC COMMUNITIES that spawned them, artists who manage to cross over into the mainstream from Harlem or Watts or Chinatown east or west call the journey ''riding on the hyphen.''
Pop musicians like Mexican-American Ricardo Valenzuela, who as Ritchie Valens topped the charts in the 1950's with ''La Bamba,'' were among the first. 
Today's crossover stars include the black American film maker Spike Lee, whose vaguely anarchist dispatches from the city (''She's Gotta Have It'') and the campus (''School Daze'') are propelled by a savvy populist energy.
David Henry Hwang - barely 30 and haunted by spirits often of his own invention - is riding on the hyphen into mainstream American theater as few Asian-Americans have before him. 
For the young playwright, the Broadway opening next Sunday of his ''M. 
Butterfly'' represents a breathtaking leap. 
With its scandalous and incredible plot, its flourishes of Chinese opera and flashes of nudity, its Western soliloquizing and reflections on East-West politics, its original music (by Lucia Hwong) interwoven with Puccini's ''Madama Butterfly,'' Hwang's play breaches just about every convention of the commercial theater.
Of the five new American dramas to open on Broadway in the 1987-88 season (a figure that baldly expresses many producers' hostility to the category), Hwang's is the only one to arrive without the benefit of development in the noncommercial sector. 
Moreover, the $1.5 million production, staged by the British director John Dexter and starring John Lithgow, is one of the most opulent ever given a nonmusical play on Broadway.
The source of ''M. 
Butterfly'' is a story that itself defies belief. 
Under the headline ''France Jails 2 in Odd Case of Espionage,'' a dispatch from Paris in The New York Times of May 11, 1986, told of Bernard Boursicot, a former French diplomat, and his lover, Shi Peipu, a star of the Beijing Opera, who had each been sentenced by a French court to six years in jail for spying for China. 
(Shi was subsequently expelled from France.) Their affair had begun in 1964 in Beijing, where Boursicot was stationed. 
It ended two decades later, after the opera star, accompanied by a child who had purportedly been fathered by the diplomat, moved into the Frenchman's Paris home and attracted the attention of the French counterespionage service. 
During the trial, the opera star was revealed to be a man.
The diplomat testified that this was shocking news to him. 
Paris buzzed.
So did the young playwright. 
''The story enabled me to pull together various concerns that I have about racism, sexism and imperialism,'' says Hwang. 
''The story was like a perfect little jar that could hold all these different subjects.
''I only knew Madame Butterfly as a cultural stereotype,'' he continues. 
''Like, sometimes you would say, 'Oh, she's pulling a Butterfly' - which meant someone trying to do a submissive-Oriental number. 
I was trying to think of a hook, a way to break the back of this spy story. 
One day it popped into my head: What did Boursicot think he was getting?
Well, he probably thought he was getting Madame Butterfly.''
Hwang, who lives in Los Angeles with his wife, Ophelia, would fit nobody's stereotype of the submissive Asian. 
He tends to augment his slight frame with the padded contours of Armani suits and speaks with considered precision, though his voice has a childlike pitch and often cracks when he is engaged by a subject.
In ''M. 
Butterfly,'' Hwang spins a complex yarn from the 1986 news report. 
His fantasy includes a slangy precis of the Puccini opera from an Asian point of view and an attempt to pair the story of the affair with a meditation on what might well have been going on within a French mission in China in the late 1950's and early 60's.
The spying gave the playwright a route into political issues he wanted to deal with. 
''It has real implications for the choices that were made,'' Hwang says of the affair. 
''People went to war, died, made political decisions through these personal things. 
We didn't consider Orientals to be our equals. 
We didn't figure after the Second World War that they'd come back and beat us at our own game. 
That sort of miscalculation also led us to believe that if we bombed Vietnam enough, they would all give in.''
''M. Butterfly'' begins a few years earlier than the true story. 
The diplomat, renamed Gallimard, meets the opera star, called Soong (played by B. D. Wong), at an embassy function where the singer performs Madame Butterfly's death scene. 
In a conversation over drinks, Soong scoffs at Gallimard's sentimental response to the opera. 
''Consider it this way,'' the singer says. 
''What would you say if a blonde homecoming queen fell in love with a short Japanese businessman?
He treats her cruelly, then goes home for three years, during which time she prays to his picture and turns down marriage from a young Kennedy. 
Then, when she learns he has remarried, she kills herself. 
Now, I believe you would consider this girl to be a deranged idiot, correct?
But because it's an Oriental who kills herself for an American - ah!
- you find it beautiful.''
Jack Viertel - one of the principal figures in bringing ''M. 
Butterfly'' to New York - was a dramaturge, working with playwrights on scripts, at the Mark Taper Forum in Los Angeles when he read the accounts of the French spy trial. 
Soon after, he called Hwang to suggest that the newspaper account had dramatic possibilities; the playwright told Viertel he'd already written the play, with the encouragement of Stuart Ostrow, an independent producer.
''It's one of the few plays that present a fascinating event - as in e Met a the blinding of the horses in 'Equus' - and then explain it in a way that's up to the fascination of the event, that isn't ultimately a disappointment,'' says Viertel.
Ostrow sent Hwang's script to John Dexter last year. 
The director's response was immediate and positive. 
Dexter - who had staged Peter Shaffer's ''Equus'' on Broadway in 1974, as well as such modern operas as Francis Poulenc's ''Dialogues of the Carmelites'' at the Metropolitan Opera - instantly recognized in David Hwang a powerful new theatrical voice.
''The language and the freedom with which he uses the stage, playing across time, space, geography - I suppose that was the appeal,'' says Dexter, whose staging of Alban Berg's ''Lulu'' will open at the Met a few days after ''M. 
Butterfly.''
''But mainly the language, which is extraordinarily funny and touching, never striking a false note. 
He has a great instinct for creating situa-tions in which theatrical magic can happen.''
DAVID HENRY HWANG, the son of a Shanghai-born banker and a Chinese pianist raised in the Philippines, began riding on the hyphen to mainstream prominence from the unlikely ''ghetto'' of San Gabriel, Calif., a middle-class enclave south of Pasadena.
''I knew I was Chinese,'' he says, ''but growing up, it never occurred to me that that had any particular implication or that it should differentiate me in any way. 
I thought it was a minor detail, like having red hair. 
I never got a lot in school to contradict that. 
My parents brought us up with a rather nice sense of self.''
Nothing in his past propelled him toward the theater; indeed, he assumed he would go into law when he went to Stanford University in the mid-1970's. 
But when he got there, he found himself searching for the meaning of ''Chinese-American.''
His parents' diverse histories didn't make the task easy.
''My father has always been interested in discarding the past,'' says Hwang. 
''He's never much liked China, or the whole idea behind China or Chinese ways of thinking. 
He's always been much more attracted to American ways of thinking. 
He feels Americans are more open - they tell you what they think - and he's very much that way himself.''
Hwang's mother brought to the family a tradition of Protestant fundamentalism. 
Her grandparents, who lived in the seaside village of Amoy, in Fujian Province, were converted by missionaries; her grandmother, Hwang says, was an exorcist. 
His mother's family migrated to the Philippines and there became wealthy merchants before coming to the United States in the late 1960's. 
Hwang's parents met at a foreign-students' dance at the University of Southern California and fell in love, but they couldn't marry until his father converted to Protestantism.
While at Stanford, Hwang started going to the theater, particularly San Francisco's Magic Theater, where Sam Shepard was bringing out his new work. 
On a lark, in 1978, Hwang attended the first Padua Hills Playwrights Festival in Claremont, Calif. 
- a workshop that has become a major playwrights' retreat - where Shepard, Maria Irene Fornes and others worked with fledgling writers.
There, Hwang began writing ''FOB'' (''fresh off the boat''). 
The play tells the story of a young, rich newcomer to California and his visit with Chinese-American cousins. 
But, in the kind of twist that was to characterize much of Hwang's subsequent work, that story is interwoven with one about Fa Mu Lan, the legendary heroine who figures in Maxine Hong Kingston's novel ''Woman Warrior,'' and Gwan Gung, the Chinese god of war introduced to American audiences by another Chinese-American playwright, Frank Chin.
''I read Maxine's book,'' Hwang says, ''and felt immediately excited by the possibility that you could interweave the hyperrealistic details of contemporary American life with the larger, mythical ghost story in the background.''
The naive in ''FOB,'' the son of a Hong Kong businessman, is treated with contempt by the kin who know what the future holds for him. 
''Coming to America, you're gonna jump the boat,'' an assimilated Chinese-American hisses. 
''You're gonna decide you like us. 
Yeah - you're gonna like having 15 theaters in three blocks, you're gonna like West Hollywood and Newport Beach. 
You're gonna decide to become an American. 
. . . You won't even know it's coming before it has you. 
Before you're trying real hard to be just like the rest of us - go dinner, go movie, go motel, bang-bang. 
And when your father writes you that do-it-yourself acupuncture sales are down, you'll throw that letter in the basket and burn it in your brain. 
And you'll write that you're gonna live in Monterey Park a few years before going back home - and you'll get your green card - and you'll build up a nice little stockbroker's business and have a few American kids before your dad realizes what's happened and dies, his hopes reduced to a few chattering teeth and a pack of pornographic playing cards. 
Yeah - great things come to the U.S. out of Hong Kong.''
No one who read ''FOB'' in its first drafts could fail to be moved by the blend of slice-of-life realism and yearning spiritualism - scattershot anger mixed with a sense of fathomless loss. 
It wasn't Hwang's first play, but John L'Heureux, his writing coach at Stanford and author of the novel ''A Woman Run Mad,'' was stunned by it.
''He came in and said he wanted me to give him a tutorial in play writing,'' L'Heureux recalls. 
''He showed me some of his first attempts; they were palpably bad. 
I told him to read Sam Shepard and to get some education. 
In the middle of the second week, he handed in a play. 
I couldn't believe it was by the same person.''
''FOB'' was first performed by students in Hwang's Stanford dormito-ry - part of the spring rites on cam-pus - under the young playwright's direction. 
At the same time, he sent it off to the National Playwrights' Conference of the Eugene O'Neill Theater Center in Waterford, Conn. 
- one of the country's most prestigious launching sites for new plays. 
In the spring of 1979, just weeks before he graduated from Stanford, he got the call: the O'Neill wanted the play. 
''Of all the moments in my career so far,'' says Hwang, ''just on a visceral level, that's probably been the most exciting.''
''The main thing I learned there,'' he says of that summer at the O'Neill, ''was how to filter criticism. 
You do this play and then everyone sits around and tells you how they would write your play if they were you. 
. . . I tended to take the bulk of the comments and do rewrites based on those lines, and I eventually threw them all out, because, yeah, there's a certain value in all this criticism, but you can't just swallow it all.''
HWANG FILLED A VAC-uum in New York, where productions of Asian-American plays were mostly limited to Tisa Chang's Pan Asian Repertory Theater and Wynn Handman's American Place Theater. 
In the early and mid-70's, the latter had produced Frank Chin's ''Chickencoop Chinaman'' and ''Year of the Dragon'' - angry plays by an angry young playwright. 
In Hwang, the producer Joseph Papp -on the prowl for new Asian-American work - found a different but no less compelling and personal voice.
'' 'FOB' reminded me of the 'greenhorns,' the Jews who came from Eastern Europe,'' says Papp. 
''Even though the cultures were strikingly different, it was the same notion. 
The principle of someone coming from the old country who didn't know how to behave himself was very much part of my own tradition. 
But this went further than that. 
'FOB' went into the traditions by suddenly moving into a more abstract, poetic existence in the context of a very naturalistic play.
''So I met him and liked him immediately,'' Papp continues. 
''He was trying to maintain his connection with his roots. 
I met his parents in Los Angeles. 
We went out for dinner. 
Naturally, his father selected a French restaurant. 
There was the son, holding on to tradition, and the father, very Westernized. 
David was looking for his past. 
That was very refreshing to me, because usually it's lost into the American culture or nobody can articulate it properly.''
''FOB'' opened at New York's Public Theater on June 9, 1980, directed by Mako, who had acted in the original Broadway production of Stephen Sondheim's ''Pacific Overtures.''
Starring in Hwang's play was John Lone, a Chinese actor trained in Asian opera techniques, with whom the playwright would be associated through several subsequent productions, and who would himself ride on the hyphen to stardom in Bernardo Bertolucci's ''The Last Emperor.''
Frank Rich wrote in The New York Times: ''Surely 'FOB' is the first show that has ever attempted to marry the conventional well-made play to Oriental theater and to mix the sensibilities of Maxine Hong Kingston and Norman Lear.''
Though ''FOB'' won Obie awards for both Hwang and Lone, the playwright found that not everyone was comfortable with his unboosterish portrayal of assimilation.
''My work has always been controversial within certain segments of the Asian-American community,'' says Hwang. 
''This is a community that is generally not represented well at all on the stage, in the media, etc. 
So on those few occasions when something comes along, everybody feels obligated to make sure that it represents his own point of view. 
And of course no artist can do that. 
. . . I find that sort of political criticism much more difficult and substantial than the esthetic criticism that I received at the O'Neill - that's nothing compared with being told that you've set the Asian-American back 10 years.''
Maxine Hong Kingston saw the Public Theater production of ''FOB.''
''The main question he asks is, What is a Chinese-American?'' says the novelist. 
''Is there a separate identity?
In 'FOB' there's a little bit of borrowing from Chinese theater, but it's not Chinese theater. 
He's searching, and he hasn't found it yet.''
Hwang achieved greater recognition with his next work, ''The Dance and the Railroad,'' which was commissioned by the Off Off Broadway New Federal Theater and moved to the Public in 1981. 
That play, set in 1867 during the construction of the transcontinental railroad, featured John Lone as a Chinese laborer more concerned with maintaining his operatic skills than with serving the white man, and Tzi Ma as another laborer whose heart is set on learning how to perform the role of a heroic warrior. 
While continuing to combine past and present, the playwright was also revealing another trait: a packed literary style that is never turgid.
Confident in Hwang's development as a playwright, Papp followed ''Dance'' almost immediately with a full-scale production of an audacious new work, ''Family Devotions.''
Mixing unembarrassed family portraits with a searching into the past, ''Family Devotions'' is a big, messy farce with a bleak, surreal coda. 
The centerpiece of the set is a pulpit, embellished with a neon cross, that is brought out daily for family prayer meetings. 
Here was Hwang skewering the Christian tradition that had obstructed his journey into the past.
''In this country, Christianity provides both a means of assimilation and a source of community,'' says the playwright. 
''Community for obvious reasons, because you have these Chinese churches and Korean churches. 
But you're also taking on what is perceived to be the religion of the society, doing something that's very acceptable by American standards -that is, you're buying into the great American cultural myth, and everybody's very happy. 
Except for your own soul, everybody wins.''
''Family Devotions'' is set in a home much like the one the playwright came from and revolves around a visit from a family elder who runs afoul of his sisters' efforts to convert him to Christianity. 
It also tells the stories of a wealthy father -a bank president who has found notoriety as a victim of a kidnapping -and his son (a thinly disguised stand-in for the author), who is leaving the family to go east and play the violin for the Boston Symphony.
''Chinese culture in general is not very religious,'' Hwang observes. 
''Confucianism is more a code of ethics than a religion, and ancestor worship is a way for parents to control you even after they're dead.''
The playwright's parents, Henry and Dorothy Hwang, were in the audience on the opening night of ''Family Devotions.''
''When he was a sophomore in college, he showed me a play and I said, 'Well, I send you to this expensive school and you write trashy stuff like this?'
'' recalls Henry Hwang, who was himself kidnapped in a bizarre incident about 10 years ago. 
''Two weeks later, he said it was going to be done in the dormitory. 
We went to see it, and I was moved to tears. 
But I felt dizzy after 'Family Devotions.'
I felt as if my life had been turned upside down. 
Of course, if the material is useful to him, he's welcome to it.''
With fame came a strong dose of self-doubt. 
''I was being put in a position for which I was not prepared,'' says the playwright. 
''At 23 or 24, I was asked to be some sort of spokesperson for Asian-Americans on various issues which I hadn't really thought out that well consciously. 
On the one hand, it was flattering. 
But on the other hand, growing up as a person of color, you're always ambivalent to a certain degree about your own ethnicity. 
You think it's great, but there is necessarily a certain amount of self-hatred, or confusion at least, which results from the fact that there's a role model in this society which is basically a Caucasian man, and you don't measure up to that.
''What was happening to me,'' he continues, ''was that that quality about which I was ambivalent was being thrust into the forefront. 
. . . It was no longer that I was a playwright per se, but that I was an Asian-American playwright, and my Asian-Americanness became the quality which defined me to the public.''
Hwang spent the next few years living a life of modest celebrity in New York - in 1983, the Public produced a pair of one-act plays of his under the collective title ''Sound and Beauty'' that were received with qualified praise - and traveling in Asia, Europe and Canada. 
In Toronto, he met Ophelia Chong, a Chinese-Canadian; they were married in Los Angeles and have lived there since 1985 with an aging Welsh corgi named Victor.
''Rich Relations'' was written during Hwang's Canadian sojourn, after a long bout with writer's block, and produced Off Broadway by the Second Stage in the spring of 1986. 
It was his first non-Asian play. 
It was also his first flop. 
Critics complained that he was rehashing old themes, and the playwright didn't disagree with the charge.
'' 'Rich Relations' was another attempt to write a spiritual farce,'' says Hwang, ''and it's about my family -except that they're not Asians. 
It was also an attempt to talk about resurrection, which was what I felt had just happened to me. 
Ethnic writers still have a kind of second-class cultural citizenship. 
. . . I've gotten a lot of mileage out of writing about Chinese-Americans. 
Whether that's good for my career in the long run is debatable.''
Hwang began writing for the movies and television as well as for the theater. 
He recently completed ''My American Son,'' about the Iran-contra affair, for Home Box Office and is at work on ''Seven Years in Tibet,'' a feature film set in India and Asia during World War II. 
All-out failure, he says, was the most liberating thing that had happened to him since the first strong flush of success with ''FOB.''
IT IS EASY TO SEE ALL OF Hwang's work as leading up to ''M. 
Butterfly,'' a play that is, at its root, a meditation on the ways the West misperceives the East and vice versa.
The composer Philip Glass, with whom Hwang was working on another project, recommended the playwright to Stuart Ostrow, who funded the research for ''M. 
Butterfly.''
By the time the play was ready to go into production, Jack Viertel had moved to New York to become a creative director for the Jujamcyn Theaters organization, which owns five Broadway theater houses. 
Viertel persuaded the company to invest in ''M. 
Butterfly'' and Ostrow to house it in a Jujamcyn theater when it came to Broadway. 
David Geffen signed on as co-producer. 
For a hugely risky work, ''M. 
Butterfly'' had garnered an extraordinary amount of mainstream support.
''This is a leap for a number of reasons,'' says Viertel. 
''One, it's a big play. 
It's the first play David's written that deals with history in a way that isn't totally imaginary or imagined; he's using the real world in a highly theatrical way. 
It's a much larger version of what he was doing in 'The Dance and the Railroad' -take an event and find the underlying social and political meaning of it.''
In ''M. 
Butterfly,'' as in all of his plays, Hwang searches in some of the darker corners of his own psyche. 
''As an Asian, I identify with Soong,'' he says. 
''As a man, I identify with Gallimard. 
That willful self-delusion is something I know I've experienced as a man; I've been good at self-delusion when I've wanted to be. 
The really sexist things Gallimard says are things that I know on some level work in my own soul and color my relationships with women. 
Pleasure in giving pain to a woman is not that far removed, I think, from a lot of male experiences.''
He recognizes the risks in moving into the political arena with so personal and stylized a work as ''M. 
Butterfly.''
During its pre-Broadway run in Washington, Hwang sweated out some negative criticism, reworking a few scenes and adding others to clarify the play without compromising his iconoclastic history lesson.
''The play might be seen as anti-Western, in the sense that it's saying that the West just hasn't looked at these issues,'' he says. 
''That's partly true, but it's very pro-American, too. 
It's saying, 'These are the facts of the situation, and if you would like to get along better in the world, then you had better look at the world more clearly. 
The East isn't going to go away.'
''
