
Xiang-Dong Kong
Xiang-dong Kong, a pianist, was born in Shanghai in 1968, and was one of the young musicians featured in Isaac Stern's 1979 film, ''From Mao to Mozart.''
Since then, he has completed his studies in his homeland and enrolled at Brigham Young University, in Utah. 
Earlier this year, he won the gold medal at the Gina Bachauer International Piano Competition, which sponsored his New York debut recital Oct. 
15 at Alice Tully Hall.
Mr. Kong proved especially impressive in works that demand outgoing, bravura playing - Liszt's ''Rhapsodie Espagnole,'' Grainger's wild-eyed paraphrase on Tchaikovsky's ''Waltz of the Flowers,'' and the sober, incisive and fiery Second Sonata by Robert Muczynski.
In these, he played with great energy, and a sense of rhythmic liquidity. 
Yet, even in the densest, loudest passages, every strand of the musical texture was clear and well-placed, and matters of phrasing and coloration appeared carefully considered.
This deliberation worked less well in a Haydn Sonata (Hob. 
XVI:50), Chopin's Polonaise-Fantaisie (Op. 61) and a Rachmaninoff Etude-Tableau (Op. 33, No. 8), all of which he played more gently. 
His sound was delicate and lovely in these, and there were some fine coloristic ideas. 
But there was also a tendency toward rhythmic squareness - the opposite of what made the brighter works so successful.
 
Arax Davtian
Arax Davtian, a soprano from Armenia who has been singing at the Bolshoi Opera in recent seasons, made her way easily through a demanding debut program last Sunday afternoon at Weill Recital Hall.
Ms. Davtian has a large, powerful, rich-toned voice and a commanding presence. 
She was most striking in arias by Verdi (''Pace, Pace'' from ''La Forza del Destino,'' and ''Ecco l'Orrido Campo'' from ''Un Ballo in Maschera'') and Bellini (''O Quante Volte'' from ''I Capuletti e i Montecchi''), and her renderings of contemporary songs by Tigran Mansurian and Edward Mirzoyan were quite moving.
She was also an effective Mozart singer, after a fashion. 
To this listener's taste, her heavy but well-controlled vibrato is better suited to music of later vintage; yet, once one got used to the dimension of her voice, her renderings of ''Come Scoglio'' from ''Cosi Fan Tutte'' and a pair of Mozart songs turned out to be fairly persuasive.
Also on the program were songs and arias by Beethoven and Glinka. 
Diana Mkrtchian was the excellent accompanist. 
Her handling of the operatic reductions were particularly pleasing.
 
Edith Murano
Edith Murano, a pianist from Argentina, favors a dry, lightly pedaled sound, and an approach to phrasing that can seem clipped and edgy. 
But her ideas are often original enough that one can overlook the more quirky aspects of her style - as well as the fact that her renderings are not always note-perfect.
At her North American debut, on Thursday evening at Weill Recital Hall, she played Beethoven's ''Pastorale'' Sonata and Prokofiev's Sonata No. 3 daringly, with razor-like rhythms and a tempestuous energy that often threatened to careen out of control, but never did. 
She also offered the United States premiere of Virgilio Mortari's Serenata, an attractive, neo-Baroque suite, which she played with clarity and incisiveness. 
Her opening pair of Bach Preludes and Fugues was less impressive. 
And her closing Chopin group was a mixed success. 
A Barcarolle (Op. 60) and an Impromptu (Op.51) were nightmarishly overwrought, but the Andante Spianato and Grande Polonaise Brillante (Op. 22) was played with a soulful, almost improvisatory approach that offset the frequent wrong notes in exposed places.
