
THE YEARS OF MACARTHUR Volume Three: Triumph and Disaster 1945-1964. 
By D. Clayton James. 
Illustrated. 848 pp. 
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. 
$29.95. IN last volume of D. Clayton James's biography of Gen. Douglas MacArthur (1880-1964), the greatest military figure of his day turns to peace and revives the energies of the Japanese to develop a modern state. 
He then returns to war, in Korea, and, after a period of defeat, fashions the Inchon landings, one of the outstanding military feats of the century. 
He is honored to the point of idolatry, but then his reputation is eroded, and his judgments about the Korean War are proved wrong by a powerful offensive by Communist Chinese armies. 
Contemptuous of President Truman, impudent toward the Joint Chiefs of Staff, MacArthur is removed from command.
This book and its two predecessors form one of the best military biographies of our time. 
The only comparison I can make is to Winston Churchill's ''Marlborough.''
In its presentation of the Duke's bickering with allies, his victory at Blenheim in 1704 and his final retreat into the shadows, that book evokes the same atmosphere of Greek tragedy.
Mr. James's book is abundantly researched and scrupulously fair to all the eminent figures who march through its pages - Truman, Dean Acheson, Gen. Matthew B. Ridgway, Emperor Hirohito. 
I regret that the author could not devote more space to the training and tactics of the Chinese troops, for it was that preparation that turned a United Nations parade to Korea's Yalu River into a stunning defeat.
A single exchange he cites between two other American generals reveals the nature of Washington's difficulties in dealing with the hubristic commander in Korea, especially after the success of the Inchon operation, which MacArthur carried out despite the misgivings of many senior officers. 
General Ridgway, then the Army's deputy chief of staff and shortly to be MacArthur's successor, asks Gen. Hoyt S. Vandenberg, the Air Force chief of staff, why the Joint Chiefs did not simply ''send orders to MacArthur and tell him what to do.''
To which the Air Force general replies, ''What good would that do?
He wouldn't obey the orders. 
What can we do?''
MacArthur had emerged from World War II as one of the great captains. 
Given the task of ruling occupied Japan, he was adept at bringing that country back into the family of nations. 
Understanding and liberal in his approach to Japan's economic and political problems, he nursed, cajoled and ordered a sick society back to health. 
The most professional of soldiers, he was thought too conservative for the job. 
But he encouraged the formation of unions, fought the giant business conglomerates that had run Japan and oversaw the country's almost miraculous recovery.
Mr. James demonstrates that MacArthur was a mass of contradictions. 
The soldier of splendid gifts also yearned for the Presidency and pursued it with singular ineptitude. 
The actor in him won the allegiance of politicians, publishers and businessmen, but he was also capable of great strategic and tactical operations in war. 
Mr. James makes a valiant effort to get to the real man, but he is only partly successful. 
Throughout his life, MacArthur spewed out speeches, communiques and statements, but like Robert E. Lee, he kept his inner self locked up.
MacArthur's dismissal by Truman in 1951 and the events that led up to it provide the most fascinating part of this excellent volume. 
After the North Korean invasion of South Korea in June 1950, MacArthur, directing poorly trained Americans and a frightened South Korean Army, held the line around Pusan with grim determination. 
After he planned and carried out the Inchon landings - of which Gen. Walter Bedell Smith remarked, ''I don't like the man, never did, but that was a great feat of arms'' - things began to go wrong. 
In his last communique about a victory, he claimed that his general assault after the landings should ''for all practical purposes end the war.''
But on Nov. 
25 the Chinese, who had intervened locally earlier, struck with two armies of 180,000 and 120,000 men. 
''We face an entirely new war,'' MacArthur said.
He was correct. 
But from that point on, his quarrels with Truman, whom he undoubtedly underestimated, and the Joint Chiefs grew more intense. 
He felt that even in this new situation, he was being denied the reinforcements he needed. 
The American and Allied buildup of NATO forces in Europe irritated him.
At the time of the Chinese intervention, the United Nations, under whose authority MacArthur operated, had begun a series of peace initiatives. 
In one of those public statements that even today set the teeth on edge, MacArthur made ''an arrogant challenge to the pride of Communist China,'' voicing his readiness to meet with the enemy Commander in Chief. 
It was also a challenge to Washington, and Truman decided MacArthur had to go because of an act ''totally disregarding all directives.''
The general had compounded previous errors by sending a message to the House minority leader, Representative Joseph Martin, declaring that he was fighting Europe's war with arms while diplomats fought it with words and ending with the slogan ''There is no substitute for victory.''
The order for his relief from command came on April 10, 1951. 
Even then some hesitated. 
Gen. Omar Bradley, then Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, wrote that MacArthur had ''stretched but had not legally violated any JCS directives.''
But to Truman, alarmed by the weakening of European support, the message was clear. 
So MacArthur went.
His departure provoked a political firestorm at home. 
In retrospect, however, it was remarkably short-lived. 
The general was showered with praise. 
He had abundant opportunities before Congress and the public to make his case. 
Then, in 1952, he flirted with Presidential politics but got nowhere. 
Another general, Dwight D. Eisenhower, took the stage.
MacArthur lived a full life until the end. 
He was much loved by many, scorned by others. 
But as few have done, he left his mark on history, not only as a soldier but as an unwilling sacrifice to the dominance of civil power in our Republic.
