
ON JAN. 
3, 1986, THE READERS OF THE ASIAN EDITION of The Wall Street Journal were treated to an arresting full-page advertisement. 
Topped by a smiling photograph of S. B. (for Shien Biau) Woo, the Lieutenant Governor of Delaware, who is also the state's highest-ranking elected Democrat, the highest-ranking Chinese-American official in the United States and a physicist, the ad posed two questions. 
''Are you thinking of investing in the USA?'' it asked. 
''WHY NOT DO AS THE AMERICANS DO!''
The wily Americans, Woo's text explained, incorporated their companies in the benign business climate of Delaware, established trusts there and founded Delaware banks and holding companies.
Shortly after the ad appeared, Woo himself was in the Orient, personally extolling the virtues of his state. 
With the Delaware Secretary of State, Michael E. Harkins, in tow, the Shanghai-born official traveled to Taiwan, Hong Kong, China, Indonesia, Singapore and the Philippines, tirelessly drumming up business with the help of a bilingual pamphlet that resembled something dreamed up by the National Lampoon back in the days when it was funny. 
''We Protect You From Politics,'' ran one passage. 
''By incorporating secretly, in the event of an emergency in your home country, such as insurrection or invasion by a hostile power, your company can temporarily or permanently move its domicile and be protected by the laws of The State of Delaware (for additional fees).''
The text went on to explain the many and subtle beauties of Delaware trust law, described the state as an investor's paradise and expounded on the wonders of the Port of Wilmington, a major point of entry for bananas and Volkswagens.
Strange as Woo's campaign may have seemed to an American, it worked. 
In the United States, Woo may be virtually unknown outside his adopted state, but in the Far East he is famous, and many doors fell effortlessly open before him. 
''We all know a lieutenant governorship isn't worth a hill of beans,'' he says, ''but they don't.''
If all goes according to plan, Delaware will shortly become the proud possessor of the only steel mill in the Western hemisphere partly owned by the Peoples' Republic of China.
Meanwhile, half a world away, Delaware's Governor, Michael N. Castle, was a man with all the delightful problems that accompany a booming economy and a healthy budget surplus. 
His state has long been known, not always favorably, as a corporate haven, a kind of American Liechtenstein - ''a pygmy state,'' fumed the late William L. Cary, a former chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, ''interested only in revenues.''
As recently as January 1988, the state lived up to its reputation when it passed legislation requiring anyone raiding a Delaware corporation either to acquire a whopping 85 percent of its stock in a single transaction or to suspend such efforts for a tedious three years. 
The precise effect of this legislation is unclear, especially because the S.E.C. immediately challenged its constitutionality, but it's typical of Delaware's tradition of tender concern for the well-being of its corporate children.
It is not a concern widely shared by other states in the Middle Atlantic region. 
Indeed, sympathetic observers of what is often called ''the Delaware design'' have long been known to express amazement that large, sophisticated neighbors like Pennsylvania and New York haven't found a way to compete with Delaware for the incorporation business.
''Surprisingly,'' notes one legal study, ''much of the difficulty of these large states appears to be . . . because of their legislatures.''
The large states persist in viewing corporation laws as complex moral and political problems rather than - as in happy Delaware - a way of making everybody rich.
Delaware has long boomed as a corporate venue; it now booms in other ways as well. 
The unemployment rate, at 3.3 percent of the work force, is the second lowest in the nation; only New Hampshire's is lower. 
Indeed, Delaware has become a net importer of labor, with more than 21,000 out-of-state commuters, most of them from Pennsylvania, Maryland and New Jersey. 
Downtown Wilmington, only a decade ago dominated by the stone mass of the Du Pont Building, the vacant lots of failed urban renewal schemes and a huge junkyard, now boasts a new skyline whose crown jewels are the 12-story Hercules Plaza (the junkyard still visible from its windows), the handsome mirrored facility of the Chase Manhattan Bank and the new 23-story Manufacturers Hanover Plaza.
In just seven short years, Delaware in general and Wilmington in particular have become a major financial center, a development that has brought the state some 15,900 jobs, 9,616 of them directly involved in the operations of out-of-state institutions like Manufacturers and Chase - jobs that would once have been domiciled mostly in New York. 
Moreover, Wilmington is the nation's largest depository of privately owned gold, largely because Delaware charges no sales tax on precious metals transactions - nor, for that matter, on anything else.
The absence of a Delaware sales tax is comparatively old hat. 
Of more interest is the fact that the state averaged an annual revenue growth of 7.7 percent over the past five years - more than double the rate of inflation -despite four consecutive cuts in the personal income tax that reduced the annual bite to an estimated 4.1 percent. 
Some have called the state a supply-side miracle. 
Others, perhaps more temperate in their judgment, suggest that the Delaware miracle is what happens when conservative Republicans like Michael Castle and Pierre S. du Pont 4th end up in the Governor's office.
In many ways, they are less ideological than pragmatic. 
Their policies have reflected the concerns of the well-educated professional class -the members of the state's unusually powerful bar association, the Ph.D.'s from Du Pont, the executives in the booming banks - that forms such an important part of the Delaware constituency. 
Like many of their generation and accomplishments, Delaware's Governors have been liberal on matters of civil rights, pragmatic on social policy, deeply concerned about education and fiscally conservative. 
''In Delaware, there isn't a lot of difference between the Democrats and the Republicans,'' says Governor Castle, who used the occasion of his latest State of the State message to utter some fairly tart words about the Federal Government and its abdication of its responsibilities. 
''I'm more of a Governor than I am a Republican.''
Delaware may not be easier to govern than, say, New Jersey, but it's certainly very different. 
In a state with 644,000 inhabitants occupying only 1,982 square miles -''Three counties at low tide,'' says Castle, ''and two counties at high'' - obtaining a consensus is fairly easy. 
''Everybody knows everybody else,'' one official explains. 
This doesn't necessarily mean that everybody is interested in looking after everybody else. 
''I'm not very proud of it, but we have the highest infant mortality rate in the country,'' Castle says. 
Delaware also has one of the highest rates of black teen-age pregnancy, and its welfare benefits are the second lowest in the mid-Atlantic region, after West Virginia. 
''The Delaware miracle?'' says the Rev. Otis Herring, the president of the Ministers' Action Council. 
''I wait to see it.''
SURROUNDED BY the dark paneling and antique china of the executive conference room on the 12th floor of the Carvel State Office Building in downtown Wilmington, Castle and his aides contemplate their handiwork and discuss a dilemma. 
With money pouring into the state coffers from the economic boom, Delaware sailed out of fiscal 1987 with an unencumbered surplus of $85 million. 
Castle wants to devote the money to long-term projects, to his new highway trust fund, to his welfare reform, to his overcrowded prisons and environmental programs.
Unfortunately, the legislators in the state capital of Dover also want to spend the money. 
''Day-care centers,'' says Castle. 
''People want to put their names on buildings. 
This whole day-care thing has gotten out of hand.''
At the same time, there is talk around the big table of granting a tax break to venture-capital firms. 
''I don't see anything wrong with giving a tax break to a business that isn't even here yet,'' says Castle, ending the debate. 
Someone points out that the whole question is moot, since Delaware will be at the bottom of the Atlantic Ocean in a mere 7,000 years. 
''Yeah, well,'' says Castle. 
''That's the trouble with us politicians. 
We always think in the short term.''
Down on the 11th floor, Lieutenant Governor Woo contemplates the handiwork resulting from his 1986 swing through Asia. 
Woo's office estimates that the Lieutenant Governor's efforts have led to an annual $1 million in incorporation fees from Oriental companies. 
The Ambassador of the People's Republic of China came to call; Wilmington and Ningbo, a port city near Shanghai, were designated as ''Friendship Cities,'' and the Lieutenant Governor was on the lookout for some Ningbo shipping business. 
With Woo pinch-hitting as interpreter, a local company won an important polypropylene contract from the People's Republic, and a refinisher of 1840's furniture landed a $1.5 million joint venture to build a furniture plant. 
And while Woo is looking forward to a rich harvest of Hong Kong flight capital in anticipation of the British pull-out from the colony in 1997, in the short run he can look forward to restarting the moribund Phoenix Steel Corporation mill using money advanced by a Hong Kong investor together with the China International Trust and Investment Corp., the second largest financial institution in the People's Republic.
IT WAS IN DELAWARE, IN 1802, on the banks of the Brandywine River, that Eleuthere Irenee du Pont de Nemours erected his first gunpowder mills and laid the foundation of the nation's largest chemical company. 
Evidently a man of iron nerve, he built his personal mansion overlooking his works, the most explosive site in North America. 
Soon, however, the estates of his heirs were spread all over the northern arc of the state, and the du Ponts occasionally seemed to harbor the illusion that they owned the place.
With 25,400 employees, the Du Pont company easily remains the largest in the state, far ahead of Hercules Inc., the chemical and plastic concern (2,700), the British-owned ICI Americas Inc. 
(3,600) and the General Motors plant (4,200). 
''Until the out-of-state banks began to come in around 1981,'' says one local banker, ''three institutions ran this state. 
One was Du Pont, of course. 
Another was the Wilmington Trust. 
And the last was the corporate law firm of Richards, Layton, & Finger.''
The firm's legendary Aaron Finger, who died in 1969, was regarded as one of the most formidable corporation lawyers in the United States, a voice that was respected, sometimes feared, and often heeded. 
And thereby hangs a tale.
Once, in Delaware and many other states, the life of a corporation was limited to a specific term (in Delaware, 20 years, after which it had to be incorporated again) and for highly specific purposes. 
The method of incorporation was via a special act of the Legislature, which offered rich possibilities for bribery. 
In 1875, the Legislature passed a general incorporation law that permitted the founding of corporations ''for religious, charitable, literary and manufacturing purposes, for the preservation of animal and vegetable food, building and loan association, and for draining low lands.''
Then, in 1896, New Jersey adopted its own incorporation statute, the most liberal in the land. 
In New Jersey, a corporation could be eternal. 
It could carry on operations anywhere it pleased, it could merge and consolidate its operations as it pleased, and within the bounds of the law it could revise its charter by a simple vote of its board of directors, without consulting the pesky and unpredictable stockholders.
Needless to say, companies raced to New Jersey; by 1902, its income from filing fees and the franchise tax was so great that it abolished the property tax. 
Delaware, quick to sense an opportunity, was not far behind with its own General Corporation Law of 1899, which was ballyhooed as even more liberal than New Jersey's, to say nothing of cheaper, but Delaware was wasting its breath. 
New Jersey remained the premier incorporation state until 1913, when the outgoing Governor, Woodrow Wilson, persuaded the Legislature to outlaw trusts and holding companies.
Most of Wilson's law was repealed in 1917, but by then the damage was done; Delaware, which had nothing against trusts and holding companies, also had most of the business. 
By 1929, corporate fees and taxes provided 42.5 percent of state income. 
Still, nothing lasts forever. 
By 1945, with more than 30 other states having liberalized their own corporate statutes, only 16.3 percent of Delaware's revenue came from the corporations it sheltered. 
By 1955, the figure was down to 7.2 percent.
Clearly, something had to be done. 
In 1967, when corporate filings had reached a new low, the General Corporation Law was revised under the guidance of a committee put together by the Secretary of State's office. 
It was an unusual but very tidy arrangement, rather as though the nation's defense contractors were to draw up the military budget. 
Few dissenting voices were heard in Delaware. 
''You can't trust the Legislature to do a lot of things,'' says former Governor du Pont, ''but you can rely on it to keep the corporation law up to date.''
With a little help from its friends, of course.
SHOULD YOU DECIDE TO incorporate in Delaware, the state makes it easy for you with a booklet entitled, appropriately enough, ''Incorporating in Delaware.''
It comes complete with handy fold-out forms, and it is a gold mine of useful tips. 
Should you be at a loss for a precise reason for incorporating in Delaware - or if you have reason for lying low when the subject is raised - the booklet suggests that you simply state: ''The purpose of the corporation is to engage in any lawful act or activity for which corporations may be organized under the General Corporation Law of Delaware.''
The minimum filing fee is $50. 
For an additional $100, the state will incorporate you on the day you hand in your papers; $50 gets you incorporated within 24 hours. 
''We respect your privacy,'' Woo's pamphlet reminds us. 
''You don't have to tell us the details of your business; you don't have to list who's on your board or who's holding office; and you don't have to use your name and address -just use your Delaware agent's.''
The job can be done in a matter of moments. 
''The fact is,'' says Carolyn McKown, the vice-president of Corporate Agents Inc., a Wilmington specialty firm, ''it's real easy to get incorporated in Delaware, no matter how you do it. 
We can do an incorporation in about three minutes.''
Buying a used car should be so simple. 
''No waiting!'' trumpets the C.A.I. advertisement in the state booklet. 
''Just call us toll free . . . and our friendly, professional staff will form your corporation while you are on the telephone via our direct computer link to the Delaware Corporation Department. 
(Have your VISA or MasterCard ready.)''
Once you have received your certificate, the advantages accrue immediately. 
For example, you can hold meetings of your anonymous board by telephone, saving yourself much bothersome expense. 
Your profits, if earned outside Delaware, will be exempt from state taxation. 
You can pay dividends, if any, out of either your annual profits or your accrued surplus from past operations. 
(New York allows dividends to be paid only from the surplus, meaning that you have to establish a track record. 
Delaware is uninterested in your track record.) Other states allow outraged stockholders to sue board members for glaring misjudgment, an increasingly common (and successful) practice that has led insurance companies to withdraw their protection - which in turn has caused many candidates to decline the honor of a company directorship, creating a small crisis in the nation's boardrooms. 
In 1986, however, Delaware allowed its corporations to reimburse their directors for many kinds of court-ordered money damages, which solved the problem quite nicely.
Moreover, if a charter is properly written, companies can change their by-laws without stockholder approval, a handy power to have when defenses are being put in place to repel a raid. 
And when it comes to corporate raiding, Delaware is by no means immune to those irrational moralisms and political acts that so bedevil the Legislatures of its larger neighbors. 
In 1987, when the Texas oilman T. Boone Pickens Jr. was trying to accumulate an ominous block of stock in the Boeing Company, long a loyal Delaware corporation, he uttered many eloquent words about the state and even traveled to Wilmington. 
(''I was surprised that he was so charming,'' says Governor Castle.) Around that time, the thinking of the Legislature in Dover was sharpened when Hercules Inc. abruptly sold its share of a joint venture for $1.5 billion - meaning that Hercules, with all that money on its books, was now itself a prime takeover target. 
In January 1988, the incorporation statute was amended to forbid any holder of 15 percent of a Delaware company's stock from effecting a merger for three years unless the board of directors approved, two-thirds of the stockholders overrode a negative board decision or the raider managed to acquire 85 percent of the company's unencumbered stock in a single purchase.
Still, anyone can make laws, and states seeking a share of the Delaware pie have amended their incorporation laws in a so-called ''race to the bottom line'' as they strive to accommodate the needs of corporate America and, not incidentally, pick up some of Delaware's handsome fees. 
Notwithstanding, companies have continued to flock to Delaware, whose continued pre-eminence in the field resides largely in the hard-to-duplicate depth and expertise of its powerful legal profession and, not least, in its unique Chancery Court, modeled on a royal institution that was abolished in most of the rest of the United States at the time of the Revolution. 
''I think a lot of my predecessors were Anglophiles,'' says the present Chancellor, William T. Allen, only the 19th person to have occupied the post in nearly 200 years.
His decisions - like those of his predecessors - will be cited by courts and lawyers far from Wilmington as the definitive word on the subject. 
Everything that happens in the Chancery Court is potentially worth millions of dollars to the arbitrageurs who bet heavily on the outcomes of the various battles, which accounts for the fact that the Chancellor's diminutive and almost makeshift courtroom - it seems to have been furnished from the catalogue of a third-rate store specializing in providing liturgical furniture to impoverished storefront churches - is sometimes thronged with local lawyers in the pay of the nation's investment community.
At crucial moments, the lawyers bolt for the phones; at least one lawyer has been known to boast of reporting to his masters directly from the courtroom, by means of a concealed cellular phone. 
Yet for all the vast sums involved, no Delaware judge has ever been convicted of corruption. 
''I think it's because we're so small,'' says Allen. 
''If somebody started getting rich at this job, the rest of us would notice.''
In the midst of the slightly hallucinatory Delaware miracle, it's easy to forget that it was not always thus. 
In 1978, Irving S. Shapiro, then the chief executive officer of Du Pont, flatly advised other companies not to locate in the state. 
For one thing, the personal income tax was a confiscatory 19.8 percent. 
''When I first came to the Legislature in 1963,'' says State Senator Herman Holloway Sr., ''we used to hope that a du Pont would die so we could balance the budget with the inheritance taxes.''
To Pierre du Pont, who was elected Governor in 1976, the problems were enormous, but the causes were simple. 
''In 1976, we were the classic liberal basket case. 
High tax rates. 
Second highest unemployment rating in the country. 
Lowest bond rating. 
When I first got here, I wondered if I could actually run this place. 
When I was a Congressman in Washington and we needed money, we always said we could take it out of the Defense budget. 
But Delaware didn't have a defense budget.''
Du Pont, an improbably handsome patrician Republican of the bluest blood, immediately adopted a classic remedy. 
''I decided I could only do two or three things a year, but I was going to get them done,'' he says. 
High on his list were balancing the budget and cutting taxes. 
''Pete du Pont is a little like Mike Dukakis,'' says a banker close to the situation. 
''He got lucky. 
He can take credit for someone else's success.''
What happened next is a little confusing, at least in its details; victory has many fathers. 
Du Pont, his first tax cut on the books, was deep in his 1980 re-election campaign when the Chase Manhattan Bank came to call. 
''They wanted to move in their credit-card operation,'' says the banker. 
''They said they could live with our situation, but they needed the usury law [the state law that set a cap on interest rates] repealed. 
They did not meet with a good reception.''
Other Wilmington businessmen persuaded Chase officials to pay calls on the Governor and on Irving Shapiro of Du Pont. 
Mr. Shapiro regarded the Delaware usury laws as absurd.
In early 1981, with Governor du Pont safely re-elected and the future tax cuts therefore assured, the Legislature passed a remarkable law called the Financial Center Development Act. 
The new law permitted out-of-state banks to set up shop but prohibited them from engaging in retail banking that could take away customers from local banks - a move that assuaged the anxieties of Wilmington Trust. 
It also required them to bring in at least $25 million in capital within their first year of operation and to hire at least 100 employees. 
But it offered them a remarkable tax advantage. 
A bank generating less than $20 million in income within the state boundaries would pay a tax of 8.7 percent, while a bank that earned more than $30 million would pay only 2.7 percent on anything over that amount.
Business flocked in. 
Chase was joined by Manufacturers Hanover, Chemical Bank, Citicorp, Bankers Trust Company, J. P. Morgan & Company, E. F. Hutton & Company, J. C. Penney Company, Montgomery Ward & Company and the Bank of New York; other banks moved in operations from as far away as Michigan and Texas. 
E. F. Hutton established a trust company; J. C. Penney and Montgomery Ward set up consumer-credit operations. 
''We had no idea it was going to be so successful,'' says Governor Castle. 
In Wilmington and its suburbs, construction boomed. 
In a state the size of Delaware, the prospect of 10,000 new banking jobs and 7,000 new jobs in support industries, many of them held by minorities, was no small event.
''Electricity in Delaware costs roughly half as much as it does in New York,'' says William E. Pike, the executive vice-president of Morgan's Delaware operations. 
''We have found that Delaware productivity is 20 percent higher per employee, at a minimum. 
There's a completely different political environment here. 
In New York it sometimes seems that the environment is not very hospitable. 
In Delaware, they couldn't have been more welcoming and helpful. 
You can't move Wall Street to Delaware, of course, but there's no reason to keep all those back office operations in lower Manhattan.''
WHAT DOES IT all mean?
To former Governor du Pont, whose Presidential ambitions are clearly not dead but sleeping, the Delaware miracle is a triumph of sound conservative principles and supply-side economics. 
He regards the Delaware model as easily exportable to other states, once they come to their senses.
Others are not so sure. 
''I don't understand supply-side economics,'' says Irving Shapiro, now a lawyer with Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom, ''and I don't think Pete du Pont does either. 
But as a businessman I can tell you it doesn't work.''
To some, the Delaware phenomenon is a result of luck, good timing, a regional boom (especially in financial services) and increasingly predatory tax policies in other states. 
''We are a very small place with a very large industrial base and a long head start in corporation law,'' says one local banker. 
''You can't duplicate that sort of thing. 
I can't believe how complacent everyone is.''
