
A decade after he lectured America's foes from the podium at the United Nations, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan brought some of the same style into a meeting this week with China's pre-eminent leader, Deng Xiaoping.
The issue, once more, was the United Nations - specifically, China's overwhelming record of voting against the side taken by the United States.
As the United States representative to the United Nations under President Ford from 1975 to 1976, Mr. Moynihan gained a reputation for taking the offensive against critics of the United States and its allies and for assailing those critics for what he characterized as hypocrisy.
At a meeting with Mr. Deng on Tuesday in the Great Hall of the People, he used less flowery language than he often used in the General Assembly. 
But his remarks on the Chinese voting record were a departure from the bland exchanges that usually result when visiting Western politicians are ushered in to see the Chinese leader.
Sen Daniel Patrick Moynihan, in China with Congressional group, complains to Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping about China's overwhelming record of voting against side taken by United States at United Nations; notes State Department tally of last year's General Assembly session shows China and United States on opposite sides 86 percent of time; official New China News Agency, in its report of meeting, says Deng acknowledged that 'certain problems' exist between two nations (M)
The New York Democrat was one of seven senators at a 75-minute meeting with Mr. Deng. The group was headed by the majority leader, Bob Dole, Republican of Kansas.
 
Tally of Assembly Votes
Mr. Moynihan entered the session with a State Department tally of last year's General Assembly session that showed China and the United States on opposite sides 86 percent of the time when a for-or-against vote was taken. 
He said at a news conference later that he had told Mr. Deng that this put China ''in the same column'' as the Soviet Union and the countries espousing nonalignment, with patterns of voting overwhelmingly against the United States.
Mr. Moynihan said he had chided Mr. Deng for what the Senator called China's ''two United States policy,'' a friendly attitude in direct relations between Peking and Washington, and a sharply different posture at the United Nations.
This was a play on China's longstanding allegation that the United States follows a ''two China policy,'' treating Taiwan as a separate state while recognizing Peking as the Government of the mainland. 
In the Shanghai communique in 1972, the United States accepted that Taiwan was part of China.
Mr. Deng, who celebrated his 81st birthday last week, appeared to be in a genial mood as he greeted the Americans. 
Reporters who were admitted to the opening minutes of the session were struck by the Chinese leader's apparent robustness and his deep tan. 
He recently spent a month at the Chinese leaders' retreat at Beidaihe, a seaside resort 165 miles east of Peking, where he is said to swim in the sea twice a day.
 
Visitors Do Most of Talking
In a break from the usual practice, the Chinese leader left most of the talking to the visitors. 
That allowed the Americans to raise matters ranging from Taiwan to China's policy on nuclear proliferation and the increasing expense faced by American businessmen living and working here.
From the senators' accounts at the news conference, Mr. Moynihan's seemed to have been the most sharply worded of the American statements.
In its report of the meeting, the official New China News Agency said Mr. Deng had responded to the senators' views by saying, ''Certain problems do exist between us, but as long as we have the desire to develop relations, these problems can be solved and solutions can be found.''
Mr. Dole, in a statement, said the two sides ''had similar views on most issues, and even when we didn't, we disagreed in an open and friendly way.''
Asked for his account of Mr. Deng's response, Mr. Moynihan chuckled. 
''He looked at his watch and indicated that it was time for the meeting to end,'' the Senator said.
