
Deng Xiaoping, China's senior leader, will not be a member of the new Central Committee of the Communist Party, delegates to the party congress said today.
Mr. Deng's expected departure from the Central Committee, which debates and approves policy, means that he will apparently also have to quit the Standing Committee, or inner circle, of the Central Committee's Politburo, the body that rules the country, But Mr. Deng is expected to remain a forceful presence behind the scenes, relinquishing little of his actual authority.
Diplomats and knowledgeable Chinese agree that Mr. Deng, who is 83 years old, will stay on as chairman of the Central Military Commission, which controls the armed forces, in keeping with Mao's dictum that ''political power grows out of the barrel of a gun.''
 
Chairmanship Eliminated in 1982
The Central Committee seat would be the first party post that Mr. Deng has given up since he eliminated his job as deputy party chairman at the last party congress in September 1982. 
The party chairmanship, which was created for Mao in 1945, was also abolished with its deputy slots.
Mr. Deng's refusal to accept the mantle of chairman then underscored the shift to a more collective leadership and left the General Secretary as the top official of the Communist Party, which has 46 million members. 
Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang is now the Acting General Secretary.
Mr. Deng was twice purged from the Central Committee, in 1966 and in 1976, when he ran afoul of leftists in the Cultural Revolution, but each time he returned to power. 
Since 1978, he has been the most powerful man in China, despite his unwillingness to assume formal leadership posts. 
He declined to succeed Hua Guofeng as Prime Minister when Mr. Hua was forced out in September 1980.
Word of Mr. Deng's decision to step down from the Central Committee emerged during a series of strictly controlled interviews today with four delegates to the party congress.
Pressed by foreign reporters, Lu Guangqiu, a prosperous 44-year-old chicken farmer from Hangzhou, blurted out his astonishment that Mr. Deng's name had not appeared on the list of potential candidates that was presented to delegates of the congress.
''I never thought I wouldn't find Deng's name on the list,'' Mr. Lu said to the foreign reporters who crowded around him.
 
Wants the Aged to Retire
Mr. Deng, who designed China's economic resurgence over the last decade, has called on all the party's elderly leaders to retire in favor of younger leaders. 
At the last party congress in 1982, he became chairman of a Central Advisory Commission newly created to get aging Communists to step aside, but he failed to get many of his contemprories to follow him.
Today, the presidium of the congress, a body of 187 delegates composed of the party's elite, approved a list of 172 names to be elected to the new Central Committee by the congress at large, according to the Government-controlled New China News Agency. 
The election, which is little more than a formality, is expected to occur on Sunday.
The list of 172 names represents a sharp drop in the size of the Central Committee from its current 209 members. 
It was unclear why a decision had been made to pare it down, unless its size has been found to be unwieldy.
 
'New Nucleus of Leadership'
There had been some speculation, particularly among Eastern European diplomats, that Mr. Deng would remain in the Politburo. 
Several Chinese familiar with the deliberations of the congress said today that it was clear now that Mr. Deng would leave the Central Committee.
Yet foreign diplomats and Chinese alike agree that even outside the Central Committee Mr. Deng will continue to exercise great influence over the formulation of policy. 
As one Western analyst here put it, referring to Mr. Deng's favorite hobby, ''he could become president of the bridge association and he'd still run the show.''
