
A daughter of Deng Xiaoping, in an article published on the Chinese leader's 80th birthday, today described for the first time her father's ordeal as a political outcast during the Cultural Revolution.
Mr. Deng operated a lathe in a tractor factory, lived in a brick house with no heat, grew cabbages and beans to feed his family and read Marx and Lenin late into the night, the article said.
The description of Mr. Deng's humiliation at the hands of Mao Zedong and his followers was provided by one of Mr. Deng's five children, identified only as Mao Mao. 
A 3,000-word article under this name filled a half-page of the Communist Party newspaper People's Daily today.
Daughter of Deng Xiaoping, in article published on Chinese leader's 80th birthday in Chinese Communist Party newspaper People's Daily, describes for first time her father's ordeal as political outcast during Cultural Revolution; article says Deng operated lathe in tractor factory, lived in brick house with no heat, grew cabbages and beans to feed family and read Marx and Lenin; article does not identify Deng by name, but officials confirm article refers to him (M)
No mention of Mr. Deng's birthday was made in the article, and there were no official celebrations.
 
Deng Not Identified by Name
The article did not identify Mr. Deng by name, but Chinese officials confirmed that the article clearly referred to him. 
Mao Mao appeared to be a nickname, and the daughter's real name was not known.
Mao Mao took up the story after 1967, when Mr. Deng and Liu Shaoqi, who was then President, were purged as would-be capitalists.
The article said: ''It had already been two years since my father was kept in custody after being labeled the nation's second biggest capitalist roader. 
Now he suddenly got the order that he was being sent to Jiangxi Province.''
Mr. Deng's family was scattered. 
His older son, Deng Pufang, a physics student, was disabled after persecution by Red Guards at Peking University, and his other son and three daughters were being ''reformed'' in the countryside, the article said.
 
Couple Kept Under Guard
''Only my father's stepmother lived with my parents in Peking,'' Mao Mao wrote. 
She said her mother, her father and his stepmother were flown to Nanchang, the capital of Jiangxi Province in south-central China, and were taken to a closed infantry academy nearby, where they lived for three years in a two-story brick house.
The family had a kitchen and dining room, a sitting room and two bedrooms. 
''The rest of the rooms were for people sent to guard my parents,'' Mao Mao wrote.
''The only able-bodied worker,'' she said, ''was my 65-year-old father, so menial jobs such as cleaning the floor and splitting firewood were done by him. 
They looked after each other, loved each other, shared together.''
Mr. Deng's wife, Zhou Lin, was often bedridden, the article said. 
There was no heat. 
''Father used to bathe in cold water every day,'' the article said.
 
'They Lived Frugally'
In spring, the family planted beans, cabbage, peppers and squash, the article went on. 
''Every day Father spent time in the garden. 
My grandmother raised a few chickens. 
Because Father was labeled a capitalist roader, my parents got only small allowances for their daily needs. 
They lived frugally.''
After supper, they listened to news on the radio, Mao Mao said. 
''They got permission to bring with them the family library. 
Father would read into deep in the night, many works by Marx, Engels, Lenin and Stalin, and also history books.''
Mao Mao described her father as an introspective man who ''day after day, month after month, year after year'' would walk in the courtyard, meditating.
In 1971, the disabled Deng Pufang was allowed to join his parents, the article said. 
He is now an official of China's Fund for the Handicapped.
 
Jobs in a Tractor Factory
At their request, Mao Mao wrote, Mr. Deng and his wife were given jobs in a tractor factory, where Mr. Deng, who had learned the trade as a youth, operated a lathe. 
Armed guards went with him to the factory.
When he was told of the death in 1971 of Defense Minister Lin Biao, accused of plotting to kill Mao Zedong, ''Father was very excited,'' the article said. 
''He uttered one sentence: 'Even heaven won't tolerate Lin Biao.'
''
Soon after, according to Mao Mao, conditions improved and the guards were removed.
In February 1973, Mr. Deng was summoned back into China's Government. 
He was purged again in 1976 and 1977 before Chairman Mao's death and the overthrow of the so-called Gang of Four, radicals led by Mao's widow, Jiang Qing. 
But Mr. Deng eventually regained power, becoming the highest leader in China.
