
On her first trip to SoHo the other day, Deng Lin, a Chinese artist who is accomplished in the brush-and-ink tradition that has flourished in her country for more than a thousand years, circled warily around a huge and complex Frank Stella wall piece at the Leo Castelli Gallery on Greene Street. 
She paused meditatively in front of a simpler floor piece by Ellsworth Kelly, composed of two flat semicircular planes. 
And she looked with a certain fascination at a pair of massive steel plates by Richard Serra, standing upright in precarious tension.
''Some American art is more about architecture and industry than feeling,'' said Miss Deng, who is the daughter of Deng Xiaoping, China's senior leader.
No doubt about it, these bold and ambitious American works are in sharp contrast with the traditional art of Miss Deng, who specializes in pine trees, plum blossoms and wisteria vines done with vivacity and great delicacy by means of a brush wielded freehand with water and ink.
 
'A Simple Medium'
''It's a simple medium in which you can express strong passions,'' she said, through an interpreter. 
Though her medium is a conservative one, Miss Deng is credited by its aficionados with bringing a highly personal sense of freedom and vitality to it, a tendency perhaps inherited from her father, who has pursued a program of liberating and revitalizing the Chinese economy.
Miss Deng was in New York for the opening of her first show here, at the Hefner Galleries, 1020 Madison Avenue, at 78th Street (through Oct. 
29). She was accompanied by Long Rui, a leading Chinese landscapist who works in the same manner and shares the show with her. 
The two were not novices at contemporary American art - they had seen it in Paris, Tokyo and even in Beijing, where Robert Rauschenberg's work has been shown at the National Gallery.
''We do respect the ideas and creativity of American artists,'' said Miss Deng, who said she felt that sculpture was more developed in the United States than in Europe.
''Chinese artists know more about Western artists than the West knows about them,'' Miss Deng said. 
At Castelli, they admired the brushwork and colors in Roy Lichtenstein's vast canvas, ''Forest Scene With Figures.''
At the Phyllis Kind Gallery, Miss Deng was bemused by the oil paintings of Jim Nutt, whose distorted faces, she felt, had ''a touch of Picasso.''
''But for myself,'' she said, ''I'm much more interested in the results coming from paper and ink.''
Later, at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, Mr. Long found a de Kooning that he said he would like to take back to China.
But of some of the work they looked at - or did not - their reactions were more negative. 
They did not, for example, cotton to Bruce Nauman's ''Hanging Carousel,'' a kinetic work at Sperone Westwater, in which the skinned carcasses of animals (in replica) swing around a video monitor on which a man is seen skinning a fox.
''Does such work sell?''
Miss Deng wondered. 
''Would anyone buy it for his home?''
Nor did they appreciate the art of Kenny Scharf, seen at the Tony Shafrazi Gallery, a kind of watered-down Pop that comments on the consumerism of American life.
 
Painted, 'but Not Made'
''It's too bright, too garish,'' Miss Deng said. 
''There's too much going on. 
I like things to be painted, but not made.''
And she was not interested in visiting the Whitney Museum of American Art to see the work of Robert Mapplethorpe, whose photographs deal explicitly with parts of the male anatomy.
''Any form of art can be seen in China,'' said Lisa Lai, Miss Deng's interpreter. 
''Even nudes, if they're not too unhealthy.''
As part of her painting career, Miss Deng - who is 47 years old, married and, in the new Chinese way, the mother of only one child - serves as president of the Society for the Excellence of the Fine Arts in the Orient, an organization that is run by artists and is devoted to the wider recognition of brush-and-ink painting. 
The group organizes exchange exhibitions with other countries, and has even had one with Taiwan.
As a recognized artist, with solid academic training, Miss Deng is given a stipend by the Chinese Government, and she is allowed to sell her work abroad, although political opponents of her father recently accused her of charging exorbitant sums for her paintings in Hong Kong and not accounting for the money.
 
'A New Freedom'
At a luncheon for Miss Deng and Mr. Long given Thursday by the China Institute, on East 65th Street, the two were asked if there was underground, or black, art activity in China, as there has been in Russia. 
''There was in the 60's and 70's during the Cultural Revolution, but it has disappeared in the last five years or so,'' Mr. Long said. 
''There is a new freedom now, and artists no longer feel a hesitancy to say things out in the open.'
Though she declined to talk specifically about the Cultural Revolution, the 10-year campaign against artists and intellectuals carried out in the last decade of Mao Zedong's rule, Miss Deng and her family suffered greatly. 
In one incident, a brother, Deng Pufang, was thrown out of a window by Red Guards and suffered permanent paralysis. 
He now leads the Chinese organization for the disabled.
Miss Deng's own career was severely blighted.''I had a tough experience,'' she said, through Miss Lai. 
''It changed my personality.''
In general, had being the daughter of Deng Xiaoping helped or hindered her?
''We're in two different areas,'' Miss Deng said. 
''He runs the country and I'm an artist.''
