
Thousands of parents are likely to pay more for diaper services as a result of import quotas the United States has quietly imposed on plain cotton diapers from China.
The quotas, which were fixed after a textile trade pact signed with Beijing on Dec. 
20, illustrate the complexity of trade issues and the trade-off involved in using protection as an instrument to preserve jobs.
The action was taken to placate the domestic textile industry, which has long complained about the job-destroying effects of imports. 
The industry is pushing legislation to set quotas on all textile and apparel products entering the United States.
 
Only 60 Jobs Involved
Only 60 jobs at diaper plants in South Carolina are involved. 
But the action seems likely to raise prices charged by diaper services around the country, as they face higher prices for diapers. 
It has also prompted criticism on environmental grounds because it may encourage more use of disposable diapers.
If use of disposable diapers increases, layoffs at diaper services may outstrip the number of jobs the cloth-diaper quotas are meant to preserve. 
At the same time, of course, the number of jobs at companies that make disposable diapers would presumably increase.
Environmental, consumer and free-trade advocates are the leading critics of the curbs. 
''They will mean higher prices, a switch to disposables and more environmental problems,'' said Mark Silbergeld, director of the Consumers Union's Washington office. 
''I'm not sure how much they can really help the domestic industry.''
 
'Destroys Their Credibility'
Representative Ron Wyden, Democrat of Oregon, criticized the Administration's trade policy as inconsistent. 
''For guys like me, fighting in the trenches for free trade,'' he said, ''this sort of protectionist action to help a grand total of one company destroys their credibility.''
The Reagan Administration says the curbs are necessary. 
Gary Holmes, a spokesman at the Office of the United States Trade Representative, said the domestic industry ''told us they were being killed by imports.''
Only one company in this country makes the thick-ply diapers that compete with Chinese diapers as the mainstay for hundreds of services. 
The Gerber Products Company of Fremont, Mich., a $1 billion-a-year baby-products concern with a small plant in Pelzer, S.C., makes Curity brand diapers as part of its Soft Care Apparel division.
Sixty of the 400 jobs at the plant are related to production of the heavy Curity diapers used by diaper services, said a company spokeswoman.
About a year ago the Government imposed temporary quotas, following a surge in imports in 1986. 
Meanwhile, Gerber raised prices twice -12 percent effective Oct. 
15 and 15 percent May 1 - increasing prices to around $9 a dozen. 
Diapers from China now cost roughly the same.
For many diaper services, the cost of diapers is about one-fifth the cost of doing business.
With Chinese diapers limited and prices higher for domestic diapers, some services now plan to increase their rates. 
''Within two months we will raise prices 6 percent, our first increase in two and one-half years,'' said Brian Smithson, president of Baby Diaper Service of Seattle, which calls itself the largest service in the country. 
That increase would work out to 50 cents on top of the $9 it now costs to provide the 80 diapers an average baby uses in a week.
Paul J. Anderson, president of Babyland Diaper Service of Portland, Ore., said that over the next two years diaper prices could go up by an additional 25 percent. 
''When you have only one supplier, you're at their mercy,'' he said.
Although shipments of diapers are normally measured in dozens, the quotas are fixed by weight. 
China this year is barred from sending the United States more than 1.27 million pounds of diapers, of which 270,000 pounds will go to Pro Diaper. 
A dozen diapers weigh approximately three and a half pounds.
 
Many More Jobs at Stake
Mr. Anderson maintained that many more American jobs are at stake than the 60 in South Carolina to be protected under the quota policy.
At least 40,000 people are employed by diaper services, including drivers, office and sales personnel and people who launder and package diapers for customers.
According to importers, the Chinese diapers, made in Nanjing, Shanghai and Beijing, are thicker, more durable and more absorbent than the South Carolina diapers.
A Gerber official who asked not to be identified acknowledged that the Chinese diapers were thicker, but added that Gerber was working on a comparable product. 
90% Come From China Diapers are also imported from South Korea and Mexico, but far more come from China. 
In 1986 diapers from China totaled 894,000 dozen, up from 45,000 dozen in 1985, according to Knox H. White, an associate of the Greenville, S.C., law firm of Haynsworth, Marion, McKay & Guerard, who sought the quotas in representations before the Office of the United States Trade Representative and the Commerce Department. 
The Chinese sales accounted for 90 percent of the one million dozen diapers taken by diaper services in 1986.
''This was a classic case of an import surge,'' said Mr. White, who represents a number of textile companies. 
Mr. White has some powerful allies in Washington, including Senator Strom Thurmond, the ranking Republican on the Judiciary Committee, and Representative Butler Derrick, a Democrat on the Rules Committee. 
Both are South Carolinians. 
The quotas have become all the more controversial because of the timing. 
Only recently have analysts begun to see at least a tentative consumer shift away from disposable diapers back to cloth diapers.
 
'Worst of All Worlds'
So trade policy, as public policy experts note, appears to be undercutting environmental policy. 
''We try to solve our trade problems only on a political basis,'' said Clyde V. Prestowitz Jr., a former counselor to the Commerce Secretary. 
''The result is that we get the worst of all possible worlds. 
We pay the cost of protection and get no benefits from it.''
Establishment of the first new diaper services in years - Diaper Fresh in Las Vegas, Nev., and KC Diaper Service in Baton Rouge, La. 
- is cited as one illustration of the revival of cloth diapers.
Because Beijing was a party to the restraints, it has not protested. 
Chen Ming Hui, commercial attache at the Chinese Embassy here, said, ''We will abide by the agreement, but of course we are opposed to any more restrictions.''
 
Visions of 'Mount Diaper'
Long before the Chinese came to the scene, the domestic industry had been hurt because of the popularity of the disposables, made chiefly by Procter & Gamble, Kimberly-Clark and Weyerhaeuser. 
Today this product, made of plastic, bleached paper and chemicals, accounts for about 85 percent of the country's diaper changes and racks up annual sales of $3.5 billion.
Nearly 18 billion disposable diapers were dumped into trash cans last year, accounting for 3 percent to 4 percent of all the waste going into the nation's landfills, according to Carl Lehrburger, manager of recycling programs for the Energy Answers Corporation, an Albany resource recovery concern.
A Washington State legislator, Georgette Valle, who has introduced a bill that would require that disposable diapers be biodegradable by 1990, said, ''Someday I will look out my window at Mount Rainier and there will be another mountain - of disposable diapers.''
