
With many clothes again made of natural fibers, which wrinkle more than synthetics, travelers are packing irons. 
Sanyo makes a travel iron with several attractive features. 
For one thing, it's a steam iron, more effective against wrinkles than a dry iron. 
It has adjustable settings and dual voltage (120 and 220) and comes with two converter plugs for foreign outlets. 
Best of all, it folds flat, measures 6 by 1 by 2 3/4 inches folded and weighs a pound. 
It's priced at $40 in the Lee Bailey section at Bendel's.
Angela Taylor highlights various interesting finds in area retail stores2. 
Robes From China
China's fashion industry is perking up, adapting some of its classic styles for Western taste. 
Take the Eastern dress called the cheongsam, which is usually made of silk or rayon, with a rather close fit and short sleeves. 
By translating it into cotton and making it looser, the manufacturers have achieved an attractive short robe that can be worn right through summer. 
The same updating has been given to the full-length kung pao, or palace robe. 
It comes in such shades as sky blue, has a diagonal fastening banded in pale pink and is appliqued with large flowers. 
The short robe comes in pink, red, pale or deep blue with a Jacquard weave and has sprigs of flowers embroidered at the top. 
Since the robes are made of cotton and polyester, they are washable. 
The Sino-American Commodities Center, 29 West 23d Street, will have them later this month priced at $25 to $30.
 
3. Vacation for the Eyes
A vacationer heading southward might check a clever new sunshade idea: a visor attached to sunglasses so that eyes get double protection. 
The Valley Visor comes in bright shades of rigid plastic. 
It has elastic loops that slip over the ear pieces of sunglasses framed in the same color as the visor. 
You'll find it in red, blue, yellow, black, white and bubblegum pink for $18 at Bloomingdale's hat bar.
 
4. To Protect Laps
They are really dish towels, but at the Wolfman-Gold shop in SoHo they are sold as oversized napkins, particularly to protect buffet diners from food spilled in their laps. 
The dish towel napkins are made of white cotton printed with ''Eat,'' ''Dine'' or a trio of tray-carrying waiters. 
They're $4 each at Wolfman-Gold & Good Company, 484 Broome Street.
 
5. Bard Sends Greetings
Shakespearean scholars know that the Bard wrote quotations that can be used for just about any situation. 
Michael LaPlaca, a young artist, has done greeting cards based on Shakespeare's characters and used the quotations amusingly. 
For instance: ''The lady doth protest too much, methinks'' (''Hamlet'') shows a rather rattled Elizabethan woman and reads ''Happy Birthday'' inside. 
''O, my offence is rank, it smells to heaven,'' also from ''Hamlet,'' apologizes for having forgotten a birthday. 
And ''Some are born great, some achieve greatness, and some have greatness thrust upon 'em'' (''Twelfth Night'') impudently asks, ''But what's your excuse?''
The cards are $1 each at Under Attack, 187 Columbus Avenue (68th Street) and Wendell's, 20 Eighth Avenue (West 12th Street).
 
Advance Warning
You've promised to knit a sweater for someone you're fond of, but you've put it off too long. 
Unless you're a lightning-fast knitter, you'll probably not get it finished in time. 
How about an I.O.U.?
A yarn shop has come up with a clever thought: When you purchase the yarn for a full-size sweater, it will give you instructions for knitting a tiny version of it that can be done in an hour, plus a gift box to put it in. 
You'll find a large selection of yarns and the instructions for miniature sweaters at Dariff Design Associates, 80 Fifth Avenue (13th Street).
