
Walk the salt and pepper, please. 
If conversation lags at meals, you might try winding up a salt and pepper set shaped like a butler and maid and sending them walking across the table. 
The plastic figures have paddle-like ''feet'' that make them amble slowly when a key winds them up. 
One fills them by removing their heads and pouring the condiments into them. 
They are $12.50 the set at Stephen Anson, 1058 First Avenue (58th Street).
Discoveries column surveys a variety of products2. 
Chinese Espadrilles
This summer's inexpensive shoe fad has been the flat, rubber-soled Mary Jane from China. 
Now the Chinese are making canvas espadrilles, with rope soles laminated with rubber so they can be worn on city pavements. 
The espadrilles vary from the French or Spanish ones in that they have an instep strap and a flower embroidered on the front. 
They come in black and colors and in flat and higher, wedge-heeled versions. 
The flats are $9.95, wedgies, $15.95, at Kathy's Boutique, 2 West 23d Street. 
You might also consider the shop's Chinese Tshirt, made of lightweight knitted silk, at $15.95.
 
3. A Fluorescent Lantern
A practical idea for backpackers and campers is a fluorescent lantern made by Zelco Industries of Hong Kong. 
The battery-operated lamp comes with a four-watt fluorescent tube and carrying case. 
Since it is only six inches high, it should fit into a shirt pocket and should be useful in a tent or as an emergency light on the road. 
The lamp is $17.95 in the gift shop of the Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street.
 
4. a pRInTiNg sEt
Although a printing set from Japan is being sold in a children's toy store, it's so well made that adults will probably be borrowing it. 
The letters of the alphabet and punctuation marks are attached to handcrafted cypress wood shafts that are easy to grip. 
The typeface is clear and the set is packaged in a good-looking box. 
Letters can be inked with a stamp pad, marker pens or vegetable coloring. 
The set is $25 at Penny Whistle, 1281 Madison Avenue (between 91st and 92d Streets).
 
5. Makeup Cases
An array of ingenious and attractive makeup cases has just arrived from Italy from a company called Pupa (it means doll in Italian). 
The cases are made of rigid, bright red plastic and are fitted with everything one would need for face painting. 
There are three cases, priced from $12.50 to $37.50. 
The largest serves a dual purpose: The tray holding 12 eye shadows, mascara, pencils and tools is removable, and by adding the accompanying shoulder strap, one has a nifty summer handbag. 
You'll find the cases in Bloomingdale's cosmetics department.
