
As soon as the powerful-looking Akahira Yonaiyama moves across the stage, speaking in Japanese sign language as he goes, the blur of simultaneous translations begins.
Mr. Yonaiyama is a star of the Japan Theater of the Deaf; as he plays his part in a rehearsal, a speaking member of the cast interprets the sign language into spoken Japanese. 
At the same time, Mr. Yonaiyama's lines are being spoken by another actor in English - and immediately translated into American sign language. 
In the actual performances, though, the only spoken words are in Japanese.
When Mr. Yonaiyama's American co-actors from the National Theater of the Deaf in Chester, Conn., speak or sign their roles in the Tokyo International Theater Festival here, the whole process is reversed. 
The festival continues through Wednesday; the theaters of the deaf will perform in Osaka for one night.
 
'Somehow, It All Works'
''When you think about it, it should all be a confusing mess,'' the American group's artistic director, David Hays, said during a rehearsal. 
''But somehow, it all works.''
In fact, it does, and the success of this largely deaf cast from India, Japan, China and the United States seems to prove that sign language is less of a barrier on stage than the spoken word.
Although spoken Japanese and English have about as much in common as sashimi and hot dogs, American and Japanese sign languages share fundamental concepts.
''I think it must be easier to understand English sign language than English itself,'' the 36-year-old Mr. Yonaiyama said through a sign-language translator.
The deaf actors in the American and Japanese acting companies were soon chatting, and by late afternoon during one recent rehearsal it became clear they were already on each other's wavelengths.
 
Festival Is in Ikebukuro
The festival is in the Seibu Theater in Ikebukuro, a jammed commuter hub and shopping area in northwest Tokyo. 
The Japan Theater of the Deaf, a small company founded eight years ago, opens its part of the program with a Kyogen, a traditional Japanese comedy often performed during the intermission of Noh, or dramatic, plays.
The American actors perform improvisations based on spoken and sign-language suggestions from the audience, with Mr. Yonaiyama and another deaf Japanese actor, Tetsuya Izaki. 
Both trained with the American group in Connecticut.
The highlight of the program is ''In a Grove'' by Ryunosuke Akutagawa, a tale of rape, betrayal and suicide that was the basis of Akira Kurosawa's film ''Rashomon.''
The story is told through the testimony of a woodcutter, a priest, a policeman, a bandit and others involved in a bizarre encounter in the woods. 
The one-at-a-time nature of the testimony - in which each of the participants gives a different version of the truth - helps to simplify the problem of multiple translations.
 
Selecting the Play
''I chose the play because the testimonies are individual, and the parts can be developed,'' said Mr. Hays, a former set designer for George Balanchine who first came to Japan in 1960 as a technical adviser to the Kabuki theater.
But Kabuki is one thing to the Japanese, and deaf actors are another. 
It is rare to see physically disabled people on the subways and buses in Tokyo; physical handicaps are viewed here as a family stigma, and the disabled are often kept at home.
That is changing slowly in Japan, and Mr. Hays and his troupe are trying to speed the process. 
''When we first planned to come here, agents told me that Japanese would not come to the theater to see deaf actors,'' Mr. Hays said. 
''They would be afraid that if they were seen, people would assume their families had someone at home in the closet.''
 
Popular Actress Appears
So far, the crowds have been encouraging. 
And this performance has an added drawing card: Tetsuko Kuroyanagi, an immensely popular actress and talk-show host, who has become a major force behind the Japan Theater of the Deaf. 
She appears in one of the few speaking roles.
Along with her are a few actors and actresses from theaters of the deaf struggling to begin elsewhere in Asia. 
Among them is Wang Ling, a young business school graduate from Beijing who is fulfilling the dream of his late father, Wang Zhentai.
When the National Theater of the Deaf went to China in 1986, Wang Zhentai spoke in Mandarin as the company performed in sign language. 
He then started a theater of the deaf in China and brought several Chinese performers to the National Theater's summer school in Connecticut. 
He died last August, shortly after returning to China, and his son picked up the effort as a tribute to him.
 
Winning Recognition
''The Chinese bureaucracy is so huge, and they had never heard of a theater for the deaf before,'' Wang Ling said. 
But he has begun to win recognition for the group, and he persuaded the Chinese authorities to allow a young deaf factory worker, Yang Ling, to join in the Ikebukuro festival.
An actor and an artistic director from India, which uses the American sign-language system, are also involved.
''I've never seen anything quite like this,'' said the artistic director of the Indian group, Zarin Chaudhuri, an actress from Bombay.
''Yesterday it looked impossible,'' she said. 
''Today it is all coming together.''
