
Christopher S. Wren is The New York Times Peking bureau chief. 
By Christopher S. Wren ANY WORTHY undertaking in China starts with a meeting, and a voyage aboard the East Is Red No. 46 was no exception. 
Once the river steamer had pulled away from the dock at Chongqing in the early morning drizzle and swung into the cocoa-colored waters of the Yangtze, the ship's loudspeaker asked passengers in each cluster of cabins to dispatch a representative to the small dining room on the second deck.
Because it was my first trip down the Yangtze, I asked if I could sit in. 
''There's nothing secret about it,'' shrugged Hu Yuchun, the chief steward. 
So I joined 14 other passengers around the table. 
Tea was poured. 
''We need the help of the passengers to make this trip smooth and peaceful,'' said Mr. Hu, a tall, earnest young man in a white jacket and horn-rimmed spectacles. 
Everyone nodded at being asked to do his part to get the vessel to Wuhan, 851 miles downriver.
Mr. Hu rattled off the statistics in the flat drawl of his native Sichuan province. 
The East Is Red No. 46 was 252 feet long and 50 feet wide. 
Its mighty twin diesel engines propelled it at a speed of 16 miles an hour, but the Yangtze's current was so swift that it sailed downstream at 21 miles an hour and back upstream at only about 10 miles an hour. 
It was carrying 850 passengers, not quite full capacity, and Mr. Hu asked that they not leave watches and other valuables lying about, throw trash overboard or sit on the railings; he also cautioned against shining flashlights at night because it would confuse the helmsman.
This was not just any boat excursion. 
A voyage down the Yangtze offered a look at a China in the midst of what may be the most massive peaceful transformation of the 20th century. 
The agricultural communes we would pass were being dismantled to encourage greater peasant initiative on a household basis. 
In the countryside and towns, private enterprise, once prohibited, now burgeoned. 
Our ship was a microcosm of this changing China. 
An increasing minority of the passengers who take this river trip travel for pleasure, and many of the rest are traveling to enrich themselves, taking advantage of a relaxation of restrictions that accompanied the de-mythification of the late Chairman Mao Zedong.
The upper reaches of the Yangtze remained closed to foreigners, no doubt because the Government was embarrassed at the persisting pockets of rural poverty. 
But between Chongqing and Wuhan, the country was moving from a spartan garrison society toward a more dynamic mixed economy. 
A traveler who changed boats at Wuhan to continue down the lower Yangtze to Nanjing or Shanghai would see signs of China's doors opening anew to foreign investment and commerce.
The Yangtze, at the heart of this transition, is to the Chinese, who call it the ''Long River,'' what the Mississippi is to Americans - and more. 
Like the Mississippi, the Yangtze courses through the nation's heartland, delineating distinct regions, customs and dialects. 
Geographically, it runs from west to east, dividing northern from southern China. 
Historically, it was a cradle of Chinese culture and later became the prominent route by which the Western colonial powers pried open the decaying empire of the ineffectual Ching Dynasty in the 19th century. 
Today, a third of China's one billion people live in the fertile basin watered by the Yangtze.
Nearly 4,000 miles in length, one of the world's longest rivers, the Yangtze begins as a clear mountain stream fed by the glaciers of the Tibetan plateau in western Qinghai province. 
But as it drops more than 17,000 feet and cuts eastward past eight more provinces to join the East China Sea, its clear waters turn muddy with silt, some 500 million tons a year, that gives the Yangtze its distinctive brown hue.
By the time it meets the Jialing River at Chongqing in southeast Sichuan, the Yangtze is also fast becoming a sewer. 
Less than a third of the 100 million tons of industrial waste dumped annually from Chongqing into the Yangtze gets treated. 
No sooner had we boarded the East Is Red No. 46 than my fellow travelers began flinging the dregs of their teacups over the side of the boat. 
As we churned downriver, some backwaters frothed with the suds of unabsorbed detergents and other effluents.
 
HE EAST IS RED No. 46 was one of 110 steamers dubbed with the same revolutionary motto that have plied the Yangtze. 
Other reminders of the old Maoist fervor lingered. 
A sign atop the boat ticket office in Chongqing proclaimed in fat red characters, ''Long Live Mao Zedong's Thoughts,'' which in the revised ideological exegesis now means the collective wisdom of the Communist Party and not really Mao Zedong's thoughts.
Deng Xiaoping, the man behind the new reforms in China, was born in the Sichuan countryside 100 or so miles from Chongqing. 
The wooden, hand-lettered sign he made to hang over the entrance to the Chongqing Youth Palace of Culture has been a weathervane of his political career. 
Twice, when Mr. Deng was demoted into official disgrace for his reformist notions, the leftists pulled down his calligraphy. 
Twice, it has been hung back up.
Mr. Deng's impact has been more obvious along the steep winding streets of Chongqing, which was the capital of the Nationalist Government during World War II. 
The air-raid shelters tunneled into the embankments to provide protection from the heavy Japanese wartime bombing have been converted into workshops. 
On the sidewalks, small private businesses repaired shoes, sewed clothes, served up steaming noodles laced with fiery peppers and rented out comic books for a penny apiece. 
Peasants in rough denims noisily hawked juicy oranges, wriggling river eels, and fresh vegetables still moist with the morning dew. 
Such farmers' markets were suppressed as the ''tail of capitalism'' under Chairman Mao. 
Now they provide Chongqing with nearly a third of its pork and half of its vegetables.
Chongqing's gray industrial skyline overlooking the river, which tempted comparisons with less prosperous Pittsburgh, soon gave way to a view of snug farmhouses with tiled roofs and terraced fields diligently exploiting every inch of soil. 
Navigational lights anchored in small gray dinghies churned against the river current. 
The river banks were scarred at intervals by the detritus of small mines and factories that splattered ugliness across an otherwise pastoral landscape.
From our steamer's wheelhouse, the foghorn blasted and a loudspeaker squawked at slower barges and sampans to pull over and yield way.
''The Yangtze River is more complicated than the Mississippi,'' declared Xu Guilin, the ship's captain, though he had never seen the big American river himself. 
''We have memorized everything - the light signals, the rocks.''
Before receiving me in his cabin on the bridge, Mr. Xu took the trouble to change from the customary sailor's garb of shorts and sandals into a new gray pinstripe suit with dark shirt and maroon tie. 
He had slicked back his thick black hair and thrust his feet, without socks, into leather shoes without laces.
Mr. Xu grew up on the river. 
At 13, he shipped out as a cabin boy. 
He became a river sailor at 18 and captain of a ship at 41. 
Now he was 49 and sailed four round trips a month between Chongqing and Wuhan, which left him little time at home. 
Snapshots of his family were tucked under the glass top of his desk, along with a large magazine picture of Deng Xiaoping in an army uniform.
The most treacherous shoals were dynamited out of the Yangtze in the 1950's, but the muddy water has remained unpredictable, particularly as the river swells with the accumulation of melting snow in spring and heavy rain in summer. 
''When there are high tides and floods, it is difficult to navigate,'' said Mr. Xu. The trickiest section, he reported, was the Yangtze Gorges, a spectacular 120-mile stretch of sheer canyons and small ragged peaks that attracts tourists to the Yangtze. 
''I steer the boat myself in the most difficult sections,'' Mr. Xu said.
By mid-afternoon, the passengers, many of whom were bound on business great and small, had acquiesced to the ship's routine. 
Some lay on their narrow bunks reading or sleeping. 
Others leaned over the railing, played cards on the bleached deck or gobbled rice with chopsticks from enameled bowls. 
One man washed his white shirt and hung it out in the passageway where it flapped wetly against passers-by. 
Curiously, the airy top deck was reserved for the crew; the paying passengers were billeted in the gloomier quarters below.
The accommodations ranged from second class, which cost $44 for a bed in a small cabin for two, with a fluorescent bulb overhead and hot water in thermos flasks, down to fifth class where a bunk for $10 came with 23 roommates. 
The boat had no first class, whether because it was deemed inappropriate for a society marching toward Communism or because none of the quarters could be called deluxe. 
Sleeping space on the deck for the 2 1/2-day journey to Wuhan cost only $8.50.
Some Tibetans camped in one of the passageways: six men and a shy woman, all with heavy coats, necklaces of coral and turquoise and cheeks ruddy from exposure to the sun. 
One said that they came from western Sichuan and were going to Wuhan, but he didn't know enough Chinese to explain why. 
They kept sullenly to themselves for the entire trip.
The second-class cabins were filled mostly with a delegation of elderly cadres, or party and Government functionaries, who were getting a free trip down the Yangtze as one of the rewards for agreeing to retire and let the middle-age generation move ahead. 
They wore drab garments, of the kind preferred under Mao, and the women wore their graying hair bobbed severely short.
The crowd seemed livelier down below. 
(One can move from second down to lower classes, but not the other way around.) A young man with glasses was returning to Wanxian, a town 200 miles down the river. 
The ship cost more than the bus from Chongqing and took the same time, 11 hours, he said, but here you could walk around.
A gaunt, unshaved cadre named Lu was attending a family-planning conference in Nanjing, on the Yangtze. 
It was his second visit. 
The first had been 35 years ago, as a young soldier in the Communist forces that captured Nanjing from the Nationalists. 
He extended a twisted hand to show where shrapnel had torn it. 
''But I couldn't sightsee because we were too busy fighting and we went through too fast,'' he said. 
This time, Mr. Lu planned a more leisurely look around.
I asked if he was satisfied with how China had turned out. 
''There have been great changes so far, but it is still not enough,'' Mr. Lu said. 
''The reforms are correct and the policy is correct. 
The cadres at the top understand the reforms and the grass roots understand them. 
But there is no direct link, because the middle-level cadres still don't fully understand them.''
A squad of soldiers lugging dirty-looking rifles filed aboard the ship at Peiling, the first of half a dozen stops down to Wuhan. 
For most Chinese, traveling down the Yangtze is purely business. 
At Peiling and elsewhere, a few officials got on carrying small black vinyl portfolios that are as much a status symbol for cadres as the metal fountain pens in their breast pockets. 
But China's broad masses, as ordinary folks get called, staggered under the weight of canvas bags, gunnysacks, cardboard cartons, bedding and the odd slab of raw meat, sometimes all swinging together from bamboo shoulder poles.
At Wanxian, a county seat west of the great gorges, the East Is Red No. 46 was scheduled to tie up for the night rather than run the worst stretch of river in the darkness. 
Wanxian, perched on a bluff atop a wide stone staircase, had been one of the treaty ports forced open a century or so ago, when Western colonialists vied with one another to control the Yangtze. 
Many years ago, a British gunboat shelled the town to retaliate for some local resistance, a fellow traveler told me. 
During the 1966-76 Cultural Revolution, Wanxian saw new violence when rival Red Guard factions shot it out with guns stolen from Sichuan's armament factories. 
NOW WANXIAN, LIKE most of rural China, was succumbing to Peking's new mandate to ''get rich through labor; getting rich is glorious.''
As the passengers disembarked to wander up the winding streets, they were beset by local sellers of homemade baskets and wicker chairs. 
The chief steward, Mr. Hu, passed the word that any passenger coming back loaded with wicker furniture would pay a freight charge.
Most of Wanxian's shops had closed by 7:30 P.M., but a score of young men hung around a hardware store, wistfully watching a romantic movie on one of the small black-and-white television sets for sale. 
The lilting song of the heroine, who kept fluttering her eyelids as she leaned against a tree trunk, echoed down the dark street into the dingy Beautiful Taste Spring Restaurant, where patrons were wolfing down the last of the fried fish and rice.
A display of large propaganda cartoons across the street told passers-by that they, too, could own a television set and even a refrigerator if they worked harder and saved. 
There were cartoons warning about extravagance, notably in weddings. 
In one, a greedy young woman informed her dispirited fiance, ''I want everything but your mother.''
In another, a bride- to-be with her mother sat at a negotiating table presenting a young man and his father with a set of demands: color television set, electric fan, bicycle and wedding banquet. 
A sort of dowry system, previously condemned as feudalistic, was clearly still a problem in Wanxian.
Passengers straggling back to the ship before the midnight curfew had to wait while seven peasants in patched denims lurched aboard with large flat wicker baskets containing scores of baby chicks intended for the market in Fengjie, downriver. 
They arranged the baskets in the passageway and hunkered down beside them for the night. 
Using the boats for private enterprise was not permitted under Chairman Mao. 
Besides, most peasants were too poor to buy a boat ticket.
Mr. Hu said that the peasants were most numerous in the autumn, when oranges and tangerines ripened along the Yangtze. 
The farmers got a high price for their fruit down in Shashi, Wuhan and even Shanghai - because they moved it faster than the state transportation network. 
Peasants were permitted to bring aboard chickens, ducks and live fish; but reasons of sanitation, Mr. Hu said, ruled out pigs or sheep.
At Fengjie, the tired peasants got off. 
Each man slid his bamboo pole under two baskets and, as if balancing on eggs, slowly climbed the long steps to the city gate. 
Wanxian's vaguely European architecture, introduced by colonial merchants in the 19th century, had looked romantic after dark. 
By cold daylight, the buildings seemed worn and gritty in the old river town near the entrance to Qutang, the first of the great gorges.
The sheer canyons loomed abruptly overhead on either side like high-rise apartment buildings, leaving a channel for the ship barely 100 yards wide. 
For the next few hours, we rode the quickening brown river past cliffs capped with lush foliage and rock spires shrouded in clouds. 
Their bizarre shapes had given rise to centuries of fanciful interpretations. 
We sailed past Fairy Maiden Peak, the Lion Wearing a Silver Medal and the Peak of the Jade Screen. 
Shafts of sunlight penetrated the morning mist.
Between gorges, isolated farmhouses were perched on the hillsides. 
Some were striped red and white like barber poles to mark the shoreline when fog hung over the river. 
The steep slopes held rows of citrus trees. 
A sharp valley at the Wu Gorge defined where Sichuan ended and Hubei Province began.
Small sampans with sails moved slowly upstream, the boatmen sometimes standing and rowing with their long oars. 
The trail worn by the trackers, men who once labored like draft animals hauling barges through the gorges, disappeared underwater when the Gezhouba Dam was thrown across the Yangtze a few years ago. 
Still, we passed other men pulling their sampans upstream with long ropes from the rocky shore as if nothing had changed.
In the second-class lounge, a grizzled, retired Red Army veteran named Liu sat in a fat armchair by the window, taking in the scenery. 
He needed little encouragement to reminisce about how he had joined the Communist guerrillas in North China's Shanxi province in 1935. 
His family was so poor that ''I had no other choice.''
He was 15 when he went off to war, Mr. Liu recalled. 
''It was hardest against the Japanese in the early 1940's. 
We never had enough to eat and we were always fighting. 
We would take some millet and potatoes and black beans and cook them together. 
Those were bitter years.
''I never expected to live this long. 
We always thought that we would die in the next 24 hours.
''We captured our weapons from the Japanese. 
Later we used them against the Kuomintang,'' he said, referring to Chiang Kai-Shek's Nationalist Government. 
''The Japanese were much harder to fight. 
When we fired, the Kuomintang troops would run away.''
He returned home after 15 years. 
''My mother and father were very happy to see me. 
They had no letters from me, and thought I was dead. 
Neighbors came from miles around.''
After the Communist victory in 1949, Mr. Liu said, the leadership ''Put me in a factory and make me a leader.''
He retired recently and, as an old party man, receives his full salary plus a bonus and other perquisites.
Mr. Liu went on: ''My three sons said to me, 'Your life hasn't been so easy, so we want you to enjoy your remaining years. 
Travel and see the country. 
You deserve it.'
''
The veteran party man was too old to be coy about Mao Zedong: ''Chairman Mao had the right idea when he launched the Cultural Revolution. 
He did it to combat revisionism, but it became confused because of the Gang of Four.''
Mr. Liu employed the approved epithet for Mao's widow, Jiang Qing, and three other imprisoned leftists, who have been blamed for all the ills that befell China during Mao's final decade.
''Everybody makes mistakes, and Mao Zedong was no exception,'' Mr. Liu said. 
''Later, he made some wrong decisions. 
But without Mao, there wouldn't be any Communist Party. 
And without the Communist Party, we wouldn't be here today.''
AFTER XILING, THE last of the three great gorges at Nanjinguan, the landscape flattened out. 
The river widened from a few hundred yards to more than a mile and a half. 
The boat headed for the locks of Gezhouba, China's largest hydroelectric dam and the first built to harness the powerful Yangtze.
The Gezhouba was conceived by Chairman Mao in the 1950's to solve both China's energy shortage and the Yangtze's seasonal flooding. 
Construction began in 1970, when it was considered better to be Red than expert, and the revolutionary amateurs made such a mess that the project was halted two years later.
The Yangtze was finally dammed in 1981, after China's experts were summoned back from tending pigs and cleaning toilets. 
When the dam is fully completed, in four years, it will generate 14.1 billion kilowatt hours a year of electricity and transmit it as far as Shanghai, Peking and Canton.
It took an hour for the boat to be lowered 65 feet to float through the lock. 
The Gezhouba will have cost about $2.4 billion by the time it is finished, but no tolls are charged, on the principle that the dam belongs to the people.
To further solve the country's shortage of energy, a hydroelectric power dam four to five times bigger than Gezhouba has been proposed 25 miles upriver in the Xiling Gorge. 
Its construction would not only impair the beauty of the three Yangtze Gorges by raising the water level farther; it would also mean relocating up to 1.4 million Chinese, whose ancestral roots in the Upper Yangtze Valley go back centuries. 
The Government has been nervous about ordering such a massive displacement of its citizens. 
WITH THE MOST exciting part of the voyage over, a few frictions surfaced. 
Most of the staff spoke Sichuanese, a dialect that other Chinese passengers had trouble understanding. 
One man asked an attendant for glue to put stamps on a letter. 
She thought he wanted ink, and snapped back that there wasn't any.
Complaints about the poor food were more numerous. 
As waibin, or foreign guests, my wife and I were in a separate dining room where for $7 a day, 5 to 10 times what ordinary Chinese might pay, we were served a plethora of undistinguished dishes of meats, vegetables and rice. 
In the mess hall below, less coddled travelers had to buy meal coupons and then line up, sometimes for 45 minutes, before getting rice, bean noodles and vegetables.
Some passengers seemed content. 
A tall young army officer from Peking remarked later that his eight- bunk cabin was like home - better - because a hot shower and toilet were just down the passageway. 
He reminded me that most Chinese still make do without the luxury of indoor plumbing and hot-water taps.
With dusk, the tree line on the wide flood plain faded into the horizon. 
A fisherman effortlessly cast his weighted net. 
Lights twinkled on the buoys marking a channel on the broad river. 
A cool wind blew up, drawing the travelers out of their stuffy cabins.
A trio of salesmen from Chengdu leaned against the railing. 
They were traveling to Wuhan, then to a foreign trade exhibition in Canton. 
''It's fun to travel around when you are young, but when you get older, you want to settle down and raise a family,'' one of them said. 
He was already 30, with a wife in Chengdu. 
''I've been traveling for five years, but next year I hope to stop.''
He complained that he couldn't live on his travel allowance, which amounted to barely $1.30 a day. 
''Our leaders know that life is hard for us, so sometimes they try to give us a little more. 
It still doesn't cover the expenses, so I have to pay out of my own pocket sometimes.''
I asked why he didn't set up his own business, as the Peking Government is encouraging young Chinese to do in order to alleviate unemployment and provide more consumer services. 
''Oh no, then you don't have a work unit,'' he objected, referring to the state enterprises providing lifetime tenure and womblike welfare benefits, however badly an employee works. 
''And besides,'' he added, ''you can't quit your work unit without permission.''
The next morning, the passenger delegates were summoned to a last meeting. 
''Give us your opinions and suggestions in order to help us improve our work, in order to meet the demands of the broad masses,'' implored Mr. Hu.
A man with glasses and a graying crew cut stood up. 
''The guiding ideology of the boat's crew is correct,'' he announced. 
''They have acted according to the promises they made at the start of the journey, including maintaining sanitation, delivering drinking water and being responsible in their service work.''
This man knew his way around a criticism session.
''However,'' he said, only then going into complaints about the food, ''I know that it is impossible to satisfy everybody's tastes since we come from all over the country. 
But it seems there is not a suitable taste for people from the north, and the quality of the food should be improved.''
Others took up the litany, a few opening compliments followed by danshi, meaning ''however.''
Danshi, the staff should learn standard Chinese. 
Danshi, there should be a television set on board. 
Danshi, the meal coupons were too flimsy and easy to lose. 
Danshi, the boat's store should sell film and better souvenirs.
Another speaker complained that his cabin loudspeaker was broken, so that his group missed the announcements, light music, Peking opera and comedy patter that were broadcast from dawn till dark.
Mr. Hu explained that the boat had a wireless operator, but that perhaps he didn't know how to repair the loudspeaker. 
If he's happy, he may be willing to try. 
If he's not, he may refuse.
With a glance toward me, Mr. Hu plunged to the crux of the problem: foreigners sometimes ripped out the wires when the loudspeaker began blaring at 6:30 A.M. Mr. Hu pointed out that trains didn't suffer this vandalism because their loudspeakers were imbedded in the ceiling, where the foreigners couldn't reach them.
This led to a request that I, as a waibin living in Peking, add my suggestions about the voyage. 
I thanked them for having been hospitable and praised the stunning beauty of the gorges.
However, I continued, and they all nodded, I was upset to see so much trash bespoiling such a renowned river. 
Why didn't the boat install more trash baskets and mount a tidiness campaign?
The young attendant taking down all the comments scribbled furiously in her ledger and I got a flattering round of applause.
I left the meeting quite smug about my contribution. 
I leaned over the railing to watch the river I was saving when an empty soy sauce bottle flung from the crew quarters swished past my head and into the water. 
I wondered how many books of suggestions the boat had filled and where they got stored. 
AT WUHAN, THE East Is Red No. 46 ended its voyage and prepared for the trip upstream the next day. 
Travelers who wanted to continue to Nanjing or Shanghai had to go to the downtown ticket office and queue up for passage on another boat. 
My wife and I decided to stay in Wuhan because we were told that the lower Yangtze would be anticlimactic.
Wuhan, a center for heavy industry, had been a proletarian bastion for Chairman Mao, who was fond of swimming in the Yangtze. 
In July 1966, the 72-year-old leader refuted rumors of his ill health by plunging into one of history's most celebrated swims. 
For more than an hour, he floated down the Yangtze nine miles at the head of 5,000 young swimmers from Wuhan. 
Then he returned to Peking and unleashed the cruel chaos of his Cultural Revolution.
Wuhan used to re-enact Chairman Mao's swim every July, sometimes employing little red flags mounted on rubber inner tubes. 
Nobody wants to do it anymore. 
As our boat trip had suggested, revolutionary hardship is a notion whose time has come and gone in present-day China. 
The Yangtze still flows eastward to the sea, as it has throughout China's history, but now it bears peasants with baskets of baby chicks, intent on exploiting the party's latest maxim that getting rich through labor is glorious.
