
A drug that takes only a single dose to effectively treat all forms of schistosomiasis, a debilitating parasitic disease that infects one in every 20 people in the world, has fallen so sharply in cost that the World Health Organization now believes it can be used for an all-out attack on the scourge.
Dr. Kenneth E. Mott, the director of the W.H.O. program to fight the disease, said the drug, praziquantel, ''is the greatest advance'' in treating parasitic diseases since chloroquin was developed in World War II as the chief weapon against malaria.
The cost of a single dose of praziquantel has been reduced to $1.40 for adults and 74 cents for children, who make up 60 to 70 percent of the victims of the disease. 
Only four years ago a single adult dose cost about $4.20. 
The single dose appears to offer two to three years' defense against reinfection by the disease, which attacks such organs as the intestines and liver. 
Although the disease is not often fatal, it is so debilitating that it has become an economic drain on many underdeveloped countries.
World Health Organization program director Dr Kenneth E Mott says cost of drug praziquantel has dropped so sharply that organization now believes it can be used for all-out attack on schistosomiasis, dibilitating parasitic disease that infects one in every 20 people in world; Bayer Drug Company makes drug, which takes only single dose to effectively treat all forms of the disease (M)
The cost reduction was announced July 1 by the Bayer Drug Company, which makes the drug.
Like other drugs used to treat schistosomiasis, praziquantel does not kill all the parasites in a person's body but reduces their number until the symptoms disappear. 
Unlike malaria parasites, those for schistosomiasis cannot multiply in the body. 
Once their population is reduced it remains low unless the victim is infected again.
 
Snails Harbor the Parasite
Freshwater snails are the parasite's hosts for part of its life cycle, just as mosquitoes are hosts for malaria. 
The disease is prevalent in hot, humid climates and has become more widespread as irrigation projects have enlarged the habitat of the snails.
At one time the World Health Organization tried to control the disease by waging all-out attacks on the snails. 
But these efforts, including a drive in China, proved disappointing as the snails quickly returned.
Now health officials are focusing their efforts on drug treatment and prevention of exposure to the parasite. 
They are doing this by reducing the discharge of human waste into bodies of water and keeping people away from such waste, whether they are swimming, fishing, washing or planting rice.
Eggs excreted from infected humans hatch into free-swimming parasites propelled by tiny hairs as they seek out a snail. 
If they fail to find a snail, they die within 12 hours. 
However, enormous numbers of eggs are produced by severely infected people. 
Inside the snail, the parasite subdivides thousands of times. 
It emerges into the water in a form with forked tail and seeks out the skin of a human being.
 
Three Types of the Ailment
Traveling through the bloodstream, the parasites evolve into male and female worms that mate and can remain joined for many years, producing a steady stream of eggs. 
In two forms of schistosomiasis, the worms lodge within the walls of blood vessels lining the intestines and the eggs are discharged with the feces.
One of the three types of the disease occurs in Africa, the eastern Mediterranean, the Caribbean and South America. 
The other is Asiatic. 
The third form, which is found in Egypt and much of the eastern Mediterranean and Africa, lodges in blood vessels of the bladder. 
Blood in the urine is a typical symptom and the eggs are discharged through the urine.
There are now relatively simple ways to test for the prevalence of eggs in urine or stool samples. 
But it is the eggs remaining in body tissues that cause severe immune reactions leading to lethargy and other symptoms.
Some drugs are effective against only one or another of the three forms but praziquantel attacks them all.
Health officials believe it is possible that the parasites may eventually develop resistance to the drugs, and for that reason some specialists see a vaccine as the long-term solution. 
While many laboratories are working on various aspects of the vaccine problem, the obstacles seem so great that a practical vaccine seems many years away.
 
Other Drug's Success in Brazil
Praziquantel grew out of research by the Merck Company in the 1970's and was then developed as a drug by Bayer. 
Since then it has been subjected to numerous tests and the cost has finally become low enough for mass administration. 
It is also effective, he said, against liver flukes and tapeworms.
Dr. Mott's optimism regarding large-scale attacks on schistosomiasis is based in part on experience gained in northeast Brazil, where seven million people have been treated with oxamniquine, a specific drug for the disease there. 
A 30-fold drop in the number of cases found by autopsies has been reported from the University Hospital in Bahia.
The beneficial effects of praziquantel are so obvious, Dr. Mott said, that ''riots'' have occurred in areas of the Sudan where supplies ran short. 
In Egypt the United Nations Children's Fund is participating in administering the drug to 30,000 residents of a single district. 
The disease has been eradicated in some of China's southern provinces.
The Chinese are using pyquiton, their own form of praziquantel. 
While 44 species of wild and domestic animals in China have been found to carry the Asian form of the disease in the same manner as humans, they do not appear to play a role in maintaining it as a threat to the human population, Dr. Mott said.
