
As the Mafia's role declines, the multibillion-dollar heroin trade in New York is increasingly being conducted by criminal organizations that together sound like a United Nations of drug smugglers, including Chinese, Thais, Pakistanis, Indians, Iranians, Afghans, Nigerians and Israelis.
Last year, for example, Federal officials had to scour the city for eight translators of the African language Twi to assess wiretaps of a ring of heroin smugglers from Ghana.
Since January, more than a dozen Israelis have been arrested for drug trafficking, and officials say there are at least four major Israeli criminal organizations stretching across Asia, Europe and North America.
More than any other ethnic group, law-enforcement officials say, overseas Chinese with contacts in Bangkok, Hong Kong and throughout the UnitedVStates have developed large, sophisticated but little-understood international drug trafficking organizations. 
The Chinese groups, the Federal Drug Enforcement Administration estimates, are now responsible for more than 30 percent of the heroin entering the city.
Yet few police departments and Federal agencies charged with fighting drug traffickers have recognized the rise of organized crime outside the Mafia and begun to learn the languages, cultures or even the identities of new groups that could eventually pose as severe a threat as the well-known Mafia families.
''These groups are posing a major challenge to law enforcement,'' said Robert M. Stutman, the special agent in charge of the Federal drug agency in New York. 
''We now are dealing with languages and cultures we don't have real depth in. 
Even in Chinese there are a number of dialects that are very different, and agents with a knowledge of Chinese are few and far between.''
For decades the Mafia dominated the importation and processing of heroin. 
Its involvement stems from the 1930's when, at the end of Prohibition, bootleggers had the capital, experience and overseas contacts to turn their smuggling operations to narcotics.
Until the late 1960's, they were able to dominate a business that bought Turkish opium, processed it into heroin in laboratories in Marseilles or the Corsican underworld and sold to distributors in poor inner-city neighborhoods.
Although most Mafia leaders proclaimed their disdain for the drug business to one another, many, including Vito Genovese, the head of one of New York's five mob families, became heavily involved.
 
Shift From Turkey
But in the early 1970's, a crackdown on opium production in Turkey shifted the source of heroin increasingly to Mexico, Southeast Asia and areas in Pakistan, Afghanistan and Iran -places where the Mafia did not have extensive contacts. 
In addition, the growth of international air transportation made it easier for groups in source countries to bring the drug into the United States themselves.
Finally, officials say, it was the Mafia's involvement in the drug business that led to the most damaging Federal cases against the Mafia, including the pizza connection trial that ended in the conviction of the former chief of the Sicilian Mafia and 16 other defendants for operating a drug smuggling ring from Siciliy to Brazil to the Middle West.
''The people who join the mob now are second- and third-generation and don't have the values their predecessors had,'' said Ronald Goldstock, the director of the New York State Organized Crime Task Force. 
''They are, in effect, yuppies. 
The ties that bind them together are financial. 
When they join and find they are not doing as well as they thought they would, it is much easier for them to break and turn informant.''
Together, these factors have opened up the heroin market to a new generation of high-level traffickers, made up largely of ethnic groups from opium-source countries or with trading contacts around the world.
In the last two years increasing numbers of major heroin cases in New York have involved organizations of Chinese, Pakistanis, Israelis and West Africans.
 
New Set of Problems
Law-enforcement officials say a recent flurry of cases against these groups are ''test bores'' into worlds they do not completely understand. 
It may take years to explain fully how these groups are organized, they say, how they make contacts with street drug distributing organizations in New York ghettos and how they take their profits out of the country.
In many ways, Mr. Goldstock added, organized crime among Chinese immigrants today resembles organized crime that developed with the mass migration of Italians at the turn of the century.
''They prey on their own with extortion and protection rackets, in a culture where people don't go to the police and where most police don't speak the language,'' Mr. Goldstock said. 
To the outside world, he added, the organizations seem mysterious and impenetrable.
Evidence abounds that groups of ethnic Chinese from Thailand, Hong Kong, Malaysia, Taiwan and China - some of whom may have long been involved in illegal gambling and other enterprises - are shipping large quantities of heroin into the country. 
Since January 1986 Federal agents have seized more than 200 pounds of heroin in New York, worth hundreds of millions of dollars, after it had been shipped by Chinese groups in furniture, musical instruments and air-conditioners.
Often it is just an odd tip or a bit of luck that leads to unraveling a smuggling organization. 
Last July, for example, the Thai police told Federal agents that a shipment that might contain heroin was heading to the United States, addressed to ''Joe Wong'' in Queens.
 
Shipment Followed
The agents discovered the shipment on a Seattle dock, watched its delivery to an apartment in Flushing, Queens, and eventually linked it to a chef in a neighborhood Chinese restaurant.
The four crates contained fine teak furniture, carved with ornate reliefs of jungle scenes and packed with 15 kilograms of pure white heroin worth more than $30 million on the street. 
In the end, the case resulted in more than a dozen arrests in New York, Thailand and China and the seizure of drug labs in Amsterdam.
 
Dispersed Expatriots
On a smaller scale, law-enforcement authorities have become increasingly aware of heroin trafficking by Israeli criminal organizations that had been active in smuggling, credit card fraud and other crimes at least back into the 1970's.
Like the Chinese, the Israeli criminal gangs are drawn from a dispersed population of expatriots who live and conduct business in Asia, Europe and the United States. 
Many are made up of Sephardim, immigrants whose families came to Israel mainly from Arab countries.
Many are believed to have met one another in Israeli prisons, officials say. 
As with the Chinese and other groups, officials say, Israeli criminals are only a tiny part of larger ethnic communities in the United States and in other countries.
The Israeli organizations caught the attention of Federal authorities in 1979, with the gang-related slaying and dismemberment of two Israelis, Eli and Esther Rubin, in Los Angeles. 
Authorities believe that there are now at least several hundred around the world who may affiliate with one another for criminal activities and that there are at least four large organizations with members on several continents.
 
Special Caution
In the last two months, authorities arrested 11 people in Brooklyn, including nine Israelis, and accused them of importing heroin from Thailand to New York through Canada. 
Two Israelis were arrested on drug charges in Detroit and three were arrested in Atlantic City in possession of five pounds of heroin.
According to officials involved in the Brooklyn case, the Israelis showed a remarkable sophistication in counter-surveillance. 
The drug traffickers would sometimes spot Federal agents' unmarked cars circling a block, and often they would protect one of their dealers by following his car at a distance with a second car to make sure no one was on his trail.
In the last three years, authorities have also seen a rise in trafficking of Southwest Asian heroin by Pakistanis, Afghans, Iranians and by West Africans who ship the drug through their homelands. 
In one case last fall in which 29 people, mainly immigrants from Ghana, were charged with heroin trafficking, the Justice Department had to find 8 to 12 translators who understood the Twi language to staff a telephone wiretap 24 hours a day.
And this week alone, Federal narcotics agents seized five pounds of heroin from Pakistani smugglers in one case, and in another case arrested four Indians who were charged with smuggling 10 pounds of heroin from their native land to Kennedy International Airport in shampoo bottles.
