
Former President Richard M. Nixon, asserting that Chinese leaders had ''misunderstood and misjudged'' President Reagan's views on the Taiwan issue, called today for an early meeting between Mr. Reagan and Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang of China to create better trust between Peking and Washington.
In a speech tonight at a dinner of the National Council on United States-China Trade, Mr. Nixon said their meeting should take place before Mr. Reagan has a meeting with Yuri V. Andropov, the Soviet leader.
''I believe that most of the misunderstandings and suspicions which have characterized recent developments could be dispelled by a faceto-face meeting in the near future,'' he said.
WASHINGTON, June 1 - Former President Richard M. Nixon, asserting that Chinese leaders had ''misunderstood and misjudged'' President Reagan's views on the Taiwan issue, called today for an early meeting between Mr. Reagan and Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang of China to create better trust between Peking and Washington.
''Before a summit meeting with our potential adversaries takes place, it is vital that a meeting be scheduled with our friends,'' he added.
At the time of Secretary of State George P. Shultz's visit to Peking last January, Mr. Zhao said he agreed in principle to visit Washington, but no date has been set.
 
'Speaking as an Old Friend'
Mr. Nixon, whose visit in 1972 was the first by any President to China, said that ''speaking as an old friend, there has been a disturbing tendency in statements emanating from Peking to question the good faith of President Reagan on issues like Taiwan and the tennis star.''
The reference to the tennis player was to Hu Na, who was given political asylum this year.
''This does a disservice both to China's and to our own interests,'' Mr. Nixon said, in one of his infrequent public appearances in Washington. 
''We had vast differences which we bridged over by quiet diplomacy in 1972. 
More resort to quiet diplomacy could prevent that bridge from falling into disrepair in the next ten years.''
''Speaking candidly, I believe some of our Chinese friends have misunderstood and misjudged President Reagan's position on the Taiwan issue.''
Mr. Nixon also said he saw no reason for concern in the event that China and the Soviet Union improved relations. 
''A war between two major powers in the nuclear age would inevitably escalate into a world war,'' he said. 
''Consequently, it is in the interest of the United States, for China, and the Soviet Union to try to reduce tensions between them which could result in war. 
It is equally in China's interest for the United States and the Soviet Union to try to reduce tensions between them which might result in war.''
Mr. Nixon also called for a further loosening of restrictions on trade with China. 
''It is my personal belief that the present policy is unnecessarily restrictive,'' he said. 
''China should be treated the same as other friendly, non-allied countries like India, which incidentally, unlike China, has close relations with the Soviet Union. 
It is time to remove United States agencies from the straightjacket which requires them to treat China like an adversary.''
