
With a visit to Peking planned next month by its party leader, East Germany is stepping up a reconciliation with China that appears to have the cautious blessing of the Soviet Union, according to scholars and Bonn officials.
Since 1982, when the Soviet Union made its first overtures to China, East Germany has been quietly mending the relations that were ruptured two decades earlier in the course of the ideological confrontation between Moscow and Peking.
The visit to China in the latter half of October by the East German leader, Erich Honecker, 74 years old, is expected to consolidate relations and possibly open the way for other Eastern European Communist chiefs to follow. 
Poland's leader, Gen. Wojciech Jaruzelski, and Hungary's leader, Janos Kadar, are the main candidates.
For Mr. Honecker, the steady opening to China is a strand in a larger strategy of gaining recognition for East Germany as a sovereign and autonomous country. 
The timing of the China trip felicitously offsets an apparent veto by Moscow on a long-planned milestone visit to West Germany.
Although there is broad agreement that Mr. Honecker has a green light from Moscow for his China trip, some analysts detect potential signs of low-level tension between the Soviet Union and its Eastern European allies over renewed ties with Peking.
 
Pressure on Moscow
The Chinese, according to this line of reasoning, want to use their improved relationship with Eastern Europe as a lever for putting pressure on the Soviet Union to wrest concessions from Moscow. 
In a speech in Vladivostok in late July, the Soviet leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, put fresh emphasis on seeking better relations with China, but several Eastern European allies are well ahead of Moscow in this regard.
The East German contacts reached a high point last December when Horst Sindermann, a Politburo member and president of the East German legislature, visited Peking and was received by Hu Yaobang, general secretary of the Chinese Communist Party.
Conspicuously, Mr. Sindermann recalled that German Communists and the Communist movement in China have hoary connections, including a friendship struck between Mr. Hu and Mr. Honecker in the 1950's when they were the leaders of their countries' respective Communist youth groups.
In June, Margot Honecker, Education Minister and wife of the East German leader, followed Mr. Sindermann's path to Peking, and in the same month China's Foreign Minister, Wu Xueqian, came to East Berlin. 
It was the highest-level Chinese delegation sent to Eastern Europe since the 1961 split with Moscow.
As trading partners, the East Germans are interested in China's vast market, and the Chinese see in the German Communist state a source of high-technology. 
Yet, at the political level, some political analysts express doubts that the Honecker visit will produce a resumption of party-to-party ties.
Nonetheless, East Germany has abandoned anything resembling ideological polemics with China, and its state-controlled press has reported with interest and even a touch of enthusiasm on the Chinese economic experiment and its free-market mechanisms.
For their part, the Chinese have virtually exculpated the East Berlin Government from complicity in such issues as the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan or the domination of Cambodia by the Vietnamese.
In Bonn, a senior adviser to Chancellor Helmut Kohl welcomed the Honecker visit to China, saying that the East German was going as ''a door-opener for Moscow.''
