
YESTERDAY was National Day, the 36th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China, and the Cantonese were firing off skyrockets and firecrackers, strolling and shopping, and eating up a storm.
The saying here is, ''The Cantonese will eat anything with four legs except the table.''
Or, for that matter, anything without legs. 
One of the local delicacies is called ''tiger fighting dragon.''
It is actually a combination of cat and snake.
This year the two-day National Day holiday followed a couple of days after the Moon Festival and everyone has been enjoying the long break. 
The Canton hotels are crowded, especially with many Hong Kong Chinese who have come back in droves to visit their families on the mainland. 
The stores, most of which are open, are mobbed. 
Children are having a ball racing up and down halls and corridors and through restaurants, laughing and shrieking, but apparently never crying. 
Their Chinese parents let them carry on as they please; with the one-child policy, teachers here say the children are getting spoiled.
There is a certain amount of economic pride connected with the celebration. 
Monday night the Governor of Guang Dong Province, Ye Zhen-Ping, told a large reception: ''This is the last year of the sixth five-year plan, and by the common effort of all the people, the plan we establish can be fulfilled and overfulfilled.''
China, he said, had now ''basically realized'' its aim of trying to get on an upward financial and economic trend. 
''We firmly take the economic reforms as our first priority,'' he added, ''and we will go on firmly, step by step.''
But, as though to demonstrate that the reformation of China still has a way to go before ''groupthink'' is over, the major local newspapers, Renmin Ribao, Guengzou Ribao and Nanfang Ribao, all played the leading speeches here and in Peking on page 1 and used identical pictures.
Deng Xiaoping's open door policy and four modernizations of industry, agriculture, science and technology, and national defense coexist with important remnants of old-style Marxism and what the Chinese call Mao Zedong thought, and others would call Stalinism.
In public, the fight between the two ideologies is muffled. 
Some old-style Marxists seek to push their cause by pretending there is no conflict between Dengism and Maoism. 
For instance, an editorial in Guangnung Daily states: ''In Deng Xiaoping's opinion, strengthening the second civilization'' -that is the new code word for the regime's objectives - ''requires ideological and political education as well as the development of socialist education, science and technology and culture.''
As though to scold Mr. Deng's disciples and those business types who are denounced here as ''capitalist roaders,'' the editorial says: ''We must unswervingly adhere to the four cardinal principles of leadership of the Communist Party, socialist road, people's democratic dictatorship, and upholding of Marxism, Leninism and Mao Zedong thought.''
Deng's response to the challenge is to put his own people on the Politburo and the Central Committee, and retire the old guard.
A little of the conflict at the ideological level does break into the open, however, at least symbolically. 
A new film, called ''Xiangshi Inn,'' which was previewed in Peking in July but has not yet been released, has already stirred up a storm of controversy among the politicians and intellectuals. 
It takes up the contemporary economic reforms, but without a happy ending.
The film, which was made by a leading director, Dong Kena, a 56-year-old woman, is about a young woman who is sent by the Government to take over and modernize an inn in a mountain village in southeast Hunan Province. 
But the former female manager of the inn tries every trick in the book, with the support of the county Communist Party secretary, to drive the young newcomer away. 
Finally, the new woman quits in despair and departs with her lover, an unmarried truck driver. 
(In the short story from which the film was made, her lover was married to a mad woman.) The movie critic of China Daily, Cheng Fang-Ming, who called ''Xiangshi Inn'' ''probably the best film of the year,'' drew the political-moral lesson for his readers: ''Obviously,'' he said, ''the sad ending implies that people sometimes must fight against the established order to succeed in rural economic reconstruction.''
The film's director said in an interview that ''one reason the film stirs heated response is that we produced it at the right time.''
But, here in Canton, in the midst of this holiday, the issue posed by ''Xiangshi Inn'' seems very remote. 
All day long the holiday-makers have been ogling, and buying, clothes and trinkets, refrigerators and stereos and other durable goods with which the stores are amply stocked. 
It is the consumer revolution that seems to be firmly in the saddle although, elsewhere in the country, Marxist and Maoist thought may die hard.
