
THE decision of the Central Committee of the
Communist Party of China to give greater
freedom to capitalist-style market forces and independence to a million state-owned enterprises may be the most damning indictment thus far of the failures of central planning and rigid controls of Communist states.
The Chinese, under Deng Xiaoping, are moving further along the capitalist road, without calling it that. 
The announcement said China would continue to adhere to Communist principles. 
Deng, unlike his predecessor, Mao Zedong, does not believe in great leaps forward or cultural revolutions; even after the reforms, some central planning will remain for key industries, such as steel, coal, cement and fertilizers, and there will be a mixture of collectively and privately controlled enterprises.
Leonard Silk (Economic Scene) column on move by China to give greater freedom to capitalist-style market forces and independence to many state-owned enterprises; says action may be most damning indictment thus far of failures of central planning and rigid controls of Communist states; sketch (M)
Yet a genuine overhaul of the centrally controlled system seems to be in the works. 
Strikingly, the Chinese declaration said the most crucial change would be in the price system, switching from fixed to flexible prices, responsive to changes in supply and demand. 
And the Chinese stress their determination to promote competition and provide greater economic incentives to producers to meet the needs of consumers, to increase productivity and to innovate.
The changes in China's economic system could have a far more powerful effect on the Soviet Union than earlier experiments in Hungary, Yugoslavia and other Communist countries because of China's huge population and the strategic threat Peking represents to Moscow.
For what the proposed changes in the Chinese system imply is acceptance by a group of top Communist leaders that the complexity of developing and operating a modern economy is incompatible with the methods of central planning and control practiced in the Soviet Union, and still preached as orthodoxy through much of the Communist world.
A new book, ''The Idea of Economic Complexity,'' by David Warsh, a reporter on The Boston Globe, serves to demonstrate that economic development involves not just greater wealth or new technology but a higher degree of complexity, with economies consisting of a greater and greater number of ''separable, analyzable parts.''
Growing complexity, in economic terms, means an increasing number of different jobs, different businesses, different machinery, different goods and services; it also means, with greater and greater division of labor, greater interdependence, nationally and internationally.
On the surface, it might seem that greater complexity would require greater control for an economy to work efficiently. 
But the reverse is true, as the experience of capitalist and Communist countries demonstrates. 
The gap between living standards in Western and Communist economies, as Mr. Warsh notes, grows greater every day. 
There are 26 centrally planned economies that, with nearly 40 percent of the world's population, produce slightly less than 20 percent of the world's goods.
But the Communist countries account for nearly 40 percent of the world's military spending. 
This huge outlay on arms helps to retard the Communists' economic development and exacerbates tensions among themselves and with the West.
''The prospect for the knitting together of these two blocs through extensive foreign trade is not bright,'' Mr. Warsh says. 
He doubts that two such different systems can really coexist peacefully when the gap between them - material and technical - keeps widening. 
''Given the exceedingly precarious balance of the arms race,'' he says, ''it seems to me that all the questions really worth worrying about grow out of this great inequality.''
China's decision to try a new route to narrow the gap in income and living standards is thus important not only for its own development, and possibly that of the entire Eastern and world economy, but also for international peace. 
That would be particularly important if China should succeed in moving forward in industry, as it has in agriculture, and establish a model for the Soviet Union.
But resistance to capitalist-style economic change is strong in the upper reaches of the Soviet political ruling class, the bureaucracy and the military. 
Partly. this resistance seems rooted in the habits of the oldest Communist regime in the world, partly in fear of the political consequences of the lifting of repression. 
Yet the Soviet system may be mired in endless stagnation if its leaders continue to resist the lessons that the Chinese - and many Soviet economists - have been learning about the complexities of modern economic systems and how to deal with them.
''The chief advantage of time,'' said Henri Bergson, the French philosopher, ''is that it prevents everything from happening at once.''
To this, the economist Jagdish Bhagwati of Columbia University adds, ''The chief advantage of economic theory is that it prevents us from considering everything at the same time.''
There's a second corollary, which Mr. Warsh's book inspires: Growing complexity requires greater simplicity, independence of decision-making, and interdependence within and among nations. 
There remain problems, including air and water pollution, congestion, crime, disease and the arms race, which require cooperation and control. 
Capitalists as well as Communists still have things to learn.
