
THIS Special Economic Zone, an area marked out to attract foreign investment through special tax programs and other incentives, is the most spectacular success story of China's open door policy.
While not without its problems, the growth of Shenzhen, which lies just across the water from Hong Kong and is connected to the New Territories of Hong Kong on its southern border, can be seen in a number of ways: Since 1979, its population has mushroomed to 350,000, from 20,000; it has signed more than 2,300 foreign investment agreements valued at more than $1.6 billion; it has attracted more than 30 percent of all foreign investment in China; it has seen the number of businesses grow to 400, and is planning 307 more; its electronics industry has grown from one company employing 300 to 60 companies employing 13,000; its total output has increased 29-fold, and its per-capita output has climbed to almost $2,000 a year in a country where the average has been less than $100 a year.
In addition, Shenzhen is expected to become the principal support base for offshore oil exploration in the South China Sea, and it is likely to become a major exporter of food, textiles and petrochemicals.
As for this zone's problems, a key one is a black market in currency. 
Three kinds of money circulate in this area - China's renminbi, its foreign exchange certificates and Hong Kong dollars. 
The three currencies, which can be used for purchasing only certain kinds of goods, provide opportunities for a great deal of wheeling and dealing.
Zhang Hongyi, the general manager of the Bank of China's Shenzhen branch, says the black market in money is the alternative to a black market in goods. 
He suggests that the goods black market would come into being without the money black market because of China's effort, which he regards as necessary, to run a dual-price system. 
One set of prices is for domestic goods, with many subsidies to support the standard of living of poor people; the other set applies to imported goods. 
But there is no way to raise an impregnable wall between the two.
Some people here maintain that the three-currency system, complicated as it is, is a valuable stimulant for business activity. 
But Mr. Zhang does not agree. 
''It's not good for the country,'' he says, ''to allow foreign currency to circulate.''
And he added that the disorderly currency system helped bring on the huge scandal on Hainan island involving Government officials who imported cars at one rate; sold them inland at far higher prices because of monetary differences, and then turned the profits back into foreign exchange for importing more cars.
This scandal, plus other criticism, Shenzhen officials say, will still not deter them from policies that have brought such prosperity to the people.
''We know from experience that the closed door policy did not work and we will not go back to it,'' one official said.
The open door does not mean just an effort to put out the welcome mat to foreign money and technology. 
The Chinese are also trying to bring people here with whom they wish to make friends, regardless of their politics or even their past connections with Taiwan or South Korea. 
Many are scientists, economists, business people and politicians from the United States.
For example, Ken Jernstedt, a 68-year-old member of the Oregon State Senate, who has been a test pilot at Republic Aviation and a Coca-Cola dealer, is back in China for the first time since World War II, when he helped defend the Burma Road as a member of Gen. Claire Chennault's Flying Tigers.
Mr. Jernstedt, who specializes in Pacific Rim affairs in the Oregon State Senate and has maintained close ties with Taiwan, was a bit wary when he and his wife were invited by the Chinese Government for an expense-free trip. 
But he wanted to see his old base in Kunming in Hunan Province, where the Third Pursuit Squadron, in which he was a flight leader, was based.
When he got back to Kunming, he was astonished to find the walled city gone, replaced by one with wide avenues, rows of trees, modern hotels and a population that had tripled.
Asked why he thought the Chinese had invited him, he said: ''I don't think they want anything out of me directly. 
The primary reason is they want to build better relations with the United States and the State of Oregon.''
He said they were interested in buying logs, and Oregon had plenty to sell. 
''They'd rather have the logs than our finished lumber,'' he added. 
''It's the difference in price.''
China is struggling to conserve foreign exchange.
''I'm a believer in free trade,'' Mr. Jernstedt said. 
''I like Reagan's attitude. 
The world is going through a kind of leveling, and this Chinese economy is not going to grow completely unless they have outlets for their goods.''
