
Lo Chengxun, whose 10-year sentence as an American spy was disclosed in Peking yesterday, was one of several Chinese or Hong Kong journalists and officials who have informal license from the Chinese Government to maintain contacts and exchanges with foreigners in Hong Kong.
In that sense, Mr. Lo belonged to a system that includes meetings over lunch and a constant round of cocktail parties and receptions involving foreign diplomats and journalists on the one side and Chinese presumed to be well-informed of the policies of the Peking Government on the other.
On the Chinese side, those people include editors and journalists like Mr. Lo attached to Hong Kong's three pro-Peking Chinese newspapers. 
They also include officials of the Hong Kong branch of the official New China News Agency and employees of the Bank of China and other Chinese commercial offices in Hong Kong.
Lo Chengxun, whose 10-year sentence as an American spy was disclosed in Peking yesterday, was one of several Chinese or Hong Kong journalists and officials who have informal license from the Chinese Government to maintain contacts and exchanges with foreigners in Hong Kong.System No Longer as Important
The system of informal contacts and exchanges, still in existence but no longer as important in these days of China's more outgoing foreign policy, seems useful both to the foreigners, including many Americans, and to the Chinese Government. 
Even though the Chinese involved are known not to divulge information that has not already appeared in the official Chinese press, foreigners find the meetings helpful in interpreting policies of the Peking Government.
Most of the diplomats and journalists assume that their meetings with the editors and others are routinely reported to the authorities in Peking, who are interested in gathering information about individual specialists on China and on Western attitudes toward the country. 
The system of contacts is also widely regarded as part of China's ''united front'' work, a series of activities by which the Peking Government builds ties with foreigners and with Chinese outside China proper.
Mr. Lo, though he did not speak English, was a prominent and highly valued participant in this system. 
It was well-known in Hong Kong that Chinese-speaking diplomats and journalists frequently sought him out. 
A lively, affable man who spoke with the accents of his native Guangxi, Mr. Lo was regarded as a pragmatic thinker who generally favored a greater political openness in China.
Hong Kong newspapers reported last fall that Mr. Lo, who was known in Hong Kong by the name Lo Fu, had been arrested while traveling in Guangdong Province with his family. 
The newspapers said that during that trip in May 1982, Mr. Lo was suddenly called to Peking. 
After that, the papers said, his family heard nothing from or about him except for a brief handwritten note to his wife that arrived a few weeks later.
Similar incidents have been reported involving other Hong Kong residents, who are considered Chinese nationals by the Peking Government.
The Chinese police have detained members of human rights groups based in Hong Kong who were traveling in China to collect information about dissidents. 
One of them, Lau San-ching, disappeared in Canton after visiting the relatives of some human rights activists who had been arrested in that city.
Another case involves Hanson Huang, a 1976 graduate of Harvard Law School who went to China in 1979 to teach law at Peking University and work as an adviser for the China International Trust and Investment Corporation, a Government body that arranges business contracts with foreign companies.
According to reports gathered in Hong Kong and published in The Wall Street Journal and SPEARHead, a magazine published in New York that monitors human rights in Asia, Mr. Huang called his mother in Hong Kong early in 1982 to tell her that he was moving out of his hotel room. 
There has been no word of him since, and it is assumed he is under arrest.
