
John T. Downey came home to Connecticut a decade ago after spending more than 20 years in a Chinese prison on charges of being an American spy.
This week, for the first time since his return, Mr. Downey will go back to China. 
He said his 18-day visit was a gesture of good will that had attracted the attention of the White House.
''If I had one strong conviction coming out of there it was that a solid relationship between the two countries was very important to our national interest,'' Mr. Downey said at his New Haven law office.
John T Downey, who returned to Connecticut 10 years ago after spending 20 years in jail in China on spy charges, will visit China for 18 days by invitation from Chinese Government; Downey says he hopes trip will be viewed as good-will gesture by Chinese; photos (S)
''It just seemed to me that maybe this was the time to go back,'' he said. 
''I'm hoping it will be seen as a good- will gesture by the Chinese.''
 
'Interest and Curiosity'
Mr. Downey, 53 years old, said he was ''looking forward to it with great interest and curiosity, but no trepidation.''
In 1952, at the height of the Korean War, Mr. Downey was 22 years old - fresh out of Yale University and working for the Central Intelligence Agency - when his plane was shot down over the mountains of Manchuria.
He was captured and sentenced to life imprisonment. 
He spent more than 20 years in prison before he was released in 1973 as relations between the United States and China began to improve.
Mr. Downey resumed his life almost as if the 20-year gap had never existed.
After his return, he went to Harvard Law School, got married and began practicing law with occasional forays into Connecticut Democratic politics.
 
A Race for the Senate
Last year he ran for the United States Senate but lost the Democratic nomination to Representative Toby Moffett, who in turn lost to Senator Lowell P. Weicker Jr., the Republican incumbent.
Speaking this month to the Western Connecticut Retired Officers Association in Westport, he said his experience in China was ''not one I would like to repeat.''
But he said it had convinced him that America society was ''the best hope for mankind.''
Mr. Downey said he began thinking about a return visit last winter when problems cropped up in United States- China relations over such things as arms sales to Taiwan and textile quotas.
''It just kind of set off alarm bells,'' he said.
He sounded out people who were familiar with China, such as Vice President Bush, a former chief of the United States Liaison Office in Peking.
They were enthusiastic about the idea of a visit but did not know how the Chinese would react, Mr. Downey said. 
They suggested that he get in touch with the Chinese on his own, which he did in March with a telephone call to the Chinese Embassy and a follow-up letter from his wife, Audrey, who was born in China but raised in Taiwan.
Mr. Downey, who will leave Wednesday with his wife and 3-year-old son, John, is going at the invitation of the Chinese People's Association for Friendship with Foreign Countries, which he described as an unofficial arm of the Chinese Foreign Office. 
The Chinese are not paying his way, he said.
 
A Chat With the President
Earlier this month, Mr. Downey discussed his trip at a meeting in Washington with Mr. Bush, who took him to the Oval Office for a brief chat with President Reagan.
Mr. Downey also had lunch with a staff member of the National Security Council for a background briefing. 
Despite the meetings, he said, his visit will be ''strictly private.''
Mr. Downey said he expected to find many changes since 1973. 
''The fact we are going is a sign of that,'' he said.
