
THE week before celebrating the Lunar New Year, which begins tomorrow, San Yan Wong, his wife, Rosanna, and his mother-in-law, Kwai Wu Chui Fung, began searching the markets of Chinatown for the appropriate foods. 
For the start of the year 4685, the Year of the Rabbit, the Wongs had decided to celebrate as they had in Shanghai.
More than 23 years have passed since Mr. Wong, a former restaurateur and now a partner in the Asian American New York Land Corporation of Flushing, had celebrated in Shanghai fashion; for Mrs. Wong it had been 16 years. 
Both had left Shanghai and married in Hong Kong before settling in New York.
''Our children had never had a true Shanghai New Year,'' Mrs. Wong said in their apartment in Chinatown's Confucius Plaza overlooking the Manhattan Bridge. 
''We wanted them to have some of the things we had.''
Their children, Lily, 14 years old, Joseph, 12, and Lisa and Lucy, their 7-year-old twins, were enlisted in the preparations.
The refrigerator holds a surfeit of seafood for the New Year's Eve dinner: two sea bass to be cooked in Shao-Hsing wine, the wine of Shanghai; two pomfret flown in from China for marinating in soy sauce and sugar in the Shanghai manner; clams for cooking in a Shao-Hsing sauce, and shrimp for stir-frying in a sweet red dressing. 
In Shanghai, fish signify plenty, clams gold and shrimp happiness, Mr. Wong said.
Mrs. Kwai, whose husband, Kwai Tak Yui, is visiting Shanghai this New Year, insisted that the apartment be swept, scoured and vacuumed in keeping with tradition, because it is bad luck to clean on New Year's Day. 
At least one new item of clothing has been bought for each child, and envelopes of ''lucky money'' have begun appearing under the children's pillows.
Tonight a New Year table for visitors is to be set up in the living room, with dishes of peanuts (symbols of birth); watermelon seeds (a wish for many sons); gold-foil wrapped chocolate coins (riches); candied lotus seeds, kumquats and dates (plenty); a pomelo, or Chinese grapefruit (abundance); oranges (life's sweetness); tangerines (good luck), and water chestnuts (many children).
On the living room wall is a picture of Chai Sun, the god of fortune, surrounded by five slogans, wishes for a successful and healthy New Year, in gold calligraphy on bright red paper.
In Shanghai, children customarily knock on doors seeking lucky money, Mrs. Wong said. 
When people answer their doors, the children cry, ''Chai Sun doh!'' and present pieces of red paper with the same words, ''The god of fortune arrives!''
This means the children are entitled to some lucky money. 
Although this tradition is not followed in New York, the Wongs plan it this year for their children, a niece and four nephews, who will come to the Wongs' door wearing red for the New Year.
The New Year's Eve dinner is to have 12 courses, ''a very good number,'' explained Mr. Wong, because it is the number of signs in the zodiac.
 
The family will also spend New
Year's Day together. 
''Here in New York we usually go from house to house,'' Mr. Wong said. 
''We see other people. 
It is not like that in Shanghai.
But this year we will all stay at home together as we used to in Shanghai.
We must be together for dinner and for the games - dice, dominoes and for mah-jongg.''
Preparation of the New Year's Eve dinner started early this morning with Mrs. Kwai cutting, slicing, chopping and mixing in the kitchen. 
Later she was joined by Mrs. Wong and Mrs. Leung Li Man, the mother-in-law of Mrs. Wong's second-oldest brother, - ''number 2 sister-in-law's mother,'' as Mrs. Wong puts it.
At dinner time, the dishes will begin to go to the dining room table - yueh e choi (a combination of hair seaweed, dried oysters, fried bean curd and bean sprouts), which signify togetherness and agreement; cold vegetarian ''duck'' wrapped in dried bean curd; vegetarian ''beef'' made from fermented high-gluten flour; noodle soup with Shanghai pickled cabbage, and a Shanghai New Year's dish, dried bamboo shoots and bacon.
There will be chi ma tong yuen (boiled glutinous rice dumplings filled with sweet sesame-seed paste) and a soup of egg dumplings and tiny meatballs with long bead-thread noodles symbolizing longevity. 
These dishes will be followed by boiled chicken dressed with Shao-Hsing wine, the sea bass and pomfret, the clams and the shrimp.
There will be ''gold bars'' of bean curd wrapped around pork, chives and bean sprouts; lin gau (Shanghai rice cakes) with spinach; shoots of the snow pea plant with shredded beef, and finally a sweet soup of red beans flavored with rock sugar.
Sixteen dishes are to be put on the table in the course of the meal, and offered to heaven and the family's ancestors before any are tasted.
''To our good health,'' Mrs. Kwai will say.
''Gung Shi Fat Chai,'' Mrs. Wong will say, intoning ''Happy New Year'' in the dialect of Shanghai.
''May our house be filled with gold and jade,'' Mr. Wong will say.
And then the family will eat.
 
Shanghai Chicken In Wine Sauce
#1 3 1/2-pound chicken, freshly killed, washed thoroughly, fat and membranes removed
#3 tablespoons Chinese Shao-Hsing wine, or sherry
#1 1/2 teaspoons salt
1/4 teaspoon white pepper
#3 tablespoons chicken broth
1/2 teaspoon sugar.
1.Place the chicken in a large pot, preferably an aluminum Dutch oven. 
Cover with water and bring to a boil.
2.Lower the heat, cover the pot leaving a slight opening, and simmer chicken for about 30 minutes.
3.Remove chicken from pot, drain and cool on a cake rack.
4.When chicken has cooled, chop into pieces 2 inches by 1 inch, skin and bones included. 
Place on a serving dish.
5.Mix together the remaining ingredients and pour the marinade over the chicken. 
Marinate for one hour. 
Serve at room temperature.
Yield: 6 to 8 servings.
 
Shanghai Clam Blossoms
#8 cups cold water
#24 cherrystone clams, scrubbed with stiff brush under running water
#3 tablespoons vegetable oil
#1 teaspoon minced ginger
#1 tablespoon chopped scallions
#1 cup chicken broth
1/4 teaspoon salt
1/2 teaspoon vinegar
#2 tablespoons oyster sauce
#1 tablespoon light soy sauce
#1 tablespoon dark soy sauce
#1 teaspoon sugar
#2 tablespoons Shao-Hsing wine, or sherry
#2 teaspoons sesame oil
#4 teaspoons cornstarch.
1.In a large pot, bring water to a boil, add clams and boil until shells open. 
Place clams on a warm serving dish.
2.Put vegetable oil in a wok. 
Set aside the ginger and the scallions, and mix remaining ingredients together for the sauce. 
Heat the wok over high heat for 45 seconds. 
When a wisp of white smoke appears add ginger and scallions. 
Stir for 5 seconds, add sauce mixture and stir with spatula until sauce thickens and begins to bubble. 
Remove from heat, pour over clams and serve at once.
Yield: 6 portions.
 
Pork With Salted Vegetable Soup
#8 cups cold water
1/2 pound fresh egg noodles (vermicelli size)
#2 tablespoons vegetable oil
#4 ounces fresh pork, shredded
#4 tablespoons Shanghai pickled cabbage, a vegetable like collard greens, almost never eaten fresh, always preserved in salt and used in combination with other foods. 
Available canned, labeled ''Shanghai cabbage.''
#4 tablespoons bamboo shoots, julienned
#4 Chinese black mushrooms, soaked in hot water one-half hour until soft, then julienned
#4 cups chicken broth
#1 teaspoon Shao-Hsing Wine or sherry
Dash of white pepper
#1 teaspoon salt
#1 teaspoon sesame oil
#1 scallion, cut into 1-inch pieces and shredded.
1.Bring water to a boil in a large pot. 
Add egg noodles, stir and cook until al dente, about 30 seconds. 
Remove from heat and run under cold water. 
Drain and put equal portions in six soup bowls.
2. Heat vegetable oil in a wok over high heat, and when wisp of white smoke appears add shredded pork and cook for 1 minute. 
Add pickled cabbage, bamboo shoots and mushrooms, and mix together thoroughly. 
Stir chicken broth, wine, salt and pepper together and pour into wok. 
Bring to a boil, then cook for 1 minute.
3. Turn off heat. 
Add sesame oil to work and stir, then pour the soup over the noodles. 
Garnish with shredded scallion and serve immediately.
Yield: 6 servings.
 
Shrimp With Red Sauce
The shrimp:
White of a small egg
#1 tablespoon Shao-Hsing wine or sherry
#1 tablespoon vegetable oil
#1 teaspoon cornstarch
1/4 teaspoon salt
Pinch white pepper
#1 pound large shrimp (about 26), shelled, deveined and washed
#3 cups vegetable oil
#1 tablespoon minced carrots
#1 tablespoon minced ginger
#1 tablespoon minced garlic
#1 tablespoon chopped onions
#1 scallion, chopped.
The sauce:
1 teaspoon sugar
#1 teaspoon soy sauce
#1 1/2 tablespoons Shao-Hsing wine or sherry
#2 tablespoons ketchup
#1 teaspoon cornstarch
1/2 teaspoon salt
1/8 teaspoon white pepper
1/4 cup chicken broth
#1 teaspoon white vinegar
#1 teaspoon sesame oil.
1.Mix first six ingredients together and marinate shrimp in mixture for 3 hours, refrigerated.
2.Mix all the sauce ingredients except the sesame oil and set aside.
3.Heat 3 cups vegetable oil in wok to 350 degrees. 
Add marinated shrimp and cook 1 minute, until shrimp change color. 
Drain shrimp and set aside. 
Drain wok and reserve 2 tablespoons of the oil.
4.Heat wok over high heat and add reserved oil. 
When a wisp of white smoke appears add carrots, giner, garlic, onions and scallion and stir-fry thoroughly. 
Add sauce to mixture, stirring until it boils and thickens. 
Add shrimp and stir a few seconds to heat. 
Turn off heat, stir in sesame oil and serve immediately in a preheated serving dish.
Yield: 6 servings.
