
Shanghai's annual crab rush begins with a frenzy in mid-September, continues unabated through October, and then subsides for another year. 
But during those six weeks virtually everyone in Shanghai, it seems, wants to eat nothing but the freshwater da zhai xie, or hairy crabs.
People line up at markets for the crabs, which are sold in the hand-woven bamboo baskets in which they are kept after being pulled from the water. 
Local people have been known to pay merchants to tell them when the first shipments of da zhai xie are to arrive. 
And after the crabs are bought, they are brought home to be steamed and eaten with shaoxing wine, the sherry-like beverage of Shanghai. 
Throughout the Shanghai region, late September and all of October are times for crab parties, time to have friends over for a feast of hairy crabs and wine.
Shanghai's crab craze is similar to the mussel madness each fall in Brussels and across Belgium, the quests for shad roe and soft-shell crabs each spring in the eastern United States, the need for crayfish each September in Finland. 
It is fascinating to watch people, mostly women, line up impatiently in Shanghai's many morning markets just to buy the crabs.
Nor will just any crabs do. 
Only the gray-blue crabs of Jiangsu Province, from the lake known as Yangcheng (west of Shanghai) are acceptable. 
And people will pay enormous prices, as much as 45 yuan (about $15) a pound for them.
Because of the demand, unscrupulous merchants have been known to place other crabs, such as those from the Yangtze River where it passes close to Anhui Province, in among the da zhai xie. 
Careful shoppers can be seen sorting through the baskets, to examine each crab individually. 
The distinguishing feature of the da zhai xie are hairlike bristles along their legs - thus their name - and the people of Shanghai know that.
So intense is the demand for the hairy crabs each fall that markets have developed in places other than Shanghai. 
In Hong Kong and the United States, immigrants from Shanghai await air shipments of the crabs, and in New York's Chinatown people will pay as much as $20 a pound for live da zhai xie.
For the markets the Chinese Government has printed brightly colored posters that show the crabs, red after being cooked, hairy legs sticking out. 
When I was in Shanghai during the crab craze last year I saw posters that read, ''Autumn is here, the chrysanthemums are blooming and the crabs are fat.''
Others read, ''This is the season to eat the crabs.''
Still others described the roe in the female crabs as ''fat and thick,'' and the meat as ''soft and tender, full of vitamins.''
It is difficult to trace historically the annual demand for da zhai xie; the three characters translate as ''big gate crab.''
The people of Shanghai say there is no religious or mythological significance to the hairy crab. 
Some suggest that it is an extreme manifestation of the appetite for crabs throughout Asia, where crustaceans are generally held in higher esteem than in other parts of the world.
In the waters of and around Thailand, Malaysia and Vietnam many species of crab exist: The so-called zebra crabs and blue swimming crabs of Thailand, the mangrove crab of Malaysia and the monkey-god crab of Vietnam are all highly prized as food.
Attention is given the hairy crab not for its history, but for its consumption, the traditions that concern how and when they should be eaten.
The body of the perfect hairy crab is ''the size of a rice bowl,'' according to the people of Shanghai, three and a half to four inches in diameter. 
The male crab has bigger claws and more bristles along its legs, and weighs about 11 ounces; the female, with smaller claws and little bristle, is about 8 ounces.
Early in the season the female crabs are much higher in demand, for they are fat with roe, their shells are softer and their meat sweeter. 
Later, as the males grow, their bodies become plump and their meat sweeter. 
The crabs are never seasoned when cooked. 
Occasionally a traditional Shanghai dipping sauce of vinegar, soy sauce and ginger will accompany them, but most often they are eaten just steamed.
The only exception to simple steaming is toward the end of October when the crabs are smaller and harder and their meat is not as tender or as sweet. 
Then they may be eaten as ''drunken crabs,'' steamed after being marinated in shaoxing wine.
Part of the art of the Shanghai table, after the crab has been consumed and all its meat plucked out, is to reconstitute the body so that it looks whole.
So much a part of Shanghai life is the hairy crab that it transcends the table. 
The way the crabs are marketed, their legs and claws bound tightly against their bodies, has meaning in the financial markets.
In Shanghai and in Hong Kong, when business dealings are most difficult, when money supplies are tight, when property transactions are moving slowly, the condition is said to be ''da zhai xie.''
I have eaten hairy crabs in the Ru Yi, a fairly new restaurant in Shanghai atop the Shanghai Friendship Store on Nanjing Road (these were steamed and accompanied by a bottle of cold Seagull Beer), and in the Lubolang Restaurant inside the mid-city enclave known as Shanghai's Old Town.
Neither of these restaurants has a listed telephone number. 
It is best to book tables through the Shanghai branch of the China International Travel Service, telephone 217200. 
The office is quite close to both restaurants. 
In both cases, the cost was about $15 to $16 each, the price of one crab the same as the normal price of a full meal for two or three people. 
But that is an indication of how greatly they are prized.
In Hong Kong, where the desire for hairy crabs increases each autumn - and where copies of the Shanghai posters are to be found in virtually every one of its Shanghai-style restaurants - the Wu Kong (27 Nathan Road, Kowloon; telephone 3-667244) is famous for da zhai xie. 
''We cook them the way they do in Shanghai,'' said the restaurant's manager, Bill Kong. 
And so they do.
Last fall, my husband and I paid about $18 each for four da zhai xie in Wu Kong, a small basement-level white marble restaurant entered from Peking Road. 
The crabs had been steamed to redness, and with them we drank glasses of shaoxing wine.
As we ate, more hairy crabs were inching about in a nearby holding tank illuminated with bright, emerald green lighting, waiting like the precious creatures they are, to give enjoyment.
