
The vegetarian dishes of Japanese Zen temples are prepared in a manner that reveals and enhances the purity, simplicity and freshness of the ingredients. 
This cuisine, called shojin ryori (which means a method of cooking in which one pursues the pure way of the Buddha), has developed mainly within the Rinzai sect of Zen, with its emphasis on meditative practices and sudden enlightenment, brought to Japan from China in the 12th century. 
In Rinzai temples, preparation of the food is a kind of religious discipline, and during the meal, to which each monk brings his own utensils, one must not speak and must sit formally and adhere to various other rules.
The Tokyo restaurant Bon serves another type of shojin cooking, called fucha ryori. 
A feast to be eaten together by all the monks of a temple after a special day of meditation and discussion, fucha ryori is a product of the more recently imported Obaku sect of Zen, brought from Ming China in the mid-17th century by a Chinese monk, Yinyuan, and other refugees from the Manchus. 
The sect's headquarters are in Kyoto, at Manpukuji Temple. 
Obaku Zen incorporates elements of Pure Land Buddhism, in which salvation depends on simple faith rather than rigorous and self-denying disciplines, and this somewhat more relaxed approach to Zen is reflected in the fucha cuisine. 
In its complexity of flavor and form, the food reveals its Chinese sources.
One Chinese element traditionally associated with fucha ryori is the harmony of spirit created by each of the guests taking food from a common dish onto his own plate. 
Perhaps due to the fastidious nature of Japanese eating habits (at home each member of a family always uses his own pair of chopsticks; guests are given disposable ones) this custom is not observed at Bon.
As in other styles of Zen cooking, the meal represents a balance of the six tastes (bitter, sour, sweet, hot, salty and faint or delicate) and the five methods of food preparation (boiling, grilling, deep frying, steaming and serving raw). 
These correspond, more or less, to the five directions (east, west, north, south and center), the five colors (green, white, black, red and yellow, also represented in a Zen meal) and the five elements (wood, metal, water, fire and earth) that structure the Chinese cosmology. 
In a complete fucha meal, the selection of dishes -both the food and the ceramic, bamboo and lacquer utensils in which it is served - mirror this harmony.
On entering the serene and elegant Japanese house occupied by Bon, all of these compexities fuse into an atmosphere that is purely Japanese. 
Bon opened 14 years ago in the quiet residential district known as Hakusan. 
Twelve years before that, the mother of Furusawa Kazuaki, the proprietor, opened the original Ryusen Bon not far away, preparing food to serve at various temple functions. 
The family built the Hakusan house as their residence and there prepared temple meals to send out.
The house is a fine example of traditional Japanese domestic architecture, scarce in Tokyo since World War II, with mud-plastered walls in earth tones complementing the tatami mats. 
The sliding glass doors that form one wall of each private dining room are framed in wood, not aluminum, and look out on a luxuriant and extensive garden, unexpected in the middle of the city.
I visited Bon in one of Tokyo's rare blizzards. 
The snow, weighing down the branches of trees and shrubs in the garden, reflecting, as the sky grew dark in the late afternoon, the light of a stone lantern, made a delightful setting for the meal. 
My companions and I stepped into the room set aside for us, already warmed in preparation for our visit by a charcoal brazier and a charcoal-burning hearth with an iron tea kettle - and a hefty electric heater. 
The calligraphy scroll in the alcove, written in bold strokes by the head of the Obaku sect, extolled the pleasures of listening to the song of the boiling kettle, comparing it to the wind in the pines - a common conceit in Chinese poetry.
A full course fucha meal (about $45 to $55) is almost indescribably elaborate, consisting of the following elements: the thick foamy tea of the tea ceremony, a tiny appetizer often given the form and color of some seasonal flower or foliage, a clear soup with a few perfectly shaped pieces of mushrooms or bamboo shoots afloat, kuchi-kawari (literally a change of flavors - a vegetable dish, varying monthly in method of preparation and ingredients according to the season) and unpen (a fragment of cloud - thickened soup made with leftover vegetables).
These are followed by nimono (boiled things - a dish of seasonal vegetables cooked in a transparent but richly flavored stock), sesame tofu (a rich and silky smooth substance, similar to bean curd in texture but redolent with sesame seeds ground to a paste in a mortar), agemono (fried things - tenpura), a hearty miso soup containing vegetables and tofu, freshly made pickles, rice and fruit. 
The ingredients and preparation as well as the utensils change seasonally, however, so guests will find a different meal at different times of the year.
Among the dishes we sampled was a warm kuzu (arrowroot) jelly containing a sweetened kumquat, said to be especially good for the throat on raw winter days.
There was also sashimi made of konnyaku (a root called devil's tongue), a firm but slippery gray substance, one of many characteristically Japanese foods valued as much for its texture and consistency as for its elusive flavor. 
Then we had a dumpling made of lily root dipped in buckwheat batter and lightly fried and a shell of yuzu (citrus junos, one of the most fragrant of Japanese citrus fruits - always translated as citron but in neither appearance nor flavor resembling the heavily candied fruit we see at Christmas) in which nuts have been cooked in miso (fermented bean paste) and preserved for months until all the flavors blend. 
This was followed by a tenpura selection crowned by a fragile spray of enoki mushrooms on their long slender stems, resembling (not by coincidence) the snow-frosted branches outside.
A somewhat more limited selection, called aka-zen (red tray) because all the dishes as well as the tray on which they are brought are made of vermilion lacquer, may cost $40 to $45. 
The golden miso soup in which slices of white turnip and brilliantly colored mustard greens float must have been chosen to enhance the red lacquer bowl. 
A smaller selection, which makes a good lunch, the hangetsu fuchidaka (half-moon tray), is simplified by presenting several of the fucha courses in a partitioned half-moon shaped lacquer box (about $30).
The restaurant consists of five private rooms, which can accommodate up to 50 guests at one time. 
Each room can seat up to 10, but two rooms can be joined together to handle larger parties. 
Beer is about $3, sake $4.25. 
Only Japanese is spoken by the staff.
Bon, 4-37-19 Hakusan, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo (telephone 947-1525), open from noon to 8 P.M., closed Tuesday. 
It is best to reserve a day or two in advance, and it is customary but not essential to order when the reservation is made. 
From July 25 to the end of August, Bon moves to Karuizawa, a mountain resort in Nagano Prefecture, and the Hakusan branch closes. 
The address of the Karuizawa branch is Tsukushigaoka Building, Kariyado, Karuizawamachi, Nagano Prefecture (02674-5-4480 or locally 5-4480).
