
FEI LO teaches regional Chinese cooking and nutrition at the China Institute in America in New York. 
She is the author of ''The Dim Sum Book: Art of the Chinese Teahouse'' to be published in the spring.
 
By EILEEN YIN-FEI LO
T o the people of southeastern China, particularly those of Canton, and Hong Kong, dim sum is far more than food. 
It is a custom rooted in history and mythology. 
It is brunch with tea. 
It is the Chinese equivalent of the business lunch. 
It is the core around which families gather.
Eileen Yin-Fei Lo discusses Chinese custom of brunch with tea, called dim sum
In Cantonese the words dim sum mean ''a dot on the heart,'' or more broadly, ''the heart's delight,'' and the seemingly unending dishes of beautifully shaped dim sum that are carried or wheeled by as you sit in a teahouse sipping green or black tea do indeed bring a sense of wonder and joy.
On the mainland of China itself, dim sum is virtually unknown outside the area around Canton - and, of course, the British colony of Hong Kong that adjoins it - although in cosmopolitan Shanghai there are both dim sum teahouses and a few Shanghai-style dim sum dishes. 
In Peking there are steamed breads and small buns that are similar, but they are not consumed in the tradition of the dim sum teahouse. 
Rather, they are meals themselves or accompaniments to courses.
The atmosphere of the teahouses in which dim sum is served is often as important as the food. 
In a little teahouse such as Hing Wan on Queen's Road in Hong Kong's central district, you sit beneath a ceiling hung with bird cages. 
They belong to elderly wealthy men who cling to the tradition of carrying their birds while taking a walk before tea. 
You might prefer to indulge in a restaurant on Nathan Road in Kowloon called the International, which seats 1,500 people on each of three floors; nevertheless customers must wait for seats on Sundays.
And what is worth waiting for?
The following are perhaps the most famous of the many dim sum:
- Har gau (shrimp dumplings), crescent-shaped dumplings filled with shrimp and pork.
- Fung ngan gau (phoenix eyes), which look, as intended, like women's eyes - almond-shaped and dotted with minced shrimp and egg whites.
- Fun guor (rice noodle fruit), half-moons filled with ground pork, mushrooms and shrimp.
- Siu mai (cook-and-sell dumplings), basket-shaped dumplings that earn their name by being the first made, the first sold, the first eaten.
- Char siu bau (barbecued pork), steamed or baked buns filled with chunks of roast pork - known to many Americans.
- Siu lung bau (soup dumplings), made with gelatin, shrimp and pork so that when they are steamed, the gelatin becomes soup inside the dumpling.
- Nor mai gai (lotus leaf rice), pillow-shaped masses of glutinous rice into which have been folded mushrooms, chicken, pork, shrimp and Chinese smoked pork sausage, the whole then wrapped with dried lotus leaves and steamed. 
The leaf imparts a slightly sweet aroma and taste.
- Jook (thick rice soup), or congee, as the Cantonese call this soup, which resembles porridge because of the preserved eggs and pork, or pieces of chicken, that are usually added.
- Yeung hai kim (stuffed crab claws), claws around which chopped shrimp are mounded, then deep-fried.
- Chun guen (spring rolls), tiny log-shaped fried rolls filled with pork, shrimp, water chestnuts, bamboo shoots and scallions. 
They are not to be confused with that American invention, the larger egg roll.
- Woo gok (dumplings fashioned from mashed taro root and stuffed with pork and mushrooms) are football-shaped and deep-fried until crisp and brown.
- Lor bok goh (turnip cake), a translucent cake of turnips, ginger, shrimp and rice powder that is cut into slices and pan-fried before serving.
And there are many more, all to be discovered in serendipitous fashion. 
Waitresses traditionally wheel the dim sum in on carts in such restaurants as King Bun in Hong Kong's central district and the venerable Luk Kwok on Gloucester Road. 
You select by pointing or asking for what you want as you drink one of several varieties of tea - green, black, jasmine, chrysanthemum or oolong.
The tea has been important since the eighth century, when Lu Yu, China's historical master of the beverage, wrote his ''Classic of Tea.''
It set down for the first time how tea leaves should be grown and processed, how the product should be brewed and steeped, how it should be served. 
He wrote that tea is a drink for body and soul, a mental stimulant, perhaps even an aid toward eventual immortality.
T he beginnings of the dim sum meal go back to the Sung Dynasty, when travelers on the highways of southern China in the 10th century would stop at small roadside teahouses to refresh themselves with tea and light meals. 
It was centuries before the practice took root and the Chinese of the south devised the small bite-sized foods that became stylized into dim sum.
These days you will see businessmen discussing what is most dear to them, sales clerks around a table chattering, family groups of three or more generations clustered together for a Sunday morning reunion, all enjoying dim sum, perhaps the most inexpensive of Chinese meals.
One of the more memorable dim sum meals I have had recently was in the 1,000-seat Maxim's Palace in the new World Trade Center extension of Hong Kong's Excelsior Hotel. 
It is a huge barn of a restaurant hung with gold and red dragons supported by green-painted pillars around which curl gilded phoenixes. 
Maxim's Palace is busy and noisy and the wagons of dim sum come by at an almost breathtaking rate.
First we had har gau, those delicious moist shrimp dumplings, then bowls of jook filled with chunks of preserved eggs. 
We also had a specialty of Maxim's Palace, gum yueh gau - or golden fish - which is a dumpling sculptured in the shape of a goldfish and stuffed with shrimp and pork.
Next came slices of fried water-chestnut cake, with siu mai, those basket-shaped ''cook-and-sell'' dumplings; and another specialty, gun jing ngau yuk kau, tiny beef meatballs.
Before finishing with sweet egg custard tarts we had kim ding guen cho, pigs' feet and egg cooked with shredded ginger and black, sweet rice vinegar. 
Wonderful!
One pays for dim sum by the plate. 
Each preparation comes on a different sized and shaped plate - round, oval, deep and saucerlike, in bamboo steamers, in metal fluted pastry tins. 
And when it is time to pay the bill the waiter simply counts the plates and matches price to size and shape. 
Most dim sum cost from 50 cents to 75 cents for three or four dumplings. 
For only a few dollars a party of four can snack to their heart's content. 
Or even their heart's delight.
