
THE CHINESE EMPEROR
By Jean Levi. 
Translated by Barbara Bray. 
341 pp. 
San Diego: A Helen and Kurt Wolff Book/ Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. 
$18.95.
OF the many stupendous stories that constitute the record of China's past, perhaps none is more moving and powerful than that of the rise and fall of the Qin (Ch'in) dynasty in the late third century B.C. Emerging from obscurity on the bleak northwestern borders of the known world, the small state of Qin, over several centuries, gradually developed an economic base, a harsh legal system and a military machine that made it a potent force among the much larger territories of the old Chinese multistate system.
By devious intrigue, by negotiation and by savage fighting the Qin rulers slowly overwhelmed their rivals. 
In 221 B.C., with the collapse of his last enemy, the ruler Qin Shihuang (Shih Hwang-ti) was able to declare himself the emperor of the first great unified Chinese empire, founder of a dynasty that was to last for 10,000 generations. 
In 206 B.C., wracked by internal rebellions and factional succession struggles, the Qin dynasty disintegrated.
Though many details of this story are lost, its general structure was shaped shortly after the Qin collapse by a Chinese historian of genius, Sima Qian (Ssu-ma Ch'ien), who lived from 147 B.C. to around 90 B.C. In a group of interconnected chapters in his ,great ''Historical Records'' (some of which may have been drafted by his father, Sima Tan) Sima Qian depicted the characters of the men, and a few of the women, who made Qin the terrible state that it became. 
His biographies of the merchant, king-maker and statesman Lu Buwei, of the ruthless bureaucrat Li Si, the Emperor Qin Shihuang, the eunuch Zhao Gao, the romantic assassin Jin Ke, have been regarded ever since - rightly - as masterpieces of both historical narration and of literature.
Jean Levi's ''Chinese Emperor'' is the first major attempt to create a historical novel out of this rich material. 
Mr. Levi, a Sinologist who was born and educated in France and studied at the University of Beijing and the University of Fudan as well as in Shanghai during the Cultural Revolution, won the Goncourt Prize for historical fiction for ''The Chinese Emperor.''
It is an ambitious and at times extremely powerful book, where moments of ghastly violence are interspersed with flickers of rare beauty. 
Mr. Levi does not admit to the title of novelist, nor does he claim that of historian. 
His goal, he tells us in his afterword, is just ''to create an atmosphere, and suggest certain ways of looking at human and political relationships, rather than revive or reconstruct a bygone age.''
The atmosphere Mr. Levi evokes is one of an archaic and murderous bureaucratic state that destroys the individual in its search for an impossible precision where all deviance from the state's norms will be obliterated. 
It is this aspect of the Qin world, Mr. Levi writes, that ''fascinated me as a mirror of the present day.''
Mr. Levi does not attempt to say whether this is an indictment of certain Western capitalist bureaucracies, or of the Soviet Union. 
But he does imply a harsh indictment of the People's Republic of China when he notes that the political organization established by Qin Shihuang and his chief minister Li Si ''endured for more than twenty centuries in various avatars - of which the present regime is the latest.''
''The Chinese Emperor'' has a deceptively simple-looking structure. 
Of the three main parts into which it is divided, the first concentrates on the minister Lu Buwei as he ruminates on his life and awaits his final fate at the Emperor's hands; the second is centered on the minister Li Si; while the third charts the descent of Emperor Qin Shihuang via paranoia and melancholia to his eventual illness and death. 
But Mr. Levi weaves the stories together imaginatively; one artificial but effective device is to have the Emperor in his study reading the dossier prepared on Lu Buwei by Li Si, as he tries to decide how to treat his former favorite. 
It does not betray too much of the plot to say that he graciously gives Lu Buwei the time to commit suicide. 
(Li Si, Lu's nemesis, was later to be cut in half at the waist on the orders of the first Emperor's successor.) SOME of the best imaginative passages in the book are Mr. Levi's reconstructions of the Qin Emperor's reflections on time and mortality as his power rises to its apogee: ''He began to reflect on the futility of all the maneuvering he had just been reading about. 
These people thought that they were playing tricks with time, but in fact they were only the dupes of history.''
In a particularly fine passage, rendered into beautiful English by the book's translator, Barbara Bray, we see the Emperor alone at his desk with the bureaucratic reports he loved to read, ''cut off from the world and the cycle of days and nights, yet conscious of the passage of time through the crystal sound of the drops of water that marked the flight of the hours. 
It seemed to him then that his mind, detached from contingency, took on a singular sharpness. 
. . . His gaze wandered amid the clouds of smoke rising from the perfume burner, then he saw them as bronze mountains, contorted slopes, vertiginous gorges.''
Or, as the Emperor reflected on his own approaching death even as he searched with mounting passion and expense for the elixir of immortality that his Taoist advisers promised him: ''A slight tremor of the earth, the collapse of a mountain, and the world, after a faint quiver at its disappearance, would continue on its way like a cart that has dropped a bit of dung.''
In these and other passages of equal grace, Mr. Levi weaves a veil of introspection around this melancholy, all-powerful man. 
The most dramatic and terrifying happenings are mostly drawn from various sections of Sima Qian's ''Historical Records'': the ghastly battles, the Emperor's secretive meanderings, the hideous punishments handed out to criminals and enemies. 
From Sima Qian also comes the satanic figure of Lao Ai, who won the Empress Dowager's love by shoving his vast erect member into the hub of a cartwheel and cavorting among drunken guests at one of Lu Buwei's parties. 
And it is to Sima Qian that we owe the unforgettable vision of the mounds of fish carried along by Li Si to hide the otherwise all too obvious fact that his Emperor had not only died but was decomposing.
But Mr. Levi does not only draw on Sima Qian. 
He has read widely in Chinese sources and makes excellent use of the ''Records of the Warring States'' (the ''Zhanguo ci''), the early chronological record of the apparently endless wars of the major Chinese contenders for power in the pre-Qin period. 
He also uses the voluminous writings of the legalist philosopher Han Feizi (Han Fei Tzu), amusingly rendered by Mr. Levi as Han Negation, as well as Taoist medical tracts, and of the recent archeological finds in China. 
Most important of these latter - though the millions of Chinese and foreign tourists who have gazed in awe at Qin Shihuang's terra cotta army buried near his tomb may find it hard to agree - are the legal and bureaucratic documents dating to around 217 B.C. unearthed by Chinese archeologists during 1975 at tomb number 11 in Yunmeng County of what is now Hubei Province. 
It is these documentary finds that allow Mr. Levi to reconstruct the bureaucratic mentality of the Qin state.
Because a source is old and in Chinese, of course, does not mean it is necessarily accurate, and this simple reminder is most important in the case of Sima Qian. 
Not only did Sima Qian love a good story, he had no scruples about recreating prolonged dialogues between leading historical figures of which he could not possibly have had any knowledge. 
He just followed his judgment as to what the characters would have said. 
Other hands then confused the issue by emending and adding to Sima's own text during the Han dynasty, so we cannot be sure at all times which passages are in fact his, and which were inserted later to bring additional opprobrium on the fallen Qin ruler, who was anathema to later generations of Confucian scholars because of his burning of books and burying alive of scholars.
THERE is also an aspect of the Qin experience that Mr. Levi gives us little of - the world of humor. 
For jokes and puns still bubbled at the heart of all that Qin terror. 
In William Dolby and John Scott's ''War-Lords,'' in the rendering of some of Sima Qian's section called ''Jesters,'' one can see how that great historian tried to lighten his own bleak vision of the immediate past that had brought such powers and yet so much misery in its wake. 
My favorite Qin jester is ''Twisty Pole.''
It was Twisty Pole who suggested to Emperor Qin Shihuang that he fill a gigantic game preserve with wild animals, so that if anyone dared to invade Qin, the Emperor could simply order the gazelles and deer to butt the enemy with their horns and drive them back whence they came. 
And it was Twisty Pole, according to Sima Qian, who applauded the plan of the Emperor's son to coat the entire length of the Great Wall with lacquer. 
To think of lacquering the wall, said Twisty Pole, was an act of genius, because all the enemies would slither and slide as they tried to climb over it. 
The only problem might be building a drying-room large enough to hold the wall while the lacquer dried to the requisite sheen. 
Even amid all that mayhem simple people could laugh at their tyrants. 
Let every reader try and remember this to avoid getting too harsh a picture of Chinese culture from Jean Levi's fearsome and remarkable book.
 
THE CRADLE OF DEMOCRACY
PARIS
The Qin bureaucracy invented in the third century B.C. in China by men lusting for power continues to this day, according to Jean Levi. 
He sees modern dictatorships mirrored in the Qin dynasty, the subject of his first novel, ''The Chinese Emperor,'' and speculates that the system of rule drifted into Russia via the Mongols and permeated both Czarist and Communist regimes before returning to China via the 1948 Communist revolution, in imitation of the Russians.
Qin-invented bureaucracy also affects the individual, Mr. Levi said recently in an interview, ''even in modern democracies. 
But their constraints on the individual are more veiled, subtle, presented for the individual's well-being. 
The political news I watch on French television all echoes that.''
Men still lust for power because ''power is a drug. 
The taste for power comes with power. 
Mao Zedong did not make a revolution to take power, he became a dictator through the Communist Party system.''
Mr. Levi, a friendly, soft-spoken 39-year-old, was born in Paris of an Italian father and Hungarian mother. 
He joined the French Government's National Center for Scientific Research in 1979 and wrote about ancient China.
The publishers of his four scholarly nonfiction works were not interested in his first novel, but his friend Mary McCarthy contacted her French publisher, Albin Michel, and, ''thanks to her,'' Mr. Levi said, it was published in France in 1985.
In 1986 he gave the book to some friends in China, ''but I don't think they were satisfied with it,'' he said wryly, referring to the bureaucracy currently in place.
Over tea in his Left Bank apartment, where he lives with his Chinese wife, whom he met in Paris, a daughter, Celia, 5, a son, Silvio, 2, his mother and two black cats, he talked about his latest project: ''I am working on my next novel about China, to show the other side - revolt - that there is resistance to bureaucracy. 
No order is perfect.''
ALINE MOSBY
 
MORE ABOUT THE QIN
One great virtue of Jean Levi's novel may well be that the atmosphere it weaves is so compelling it will bring readers back to the various sources to try and sort out fact from fiction for themselves. 
Mr. Levi's afterword gives a good many of the Chinese leads, as well as paying due homage to Edouard Chavannes's great 1890's French translation of the historical annals sections of Sima Qian's work. 
But the general reader may also be interested to know that much of the key material is also available in English.
Fifty years ago, Derk Bodde produced a fine annotated translation of Sima Qian's biography of Li Si, which he published as ''China's First Unifier,'' and he followed this up with masterly translations of Sima Qian's biographies of three other major Qin actors - including Lu Buwei and the assassin Jing Ke - under the title ''Statesman, Patriot and General in Ancient China.''
J. I. Crump, nearly 20 years ago, translated ''The Records of the Warring States,'' so one can read a flowing English version of the source that offers the most important alternative interpretations of Qin's rise to power.
Burton Watson has published extensive and admirable further translations of Sima Qian, as have William Dolby and John Scott in a little book published in 1974 in Edinburgh which they entitled simply ''War-Lords,'' but which is not limited to military figures.
