
In Hong Kong's colonial system of government, a relative handful of Britons have complete control, even though 98 percent of the city-state's five-million-plus residents are Chinese.
Yet with the negotiations over Hong Kong's future just under way, begun two weeks ago when Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of Britain met in Peking with Chinese leaders, the vast majority of the British crown colony's people want to retain the British administration without any real changes for the foreseeable future, according to public opinion polls.
Under the present setup, the Governor, Sir Edward Youde, in consultation with the executive and legislative councils, makes all policy decisions. 
Though there are some Chinese members of the two councils, they are all appointed by the British administrators, not elected by the populace.
HONG KONG, Oct. 
6 - In Hong Kong's colonial system of government, a relative handful of Britons have complete control, even though 98 percent of the city-state's five-million-plus residents are Chinese.
The system of government is, in many ways, as contradictory and anomalous as Hong Kong itself - a colony in an anticolonial era. 
For example, when Mrs. Thatcher was in Peking, Hong Kong was engaged in its largest exercise of democratic expression in its history, the election of representatives to so-called city district boards. 
These boards have been established as a vehicle for gathering views from the people on matters of public concern.
 
Reluctance to Vote
Despite a big get-out-the-vote effort by the Government, only 12 percent of the two million people eligible to vote bothered to exercise their privilege.
''The Government is pushing people to the polls,'' acknowledged Joseph Cheng, a professor of political science at Hong Kong's Chinese University and a leading critic of the Government. 
''It is the people who are reluctant to vote.''
There are several reasons for the apparent political apathy in Hong Kong. 
With more than 40 percent of the population immigrants and the colony's future uncertain, there is a sense of impermanence to Hong Kong that makes people less inclined to be politically active.
Moreover, even the Government's harshest critics describe British rule as a ''benevolent dictatorship.''
In the mid-1970's, for instance, the Government established statuatory holidays. 
In 1979 and 1981, rent control legislation was enacted. 
In both cases, social programs were enacted by government fiat that the labor unions were too weak to push for and the business community resisted, according to political experts.
 
Hands-Off Government
In addition, Hong Kong is renowned for its brand of hands-off government with low taxes, and public-sector spending and services, while expanding, is kept to a minimum.
Because of the Government's limited scope, some residents are not particularly anxious to have a voice in shaping its activities. 
''The Government does very little for us,'' said Shirley Woo, a 25-year-old office worker, who did not vote in the district board elections. 
''Why should we care about it?''
Rising wages and living standards afforded by Hong Kong's rapid economic growth and a policy of giving the Chinese elite appointed positions in Government have also blunted demands for a more democratic system.
However, the portion of Hong Kong's population that is seeking more direct participation in Government, though still a minority, is growing. 
About 60 percent of all residents are under 30 years old, and their levels of education and expectations are higher than their parents, many of whom were refugees.
 
Talks on Hong Kong's Future
One force that should heighten political awareness, analysts say, is the Peking-London negotiations over the future of Hong Kong after 1997, when the lease covering 90 percent of the colony's land runs out.
China has stated that it will reassert its sovereignty over all of Hong Kong by 1997. 
Britain says that the 19th-century treaties that created the colony are still valid, though they can be altered.
For years, it has been understood that the Peking leadership would not permit Hong Kong to become an independent, self-governing state, or ''a third China,'' Taiwan being the second. 
This has allowed Britain to run Hong Kong without opening the Government up to elected representatives from the local Chinese community.
Now, one likely compromise in the British-Chinese talks appears to be a long transition period, up to 40 years, during which the British presence is gradually phased out. 
Presumably, local Chinese would then be phased in. 
''It's very clear that there will be a transition period,'' Mr. Cheng said. 
''There can be no excuse for keeping local Chinese out anymore.''
 
System Characterized as Relic
As a first step, Mr. Cheng thinks that there should be elected representatives on the legislative council within five years. 
Many British Government officials here agree. 
In private conversations, they are among the first to characterize the present system as a relic of a bygone era. 
But first, they emphasize, an agreement must be worked out with China, preferably within a year to restore business confidence by removing uncertainties about Hong Kong's future.
So for the time being, the British administration must remain as the reassuring symbol of the ''stabilityI and prosperity'' in Hong Kong that Peking and London agree are key objectives of the current negotiations.
''This benevolent dictatorship isn't 100 percent what I'd like, maybe not even 80 percent,'' said Ronald Li, chairman of Hong Kong's Far East stock exchange. 
''But 60 percent is better than a lot of the alternatives.''
