
Britain's tabloids had a field day today insuring that remarks attributed to the Duke of Edinburgh about Chinese ''slitty eyes'' and how ''ghastly'' he had found Peking would become the longest-remembered happening of the royal tour of China by Queen Elizabeth II.
The most sophisticated headline was in The Daily Mail, which asked, ''Does Britain Need a Terracotta Duke?''
Under it was a photograph of a grim-faced Queen inspecting the terra cotta warriors guarding the imperial tomb of the Chin Dynasty emperor near Xian and a heading that said, ''They're tall, dignified, ceremonial and above everything else, they are silent.''
There was also a cartoon of the Queen's husband with a gag over his mouth.
 
A Barrage of Puns
Headline writers on other newspapers let loose with a barrage of outrageous puns to show why British diplomats on a tour that had earlier been heralded as ''historic'' were now choking with embarrassment.
''Philip Gets It All Wong,'' screamed the front page of The Sun, a mass-circulation tabloid, which was illustrated with a photo of the Prince retouched so as to give him darting Fu Manchu eyebrows and eyelids. 
''Prince Philip torpedoed the royal visit to China,'' the newspaper reported.
''Great Wally of China,'' cried The Daily Mirror, using a British colloquialism applied to bumblers and buffoons. 
Taking a more somber line, the newspaper Today's front page declared simply, ''Philip Drops a Clanger.''
Reporting from Peking, the BBC found some consolation in the fact that the Chinese press had ignored the remarks, which were made in Xian in conversation with a group of University of Edinburgh students.
 
Chancellor of University
The Prince, who is the university's chancellor, was reported to have asked one of the students how long he had been in China. 
When the young man replied that he had been there six weeks, the Queen's husband then wisecracked, ''If you stay here much longer, you will go back with slitty eyes.''
Asked by one of the students how he had found the Forbidden City, the Prince seemed momentarily confused about where that was. 
His wife's response - that she had found it fascinating and wished she could have spent more of her time in Peking visiting it -appeared to refresh his memory. 
''Oh yes,'' he was quoted as having said. 
''But Peking was ghastly.''
A journalist then repeated the Duke of Edinburgh's remarks to a British diplomat. 
''Thank you for spoiling my evening,'' the diplomat replied.
Michael Shea, the Queen's spokesman, was rushed in to explain that the Prince's remarks had been entirely jocular and that ''the Duke of Edinburgh is in no way disparaging of the Chinese people.''
 
A Pained Expression
Wearing what was described as a pained expression, the spokesman went on to try to explain the statements. 
He said: ''It's a well-known physiological fact that people in different parts of the world have eyes that are differently shaped. 
My eyes are round.''
Asked today, when the royal party stopped in Kunming, about the uproar over his remarks, the Prince commented offhandedly that he thought it had been ''a little tactless'' of the Edinburgh students to repeat them.
Queen Elizabeth II is the first British sovereign to visit China, but a distant ancestor, George III, sent an envoy to Peking in 1792, an occasion that became the first of many embarrassments and misunderstandings in relations between the two countries. 
The Chinese assumed the envoy had come to pay homage on behalf of George III to the reigning Ming emperor and to make Britain a tributary state.
