
After a long climb out of the American basement rec room, the game of Ping-Pong is spinning toward acceptance as a sport in this country.
The impetus is the decision to include table tennis as a game in the 1988 Olympics. 
The American effort to compete against the two national teams that dominate the sport, China and Sweden, will be helped by a $1.2 million grant from the United States Olympic Committee, one of 37 full shares of the profits from the Summer Games last year in Los Angeles.
As the United States Open Table Tennis Championships got under way in this resort's cavernous convention hall this week, with more than 600 players from 30 countries rocketing shots at each other across dozens of green tables, promoters were savoring the chance to boost the game from summer-camp obscurity to the hot-ticket mass following it enjoys in other nations.
China's 'Most Popular Sport'
One of the first things the United States Table Tennis Association did with the Olympic money was to hire a Chinese couple to coach the American men's and women's teams.
Ai Liguo moved to the United States last year from Peking with his wife, Li Henan. 
Ai, 43 years old, was a player on the Chinese team that won the world championship in 1961. 
Miss Li was the coach of the world championship Chinese women's team.
''We had good jobs and high social position in China,'' Ai said during a break from his scrutiny of the strokes of the hundreds of American players participating in the Open. 
Ai was chief editor of Sports News, which he described as the leading sports publication in China.
''My wife was very famous because table tennis is the most popular sport in China,'' he said.
 
Second Behind Soccer
The top-rated American player is Eric Boggan, a 21-year old New Yorker who is ranked 33d among the best male players in the world.
''Our problem in America,'' said Tim Boggan, Eric's father and a vice president of the International Table Tennis Federation, ''is that there are something like 19 million Americans who play table tennis, but only a few thousand take it seriously. 
In China there are two million officially registered players - players who compete seriously at the sport - and the unofficial figure is probably more like 12 million.''
The game is the only livelihood of about 40,000 Chinese players, he said.
By contrast, he pointed out, only a few American players are able to squeeze a living from it. 
Eric Boggan plays for a club team in West Germany, said his father, a professor of English at Long Island University whose other son, Scott, 23, is ranked the third-best American player.
Ping-Pong is estimated to be the second most popular participatory sport in the world behind soccer, but it has never attracted much of a following in the United States, even though most Americans have played the game.
Until the 1950's, when Europeans dominated the game, table-tennis competition was seen as battle between players with special offensive or defensive skills. 
Long battles over points tended to pitch two players ranging far from the table, one killing the ball while the other returned the smashes with unerring, looping shots. 
Or else the opponents engaged in an exchange of chopping, spinning shots and single points could involve dozens of individual strokes.
''Now techniques have changed and the game is much faster,'' said Tim Boggan. 
''The Japanese introduced a racket in the 1950's with a sponge layer that rocketed the ball. 
In the 1960's the Chinese used a sponge paddle with a layer of rubber that gave their shots both speed and spin.
''With the new rackets the day of long rallies came to an end and now the game is attack, attack, attack,'' said Boggan, smiling. 
''The quality of the rubber paddles allows for so much speed and hop on the ball that the defensive player doesn't have a chance.''
The International Federation is studying ways to slow down the game, he said. 
One proposal is to raise the net by a half-inch; another is to force single players to serve cross-court as doubles players are made to do.
