
JANET YANG remembers clearly the first time she saw an American movie in China. 
It was called ''Nightmare in Badham County,'' and it was about the horrors and injustices heaped upon two women trapped in a backwoods town in the American South.
''At the end of the movie, people came running up to me and said, 'It's so terrible that you have to live in such a place,' '' Ms. Yang said.
That was in 1980. 
Today, if the sophistication of the Chinese about the United States and American films is vastly improved from the days when ''Badham County'' was a hit, it is in part because of Ms. Yang, the head of Far East Operations at MCA Inc., the parent company of Universal Studios.
Since 1985, the 31-year-old native of New York has been spearheading the joint effort of three of Hollywood's biggest studios - Universal, Paramount and MGM/UA - to sell their films in China.
Ms. Yang is one (almost surely, the one) Hollywood executive who can discuss Chinese history in fluent Mandarin as comfortably as she can take a meeting, as they say here, with Steven Spielberg.
Both skills come in handy, since she must explain the ways of Hollywood to the Chinese as she promotes the long-term business potential of China to entertainment moguls who usually measure success by overnight box-office reports.
It is a slow, somewhat frustrating process, subject to all the financial, political and cultural hurdles that might be expected when the decadent capital of Western entertainment meets the world's largest workers' state.
But two years after Universal and Paramount joined forces to become the first American studios since the 1949 Communist revolution to strike ongoing distribution deals with the Chinese - MGM/UA joined the consortium later - China's appetite for blockbuster Hollywood movies, as for many things foreign, seems to be growing as it opens itself to the rest of the world.
Under the guidance of Ms. Yang, the three studios are selling China some of the most popular films in their libraries. 
''Love Story'' opened last winter to packed houses in Beijing, where a movie costs about 8 to 15 cents. 
''Spartacus'' and ''Roman Holiday'' drew huge crowds later in the year. 
''In the Heat of the Night'' is scheduled to open early in 1988. 
And in the works are titles ranging from ''To Kill a Mockingbird'' and ''North by Northwest'' to ''National Velvet,'' ''Earthquake'' and ''Airport.''
CULTURAL aspects aside, the studios are dealing with China primarily to see if it will develop into the huge and profitable market that peddlers of everything from airplanes to toothpaste have dreamed of since the Ping-Pong diplomacy of the early 1970's.
So far, China is mostly promise and little payoff, at least as far as motion pictures go. 
Studios have long been wary of doing business there because the China Film Corporation, the Government-controlled agency that oversees movie imports, resisted arrangements to pay for American films on the basis of their box-office popularity.
Now, under the compromise agreement struck by Universal, Paramount and later MGM/UA, payment is based on a formula involving the number of prints that go into distribution. 
In negotiating the deal a few years ago, the Chinese also agreed to pay for movie rights in hard currency. 
Still, financially speaking, China is a market that can only be justified on its long-term potential.
Ms. Yang declined to give the revenue figures to date for her Chinese venture. 
''If we were in this to make money in 1987, we wouldn't be in it at all,'' she said.
WHETHER or not the project pays off for Universal, Paramount and MGM/UA, it has already proved to be a dream come true for Ms. Yang. For years, she says, China and film have been her two passions.
Her parents came to the United States from China as students in the late 1940's, and stayed on after the Communist takeover at home. 
Ms. Yang was born in Queens, and raised on Long Island and in Scarsdale, N. Y. Her father is an engineer; her mother has worked at the United Nations.
As she grew up, she says, she thought little about her Chinese heritage. 
But in 1972, the year that President Nixon started the process of normalizing diplomatic relations with China, Ms. Yang went with her mother to visit relatives in a number of Chinese cities. 
The trip sparked an intense curiosity in the 16-year-old.
''It was a very moving experience,'' Ms. Yang said. 
''All of a sudden, I felt an intense connection to this great mass of people.''
The feeling stayed with her at home; she pursued Chinese studies at Brown University in the mid-1970's and briefly in graduate school at the University of Michigan.
In 1980, with the help of a former professor, she landed a job as a translator and editor at the Chinese Foreign Language Press in Beijing (where she saw ''Nightmare in Badham County'').
Her time there gave her a much deeper understanding of China, and a new passion - film, an interest she says she first developed through friendships with some young Chinese directors.
After 15 months in Beijing, Ms. Yang returned to New York, where she tried, with little success, to sponsor some Chinese film festivals in American cities.
Film and China were still the constant themes in her life, she says, when she enrolled in Columbia University's graduate business school in 1982. 
After receiving her M.B.A., Ms. Yang worked for a year with a small San Francisco company, World Entertainment, distributing Chinese films in the United States.
One day while she was at World, she got a call from Charles S. (Skip) Paul, president of MCA Enterprises, an MCA subsidiary. 
Mr. Paul said he was going to China to try to distribute some films, and wondered if Ms. Yang had any contacts she could share.
As Ms. Yang tells it, she naively admitted to Mr. Paul that she had never heard of MCA but was happy to supply him with a few names. 
The two stayed in touch, and within a few months, he offered her the job of helping Universal Studios set up its deal with Paramount and the Government of China.
In the two years that she has been head of MCA's Far East operation, she says, she has learned that Hollywood and China - seemingly an unlikely match - have a lot to offer each other. 
''One thing that's very apparent to anyone who goes to China is the tremendous and overwhelming curiousity about American culture,'' she said.
American films were popular in China during the 1930's and right up to 1949, the year of the revolution. 
Widespread distribution ceased when Mao Zedong took power, although a few films trickled in whenever the politics of the day allowed.
Through it all, Ms. Yang says, the allure of Hollywood and the power of its imagery persisted. 
''The love for American movies is an incredibly powerful thing,'' she said. 
''Even when America was public enemy No. 1, that thread was never broken.''
During the 10 years of the Cultural Revolution, ended in 1976, foreign films virtually disappeared in China. 
Indeed, only eight films, in all, were sanctioned for viewing, Ms. Yang says. 
Called ''Revolutionary Model Operas,'' they had names such as ''The Red Detachment of Women,'' and concerned themselves with the efforts of the proletariat to cast off the shackles of oppression.
UNTIL the Universal-Paramount deal and Ms. Yang's efforts, the only American films widely seen in China were sold by independent producers under ad hoc arrangements. 
Although occasionally a well-known film like ''Superman'' might get limited distribution, most of the Hollywood movies that found their way to China were low-budget and were useful for making propaganda points. 
''Badham County,'' for example, was a 1977 ABC television movie.
In contrast, ''Love Story,'' one of the most popular films distributed by Ms. Yang, does not carry any more of a social message in China than it did when it opened in the United States 17 years ago. 
If ''Love Story'' illustrates anything, Ms. Yang says, it is that films with simple plot lines play best in China.
''What works well is a good story,'' she said, adding that Chinese audiences ''want to know what is going to happen. 
They don't want too much left up to the imagination.''
They also apparently do not want anything too current. 
The newer films might contain cultural and social references that the average Chinese moviegoer could not connect with.
Beyond that, older films are more popular with both sides, because there is less likelihood that they will draw fire from those Chinese who see politically touchy subjects in them. 
''We don't want to give them a film where a few years from now someone will ask what that was doing on the screen,'' Ms. Yang said.
There is another reason, too, that the best of the studios' newer films are not going to China now: There is not yet enough money to be made. 
''An 'E.T.' or a 'Jaws' is too valuable a property,'' Ms. Yang said. 
''The fee structure still has to evolve to absorb those films.''
Besides distributing films, Ms. Yang also sells television programming to Chinese Central Television. 
The programming includes dramatic shows like as ''Columbo,'' ''Marcus Welby, M.D.''
(both from MCA/Universal) and ''Family Affair'' and ''Star Trek'' (from Paramount). 
She also is trying to sell American companies advertising time on those shows - aired from 8 to 10 P.M., China's prime time - and in movie theaters.
As sending motion pictures to China becomes less of a novelty, Ms. Yang may soon move on to a motion picture production and development job within MCA, leaving the Far Eastern operations in the hands of the company's normal international distribution arm. 
But wherever she ends up, she said, ''I'll always be a China person.''
