
In the middle of a recent weekday afternoon, in a large, immaculately maintained cinema off the Ginza, there were only two dry eyes in the house - mine. 
They really didn't count, since the film I was watching was in Japanese, supplemented from time to time by dialogue in Mandarin Chinese translated by Japanese subtitles.
The house wasn't packed. 
However, the people who were there sat rapt while a small, rambunctious Chinese boy, who could have studied acting at the knee of Gary Coleman, chewed the scenery that wasn't being chewed by a panda cub named Hoa Hoa. 
The film was ''The Panda Story,'' the latest in a series of sentimental Japanese movies about animals that, at least until now, have done nothing but make money.
Though Japan is riding the crest of one of the greatest economic booms the world has ever seen, serious film makers are not receiving many of the benefits.
The venerable Akira Kurosawa, now 78 but tireless, must look for financing outside his own country. 
His ''Kagemusha'' came to fruition only through the support of George Lucas and Francis Coppola, tax-paying citizens of a large debtor nation. 
Serge Silberman, the French producer responsible for Luis Bunuel's final masterworks, produced ''Ran,'' Mr. Kurosawa's majestic reworking of ''King Lear.''
Now Steven Spielberg is in the process of producing Mr. Kurosawa's next film, tentatively titled ''My Favorite Dreams.''
Nagisa Oshima, who shook up the censors at home and abroad with his sexually explicit ''In the Realm of the Senses,'' made his most recent film outside Japan - in France. 
With the exception of Shohei Imamura, who is now completing ''Dark Rain,'' an epic about the atom-bombing of Hiroshima, and the handful of new social satirists exemplified by Juzo Itami (''Tampopo''), serious film making appears to be languishing.
Instead, the nation that gave us the classic films of Kenji Mizoguchi, Yasujiro Ozu and Mikio Naruse, which were produced in the 30's, 40's and 50's (though unseen in the United States until the 60's and later), has developed an insatiable appetite for kitsch.
Kitsch is certainly not an exclusively Japanese passion. 
If it can be defined as anything that's both too much and not enough, whether the subject is art, architecture, literature, fashion, food or movies, the passion is clearly international.
Kitsch is Sylvester Stallone's musculature, the Liberace museum in Las Vegas and possibly even those Presidential campaign pitches that are designed to melt the heart but often melt the head. 
It's music in elevators. 
It's the music you hear when the airline reservations clerk puts you on hold. 
In Tokyo, it's the music with which almost every office pacifies you while you're waiting to be passed on by the secretary to the person you're calling.
In the major cities of the world, from Cairo to New York and on, kitsch is also the top-of-the-hotel restaurant that revolves to give the diner a 360-degree view during a 60-minute repast. 
The turntable of the restaurant atop the New Otani Towers, which was built in anticipation of the 1964 Tokyo Olympics, may be getting rusty. 
Its discreet lurches make some people seasick. 
Yet the night view of Tokyo is as significant as it is spectacular.
The skyline is aglow with huge, brightly lit signs for Toshiba, Sony, NEC and the other wizards of electronics responsible for revolutionizing American home entertainment. 
Tokyo takes on the aspects of some great 47th Street Photo in the sky.
Japanese kitsch is conspicuous consumption, such as the sort of casual jacket a suburban father might wear on late autumn weekends to rake the leaves, only the one on display here is made of waterproofed, olive-colored silk, instead of poplin, with a mink lining to keep dad warm. 
The price: $10,725. 
Kitsch is also conspicuous consumption in terms of the occasional film budget.
One of the most expensive films ever produced by a Japanese company, and apparently one of the year's biggest box-office flops, is the $40 million ''Dun-huang,'' based on Yasushi Inoue's novel set in an ancient city of Buddhist cave temples in China.
The project was one long cherished by Masaki Kobayashi, who became interested in it in the late 60's. 
In spite of, or maybe because of, his formidable reputation as the director of the three-part, nine-hour ''Human Condition,'' among his other internationally recognized works, Mr. Kobayashi was never able to raise the financing. 
The fear was that he would be too fussy, too intellectual and would run over his budget.
When the project finally came together, it was put into the hands of a director who, according to someone who worked on the film, was thought to be good in his handling of horses and camels. 
I have not seen the film. 
The horses and camels may look great, but the reviews were caustic and the public did not break down the doors the day the film opened.
It's one of the oddities of the current Japanese film scene that, in spite of the general apathy, ''Dun-huang'' may not actually lose much money. 
The film was a joint venture of Daiei, a production company, with Marubeni, a huge trading company with offices all over Japan, and Dentsu, a production company with interests in publishing and advertising.
An accepted practice in such cases is for the companies involved to require their employes to buy tickets to these show-business ventures sight unseen. 
When the numbers of employees, plus the members of their families and their friends, run into the tens of thousands, the size of the captive audience can make the difference between a hit and a flop.
Another practice that is helping producers of Japanese films to cut their losses is the advance-discount purchase plan. 
Some time before a film opens, the public is given the opportunity to buy tickets at discounts of 20 percent. 
This is a sizable saving when a first-run Tokyo movie ticket sells for 1,500 yen (approximately $12 at the current rate of exchange), and going up to 1,700 yen at the end of this year.
The Japanese film industry is not declining to quite the same degree as the industries in France and Italy, but it's far from healthy. 
Theater attendance was down to 143,935,000 last year from 185,324,000 in 1973, and though box-office receipts were up, most of the increase could be attributed to the 300 percent rise in ticket prices between 1973 and 1988. 
Cable television is still limited to hotels and a few choice apartment houses. 
Japanese television stations present nowhere near as many films as American stations. 
Everybody, however, has his video cassette recorder, and movie rentals are cheap and popular.
That Japanese movie producers should lean toward sure-fire pop hits is not hard to understand. 
They are fighting fire with fire in a highly competitive market in which American films take nearly half of the annual receipts.
It also isn't difficult to understand why Japanese audiences are so taken at the moment by animal kitsch, of which ''The Panda Story'' is a gooey if harmless example:
A pretty, 20-year-old Japanese zoo worker, played by a pop star named Saori Yagi, is sent to north central China as part of a joint Chinese-Japanese team whose mission is to save pandas. 
She becomes friendly with a tirelessly cute little Chinese boy and, with him, helps to raise a motherless baby panda to an age when the panda must be turned back into the wilderness to find its own bamboo.
Though I could guess at some of these plot twists, I am indebted to Alan Booth, the film critic for The Asahi Evening News, for explaining a number of the film's subtleties in his cheerfully jaundiced review. 
(Among other things missed by the non-Japanese-speaking critic is the information that pandas are black as well as white because they are in mourning for a young woman who gave her life to save a panda cub.) Preceding ''The Panda Story'' in release was the hugely popular ''Hachiko,'' based on the true (pre-World War II) story of a dog that used to wait each night outside the railroad station for the return of his master, a Tokyo professor. 
One day the professor died on the job and was taken home by a different route. 
The faithful dog refused to believe his loss. 
For years he returned to the station each evening, only to be disappointed again.
When the dog finally died, local citizens erected a statue of him that sits today, as he once sat, outside the Shibuya station in Tokyo. 
The film was a bigger hit than ''Love Story.''
In addition to ''Hachiko'' there have been ''The Antarctica Story,'' about the rescue of some huskies inadvertently abandoned after a Japanese expedition to Antarctica, ''Chatran,'' dealing with the marvelous adventures of an anthropomorphic cat, and ''Oracion,'' which I saw without benefit of English subtitles, inflight, en route to Tokyo.
''Oracion'' seems to be about a small boy, dying of some dread but not disfiguring disease, and a horse that is being groomed to win a Japanese derby. 
It's full of scenes set in great wide-open spaces (juxtaposed with hospital room scenes), lots of pretty sunsets and shots of horses frolicking freely on broad, grassy plains.
Such films obviously touch on current Japanese longings, especially for space in a tiny country where much of the land is too mountainous to be habitable, and where 10 percent of the population of 120 million lives in crowded, though remarkable tranquility in and around Tokyo. 
Pets mean space, room in which to roam. 
In most Tokyo apartments, a litter box would be an odoriferous intrusion. 
Japan has money to burn, but even fortunes can't buy much space in a city where nine square feet of land was recently valued at $255,000.
The Japanese find themselves in a maddening position. 
Japan is a rich society, and only rich societies can afford to indulge themselves with animals as pets. 
People in poor countries, or even in poorer sections of rich countries, regard animals as creatures that must earn their keep. 
Unless they can herd sheep, bark at prowlers, catch rats or pull the plow, they are just so many more mouths to feed. 
They are luxuries.
People here can afford virtually every conceivable appliance and labor-saving electronic gadget, which, if it wasn't invented by the Japanese, was perfected by them.
What they don't have is room to swing a cat.
