
''One should rise before the cock's crow and explode firecrackers in the courtyard to ward off demons.''
So wrote Zong Lin of the New Year in the fourth-century text ''Records of Annual Festivals in Central China.''
No cock crowed yesterday. 
No demons loomed. 
Still, it began as it has for more than a century in Chinatown: A crackle here and there; slowly, one rat-a-tat-tat echoing against another. 
Then hundreds and thousands of tiny explosions collapsing into a thunderous din that resounded from the brick walls of six-story red-brick tenements. 
An odor of cordite hung in the air.
Edward A Gargan highlights Chinatown's celebration of Year of the Pig
The Year of the Pig, 4681, stumbling over snowbanks in the narrow streets, arrived in Chinatown yesterday, a neighborhood struggling with the woes of an economically depressed garment industry and troubled by recurring gang violence. 
But yesterday was a day for Chinatown to forget its difficulties and embrace the optimism brought by the year's first new moon.
At noon, a huge lion's head, trailing a paper tail in brilliant reds and blues, undulated in a small circle before a mound of exploding fireworks. 
To the thump of a large drum, the lion dancers, sponsored by the Chinatown Community Young Lions, a youth group, slowly veered up Mott Street, halting in front of restaurants and shops.
''We stop at all stores and restaurants to bring good luck,'' said Victor Soo Hoo, a director of the Young Lions, who brandished an immense ceremonial sword. 
''We usually have a wagon for the drum, but not with the snow. 
People will carry it this year.''
 
Pandemonium in the Snow
On the corner of Mott and Pell Streets, Lorina Lee and her sister Sandra stood on a solid mound of snow watching the semiorganized pandemonium before them.
''It's noisy, it's exciting,'' said Lorina, who was wearing a nearly luminescent blue-silk brocade jacket. 
Amid the festive cacophony of drums, cymbals and fireworks, Lorina, who works at a Chinatown branch of Citibank, said that she was worried about the area.
''I deal with owners of garment factories,'' she said. 
''Things aren't so good. 
I can't see it getting better.''
A New Year's custom in China that has endured here is giving hongbao, red envelopes that contain money, to family members. 
Shortly after midnight on New Year's Day, according to tradition, junior members of the family pay ceremonial respect to their elders and the elders, in return, give money.
To the New Year's greeting ''Gong xi fa cai'' (''Happy and prosperous times'') little children gleefully retort, ''Gei wo yige hung bao lai'' (''Give me a red envelope'').
And always there are feasts. 
The rest of the year rice is primary in Chinese meals, with cai, meat and vegetables dishes, secondary. 
But at New Year's, this custom is reversed and cai becomes primary.
''We've been eating all week,'' said Perry Hong, a camera hung around his neck. 
After taking a snapshot of a dragon swooping toward a pile of exploding firecrackers, Mr. Hong pointed to 14 family members, including uncles, cousins, brothers and sisters who came in from Brooklyn for the day. 
''Everybody likes to throw firecrackers at the dragons,'' he said.
Everywhere the dim sum restaurants, like the Silver Palace on Bowery and No. 1 on Canal Street, were teeming. 
Carts piled with duck feet, steamed shrimp balls, cold spiced pork slices and myriad other delicacies trundled past tables filled with families in their finest holiday dress. 
A special New Year's dessert, ba bao fan, a ball of sticky rice laced with sugared candies, appeared.
As the dragon from the Ho Nan Shau Lin Golden Dragon Team started down Mott Street toward Chatham Square, it paused before the Mayflower Tea Parlor, where a waiter came out to throw firecrackers. 
At Lee's Good Food, where ducks and finely barbecued chickens hung on skewers in the window, a man in an apron stood and watched the dragon bow and soar.
Not everyone on the streets of Chinatown could claim Chinese ancestry, however. 
Eleven-year-old Shay Silvestri came from Long Island wearing her own blue dragon headdress made of cardboard, Styrofoam balls, tin cans and layers of blue and green crepe paper.
''Every year I come here,'' she shouted over the rattle of fireworks. 
''I made this mask first for Halloween, and I thought I'd use it for New Year.''
