
A syndicate of 10 Western banks, led by Deutsche Bank, West Germany's largest commercial bank, has initiated the first Eurobond issue ever guaranteed by the Bank of China, even though nearly $100 million of pre-revolution Chinese government-backed bonds are still in default.
German bank officials said the banks were seeking to improve their position in the emerging market for bank services in China. 
Several large German banks, including Deutsche Bank and Dresdner Bank, the second largest, have expanded their activities in China in recent months.
Syndicate of 10 Western bank, led by West Germany's Deutsche Bank, has initiated first Eurobond issue ever guaranteed by Bank of China even though nearly $100 million of pre-revolution Chinese government-backed bonds are still in default (S)
Investment bankers say the lack of a settlement of old defaults still prevents the Chinese from raising money in dollars or pound sterling. 
But the Bank of China, which handles the country's foreign exchange dealings and overseas banking, has issued more than $150 million of Government-backed, yen-denominated bonds in the Japanese domestic market in the last year.
Deutsche Bank said Merrill Lynch International was the only United States-affiliated partner in the syndicate, which includes banks from West Germany, Britain, France, Japan and Switzerland.
The bond issue is the latest indication of China's apparent willingness to resurrect capitalist cash-raising practices under its new economic policies to help finance development.
 
Stock Offerings
Over the last year, several stock offerings, including a recent $385 million issue for the construction of a rail line in northern China, have backed up repeated reports in Chinese newspapers that the Government is considering reviving the nation's stock markets, which were closed after the Communists came to power in 1949.
The United States Foreign Bondholders Protective Council, a New York-based group set up in the 1930's to guard the interests of foreign securities holders, has records showing that more than $30 million of Chinese debt, including government bonds, is owed to American investors.
But John Petty, chairman of the Marine Midland Bank and the council's president, said the council did not oppose the Deutsche Bank bonds.
 
'Outstanding Problem'
Mr. Petty said the ''outstanding problem'' relating to American investors involved a 1919 issue of $5.5 million of dollar-denominated Chinese government treasury notes that were sold in the United States but never honored.
A Deutsche Bank official in Frankfurt said the prospectus for the 150 million German mark offering of seven-year, 7 percent bonds, worth about $50 million at the current exchange rate, contained a passage stating that the present Chinese Government refused to recognize external debt incurred before the Communists came to power in 1949.
But Michael Gough, director of the Council of Foreign Bondholders, in London, which keeps track of Chinese bonds in default with a face value of £61 million, or about $75 million, said, ''We would have hoped for something saying the bonds are in default, followed by a statement of the Chinese position, if they insisted.''
Mr. Gough said the council had never received a direct reply from Deutsche Bank to a request by the council earlier this month that similar wording be used.
