
China and Taiwan today concluded their first face-to-face negotiations in 37 years, with Peking agreeing to allow the Nationalist Government to reclaim a cargo plane flown to the mainland by its pilot, who defected.
The agreement, after three days of talks here, will also involve the return of two crewmen who were flown to China on the plane by the defector.
During talks on Saturday and Sunday, representatives of the airlines of Taiwan and China disagreed on where the transfer of the plane should occur. 
China wanted Taiwan to pick up the plane, a Boeing 747, on the mainland, while Taiwan said China should fly it to Hong Kong.
Today China agreed that a crew from its national airline, the Civil Aviation Administration of China, would fly the plane and the two crewmen to Hong Kong. 
Another meeting was scheduled for Tuesday to work out the details.
 
First Talks Since 1949
The talks have been the first direct contact between Taiwan and China since the Nationalists fled the mainland for Taiwan after losing a civil war to the Communists in 1949.
The Nationalists, who say they are China's rightful Government, had until now shunned all contact and had rebuffed initiatives by China to set up commercial, postal and communication links with the eventual goal of reunification.
Both sides have said the talks did not have political significance, but were a business matter between two airlines, not Governments.
But political commentators said they believed Taiwan's decision to negotiate directly must have been approved by President Chiang Ching-kuo, whose Government has been criticized by some legislators for rejecting all contacts with China.
Western diplomats in Peking have said that China, which views Taiwan as a Chinese province and has hopes of gaining its agreement to a new relationship, scored a victory by getting Taiwan to negotiate, whatever the outcome of the talks.
 
A Desire to Appear Reasonable
China has sought to appear reasonable and it was in its interest to reach an agreement quickly to avoid the impression that the two crew members who want to return to Taiwan were being held hostage, according to the diplomats.
Zhang Ruipu, the head of the Chinese delegation, said today that China had accepted Taiwan's proposal as a gesture of sincerity.
''We always maintain that there is no problem that cannot be solved between fellow countrymen through friendly and sincere discussions,'' he said in a news conference.
Chung Tsan-jung, the head of the Taiwan delegation, said China's concession was ''not a victory but a right'' of Taiwan.
The China Airlines cargo plane, which had left Bangkok bound for Hong Kong, landed in the southern Chinese city of Canton on May 3. 
Aboard were the pilot, Wang Hsi-chueh, 56 years old; the co-pilot, Tung Kung-shin, 57, and a technician, Chiu Ming-chiu, 40.
 
Father Is in Sichuan
Mr. Wang said in a news conference in Peking that he had defected in order to be reunited with his 82-year-old father in the central province of Sichuan.
Officials of Taiwan have said that they believed Mr. Wang had been kidnapped and that they reserved the right to ask China later for the pilot's return. 
Mr. Chung said China had refused to let members of the Taiwan delegation telephone Mr. Wang to clarify the situation.
In Taipei, a spokesman for China Airlines, Larry Lin, said the carrier did not regard the outcome of the talks as a victory ''because the release of all three crewmen, including Wang Hsi-chueh, is our final goal.''
Wang Fu-yao, the pilot's son, said in a telephone interview that relatives still refused to believe his father had defected. 
''I hope he is allowed to visit Hong Kong to clarify the situation,'' he said.
