
Six pianists, all males, five of them Americans and one from China, were chosen last night as the finalists of the Van Cliburn International Piano Competition. 
They are the survivors of the 39 pianists from 17 countries who started competing on May 17 for the richest prize that any musical competition in the world has to offer - a $12,000 cash award, a recording contract and two years of solo and concerto appearances in the United States, Europe and the Far East.
The judges, aided by a computer, selected the finalists shortly before midnight last night. 
They are: Zhu Daming, 29 years old, from China. 
Jeffrey Kahane, 24, from Piedmont, Calif. 
Andre-Michel Schub, 28, from New York. 
Santiago Rodriguez, 29, from Columbia, Mo. 
Christopher O'Riley, 25, from Jamaica Plain, Mass. 
Panayis Lyras, 27, from New York. 
Over a hundred people waited patiently at the Ed Landredth Auditorium
Eighth in series on Van Cliburn International Piano Competition notes 1981 finalists and briefly describes their playing styles
This is the eighth of a series of occasional articles on the Van Cliburn International Piano Competition. 
The world-famous piano contest will end Sunday with the winner on the way to a major career.
of Texas Christian University until John Giordano, chairman of the jury, read the names of the finalists. 
In the audience were all 39 of the competing pianists and their host families. 
The families were more excited than the contestants, who received the news of success or failure with stoic professionalism. 
The six finalists were brought to the stage, where they embraced one another. 
A photo session followed, climaxed by pictures of the contestants in Texas hats. 
Mr. Zhu, for one, was obviously amazed at this example of American folk ways.
In reading the names of the finalists, Mr. Giordano emphasized that the order in which the pianists were called to the stage had no relation to the actual scores the jury had given. 
The pianists were called forth by the number that they originally had drawn, starting with the lowest. 
Before the competition started, each pianist had drawn a number, giving him the order in which he would play. 
Mr. Zhu had the lowest number of the finalists (No. 5) and Mr. Lyras was highest (No. 36).
 
How Judges Operated
Each of the 11 judges had submitted a ballot with a numerical rating for each contestant, with 100 being the top score. 
The computer averaged the scores, breaking down the results to four decimal places. 
When the printout was studied last night, it was clear that four pianists were well above the other eight semifinalists. 
But for the fifth and sixth places there was a triple tie. 
According to the rules of the competition, a less than twopoint difference between two contestants is considered a tie. 
Three pianists were within two points of each other for the last two places.
Thus a vote was taken and fed into the computer. 
The judges were asked to list the three names in order of preference, No. 1 being the highest rated. 
''Don't forget,'' Mr. Giordano emphasized. 
''No. 1 is the best, No. 3 is the worst.''
When the votes were put into the computer, the last two finalists emerged. 
It was close. 
Each of the three was within a single vote of the others. 
The two-point rule does not apply to a tie-break.
The selection of the finalists was greeted by the public and the professionals around here with general approbation. 
It is when the winner is named on Sunday that there may be howls of outrage. 
Each of the three leading contestants has a fervent following.
Among the young pianists in the competition who did not make it to the finals, the favorite by far is Mr. Kahane. Seven or eight of them were discussing the level of talent in the competition the other day, and it was unanimously agreed among them that Mr. Kahane is the most poetic and elegant of all. 
They will be terribly disturbed if he does not win first prize.
 
Judges Leaning Toward Two
But it is believed, on very good authority, that the judges are leaning toward Mr. Shub and Mr. Rodriguez, who are neck and neck. 
The next three days will of course decide the issue. 
With solo recitals and chamber music out of the way, the finalists now have to play concertos. 
With the Texas Little Symphony, all will be heard in a concerto by Mozart or early Beethoven. 
With the Fort Worth Symphony, they will play a major 19th-century concerto. 
Leon Fleisher will conduct.
Each of the finalists has a sharply etched style, and they differ considerably from one another. 
Mr. Zhu, trained entirely in China, does lack experience in Western music, but his instincts are remarkably sure and he learns with incredible speed. 
He has a blazing technique, draws a resonant sound from the piano and approaches music in a very serious manner.
Mr. Kahane is indeed the poet that his colleagues believe him to be. 
A prize-winner in the 1977 Clara Haskil International Piano Competition in Vevey, Switzerland, and high up in the 1980 American National Chopin Competition in Miami and the Chopin International Piano Competition in Warsaw, Mr. Kahane studied at the San Francisco Conservatory and the Juilliard School. 
He does not rely on powerhouse technical effects, though he has a glittering technique. 
It was characteristic of his style that in his recital he played a perfect performance of Chopin's Variations Brillantes (Op.12), and later he received a deserved standing ovation for his performance of the Dvorak Piano Quintet. 
But he did have a bit of trouble with the big sonorities of the Schumann Fantasy. 
Many believe him to be the most sensitive, refined pianist in the finals.
 
Self-Described Romantic
Mr. O'Riley has been a finalist in the 1975 Three Rivers Competition in Pittsburgh and second-prize-winner in the 1980 Montreal International Piano Competition. 
He grew up in Pittsburgh and was trained at the New England Conservatory. 
He describes himself as a Romantic pianist. 
Mr. O'Riley likes big sonorities, and attacks the keyboard energetically. 
When he played the Brahms F-minor Piano Quintet, he all but made a little concerto out of it. 
He is a pianist with temperament and a big style.
The one pianist who went out of his way in his programming was Mr. Lyras. Greek-born, he came to the United States when he was 12, and attended the High School of Performing Arts in New York and the Juilliard School. 
He has won first prizes in the 1976 University of Maryland International Piano Competition and the 1978 Three Rivers Piano Competition. 
In 1980 he won the Silver Medal at the Arthur Rubinstein International Piano Competition in Tel Aviv. 
Where everybody else stuck close to repertory staples for their recitals, Mr. Lyras played such things as three Medtner ''Fairy Tales'' and the ''Islamey'' of Balakirev. 
His inclusion of the Balakirev piece suggested a pianist with virtuoso instincts, and Mr. Lyras did play the old warhorse with technique to burn. 
He is a well-schooled, utterly dependable pianist who brings logic and power to his playing.
Of the two front-runners, it is a classic case of Apollo and Dionysus. 
Mr. Schub was born in Paris but came to the United States as an infant. 
He started to play the piano at 4, studied at Princeton University and the Curtis Institute of Music, won the 1974 Naumburg Competition and was awarded the Avery Fisher Prize in 1977. 
Mr. Schub is an Apollonian player. 
He is an elegant pianist and, as his performances of two of the Paganini-Liszt etudes showed, a supreme technician. 
His fingers have been well brought up and have been taught never to associate with a wrong note.
 
Plays With Immense Authority
He plays with clarity, intelligence and immense authority. 
Yet he is a cool pianist. 
Proportion to him is more important than color. 
He refuses to make a play for the audience, and he performs miracles of virtuosity in a detached, aloof manner.
Mr. Rodriguez is the Dionysian pianist. 
He was born in Cuba, came to the United States at 9, received a degree from the University of Texas at Austin, and studied at Juilliard. 
In 1976 he won the Maryland International Piano Competition and took second place in the Naumburg Competition. 
In 1977 he was a finalist in the Leventritt Competition.
Mr. Rodriguez is a crowd-pleaser, a virtuoso, a colorist, a dashing, cocky performer who has thought out every element of his interpretations. 
Fortunately he is much more than a technician. 
His interpretations have had taste at all times, and his virtuosity is always employed for legitimate musical devices. 
In the Preliminaries, he played the first book of the Brahms ''Paganini'' Variations, and it was a stunning performance, one of the best this listener has ever heard. 
He was also remarkably effective in the Stravinsky ''Petrushka.''
On Sunday the last 45 minutes of the Van Cliburn Competition will be telecast from the Tarrant County Convention Center over the network of the Public Broadcasting Service.
The live coverage is part of a 90-minute special on the competition, made possible by International Business Machines Corporation. 
In New York, the telecast will start at 7:30 P.M.
