
Flash flooding along China's eastern coast has killed thousands of people and left tens of thousands homeless so far this year, and a drought in the country's central and southern grain belts has damaged millions of acres of crops.
Over the last four days, more than 200 people have died and 450 more were listed as missing in floods that engulfed parts of the coastal province of Zhejiang, news reports said.
At the same time, a heat wave continues to grip the Chinese heartland, from Jiangsu Province, across Anhui and Hubei Provinces, and into Jiangxi Province. 
Officials say 65 million acres of grain have been devastated by temperatures of 100 degrees and higher.
More than one-fifth of China's 296 million acres of farmland have been hurt by drought this year, with 24 million acres damaged by floods.
Natural disasters are a common feature of life in China, and their effect is accentuated by poorly constructed homes, bridges and dams; inadequate flood-control devices, and rudimentary road networks in rural areas - all of which hamper rescue efforts.
This year, the effect of the flooding and the heat wave is more severe, and many Chinese speak fatalistically about the cataclysms that every 12 years seem to accompany the Year of the Dragon.
''It's the dragon year,'' said a man who returned from Hebei Province on Sunday. 
''In 1976, there was the big earthquake, and the Chairman died,'' he said, speaking of the previous Year of the Dragon, when a catastrophic earthquake in Tangshan killed 100,000 people, and Mao Zedong died.
So far this year, a combination of floods, drought, landslides and cold spells have killed 11,588 people, destroyed 470,000 houses and affected the lives of 64 million people, a report in the English-language China Daily said.
Five counties in the central part of Zhejiang Province have been struck by flash floods, said The People's Daily, the official newspaper of the Communist Party. 
In a torrential rainstorm on July 29 and July 30, the paper said, nearly 700 people were reported missing, almost 17,000 houses were destroyed, the banks of 100 reservoirs crumbled, and 305 bridges collapsed.
China's central television station showed scenes of devastation, including towns with flooded streets. 
Fallen trees and other debris were shown sweeping past crumbling houses in a muddy torrent. 
Troops were sent to the region.
 
Oil Wells and Granaries
Meanwhile, Heilongjiang Province was battered by severe rain and hailstorms that affected 40 percent of the farmland in that northeastern region, The People's Daily said. 
Half the cities and counties in the province were struck by the storms, which flooded 1,000 oil wells and inundated grain stores, factories, shops and schools.
In the south and center of China, a stubborn heat wave parched paddy fields and withered rice stalks, damaging or destroying large portions of the year's first crop.
Officials in Hubei, one of the provinces hardest hit by the drought, reported that more than half the arable land in the region shriveled under the absense of rain and that two-thirds of the peanut and sesame crops were lost for the year.
''The drought is not only happening here in China,'' said Fan Yongxiang, the chief meteorologist at the Central Meteorological Bureau. 
''It's a global one.''
Mr. Fan suggested two possible causes for the dry spell. 
The first was an increase in sunspot activity earlier in the summer. 
Sunspots, which run in 11-year cycles, lead to strong electro-magnetic disturbances on earth.
The other was the global increase in temperatures attributed substantially to the greenhouse effect, in which an excess of carbon dioxide and other gases, produced primarily by the burning of carbon-based fuels, collects in the atmosphere, trapping heat and causing a gradual warming of the planet. 
Although the greenhouse effect's functioning has yet to be definitively established, there is a consensus among specialists that it is the cause of hotter temperatures on earth.
A spokesman for the Chinese Agriculture Ministry said the drought is the second this year in the region. 
The first occurred in April and May.
Xu Yuchang, a spokesman for the relief department of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, said more than 1 billion yuan, or about $270 million, has been allocated for relief work in drought- and flood-stricken areas. 
Mr. Xu said that families were being moved from flooded areas but that it was too early to say how many people were affected.
Last week, the United States Department of Agriculture said that China had bought 400,000 metric tons of wheat at subsidized prices.
In the last two years, the United States has exported seven million tons of wheat to China, according to the official New China News Agency. 
Some grain traders in Beijing today expressed doubts about whether China could achieve its stated grain-production goal of 410 million tons this year.
