
''THE food in China used to be very good, but it was set back by the Cultural Revolution,'' said Zhou Zhi Bin. 
That observation is particularly noteworthy because the man who made it is one of Shanghai's oldest master chefs. 
Western visitors to China have been saying the same thing for years.
In a period of increasing openness and contact with the West, Chinese chefs have begun to acknowledge the poor quality of the food in a country once as famous as France for its culinary heritage. 
In an effort to repair the damage, master chefs have been called out of retirement and foreign chefs have been invited to demonstrate Western cooking.
A desire to regain their culinary stature is not only a matter of national pride for the Chinese; it makes creasing number of privately owned restaurants, those owned by the state face stiff competition: as the Chinese become more affluent they demand better food. 
It is often difficult to get reservations in the best restaurants. 
And foreign visitors expect to eat equally well in dining rooms serving Chinese and Western food.
The Cultural Revolution, which extended from 1966 to 1976, is rightly blamed for the state of disrepair into which Chinese culinary artistry had fallen. 
Like so many of his peers, Mr. Zhou spent six years in that period working in a rubber factory.
But the Cultural Revolution does not bear full responsibility. 
Between 1950 and 1958, China had virtually no training program for chefs. 
As a result of these two barren periods there is a shortage today of competently trained chefs in their late 30's, 40's and even 50's. 
Most skilled chefs are in their 60's, 70's and 80's. 
In the late 1970's Mr. Zhou and other professional chefs were ''rehabilitated,'' returned from the countryside and factories to the professions for which they had been trained, but the rehabilitation was short-lived. 
These older men were soon forced to retire to make room for the young people who were coming back from ''retraining'' in the countryside. 
Speaking through an interpreter, Jie Zhi Zhong, manager of the new Sichuan restaurant in the Jinjiang Hotel, one of Shanghai's most famous old hotels, explained: ''It was the Government's policy to replace old people with young people. 
But the young people couldn't produce the best food as their fathers had done because they did not have the proper training. 
Eventually, the restaurants and hotels took things into their own hands and invited old chefs back to supervise and to teach.''
Mr. Zhou was called back to the Jinjiang, where he had begun his career 50 years before. 
This time he would train the young generation of chefs, who until a few years ago learned most of what they knew from books.
''Now, leaders of the Government at various level are giving full attention to the art,'' Mr. Zhou said, ''and we are focusing our attention on training young chefs. 
The cooking schools have improved and the chefs are going there for theoretical training. 
We understand Chinese cooking is not of the finest quality at this moment, but the food is improving.''
One of Mr. Zhou's pupils nodded in agreement. 
''Self-taught by books,'' as he put it, Lu Da Ming went to the hotel in 1974. 
''Because of Mr. Zhou,'' he said, ''I am learning the traditional dishes and I am learning much faster, especially the things you can only learn by experience. 
We all hope the old chefs will have long life and stay healthy.''
The better food in China is being cooked by chefs who have had the advantage of training under the old master chefs: Li Cheng Heng, for example, the Sichuan chef at the Golden Flower Hotel, a joint venture operated by the Chinese Government and a Scandinavian company in Xi'an.
Mr. Li, 42 years old, was also a victim of the Cultural Revolution, but he had been trained by a master chef from the age of 12. 
He gives full credit to his old teacher, who eventually became a chef at several Chinese embassies abroad, an honor accorded only to the country's best.
As evidence of the Government's renewed interest in its culinary experts, chefs like Mr. Li have been sent to Europe and America to demonstrate Chinese cooking and to work at foreign restaurants. 
The Sichuan Pavilion in New York is one of the first of these restaurants to employ its entire kitchen staff from China.
Wong Lin Chou, a gracious, sophisticated older man who speaks fluent English, was also called out of retirement, in this case to add polish to the state-run Mei Leung restaurant in Shanghai. 
At one time Mr. Wong owned an import-export business; he knows about dealing with Westerners and about the fine points of old-fashioned service. 
During the Cultural Revolution he was forced to work in a candy factory. 
In 1984, he said, the restaurant hired him to ''greet foreign guests and to teach the dining room staff how to speak English and how to conduct themselves.''
He appears to have had an effect: the service at Mei Leung was several cuts above that in many of the other restaurants visited on a recent trip to China. 
''The cooking art is picking up,'' said Ge Xian-E, vice principal of the City Restaurant and Service School in Shanghai. 
''The central Government is paying attention.''
Speaking through an interpreter, she said: ''There was a large culinary demonstration in the Great Hall of the People in Beijing in 1983, and similar demonstrations have been held throughout the country. 
The status of cooks has been raised from simple worker to master, and the system of accrediting cooks at varous grade levels, which had been stopped during the Cultural Revolution, has begun again.''
To improve the quality of middle-aged chefs, schools like the one in Shanghai are also retraining them.
Miss Ge said the quality of that training is very high: ''Most of the teachers are the creme de la creme.''
It is certainly good enough to attract some foreign students studying at Chinese universities in Shanghai.
Full-time students at the school must pass an examination to enter.
To graduate, they must design and prepare a banquet. 
The course is two years for senior high school graduates and three years for students above the junior high school level. 
American chefs are being invited to China to share their culinary secrets, among them Jasper White, chef and owner of Jasper's in Boston, and Lydia Shire, executive chef at the Four Seasons Hotel in Los Angeles.
''They want to elevate the status of the chef by having important American chefs go into the kitchens with big Chinese chefs,'' Ms. Shire said. 
''It strengthens what they are trying to do.''
The American chefs are also teaching the Chinese how to prepare Western food. 
''The Chinese have lost a whole generation of chefs and especially those who knew anything about Western food,'' Mr. White said. 
''One morning we had eggs and sausage for breakfast, and the eggs were deep-fried. 
Having us do cooking demonstrations is part of an effort to satisfy their guests, both tourists and businessmen.''
When preparing Chinese food, chop, slice, dice and mix all the ingredients before you start cooking, so that they are ready to toss into the skillet
 
Beef and Black Beans With Noodles (From the Golden Flower Hotel)
 
Preparation time: 15 minutes Cooking time: 4 to 5 minutes
 
1/4 cup julienned green bell pepper
1/4 pound shredded beef
4 ounces cleaned bean sprouts
1 teaspoon cornstarch
4 tablespoons chicken stock
1 tablespoon salted black beans
4 ounces fresh Chinese noodles (see note)
2 tablespoons plus 2 teaspoons peanut oil
1 teaspoon grated ginger
1/2 teaspoon minced garlic
2 tablespoons thinly sliced spring onion
1 tablespoon oyster sauce.
1.Cut green pepper into julienne strips about 1/8 inch thick; cut beef into strips 1/8 inch wide, 2 inches long and about 1/8 inch thick.
2.Remove heads and tails from bean sprouts, and rinse.
3.Mix cornstarch with a little chicken stock to make paste; then stir in remaining stock.
4.Rinse black beans to remove salt; drain.
5.Cook noodles in boiling water until tender, 1 to 2 minutes, depending on thickness of noodles. 
Drizzle with 2 teaspoons peanut oil.
6.Heat 2 tablespoons peanut oil in a wok until it shimmers; stir-fry black beans, ginger and garlic for 30 seconds; add beef and green pepper and stir-fry until beef loses its color.
7.Add bean sprouts and spring onion and stir-fry.
8.Make a well in center and stir in chicken stock mixture and oyster sauce; stir-fry until mixture thickens slightly.
9.Remove from heat and stir in drained noodles.
Yield: 2 servings as part of a Chinese meal.
 
NOTE: If fresh Chinese noodles are unavailable, use very thin fresh Italian noodles.
 
Chicken With Bamboo Shoots and Chili (From the Golden Flower Hotel)
 
Preparation time: 7 minutes Cooking time: 4 to 5 minutes
 
6 ounces julienned white chicken meat
1/2 egg white
1 teaspoon cornstarch
1/2 cup finely chopped bamboo shoots
1 teaspoon black vinegar
1 teaspoon soy sauce
1/2 teaspoon sugar
1/8 teaspoon white pepper
3 tablespoons peanut oil
2 tablespoons finely chopped celery
1 thinly sliced spring onion
2 tablespoons finely chopped red bell pepper
1 1/2 teaspoons chili paste
2 tablespoons chicken stock.
1.Cut chicken into strips about 1/8 inch wide and 2 inches long. 
Mix with egg white and cornstarch. 
Set aside.
2.Rinse and drain bamboo shoots and slice with a thick slicing blade in food processor. 
Cut slices into small dice.
3.Combine vinegar, soy sauce, sugar and white pepper and set aside.
4.Heat 1 tablespoon peanut oil in wok until it shimmers. 
Stir-fry bamboo shoots, celery, spring onion and red pepper about 2 minutes; remove and set aside. 
Wipe out wok.
5.Heat remaining 2 tablespoons peanut oil in wok until it shimmers. 
Stir-fry chicken until it turns white.
6.Add chili paste; stir-fry. 
Add vinegar mixture and stir-fry.
7.Return the vegetables to wok and stir in chicken stock; stir-fry to mix well.
Yield: 2 servings as part of a Chinese meal.
 
Winter Bamboo Shoots (From Jinjiang Hotel)
 
Preparation time: 5 minutes plus 30 minutes' soaking Cooking time: 7 to 9 minutes
 
1 tablespoon dried shrimp
1 teaspoon cornstarch
2 tablespoons chicken stock
2 cups julienned winter bamboo shoots (see note)
1 cup peanut oil
2 teaspoons rice wine
2 tablespoons chopped chives
1/2 teaspoon sugar
Salt to taste
1 teaspoon sesame oil.
1.Pour boiling water over shrimp and soak 30 minutes. 
Drain and chop finely. 
Set aside.
2.Make a paste of the cornstarch and a little chicken stock; stir in remaining stock. 
Set aside.
3.Rinse and drain winter bamboo shoots. 
Using julienne blade of a food processor, process bamboo shoots. 
Dry well in a cloth towel.
4.Heat oil to 375 degrees. 
Add bamboo shoots and fry 5 to 7 minutes, until bamboo begins to turn golden. 
Drain off all but one tablespoon of the oil and set aside bamboo to drain.
5.Add shrimp and stir-fry in the remaining tablespoon of oil.
6.Add rice wine, chopped chives, sugar, salt, sesame oil and chicken stock mixture.
7.Return bamboo shoots to mixture and cook until liquid has been absorbed.
Yield: 2 servings as part of a Chinese meal.
NOTE: In Chinese grocery stores bamboo shoots are found in large tubs of water. 
There are usually two kinds; the large, heavy ones are winter bamboo shoots.
