
Four decades ago this old city in southwest China was one of the hubs of World War II, familiar to thousands of Americans who helped Chiang Kai-shek's ''Free China'' survive invasion by Japan.
In the teahouses and free markets that enliven the city center, and in other spots where old-timers gather, fond memories linger of the Americans who helped push the ''Burma Road'' through the jungles from Kunming to Mandalay. 
Equally remembered are the men who flew lumbering transports over ''the hump'' of the Himalayas into the airfield to the west of town.
One old man with gapped teeth paused to offer his assessment while trying on a new pair of spectacles at a stall along Qingnian Street. 
''Americans?
Terrific, terrific!'' he said, shooting out an upraised thumb.
Americans visiting Kunming, China, find good will among residents, who have not forgotten how American fighter squadrons drove off Japanese bombers during World War II, ending raids that terrified city; photo; map (M)
Elsewhere, the pattern was the same. 
A 58-year-old American of Chinese origin, C. W. Kung, who grew up here during the war before leaving to make a career as a chemical engineer in the United States, told visitors to the apartment he shares with his new wife that local people still recall how American fighter squadrons drove off Japanese bombers in 1943 and 1944, ending raids that terrified the city.
 
Popularity Is Recalled
''Nobody has forgotten them,'' Mr. Kung said. 
''They were very popular because they actually fought the Japanese, while Chiang's air force did nothing.''
For the Americans, the good will is the only memorial. 
Local officials have no plans to mark the 40th anniversary of the Japanese defeat in August. 
There is not so much as a plaque on the wall of the four-story gray-stone building on Peking Road that was headquarters for Gen. Claire Chennault's 14th Air Force, now doing service as a hotel.
Out at Wujiaba, the wartime airfield that still serves civil and military planes, passengers looking toward the Shuimenren Mountains that hold the city like a bowl can see a cluster of dun-colored hangars and crew rooms, some of wartime vintage. 
Where General Chennault's ''Flying Tigers'' taxied in after their 700-mile journey across 15,000-foot mountains from Assam there is now a fighter base of the People's Liberation Army.
The rows of aging MIG-19's and F-5's are a reminder of the new conflict 200 miles to the south between border troops of China and Vietnam. 
Mostly, it is a war of artillery barrages and small-scale infantry skirmishes, but it is severe enough to have driven hundreds of villagers with relatives in the city to trek north for sanctuary.
 
'City of Eternal Spring'
Set at nearly 6,000 feet above sea level, Kunming is known as ''The City of Eternal Spring.''
Travelers reaching here from lower-lying spots elsewhere in southern China, such as Canton, celebrate the cooler air and the blossoms that linger through much of the year. 
But in other ways Americans who return to savor their wartime associations find the city transformed.
A thousand-year-old university town has grown into a bustling city of nearly two million people. 
The sinuous, cobblestoned lanes of the old days have mostly disappeared. 
As in other Chinese cities, broad avenues and rows of 12-story apartment blocks have destroyed a good deal of the old character, though much that is ancient remains.
A change that few regret is the passing of the prostitutes and opium sellers who were an insistent feature of wartime Kunming. 
Prostitutes were rounded up after 1949 and sent to re-education camps, but the opium dealers proved more persistent. 
Terraced fields outside town where poppies once grew have been given over to tea and other crops, but small-scale dealing continues.
A Deputy Governor of Yunnan Province, Zhu Kui, told Western reporters that drug abuse was a thing of the past. 
But other local residents asserted that opium was still available among the mountain tribes that live along Yunnan's 1,300-mile border with Burma, 250 miles to the west, where movement is uninhibited by fencing or effective border patrols. 
The locals said that at least six people had been shot in Kunming for opium trafficking in the past year.
 
Notice Confirms Execution
One of the executions was confirmed by a notice outside the Kunming Intermediate People's Court on Qingyun Street, a relic of the old city with its two-story gabled homes, its street-side merchants and its cluster of old men nursing bamboo pipes as they relaxed in the springtime sun. 
The poster announced three executions on March 30, one of them of a 54-year-old opium dealer, Qian Guanxing.
Mr. Qian had a surprisingly long career. 
Above the red check mark signifying that his sentence had been carried out, the poster said he had been imprisoned four times for opium offenses since 1955, most recently for ''entertaining'' 28 people at an ''opium den'' in Kunming in 1983. 
The poster said he was on parole from the fourth term on the ground of ill health when he resumed trafficking last year.
Outside the Kunming Hotel, the center for the city's thriving tourist trade, a retired American college professor who served as a major with a Chinese artillery unit, recalled how opium was a commonplace in the wartime days. 
''If you went out with a boatman on the lake,'' he said, referring to Lake Dian, a local beauty spot, ''he would row for a while, ship his oars, pull out his opium pipe and start puffing away.''
Like others who knew the old Kunming, the professor had little nostalgia for the uprooting of some of the old ways. 
Wartime accounts tell of hungry Chinese soldiers dying by the dozens in the streets, and of beggars at every corner. 
These days the free-enterprise markets are bursting with fresh meat, vegetables and fruit, and ''night markets'' thrive past midnight with stalls serving spicy dishes to order.
 
Feel of a Country Fair
So many are the merchants that a visitor passing down Qingnian Street could imagine himself in Hong Kong. 
In this the city is reverting to its old self, before the collectivist austerity of Mao Zedong extinguished enterprise. 
For a mile or more on either side of the broad avenue entrepreneurs ply selections of clothing, toys, comic books and herbal medicines, haggling over price as though Mao had never been.
Other merchants give the street the feel of a country fair. 
Men with homemade pool tables charge the equivalent of 35 cents for a quarter of an hour, with side bets for those who want them. 
An old man draws crowds with a homemade ''test your strength'' machine. 
The spirit of the place seemed to be captured when a West German reporter introduced himself to one old trader by his first name, Jurgen-Karl. 
With a grin, the man shot back: ''Karl?
Like Karl Marx?
We've no time for him around here.''
So far, there is nothing to rival Billy's, the nightclub that was a big draw among wartime G.I.'s. 
But a start has been made at the city's Peking Opera Troupe, where musicians have formed a Western-style band, rented the troupe's rehearsal hall and organized a discotheque that draws crowds of 200 to 300 at a time. 
With a repertoire that includes a reedy version of ''Home on the Range,'' the band is taking in more in a month than the opera earns in a year.
