
Pao Peter Lee's satisfactory universe, not large, is his family, his restaurant and his community association, all of them circumscribed by the Chinese traditions he has stubbornly kept alive for three generations and defined by four lines from the Tang Dynasty poet Li Po, a poem he says has governed his life. 
I raise my head up To watch the bright moon, I bow my head down To think of my old home.
It gives him pleasure to recite the lines, in English and Chinese, to ink them with an old calligraphic brush, and he will tell you of the twin moons in his world, and of his ''old home.''
His first moon was his dream of coming to America from Wuhan, China, something he accomplished 30 years ago, but which still fills him with wonder because it was a happy accident. 
And then there is his family - his wife, Tsen Yee Lee, whom he married 40 years ago in Wuhan; his daughters, Jean and Karen; his son, Dickson, and his crop of grandchildren, currently numbering three.
Pao Peter Lee's satisfactory universe, not large, is his family, his restaurant and his community association, all of them circumscribed by the Chinese traditions he has stubbornly kept alive for three generations and defined by four lines from the Tang Dynasty poet Li Po, a poem he says has governed his life.
''My 'old home' is Chinese culture,'' Mr. Lee said, ''and when Li Po says to bow down it does not only mean that we must pay respect to the elders of the family, but to the elders of other families too. 
We must not only care for our family's children, but we must extend our care to the children of other families.''
It is this belief that led him to establish the Chee Yue Community Association, which helps Chinese immigrants to learn basic English and to find jobs and companionship.
His association, whose name translates into ''Freedom,'' is also devoted, because Mr. Lee thinks it proper, to maintaining Chinese customs. 
So one recent evening the extended family of Pao Peter Lee gathered at his restaurant, the Flower Drum at 856 Second Avenue, to rehearse the small family pageant with which the lunar New Year is celebrated annually.
The dances and tableaux are conducted by the Chee Yue Community Association before, during and after the New Year, which falls this Sunday. 
And Mr. Lee's children are its cast.
But his three grandchildren were there as well, as were a cousin from Wuhan newly arrived to attend college; Mr. Lee's ''uncle,'' Yi Yuen Yu; the uncle's wife, Lihua Chen, who is a ballet dancer, and the couple's two daughters. 
Although Mr. Yu is 48 years old and Mr. Lee is 61, Mr. Yu, because of convoluted family relationships, is Mr. Lee's uncle.
''In China rank counts,'' Mr. Yu said, ''not age.''
''This has always been a family thing,'' says Dickson Lee, 26, a graduate of Queens College who is being groomed by Mr. Lee to take charge of the family restaurant. 
''Our parents expect a lot from us,'' he says. 
''And we want to do it because we see how hard he and mother work and they really don't have much chance to enjoy the fruits of their labors.''
''We're basically a small family,'' says Jean Gagnon, Mr. Lee's older daughter. 
''There are still more than a hundred of us in our homeland. 
But we have always spent a lot of time together. 
He has always drawn on us as resources. 
We always come to his aid at the New Year. 
Father is old stock.''
Mr. Lee seems to be precisely that. 
He is a man who is modest about his personal accomplishments. 
Born in Peking, where his father was a court interpreter in the last days of the Ching Dynasty, he was raised in Wuhan and later moved to Chongqing.
 
Invited to the United States
In 1950 as the revolution moved southward Mr. Lee, who had been studying at the Central Police College in Chongqing, went first to Canton, then, like many refugees, to Taiwan. 
In 1953, because of his background, he was invited to Detroit to participate in a conference of the International Association of Police Chiefs. 
He came to America, his ''moon,'' and never left.
He became a student, studying English at Columbia University and working in a Chinatown church as a superintendent. 
He later held three jobs while at school: as a busboy in a restaurant at night, a counselor at a Bronx youth house and a weekend captain in a Queens restaurant. 
He then became an interpreter at the United Nations, but continued to work in the Bronx and Queens. 
''I saved $5,000,'' he says. 
''It was to be the beginning of my dream, my restaurant.''
Mr. Lee sent for his wife and in 1960 began work as a full-time interpreter and calligrapher for the United Nations. 
''That was my only job until 1963,'' he says, ''when my wife found Mama Goldberg East,'' the restaurant that became Flower Drum. 
The family lived over the restaurant, Mrs. Lee worked there and the children took lunch and dinner there and also helped out. 
Mr. Lee continued to work at the United Nations, but came to the restaurant lunch hours and evenings. 
In 1965 he resigned from the United Nations. 
''I made up my mind, no more part time, only overtime.''
The Flower Drum is named for a street dance native to a part of Anhui Province called Fengyang, according to Mr. Lee. The people of Fengyang are known throughout China for their dancers, who are often requested to perform at special celebrations.
He works 10 or 12 hours a day. 
''It is a tough job,'' he says, ''but I do it because my restaurant, my business has character and cultural background that must be seen to. 
It gives me satisfaction that is not of money.''
It is why, he says, he puts much effort into devising menus of classical food preparations, why he serves brown rice which he considers healthful, why he and his wife still buy the restaurant's foodstuffs, ''why the New Year festival must go on, why the family must go on.''
And so must the Chee Yue Community Association, once down on the Bowery, but now around the corner from the Flower Drum at 300 East 46th Street. 
Mr. Lee spends much of his time at the association, which he insisted had to become part of the 46th Street Block Association. 
His daughter, Mrs. Gagnon, explained, ''His old schoolmates, the people he formed Chee Yue with, still come around to talk about old times and the old country.''
 
A Helping Hand
''He helps everybody,'' she says. 
''He never says no. 
People come in and Dad will call a friend, a politician, a lawyer he knows. 
It's often a lot of trouble, but he insists on making the call himself. 
He gives everything. 
And still there is so much time for us.''
When asked about the cohesiveness of his family, Pao Peter Lee smiles and tells the story of a Tang Dynasty official named Chan Kung Yi, who amazed his emperor by telling him that nine generations of his family were living under the same roof. 
How, the emperor asked, could there be harmony?
Chan Kung Yi told him he would write out his secret and bring it to the emperor the following day.
''He brought in a scroll with one character of calligraphy written 100 times, Mr. Lee said. 
''It was the character for patience.''
