
It was not an accident that Han Xu, China's Ambassador to the United States, chose a reception and a luncheon in his honor, a forum provided by the China Institute in America, for his first public appearance in New York before an American audience. 
He said with a broad smile yesterday: ''My predecessor made that choice and I make the same choice because you are a force for Sino-American mutual understanding and friendship.''
So, only one and a half months after he became China's Ambassador, he boarded the Queen Elizabeth 2 for a cocktail party followed by a luncheon of avocado and crabmeat and sliced tenderloin, with a 1982 Macon-Lugny. 
A speech by the Ambassador called the British cruise ship a symbol ''that will take us on a common journey.''
Han Xu, China's new Ambassador to United States, choses reception and luncheon in his honor, forum provided by China Institute in America, for his first public appearance in New York before American audience; photo (M)
''The wind is up,'' Ambassador Han said. 
''Let us sail to a splendid tomorrow.''
That was the sort of good fellowship that continued through the afternoon in the QE2's Princess Grill as a crowd of 50 people toasted the new ambassador and his wife, Ge Qiyun. 
A marimba band, getting tuned up for the ship's departure last evening for Bermuda, played softly.
The Ambassador called for an increase in American-Chinese trade, a relaxation of what he called a ''rising protectionist trend'' here, and a renewal of efforts to bring China and Taiwan together without interference from the United States. 
That done, the Ambassador seemed to enjoy dropping by the various knots of people to introduce himself and his wife.
Among those at the party were Wan-go H.C. 
Weng, president of the China Institute; Ji Lide, Consul General of China in New York, and his wife, Ma Shaoping; Gillian Martin Sorensen, the city's Commissioner for the United Nations and Consular Corps, C. Douglas Dillon and his wife, Susan; Von Sung Yang, one of the oldest members of the institute's board of trustees; Denise Sze, sister to I.M. 
Pei, the architect, and Dr. William Shaw.
 
Businessmen Present
The luncheon crowd was liberally sprinkled with American and Chinese businessmen, including Morley Cho, a Hong Kong shipping executive; Phillips Talbot, former president of the Asia Society, and Zhou Zhenxing, representative of the Bank of China here. 
Winston Lord and his wife, Bette Bao Lord, were there as well, and Mr. Lord was placed in a seat of honor at Ambassador Han's table. 
Mr. Lord has been mentioned as a leading candidate to be United States Ambassador to China.
Mrs. Han, sipping a Perrier water, spoke of growing up in Shanghai, of her three children - her 33-year-old daughter, who is a doctor, and her sons, one a philosophy teacher, the other an engineer - but she became animated when she spoke of her only grandchild, a girl.
''The Chinese have a saying,'' she said. 
''A little girl is like a pearl in one's palm. 
My granddaughter is the pearl in our family's palm.''
Mr. Weng, who was the ambassador's escort for the occasion, took pains to introduce him as ''no stranger to us.''
He pointed out that from 1973 to 1979 Ambassador Han had been stationed in Washington with China's liaison team, as negotiations for resumption of relations between the United States and China went on. 
In Peking he was head of the Foreign Ministry's American and Oceania Department and his expertise was in the field of United States foreign relations; he was later head of protocol. 
He came to the United States on May 3.
Mrs. Han also worked in the Foreign Ministry, she said, specializing in disarmament problems. 
When it was suggested that her specialty could be used at this time, she laughed loudly. 
''I am my country's hostess now,'' she said.
Miss Sorensen welcomed the Hans on behalf of Mayor Koch and used the occasion to announce that an exhibition of photographs entitled ''New York City: The City and Its People'' was about to open in Peking as part of the New York-Peking sister city exchange arrangement. 
Mr. Weng then took the floor and invited ''all of you to the Workers Cultural Palace in Peking to see New York.''
