
Li Xiaoyan remembers the day he began working for his master's degree in business administration from an American university.
''Everyone said we would be the central pillar of Chinese talent,'' Mr. Li said. 
''We thought we had a great future. 
So did our American professors. 
It didn't work out that way.''
Now he is beginning to regret what he calls ''drinking foreign ink'' - the two years he spent earning his M.B.A., first at a school in the northeast city of Dalian run by the State University at Buffalo, and then for a final semester at the university's American campus.
One year ago Mr. Li and 37 fellow M.B.A. graduates returned from the United States confident that they were bringing with them the training needed to contribute to China's ambitious effort to rejuvenate its economy.
Employees With Nothing to Do
Today, nearly all of them have yet to find jobs where they can use their skills. 
Some work as translators, while others sit behind paper-laden desks in overstaffed offices with nothing to do. 
Some are unemployed. 
Their plight represents a growing crisis for China - an inability to efficiently absorb people highly trained in Western management and technological specialties. 
Biologists and economists, chemical engineers and physicists, all with foreign degrees, are relegated to jobs that have little, if any, relation to their education.
''We are a country with a severe shortage of qualified personnel,'' said China Youth News, the official newspaper of the Communist Youth League, in acknowledging the problem. 
''Yet in many places a large amount of talent is kept idle and wasted.''
Government officials have decided to hold meetings to discuss the issue.
Not only human resources are being squandered. 
In China's modernization drive, tens of millions of dollars worth of advanced technology - assembly lines, computers, research equipment - is ill used or standing idle.
An American physician who works in Shanghai said the hospital where he spends most of his time has the world's most advanced equipment for testing the presence of 47 drugs in a patient's blood. 
''The problem,'' he said, ''is that only two of these drugs are available in China.''
 
Machinery Stands Idle
In Shenyang, a populous city in the northeast, the main hospital has two CAT scan machines. 
But according to recent visitors to the hospital, none of the doctors or staff members know how to use the machines.
Of China's 72 production lines imported from abroad to manufacture color television sets, none are operating at more than 30 percent of capacity. 
Throughout the country, plastic molding machines, welding robots, machine tools and other costly items rest partly or totally unused, in some cases rusting outside factories gates.
But it is the continuing failure of highly trained students returning from abroad to find suitable jobs that has prompted a series of high-level meetings among senior Government leaders to examine the situation.
At issue is not only how to properly employ those who have returned from studying abroad, but how to keep the tens of thousands of Chinese students at American and European universities from remaining abroad because they are aware of the difficulty of finding jobs back home.
Mr. Li was exiled in 1967 to Inner Mongolia as the the Cultural Revolution engulfed China. 
He was sent there as retribution because his parents fled to Hong Kong in 1949 when Communist armies marched into Beijing, leaving him in the care of an uncle.
Mr. Li says he does not regret his six-year exile, which cut short a promising career as a mathemetician.
 
'I Was a Cowboy'
''I rode horses every day and lived in a yurt,'' he said, rubbing his hands together, relishing his recollections. 
''We rounded up sheep, lassoed horses. 
I was a cowboy.''
He had studied mathematics and some English in Beijing. 
Although he came to love the vast reaches of Mongolia, he also missed intellectual nourishment in a political climate that denigrated learning.
''I smuggled books to Mongolia to study English,'' he said. 
''I took a radio to listen to the Voice of America. 
Of course, I had to do that in secret. 
I didn't waste my time. 
I studied every day.''
In 1973 he was brought back to Beijing and was in the second class of students who returned to Beijing University after the worst of the Cultural Revolution was over. 
Mr. Li specialized in applied mathematics, and after graduation was assigned to the Institute of Geophysics, where he performed data analysis. 
''I didn't know geophysics very well,'' he said. 
''I only knew mathematics.''
In 1984 a nationwide search was held to select candidates for the M.B.A. program. 
Four hundred forty people were chosen to sit for the entrance examination; Mr. Li was one of 40 who passed.
Unlike the practice at China's other prestigious universities, he said, there were no children of senior Government officials who were allowed into the M.B.A. program through what the Chinese call ''the back door.''
''They couldn't have done the work,'' he said.
Mr. Li said students took the same courses as students in the American program. 
They used the same textbooks and were taught by professors from the university who came to China. 
''Time was very limited,'' Mr. Li said. 
''There was lots of homework. 
The psychological pressures were tremendous.''
In September 1986, Mr. Li and the other students went to Buffalo, where they finished their coursework and did management internships with local companies. 
Mr. Li worked in a local bank studying the way computers are used in managing bank resources.
When they returned home last December, Mr. Li said, the students were confident that they had learned much and enthusiastic about what they had to offer their country. 
But they were disappointed.
 
No Jobs Without Help
''The State Economic Commission helped set up this program,'' said Mr. Li, referring to one of China's top planning bodies. 
''But they said they weren't responsible for us getting jobs. 
In China, if the Government doesn't help, you can't get a job.
''Nearly everybody went back to the same jobs they had before because their work units paid for their plane tickets. 
Nobody could get good jobs. 
I wanted to get into business. 
I speak English and have management skills. 
I started looking for work.''
''I went to many companies,'' he continued, ''but they didn't know what an M.B.A. was. 
They said, 'If you want to work here, you can be a translator.'
One day I went to the Bank of China and wanted to contact the personnel department. 
But the guard would not let me in. 
He said I didn't have a letter of introduction.''
Other M.B.A. graduates have had similar difficulties. 
Liu Zhongtian, who was nicknamed Shotgun by his colleagues, returned to the factory where he had worked. 
His request for a transfer to another job was denied.
According to China Youth News, which chronicled the experiences of several of the M.B.A. students, the leader of the factory told Mr. Liu:
''Since I've provided the funds for you to study abroad, I certainly can afford to keep you now that you're back. 
You don't believe me. 
Watch me keep you here for 20 years. 
Who says your talents aren't being used?
Last time, when visitors from Mauritania came here, their translator was useless. 
Next time, you'll be the translator.''
 
Frustration Is Widespread
Another M.B.A. student, Yu Changbin, returned to a factory where he worked as a manual laborer. 
China Youth News quoted his somewhat despondent remarks: ''Traditional things are what are strong in China. 
The existing quality of our enterprises and the cultural level and attitudes of our workers cannot live up to the management methods learned in an M.B.A. program.''
The article in China Youth News, a rare expose of a stunning failure of such a high profile program, prompted concern within the senior levels of China's Government. 
Acting Prime Minister Li Peng called a meeting of senior officials to discuss the matter and, according to China Youth News, acknowledged that vast numbers of highly trained people are mired in jobs irrelevant to their skills.
Mr. Li, who finally found a job at the China Metals and Minerals Import and Export Corporation, said he spends his days studying whether the corporation should build a hotel in Mexico.
''I guess I'm using 10 percent of what I learned,'' Mr. Li said with resignation in his voice. 
''And because I'm new, I have no seniority. 
I get paid 82 yuan a month,'' or about $22. 
''Most people my age get 97 yuan,'' or $26.
''I want to use my skills as much as possible,'' he said. 
''But in the Chinese system, this degree means nothing.''
