
China's parliament approved a new lineup today of Government leaders who are widely seen as committed to its ambitious program of economic restructuring.
As the National People's Congress approved the new leaders, men who in general are slightly younger and better educated than the previous leadership, it also voted to give constitutional protection to private enterprise and to the selling of land use rights, activity that is tantamount to selling land itself.
Last Saturday, the congress approved Li Peng, a 59-year-old Soviet-trained engineer, as Prime Minister. 
The congress, which meets annually, has been marked by a degree of open discussion not seen since the founding of the People's Republic in 1949, but its real power is essentially confined to ratifying decisions already made by the Communist Party's Politburo.
The official New China News Agency described the new group of state councilors, the equivalent of a cabinet, and ministers as ''a group of technocrats, who are younger in age, pragmatic and enthusiastic in the reform.''
''China is rejuvenating its leadership, making it professionally more competent as a measure to insure the continuity of its current policies for reform and the opening to the outside world,'' the press agency said.
Western diplomats here generally subscribed to that view, saying that the new group of officials reflects a continuing shift toward a more nuts-and-bolts and less politically motivated government.
Among the most prominent appointments made today was that of Qian Qichen, 60, as Foreign Minister. 
He succeeds Wu Xueqian, 66, who was named a Deputy Prime Minister and who is expected to retain overall control over China's foreign policy apparatus.
Mr. Qian, who has spent nearly all his career in the diplomatic ranks, has been heavily involved with the Soviet Union, where he was stationed for a total of 10 years, and with Eastern Europe. 
He has been a Deputy Foreign Minister since 1982.
Other significant appointments include the naming of Li Guixian as a state councilor and governor of the country's central bank, and Li Tieying as Minister of the State Education Commission..
Neither man brings visible experience to his new position. 
Li Guixian is a chemical engineer who has been a senior party bureaucrat, and Li Tieying, an electrical engineer who studied in Czechoslovakia, has worked in the electronics industry and as a senior party official in the provinces.
Qin Jiwei, 73, a veteran military man, was named Defense Minister. 
He replaces the ailing Zhang Aiping, 80. 
The party's Central Military Commission, headed by Deng Xiaoping, has most of the military power in China.
Altogether, three Deputy Prime Ministers, two fewer than there were previously, were appointed: Yao Yilin, Tian Jiyun and Wu Xueqian; 11 state councilors, down two from before; and 41 ministers, down from the previous 45. 
The slight shrinking in the number of senior posts is evidently part of an effort to streamline the cumbersome governmental apparatus.
Both constitutional amendments approved today are intended to give legal weight to the continuing remolding of the economy. 
By granting constitutional legitimacy to private enterprise, a radical step here,the leadership has given recognition to the need to protect the most rapidly growing segment of the economy.
