
THINKING IN TIME The Uses of History for Decision-Makers. 
By Richard E. Neustadt and Ernest R. May. 329 pp. 
New York: The Free Press. 
$19.95.
 
IN 1948 George C. Marshall, then President
Truman's Secretary of State, was concerned that the Communists seemed to be winning the civil war in China. 
He therefore asked Gen. Albert Wedemeyer, who had been the American commander in China at the end of World War II, to go to the Far East and see what, if anything, could be done. 
Upon his return, Wedemeyer recommended that Washington dispatch a few thousand military advisers. 
Attached to Chinese Nationalist forces, those advisers might well halt the Communist advances and perhaps even allow the Nationalists to win.
General Marshall rejected the advice, concluding that the United States should not go beyond giving the Nationalists money and supplies. 
He later explained this decision to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee: ''It would be impossible to estimate the final costs. 
. . . It certainly would be a continuing operation for a long time to come. 
It would involve this Government in a continuing commitment from which it would practically be impossible to withdraw.''
Marshall's judgment is cited by the authors of ''Thinking in Time'' as a stunning example of how a statesman can - and should - look at ''an issue in the present with a sense both of past and of future.''
Marshall's first assignment as a young soldier had been in the Philippines after the Spanish-American War, when American public opinion turned against imperialism and in favor of the Filipinos who were resisting occupation. 
He had witnessed the public's disenchantment over American involvement in World War I, its dislike even for small military actions that lasted too long, such as sending the Marines into Nicaragua in the 1920's. 
He had even served in China before World War II. 
But it was not his firsthand experience in the Far East that made him reject sending military advisers to China - General Wedemeyer had served there too but came to the opposite conclusion. 
It was Marshall's habit of thinking in ''streams of time'' - identifying what is worth preserving from the past to carry into the future.
Richard E. Neustadt and Ernest R. May, distinguished professors, respectively, of public administration and history at Harvard University, believe that readers of this book can learn how to use history in the manner of a Marshall. 
They suggest a methodology that may or may not produce wise statesmen, but will at least provide the means to avoid the usual pitfall of American decision makers - excessive reliance on solving the problem at hand as quickly as possible, with little regard for the history that led up to it or the future consequences of actions taken. 
Students too often believe that international relations can best be understood by constructing abstract models of behavior, or relying on historical analogies that fail to question ''some presumption the decision-makers cherish.''
In their formative years they would do far better to read history and literature - how the Athenians' preparations for their ill-fated Sicilian expedition in the fifth century B.C. so weakened them that they ultimately lost their freedom, or Stendhal's antiheroic description of the battle of Waterloo.
Before making a final decision on events of grave consequence, the authors urge the following as standard practice: list the key elements of the immediate situation, namely, those Known, Unclear and Presumed. 
That simple procedure, they point out, ''puts attention on the situation itself instead of on the question 'what to do?'
(which thus is kept at bay a little while).''
Then identify any past situations that appear analogous -and quickly note the Likenesses, as well as the Differences that can block use of potentially misleading analogies. 
Before defining the desired objective, examine the history of the issue. 
First, ask: what's the story?
And note any significant changes in the story so far. 
Next, ask what the authors call ''the journalists' questions'' - where, who, how and why?
Finally, place the organizations and the people concerned with the situation at hand - what are their histories?
We are treated to cases of how the method was employed successfully (for example, the Cuban missile crisis, when President Kennedy and his executive committee used analogies sparingly and subjected them to careful scrutiny) and unsuccessfully (for example, President Johnson's Vietnam policy in 1965, when he ''relied on the supposition that [the North Vietnamese Government] would respond to pain as a person might''). 
The Carter Administration, not surprisingly, was apt to ignore history. 
(The President himself, an engineer by training, cared little for history; his instinct was to get things fixed and move on to the next problem.) A signal instance the authors provide of how things went wrong when they need not have was the ''discovery'' in 1979 of the Soviet brigade in Cuba.
The story of the Soviet brigade begins in late July, when the Democratic Senator Richard Stone of Florida wrote the President of rumors that the Russians had combat troops in Cuba. 
If true, the Senator said, Moscow was violating agreements with Washington made after the 1962 missile crisis. 
Mr. Carter's national security adviser, Zbigniew Brzezinski, asked for more data, and sure enough, there the troops were. 
With the second strategic arms limitation treaty with the Russians just signed but not ratified, the last thing Mr. Carter wanted was evidence that the Russians did not keep their word. 
Nonetheless, calm prevailed until Senator Frank Church, the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, learned of the brigade from Secretary of State Cyrus Vance. 
Church was up for re-election in 1980 and was under fire for having supported the arms control treaty and for having gone to Cuba to meet Fidel Castro. 
He reacted to news of the Soviet brigade by saying the treaty should be scrapped and the brigade removed.
Secretary Vance then declared, ''I will not be satisfied with the status quo.''
Mr. Brzezinski, in turn, saw the brigade as further evidence of Soviet adventurism all over the world. 
As the mini-crisis continued through the fall, the President and his aides finally learned more about the history of the brigade. 
In fact, the brigade had been there since 1962, and did not violate past agreements made by Kennedy. 
Although Kennedy had asked the Russians to remove the troops, they had not promised to do so, and finally he dropped the subject. 
Because the Carter aides failed to discover the true history of the Soviet brigade soon enough, however, valuable time was wasted that should have been spent getting the arms treaty ratified, and when the Russians invaded Afghanistan in December any chances of ratification disappeared forever. 
''C OULD this farce have been avoided?'' the authors ask. 
Mr. Carter's staff say the intelligence agencies should have dug deeper earlier. 
But no one seems to have asked what motive the Russians could have possibly had to test Mr. Carter, particularly with an arms control agreement pending. 
Mr. Neustadt and Mr. May believe this episode ''underscores the uses of an issue's history and the consequences of habitually slighting it.''
They add: ''The brigade became an issue only because Carter and his aides did not know the brigade had been there all along, hence supposed it indicative of some new move by the Russians, hence reacted with their own form of the sovereign's complaint, He can't do that to me.''
Nor did the intelligence agencies have the historical data at hand, the authors tell us, ''because they were not accustomed to answering historical questions. 
Carter did not ask them. 
So his aides did not ask them either. 
Nor were they accustomed to pursuing them with persons out of government, but formerly with it, who might have known the answers, as some surely did.''
Indeed, Dean Rusk, who was Secretary of State in 1962 when the Soviet brigade was first discovered there, tells us he could have ''straightened them out . . . in five minutes - but no one called.''
There are other rich illustrations scattered throughout ''Thinking in Time,'' and they are fascinating (though the style often lapses into dreadful jargon -''credentialed,'' ''sophisticating'' - and so, along with history, I would recommend English composition). 
As for reading the great historians of the past - from Thucydides to Henry Adams - we should not look to analogies as a guide to present problems, a generally dangerous habit. 
Rather, the authors suggest, we should understand ''Thucydides' proposition that human nature remains constant - or better, perhaps, that dilemmas of human governance remain so.''
CHARMING JIMMY CARTER ''Someone from another country ordinarily has little American history in his head. 
. . . [The West German Chancellor Helmut] Schmidt seems to have taken no notice of events and details offering him possibly useful inferences about Carter. 
. . . With a little simple question-asking, Schmidt might have seen Carter's details against the special events of Southern, even Georgian, history. 
. . . Schmidt might then have assumed that he would be greeted with a sermon and that a great deal of courteous ritual would have to precede any getting down to business. 
One veteran of the Carter Administration, also long acquainted with Schmidt, feels sure in retrospect that, with only a little imaginative effort, Schmidt could have made Carter a dogged friend and ally. 
We are inclined to agree. 
With a good deal less brainpower than Schmidt but, partly for that reason, more experience in the exercise of personal charm, British Prime Minister James Callaghan managed to use Carter occasionally as the equivalent of an extra Labour Party whip.- From ''Thinking in Time.''
