
THE scene at the night market along Donghuamen Street in the bustling center of Peking one recent spring evening was a grazer's paradise: Two dozen or more food stalls, some as simple as an oilcloth-covered counter, others virtual restaurants in miniature, each offering enticements.
There were hearty, filling soups; noodles with meat and vegetables, especially the tender garlic shoots popular in northern China at this time of year; fried egg rolls; dumplings steamed and fried; won tons from southeastern Anhui and mutton kebabs from Moslem Xinjiang Uygur. 
Thick rounds of Shanghai bread stuffed with chopped scallions toasted on a griddle while nearby a Peking favorite, sweet almond soup, simmered away. 
Most popular, judging by the crowds, was the Tianjin pancake maker, fat and bald like a traditional Chinese kitchen god, who deftly flipped crepes, smeared them with chili paste and stuffed them with fried eggs and chopped onions.
The lively Donghuamen night market would have been unremarkable in Taiwan, Hong Kong or Singapore. 
But only in the last few years have such night scenes become common in Peking and other Chinese cities. 
For a visitor who remembers the dispiriting look of nighttime Peking 10 years ago, the change is astonishing.
Private restaurants and so-called free or farmers' markets - outlets for food produced independent of Government quota systems - are becoming even more commonplace. 
Altogether, these are dramatic indications that after years in which farmers were often forbidden to raise even chickens and pigs for personal consumption, Government policy has been overturned and private initiative encouraged under the unlikely slogan, ''Getting Rich Through Labor Is Glorious.''
In 1984, for the first time since these changes began six years earlier, the quantity of fruits and vegetables sold in free markets exceeded that sold in state markets, according to Pang Chungmin, an economist who was formerly with the Ministry of Agriculture in Peking and is now with the International Finance Corporation of the World Bank in Washington. 
There are now some 46,000 free markets in China, Mr. Pang said. 
That figure includes only officially licensed markets, not the thousands of informal markets, the peddlers who sell fresh fish or bean curd cakes door-to-door or the older people hawking apples, oranges and homemade Popsicles outside schools and factory gates.
''It has developed much more rapidly than anyone foresaw,'' Mr. Pang said. 
''The whole thing has taken on a movement of its own. 
It's becoming quite commercial.''
So has the restaurant business. 
In 1980, Chen Yinfeng says, he became the first private restaurateur in Peking. 
With his wife, Mr. Chen now owns and operates Peking Jiale (Peking Excellent Happiness) at 5 Xiagungfu, behind the Peking Hotel.
Mr. Chen comes from a long line of restaurateurs: His grandfather opened a restaurant in Peking in 1946. 
His father and six uncles are cooks and there are seven chefs among his brothers and cousins. 
But Mr. Chen, who, like many Chinese, was sent to the countryside during the Cultural Revolution, is the only one to have a restaurant of his own.
Peking Jiale, which serves a mild version of Sichuan-style food, is his second restaurant. 
It cost 30,000 yuan (about $10,000) to open - a considerable sum in China, where the average factory or office worker earns less than 100 yuan a month. 
Mr. Chen said he borrowed about two-thirds of it from friends. 
The balance was available in profits from his earlier, smaller operation, which he closed two years ago on establishing the new place.
Business is brisk at Peking Jiale, where American country-and-western music played in the background one recent afternoon. 
Mr. Chen serves 400 to 500 customers a day. 
Unlike state-owned establishments with inflexible 7:30 P.M. closings, his restaurant is open seven days a week, 8 A.M. to 9 P.M. His cooks earn 500 yuan a month, he said, while waiters get 120 to 180 yuan, depending on their experience - excellent wages in China.
Mr. Chen's restaurant yields 20,000 to 30,000 yuan a year in profit. 
China is still China, however: Mr. Chen said he and his wife contributed much of it to ''social welfare funds.''
Recently, he said, as part of a Government campaign for people to ''learn from the heroism of China's border guards,'' he and his wife went to the Vietnamese border region. 
The trip cost 10,000 yuan, much of which was spent on presents for the guards.
Restaurants like Peking Jiale, attracting Chinese clientele as well as tourists, stand in contrast to state-owned restaurants, whose hallmarks are poor food poorly prepared, indifferent service and a breathtaking disregard for basic sanitation. 
Even a visitor who does not understand Chinese characters can quickly pick out the new, privately owned places, for, although humble in appearance, they are relatively clean, bustling and lively.
Crowded food markets, like the one along the northeastern wall of the Temple of Heaven Park in southern Peking, and another along Baiwanzhuang Street in the city's northwestern section, are other indications of far-reaching change. 
Every town, it seems, has at least one regular market where farmers and licensed peddlers hawk their wares, and prices are only slightly higher than in state markets.
In the northern industrial city of Jiamusi, in Heilongjiang Province, May Day holiday shoppers in a vast covered market thronged past stalls offering fresh cabbages, cauliflowers, cucumbers, apricot-fleshed melons from Xinjiang Uygur, Philippine bananas, eggplants, watermelons and peppers, along with live ducks and chickens, fresh and dried fish, fresh pork, spices, dried tobacco leaves, Korean-style salted and pickled vegetables, and sacks of rice, millet, corn, wheat and dried legumes.
Much of this food is lower in quality than food in American markets. 
But it is considerably better than what was available a few years ago, when northern city markets offered little more than leeks, onions, garlic and tired, often half-rotten cabbages, turnips and apples from storage cellars.
The effect of this economic activity has been spreading. 
As peasants get richer, they invest in larger and more solid houses as well as in refrigerators and televisions. 
That means more work and better wages for construction crews and factory employees. 
For example, in the county town of Fuyuan on the Amur River along the Soviet border, construction of new brick housing is so rapid that local brick factories can scarcely keep up.
All is not roses, however. 
China's 1985 grain harvest, an important indication of economic and political stabilityII here, was down 6.6 percent from the record crop in 1984. 
While the decline was attributed in part to the weather, experts say it was also caused by peasants switching from grain to more profitable crops or leaving farming to start rural industries. 
Meanwhile, city residents are experiencing inflation, a new factor with unforeseeable consequences.
For many Chinese, however, and especially for those peasants at the bottom of the heap, the new policy has meant, for the first time in modern history, money, mobility and an exciting, enticing world of possibilities.
