
IRON & SILK By Mark Salzman. 
211 pp. 
New York: Random House. 
$16.95.
IF there were a prize for most winning writer, Mark Salzman would cop it. 
After studying all things Chinese at Yale University, he took a job teaching English to doctors in the city of Changsha in Hunan Province. 
During his two-year tour of duty, in addition to his teaching, he managed to study calligraphy as well as more than one of the Chinese martial arts. 
He also played the cello, tuned a piano, killed a rat with his American College Dictionary and generally kept his eyes and ears open. 
If there has ever been a better American ambassador to China, I don't know of him. 
Well aware of the antipathetical philosophy of the society, irked by a crabbed bureaucracy whose instinct is to holler ''no'' after any request and depressed by the lack of physical charms with which Communism has cemented itself upon a charming people, Mr. Salzman retained and indeed enlarged his deep affection for China and its people. 
It should come as no surprise that their feeling was reciprocal toward this courteous, friendly young American.
''Iron & Silk'' is a collection of anecdotes, each intended to give a glimpse of a circumstance of life in China or a trait of the Chinese, and all written in a jerry-built teen-age prose that is oddly appealing for all its habit of bumping into itself. 
Ah, but for that I prefer to put the blame on Yale rather than the author. 
It would be swinish to carp about a book that kept a smile on my face from cover to cover. 
Besides, where is it graven in stone that one must write stately Latinate phrases in a hand still pudgy with baby fat?
None of the anecdotes in this book is anything less than compelling. 
For instance, Mr. Salzman once assigned his student-doctors to write a composition entitled ''My Happiest Moment.''
Mr. Zhu, after recounting in minutest detail his having dined on Peking duck in a famous restaurant in Beijing, confessed that he had never actually eaten duck in Beijing. 
He had never even been to Beijing. 
It was his wife who had done that, ''but she often tells me about it again and again, and I think, even though I was not there, it is my happiest moment.''
Struggling to satisfy the seemingly cruel demands of his Chinese weaponry teacher, Mr. Salzman had to practice mutual staring and scowling for minutes at a time and always in a state of anticipation of the unexpected blow. 
The art of wushu, we learn, draws its strength from the eyes. 
By staring at his student, a teacher passes it on. 
When Mr. Salzman clumsily lost control of his weapon and injured himself, the teacher remarked with admiration, ''Sweating and bleeding. 
Good.''
About calligraphy he learned that there are several tens of styles and that to make a single dot may involve five distinct motions of the wrist and shoulder.
Some of the ways of China ought to be adopted immediately by the West. 
One of these is the means by which the Chinese endure the endless, boring speeches to which they are subjected. 
Actual listening is optional. 
Nor do they pretend to pay attention, but openly doze or get up and walk around or chat among themselves, none of which offends the speaker in the least. 
Very sensible. 
Most touching and most hopeful is Mr. Salzman's rendering of the relationship between teacher and student. 
It is clearly one of profound respect and devotion, a blend of expectation and obligation. 
Any distance between East and West shrinks to inconsequence alongside instruction and learning on a one-to-one basis, as with his calligraphy and wushu teachers. 
What stirs is no less than the yearning for world peace. 
STILL, despite Mr. Salzman's sincerity and eagerness, East remains adamantly East, where ''The World According to Garp'' is ''very, very unsuitable'' reading and one cannot be treated for athlete's foot because it has been ''declared successfully driven out of China.''
Reaching out, Mr. Salzman asked the young man who taught him calligraphy what two things he thought about most. 
''Eating and sleeping'' was the reply, which was a far cry from Mr. Salzman's own confession that he more than anything wanted to be liked, especially by women, and that he wanted to master something, anything, well enough to earn recognition for it. 
The Chinese teacher was incredulous: ''But these goals can be achieved so easily!
All you have to do is be kind and work hard. 
But to eat and sleep well, that is a difficult wish, because you cannot control these things yourself.''
For all the moments of mutual pleasure in each other's companionship, the Chinese and the American were rarely able to cross over the cultural gap. 
Still, Mr. Salzman will have us believe it is enough to understand that the gap is there and that much hard work lies ahead for both countries.
