
Over the last 10 years, China's intellectuals have visibly if slowly shaken off the effects of decades of re-education and imprisonment, public humiliation and private despair.
And yet, while some of those who endured labor camps and prisons have managed to leave China, to speak from the safety of adopted homelands, almost no one here has been willing to talk with candor about the past treatment of the intelligentsia, to reflect on the larger meaning of a society that so easily turned on its best and brightest in pursuit of one man's notion of class struggle and communism. 
And few have spoken publicly about the implications of this tortured history on writers, artists and academics today.
Seldom does an individual Chinese intellectual speak critically of his country. 
Fang Lizhi, the astrophysicist who was expelled from the Communist Party in January 1987 for his discordant views, is almost alone in challenging Government and party policies. 
A journalist, Liu Binyan, who was expelled from the party at the same time for similar views, held his tongue until he journeyed abroad this year.
Retribution for dissonant opinions remains a constant threat. 
Not long ago, Professor Fang was denied permission to visit the United States to attend a scientific conference because of what he said was ''displeasure by the leaders over my views.''
 
'We Must Be Careful'
A well-known young writer here in the capital talked quietly of this reluctance. 
''You know, people like us worry about this, but because our futures are controlled we must be careful,'' he said. 
''Of course it's very important to know what happened to the older generation because that could happen again. 
We need to know what older intellectuals went through. 
We don't want that for our generation.''
Prof. Wu Ningkun, who now teaches English literature at the Institute of Foreign Relations in Beijing, is one of that older generation. 
He agreed to recount his experiences, not because they are so much different from those of others, he said, but because they tell much about what China has been since Mao Zedong proclaimed the People's Republic in 1949. 
He said his treatment, and that of others like him, suggests the limits of intellectual life in this society.
''I had heard a lot of good things about China,'' Professor Wu recalled of letters he received in 1950, when he was in the United States. 
''I had been very dissatisfied with the Kuomintang regime, like most of my contemporaries. 
So everything we heard about the Communists was good. 
China was turning over a new page.''
That year, a friend on the English faculty at Yanjing University urged him to leave the University of Chicago, where he was finishing a doctorate, and return to China to teach. 
After wrestling with the attraction of American academia and the tug of patriotism, Professor Wu finally gave way and arrived in Canton in 1951.
 
A Revolutionary University
''The most unforgettable experience in Canton was that we were taken to visit a revolutionary university,'' he continued. 
''It was a very dingy old place. 
We were taken into a room.
''We didn't see any revolutionaries, but there were pamphlets, handwritten pamphlets on display. 
They were all autobiographies - meaning confessions of the students, to say how they had committed this or that crime or sin against the people. 
The political commissar came and spoke to us and told us what this place was for, to help the intellectuals reform themselves, for ideological remolding. 
So we were given a foretaste of our own future.''
From Canton, he went to Beijing and joined the English department. 
Life changed rapidly for the young assistant professor during a series of political campaigns intended to purify the ideological consciousness of the country. 
''The academic atmosphere changed greatly after that,'' he said.
''Now, what was uppermost in your consciousness was whether to be for or against,'' he said. 
''You either have to go along or resist. 
That's how you got into deeper and deeper trouble.''
''In 1955 came this movement to uproot the hidden counterrevolutionaries, to smoke them out,'' he said. 
''So my house was searched for counterrevolutionary evidence. 
I was denounced. 
They made me sit in the center of the room, and I was surrounded by a whole group of my accusers, the entire department. 
I had read 'Darkness at Noon' and '1984,' and I said, 'My god, it's all happening, this is going to be the future.'
''
 
A New Day Dawns
The denunciations tapered off toward the end of 1955. 
When 1956 dawned, many intellectuals, including Professor Wu, felt more hopeful that the party would be more accommodating to a diversity of views. 
That year, a short-lived explosion of opinions, many extremely critical of the Communist Party, swept through the press, part of the so-called Hundred Flowers period. 
Professor Wu was transferred to the Institute of Foreign Relations.
''Everybody was elated, even the leftists, people who had been very active in denouncing me,'' Professor Wu said. 
''They said, 'Now China will be different.'
'' Then, in the summer of 1957, the official press published editorials attacking outspoken intellectuals. 
Mao called for a purge of ''rightists.''
''I didn't consider myself a rightist,'' Professor Wu said. 
''I didn't know I qualified. 
My understanding of politics was very naive and limited. 
Well, I was the number one rightist. 
I was officially labeled an ultra-rightist. 
That meant there would be practical consequences. 
Most of what I had said had to do with freedom of speech. 
As an intellectual that was my uppermost concern: people are not only born equal but they're born free to speak.''
Leading the national campaign against so-called rightists was Deng Xiaoping, now the country's senior leader. 
The new mood of repression swept campuses, publishing houses and film studios.
 
Sent to a Labor Camp
At the Institute of Foreign Relations, Professor Wu said, it was decided that he would be sent to a labor camp to be re-educated. 
He and other academics labeled as rightists were shipped to a swampy area near the border of Soviet Siberia, an area near Xingkai Lake in Heilongjiang Province.
''They didn't need any legality,'' he said. 
''It was to educate me, except that it's in prison. 
The worst part about it is that it's indefinite. 
We were even laughed at by the prisoners, by the penal criminals. 
They said, 'I serve five years, I go home. 
How do you know you'll ever get out of here?'
'' In 1960, as China was enduring its worst famine of the century, he was transferred with many other rightists to a walled prison farm outside Beijing.
Although many other writers, poets and academics were imprisoned with him, no one talked about literature or politics, he said. 
''Nobody dared, and nobody was interested because they were hungry all the time,'' he said. 
''They were dying of hunger.''
When Professor Wu began digging graves to bury cell-mates who had died of starvation, he decided to write to his wife, Li Yikai, to tell her to come for a last visit. 
His wife, who herself had been deprived of her academic job simply because she was married to a rightist, was shocked by the frail man who met her that day in 1961. 
She left the prison and went to the Institute of Foreign Relations, the only entity that could win freedom for her husband. 
Some weeks later, Professor Wu was handed a train ticket and taken to the station on a donkey cart.
 
Half a Million Rightists
There were in 1962, by official Government count, more than half a million people classified as rightists, people who had been persecuted since 1957, from imprisonment of the sort endured by Professor Wu to losing their jobs at universities and institutes -virtually the entire intelligentsia of the country. 
Once again, the repressive intellectual environment seemed to ease.
He returned to teaching at Anhui University. 
From 1962 to 1966, he and his family lived quietly until the morning of June 6, 1966, the day the Cultural Revolution came to Anhui University.
''We were sleeping and my wife nudged me,'' he said. 
''She said, 'Ningkun, you hear the shouting. 
They're shouting your name.'
So I began to hear closer and closer, 'Down with Wu Ningkun, down with ultrarightist Wu Ningkun, down with U.S. imperialist element Wu Ningkun.'
''
''They took me to one of these public places on campus,'' he said. 
''A student leader was making a long speech. 
He was haranguing against the crimes, sins and counterrevolutionary activities of all the teachers. 
And I was hit and kicked so hard, I was on my knees.''
The next year, Professor Wu was sent to a village to perform hard labor and, in the words of his tormentors, to be educated by the peasants. 
''We were shifted around, to different villages and criticized from village to village,'' he said. 
His wife and children were sent to another village in Anhui Province where they too were to be re-educated. 
After five years, they were reunited in his wife's village.
 
'I Had No Identity'
''I was nobody,'' Professor Wu said of arriving in his wife's village. 
''I had no identity. 
My children had changed their names. 
Wu Yiding became Li Nong, Li the Peasant, Wu Yimao became Li Zhong, Li the Faithful, that is faithful to Chairman Mao's thought. 
The name Wu was odious.''
He lived in this village in western Anhui Province until 1974, when he and his family were sent to the small town of Wuhu where he was to resume teaching. 
Again, in 1976, in the last gasps of the Cultural Revolution, Professor Wu was denounced. 
''People started shunning me again,'' he remembered. 
''I said oh-oh, here we go again.''
Finally in 1979, three years after the death of Mao and the arrest of his wife and her radical associates in the party leadership, Professor Wu was summoned back to Beijing to the Institute of International Relations to be politically ''rehabilitated.''
In the years that followed, he has been promoted to full professor, given a three-bedroom apartment and allowed to travel abroad. 
His children - once denounced as ''little ultra-rightists'' and ''little cow monsters'' - now live in the United States. 
But What of the Future?
For China's young writers and academics, it is the experiences of people like Professor Wu and the tens of thousands of others like him that may insure some greater measure of intellectual freedom. 
Indeed, a recent television series, ''River Elegy,'' issued the bluntest warning of this threat.
''Although 20th century Chinese intellectuals are now rid of the misfortune of being categorized as 'stinking ninth elements,' their social status has only been marginally raised,'' wrote the program's authors. 
''Economic and psychological pressures still affect them. 
There are constant reports of their early deaths.
''What is more horrifying is that a country where Confucius was most respected is now treating its teachers so badly. 
The old generation is dying and the younger generation is unwilling to follow in their footsteps. 
They are desperately in need of cleaner air and more freedom.''
