
ONCE UPON A TIME THE BRIT-ish, masters of half the world, built a modest palace for the Governor of their easternmost possession, Hong Kong, which they had acquired as booty of the Anglo-Chinese Opium War of 1839-42.
It was a pleasant, white building, classically pillared, and from its hillside slope it dominated the magnificent harbor that lay below, where the traffic of Empire came and went.
A century and more later, Government House still stands, but there have arisen stupendously around it, all but blocking that prospect of the harbor, the overwhelming skyscrapers of commerce and finance, glittering with the investments of a dozen nations and towering grossly over the Union Jack flying from the mansion's flagstaff.
For, yes, although 98 percent of its people are Chinese, Hong Kong, which lies 6,000 miles from London, is still a British Crown Colony, and a Governor still occupies the mansion - Sir David Wilson, who came to office earlier this year, the 27th in a line of succession that began in 1841. 
He lives in the unmistakable style of the late Pax Britannica, with its wry ambiance of slightly amused but dignified restraint. 
He assumes, when the occasion demands, all the old trappings of Empire, the plumed hat and the striped trousers, and he is attended, of course, by elegant aides and considerate Chinese servants. 
He is driven about in a Rolls-Royce Phantom, he sails across the harbor in a gloriously elderly yacht, and he performs, as British colonial governors always have, all manner of ceremonial functions, presiding over legislatures, receiving visiting swells, representing Her Majesty at celebrations of the Queen's Birthday.
But he is also the all-powerful chief administrator of Hong Kong, and just as the posture of his mansion has been transformed by the turns of history, so Sir David Wilson now plays a role that would have seemed inconceivable to most of his predecessors. 
His prime function is to supervise preparations for Hong Kong's departure, in 1997, from the British Empire - its return to the motherland, China, and the absorption of its colonial-style capitalism into the body of Chinese Communism.
It is possible that Wilson may be the last British Governor of Hong Kong; almost certainly he will be the last to exert any real power. 
After him all will be mere formality. 
Hong Kong is, in effect, the end of the British Empire, its population, at 5.6 million, being some 35 times greater than the population of all the other remaining overseas possessions put together.
Sir David is a courteous and intellectual Scot, a 52-year-old Sinologist who was once editor of the authoritative China Quarterly, a distinguished mountaineer who has climbed in the Chinese Karakoram and a diplomat with 30 years' experience of Asian affairs; just the person, one would think, for the job and for the moment.
Ten years before its return to China, Hong Kong is in a ferment of change. 
It is earnestly, anxiously, often angrily bracing itself for the denouement. 
Its colonial character is fading fast, and Wilson's successors are already jostling for position - not only the agents of the People's Republic of China, but ambitious Hong Kong citizens of many persuasions. 
New political movements are springing into existence, the territory buzzes with rumor and speculation, rascals and philanthropists alike are taking up advantageous positions. 
For it is generally believed that what happens now, while the British are still in control, will decree what happens in Hong Kong far into the 21st century.
THE WORLD AT LARGE thought the Hong Kong question settled in 1984, when the British Government agreed to return the colony to Chinese sovereignty in 1997, and the Chinese Government promised that for 50 years thereafter Hong Kong's ''capitalist system and life style shall remain unchanged.''
The colony would become a Special Administrative Region - S.A.R. for short - part of the People's Republic of China, but specifically excused for half a century from China's socialist ideology. 
As the Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping himself put it, two systems would coexist within one country.
The concord was generally hailed as an acceptable conclusion to Britain's imperial career upon the China coast, enabling it to maintain satisfactory economic relations with the People's Republic. 
Deng assured the people of Hong Kong that they need have no worries about their future.
But, from the start, they did. 
They put no dependence on Deng's assurances -and who honestly could, after China's volatile changes of style and temper during the last few decades?
And they suspected that Hong Kong, none of whose inhabitants had played any part in the treaty negotiations, was being regarded chiefly as a source of foreign currency and technology for China, a base for international financiers and conglomerates - not as the home of more than five million people, many refugees from Communist China and few possessing any nationality other than that of British colonial subject.
In Chinese semantics, an American Sinologist once observed to me, ''words are like rubber,'' and the terms of the 1984 agreement are certainly elastic. 
The Chinese, for example, undertook to draw up a constitution for the S.A.R., to be known as the Basic Law, which they are preparing in consultation with notables within Hong Kong. 
It is expected to be made public next year, but nobody knows whether it will really work as a constitution in the Western sense, guaranteeing the rights of the people, or a constitution in the Communist sense, entrenching the powers of the state. 
The 1984 agreement promises that the legislature of the S.A.R. will be chosen ''by election'' - but what that signifies, and whether it will be any more popularly elected than the People's Congress in Beijing, is anyone's guess.
And what do the Chinese mean when they promise the ''accountability'' of the executive to the legislature - an obligation to obey, or simply an undertaking to report?
What do they mean by ''capitalism,'' or for that matter ''socialism''?
What indeed do they mean by ''life style,'' which sounds more like an adman's concept than a diplomatic definition, and are they referring to Hong Kong's life style as it is now, or as it will be in 1997?
It is Sir David Wilson's job to make the most of this equivocal concord, which he helped to negotiate. 
I asked him recently what he saw as his chief historical obligation toward the colony. 
He said it was to insure that Hong Kong was handed over to China in good working condition, but I suspect he may have been deliberately ambiguous in his response. 
He is careful with his words.
Certainly there are many people in Hong Kong, Chinese and British, who believe that his duty is more profound. 
They think he owes it to the conscience of the British and their lost Empire to leave Hong Kong with a government of its own, composed of Hong Kong people, elected by Hong Kong citizens, a government strong and experienced enough to stand up to the Chinese Communists when they formally arrive with their party secretaries and their propagandists on July 1, 1997. 
''Fair play'' was the ideology of the British Empire at its best; the fount of its authority, after all, was the mother of parliaments at Westminster. 
And fair play seems to demand that the last of the imperialists should leave the people of Hong Kong as much in control of their own destinies as is politically possible.
READERS OF HONG KONG newspapers cannot fail to have noticed a recent change in the nomenclature of Sir Y. K. Pao, one of the colony's richest and most powerful citizens, who for years has been known to everyone as Sir Y. K. - a truly imperial colloquialism. 
Lately, he has been identified in the press as Sir Yue-Kong Pao, and one wonders how long it will be before he forgets his imperial honorific altogether and tactfully returns to his original persona - citizen Pao Yue-Kong, from the Chinese province of Zhejiang.
Several such colonial grandees have already made their peace with Communism, and the powerful international financial community seems at the moment similarly sanguine. 
At the level of high finance, the reunion of Hong Kong with China seems to be going well enough. 
It is true that there has been a steady exodus of middle-rank, middle-aged business people, and many more plan to leave before 1997, but at the top there is no sign of panic.
There is hardly a Hong Kong businessman - Chinese, Japanese, European, Australian or American -who would not prefer this marvelously profitable city to remain just as it is. 
But faced with the certainty of change, many of them appear to think that whatever happens after 1997, they can at least reinforce their fortunes in the meantime. 
For the most part, they have little to lose anyway. 
The conglomerates can easily switch their cash and their operations elsewhere; the Chinese tycoons are so rich that they can move where they like when they like, and, indeed, many of them have already acquired homes and thriving bank accounts in Canada, Australia or the United States.
So big business still flourishes in the doomed colony, and the place clicks, flashes, fizzes, blinks, roars, rumbles and pullulates as vigorously as ever. 
Property values are stunningly high, the stock market is bullish, new office blocks are going up everywhere. 
One international consortium is building a new tunnel under the harbor, and another is hoping to build a new airport and a new seaport on an artificial island.
Hong Kong is the second-largest container port in the world, and one of the world's half-dozen key financial centers. 
The city's gleaming new Exchange Square swarms with young brokers and bankers from all over the world. 
When I asked one American why he and his colleagues seldom left the office before 8 in the evening, his reply adequately expressed the flavor of this marketplace: ''Because we're aggressive young men trying to make as much money as possible in the shortest possible time.''
To some entrepreneurs, reunion with China itself promises a bonanza, and already Hong Kong money is hard at work searching for new profits within the People's Republic. 
Some 2,000 factories in nearby Guangdong province are owned, or partly owned, by Hong Kong concerns, and thousands more operate for Hong Kong industrialists under subcontracts. 
Countless Hong Kong concerns have offices or branches in Beijing. 
Conversely, within Hong Kong there are now hundreds of concerns owned wholly or partly by the agencies of Communist China, including banks, insurance companies, airlines, hotels and newspapers.
The truth is that now, as always, to the big moneymakers the existence of Hong Kong is no more than a convenience, and if reconciliation with Communist China offers the best hope of future profit, so be it. 
Sir Y. K., whose family came to the territory as refugees from Communism, is now almost as honored in Beijing as he is in Hong Kong, and he has handsomely subsidized a new university in his birthplace of Ningbo, where he is already referred to as Mr. Pao.
CONSIDER, HOW-ever, the group of young people on the upper deck of the ferry to Lantau Island. 
They are extremely lively, extremely neat, extremely polite, extremely engaging young people. 
Laughing a lot, with their bright blue rucksacks, their sneakers and their Walkman radios, they might easily be, were it not for the chirpy Cantonese of their conversation, students at one of the more genial and go-ahead universities of the West.
They are Sir David Wilson's particular wards and charges, an educated young bourgeoisie brought into being entirely by the presence of Britain in Hong Kong. 
There is nobody like them in China proper, and they are the colony's chief cause for pride. 
Admirably fit (Hong Kong has one of the highest life-expectancy rates in the world), highly numerate and literate, they seem as clever, as promising and as thoroughly normal a young society as you can find anywhere on earth.
I use the word ''normal'' advisedly, because this is the first ordinary generation Hong Kong has been able to foster. 
The territory was born and bred to abnormality. 
Peculiar in its origins, unique in its functions, until 20 or so years ago it was, above all, a city of refugees, intent as refugees must be on establishing themselves and accumulating enough cash to give their children security.
It was the pressure of these communal anxieties, plus, of course, the Chinese genius for commerce and finance, that gave rise to the old canard about the people of Hong Kong being interested exclusively in the making of money. 
This was certainly true, as it still is, of most of its expatriates, generally transients making a quick and easy buck before returning home to Europe, America, Australia or Japan. 
It is, however, no more true of the new educated middle-class young Chinese on that ferryboat than it is of young people anywhere else.
Their interests and emotions are the same as those of young Americans or Europeans. 
They are just as idealistic, no more, no less; just as concerned with a proper balance of life, between the necessary making of money and enjoyable ways of spending it. 
They were nearly all born into this temple of capitalism, with its seductions of wealth and financial power, but they are by no means all blinkered in materialism. 
Indeed, a British employer of my acquaintance tells me that his junior executives and secretaries sometimes seem to him almost alarmingly altruistic, so preoccupied are they with good causes and high intentions.
A decade from now the British Empire will be delivering this generation, by then in its 30's and early 40's, into the unpredictable hands of the People's Republic of China. 
Its members do not generally have the option, as do foreigners and the very rich, of going somewhere else. 
Nurtured as they were beneath the British flag to British citizenship of a kind, they, nevertheless, have no legal right to go to live in Britain. 
When 1997 comes, they will be utterly dependent upon the good faith and the political constancy of China - which has shown itself, during their lifetimes, almost preposterously inconstant.
The historical duty of the British, says the Governor, is to hand over Hong Kong in good working condition, but essential to that condition will be the support of this formidable new bourgeoisie. 
In such countries as South Korea, Singapore and even Taiwan, these are the very people who have lately forced their Governments into political concessions; and in the years before 1997 they might still plunge Hong Kong into confusion, sending stock prices and land values plunging, driving the foreign financiers out, thus killing the golden goose before the Chinese even get hold of the nest.
So in the first generation of their existence, they seem to me to hold the fortunes of Hong Kong in their hands. 
It is because the British are still there, because they have kept the colony in orderly equilibrium through many hazards, that Hong Kong remains a world financial center, and a vital instrument of China's own economic policies. 
What a prize the People's Republic will be acquiring, if Hong Kong is transferred in its present state of prosperous efficiency!
All depends, though, upon the young bourgeoisie. 
Keeping them content, encouraging their sense of responsibility, is a sine qua non of Hong Kong's continued success; and keeping them content must surely entail giving them a proper share in the running of their own territory.
THERE'S THE crunch. 
Politics!
As never before in its history, Hong Kong today is in political tumult. 
This is all the more startling because British Hong Kong has never been anything like a democracy. 
It has honorably fostered freedom of speech, thought and opportunity, but its Government has always been of the standard Crown Colony pattern, in which an all-but-omnipotent Governor, subject only to London, has been supported by an administration firmly under his thumb. 
The Executive Council, the policy-making body, is entirely officially nominated, and only a minority of the Legislative Council, Legco, is elected. 
Nobody on Legco is chosen by direct vote in a public ballot box, and its electorate is drawn from an infinitesimal part of the population - about 71,000 out of 5.6 million - who are members of various local councils and professional or trade organizations. 
The Governor personally presides over both councils.
The notion of adversarial politics, with all its concomitants of party dissent and economic fluctuation, has been anathema to the financiers of Hong Kong, and to many of its ordinary people. 
Until now the only organized political activists have been the Communists, and when in 1967, under the impulse of the Cultural Revolution, they came into the streets of Hong Kong with riots, bombs and Little Red Books, the populace at large was unfeignedly grateful to a colonial autocracy that brusquely put them down.
But there have always been voices to criticize the archaic order of Hong Kong. 
For years, visiting parliamentarians have expressed their dismay at the spectacle of this territory, so rich, so capable, so modern, yet so stuck in the political forms of fin de siecle. 
And they have been backed within Hong Kong by a persistent handful of Chinese and some progressive-minded expatriates.
So fierce had these criticisms become by 1984 that in order to get the Sino-British agreement accepted by the British Parliament, Margaret Thatcher's Government had to promise a measure of constitutional reform for Hong Kong. 
Almost simultaneously, the British announced their intention of making the colony's legislature more properly representative.
Since 1984, the voting franchise for Legco has, in fact, been somewhat widened, and the Government is committed to a further review next year. 
Three years have passed, three years out of 13, and Hong Kong is now in a dangerous frenzy of debate about the reforms that haven't yet happened. 
Scores of political organizations, mistily identified by names like the Group of 71 or Meeting Point, are now posturing and arguing, petitioning and protesting. 
Everyone talks of it, everyone writes about it, everyone has a view, whether it be that of the fiery liberal lawyer Martin Lee (''The Government cannot stifle the wave of public opinion without facing the consequences'') or that of the former Chief Secretary, Sir David Akers-Jones (''What we must do is adjust gradually and maintain the balance between the various parts of the system'').
Some want immediate universal franchise and direct elections, on the ground that a community that has reached a certain level of maturity has the right to run its own affairs. 
Some demand exactly the opposite -the firm maintenance of the status quo, on the ground that tampering with it can lead only to trouble. 
Don't risk upsetting Beijing, says one school of thought; make sure, says another, that the people of Hong Kong have some genuine political experience before they are handed over to the Communists.
On the whole, I suspect that big business, whether Chinese or foreign, would prefer as little change as possible. 
Anyway, what's the use of introducing democracy now, runs a favorite Exchange Square argument, when the Chinese are sure to abolish it in 1997?
Pollsters, however, report that the majority of the population at large now wants representative government, and that probably includes most of those young, educated people who are likely to provide Hong Kong's civic leadership by 1997.
Views are, however, by no means stereotyped. 
Some conservatives believe repressing political instincts is likely to be more dangerous to stabilityI than satisfying them. 
Some liberals believe party politics would soon be subverted and manipulated by the Chinese Communists. 
Already, one hears horror stories about Beijing's interfering with the political processes - ''Do we gather you support the idea of political reform?
Oh?
Well, about that contract now. 
. . .''
As for the Government, it keeps its own counsel; although generally benevolent, it has always been a reticent regime. 
Last May, it published a Green Paper outlining possible alternative constitutional developments for 1988. 
Skeptics maintain that this is merely camouflage, and that under Chinese pressure the British are really reneging on assurances of reform, or at least tempering them to suit the forthcoming Basic Law. 
Who knows?
When I asked the Governor for his personal view about what should be done, he replied, with a gentle Foreign Office sort of smile, that this was the only question to which he was not prepared to give a direct reply.
IRONY HAS BEEN A pervasive characteristic of the British Empire in its last years, its silver years, during which it has watched its own dispersal with a blend of regret, relief, pride, cynicism and self-amusement. 
It is an attractive quality in many ways, puncturing pomposity and bitterness, and clothing one of history's truly grand processes - the dissolution of the greatest of all Empires - in a dressing of humor.
But time is running short for irony. 
Already one senses the shift of power in Hong Kong as the British prepare to go, the Chinese to take over. 
An ever-decreasing cadre of Britons is all that is left of the old imperial administration, and an American now heads Jardine Matheson, the most famous of Hong Kong's old British concerns. 
If you enjoy watching history speeding up, like a movie running too fast, Hong Kong is the place to be.
Everything the British do now is in reflex to the attitudes of China across the border, and in anticipation of 1997. 
Yet even now, they alone can decree what ideological legacy they will bequeath to the Special Administrative Region of Xianggang. 
They can play it safe, so as not to upset the money market or exacerbate Chinese suspicions. 
Or they can be bold, and make of Hong Kong, just in time, a democracy in their own image.
Whichever course the British take as they calculate the risks and assess the advantages, they have one gigantic imponderable to face: they do not really know what they are preparing for. 
Neither Sir David Wilson, nor Sir Y. K. Pao, nor the chairman of the Hongkong Bank, nor the shrewdest of American company lawyers, nor the most cunning of Australian property millionaires, can possibly know what China itself will be like in the year 1997, when Deng Xiaoping is gone and a new generation dominates party thinking in Beijing. 
It may well honor its commitments, or it may scrap them. 
It may be freer than it is now, or more despotic, more open to the West or more closed, loyal to the memory of the pragmatic Deng or pursuing once again the philosophies of the dogmatic Mao Zedong. 
Perhaps it will respect the status of democratically elected politicians in Hong Kong, or perhaps it will parade them in dunce hats outside Government House.
It is impossible for the 27th Governor to know, and when I asked one of the best-informed of all Western Sinologists how he thought the present Chinese leaders really saw the future of Hong Kong, he said they didn't know either. 
Nobody knows - an ironic text, with a vengeance, for the British Empire's epilogue.
