
Put simply, the city was broke.
Year after year for decades, the bulk of Fuxin's 1,300 businesses and factories, all ponderously run by the city government, lost money, lots of money. 
Food was short in the winter. 
The water works managed to pump water only three hours a day.
Like the rest of China, the city just shuffled along, subsidizing and absorbing losses and tolerating inconveniences in the spirit of socialism. 
Wang Yachen has changed all that. 
''Like a seriously sick patient, Fuxin is at a critical state,'' Mr. Wang told the official New China News Agency shortly after becoming the city's mayor last year. 
''If we don't perform major surgery, it will never recover.''
Mr. Wang's brand of surgery amounted to putting the city on the auction block - leasing out virtually every grocery store, department store, movie house and factory in town in what is still a radical step in this country where government is only reluctantly extracting itself from control of economic life.
 
City of 700,000
Like much of China's northeast, especially here where the vast plains that stretch into Mongolia begin, life is hard and the people are poor. 
Single-story dun-colored houses, their barreled roofs rolling through the city like furrows in a newly plowed field, crowd together as if afraid of getting lost in the wilds beyond.
At the heart of this city of 700,000, a soaring stone statue of Mao, an increasingly rare sight in this country, points his hand down the nearly deserted main shopping street. 
The broad boulevards that dissect Fuxin, unlike the gridlocked streets of southern cities, are often deserted even in midday, emptying into dirt roads that wind off into the suburbs where coal miners labor in the huge mines that circle the city.
''Compared with other cities in this province, people's income is among the lowest,'' said Dai Mingxun, the Deputy Mayor of Fuxin. 
''We have even a wider income gap with the cities in southern parts of China and in coastal areas.''
''Many, many enterprises were losing money,'' Mr. Dai said.
Typical was the state of Fuxin's No. 2 Knitting Factory. 
Perenially in debt since it was founded in 1966, the factory, which primarily makes nylon socks, lost $118,000 in the two years before Chen Zhiqin, a factory employee, decided she could make money if she could run it. 
The city agreed to lease the plant to her for a deposit of $3,000, which she paid from savings.
 
Reward Hard Workers
''Before I leased this factory,'' the 43-year-old Mrs. Chen said, ''it was on the verge of bankruptcy.''
But Mrs. Chen turned the place upside down. 
''I gave 2,000 pairs of socks to each worker to sell,'' she said. 
''If they sold them they got paid. 
If they didn't, then they got nothing. 
We began to reward those who worked hard and punished those who were lazy.''
''Last year,'' she said, flashing a grin of success, ''we turned those losses into profits.''
There is no rent as such to be paid beyond the deposit, but she is responsible for paying taxes on the profits. 
Last year the taxes came to about $28,000.
While in much of China things tend to happen at molasses speed, here Mayor Wang, whose previous management experience consisted only in running a machine-tools factory, bulldozed his way through the sclerotic city administrative apparatus.
''I am for the saying 'a new broom sweeps clean,' '' the Mayor said. 
''The citizens will judge whether you are an effective and competent broom by how you sweep.''
In little more than nine months, Mayor Wang had nearly everything auctioned off.
 
City Agencies Not Immune
Even city agencies were not immune. 
Mayor Wang stormed into the city water department shortly after taking office and announced that if water was not running 24 hours a day they would all be out on the streets looking for work. 
Twenty days later the water was flowing.
City officials admit that opposition to the Mayor was substantial.
''Some cadres,'' said the Deputy Mayor, using the Chinese lexicon for a government functionary, ''doubted whether leasing out factories was socialist or not. 
Some of the workers and staff felt that leasing would give directors much higher wages. 
And many department heads felt that leasing would mean that they would lose control of enterprises.''
''Well, the fact is that it is all right for directors to have higher wages,'' Mr. Dai said. 
''The directors have to work harder and have greater responsibilities. 
They're the ones running the risks.''
 
Halved Administrative Staff
At the sock factory Mrs. Chen is acutely aware of the risks. 
''The city has set a profit quota for me of 100,000 yuan,'' or $27,000, she said. 
''Even if I make that, I still get nothing. 
Only over that figure do I begin to make money. 
And if I don't make it, I lose my leasing deposit.''
Where once a city agency had approved every minuscule decision about how the factory was run, Mrs. Chen became solely responsible for management. 
By halving the size of the company's administrative staff, reorganizing the shop floor and paying attention to her market, Mrs. Chen turned a profit of about $220,000 last year, eight times what she was required to make.
''We've been successful so far,'' said Li Jiaoyi, the head of the city's economic restructuring agency. 
''Production and profits are up. 
The city is booming.''
Last year, because of the leasing alone, profits jumped 50 percent for the town's enterprises, making Fuxin the most rapidly developing urban economy in the country.
