
In dark hotel bars along China's coast, young women in tight dresses and carefully coiffed hair wiggle their ankles as they linger for hours over a single Coke. 
Nearby, young men in ostentatious jewelry look for clients to whom they can offer the women's services.
Prostitution in China is back and flourishing.
Here in Fuzhou, a coastal city beginning to feel the breeze of economic growth and the onslaught of social change, that profession once obliterated by the Communists in China has reappeared and is now an entrenched facet of urban life.
A young man in his 20's strolled into the bar fingering a gold watch on his left wrist, his eyes massaging the room the way a furrier fingers a pelt. 
He pivoted slightly on his stacked heels, cruised to a table and slithered into a lounge chair.
''Girls?'' he whispered as he stared intently away from the subjects of his inquiry. 
''Do you want girls?''
''How much?'' came the reply. 
Slowly and nonchalantly he lifted two fingers from the table, a tapered two-inch-long thumbnail tapping the glass surface twice. 
''Two hundred.''
''You can take the girls to your room now,'' he said, his voice low. 
''If they check, just swear at them and don't open your door under any circumstances. 
But I think they won't check.''
 
Away With Social Decadence
Before 1949, before socialist morality became creed, prostitutes engulfed port cities from Tianjin to Canton, working the bars, hotels and bordellos. 
After Communist armies marched through town and the People's Republic was declared, one of the first targets of local governments was the eradication of social decadence, which included everything from prostitution to opium smoking to gambling over mah-jongg.
Tens of thousands of prostitutes were sent to re-education centers and dozens of personal accounts of rehabilitation were published as instructive examples of the benefits of the new order. 
For decades afterward, Chinese officials boasted that prostitution, which is described in Chinese texts dating to the sixth century B.C., had disappeared from the mainland.
But since 1980 China has shifted its economic orientation and political horizons, and foreigners have flooded the country's tourist sites. 
Business people now scour the country selling everything from nuclear reactors to Coca-Cola, and the behavior of the decadent outside world is chronicled in pulp magazines. 
Prostitutes began reappearing in tiny numbers five years ago, in throngs today.
The bar of the Hot Springs Hotel in Fuzhou, 380 miles southwest of Shanghai, is a seedy, smoke-filled corner of the main floor. 
Hong Kong travelers alight on bar stools for welcome drinks, German salesmen hunch over San Miguel beers and young women sway uncertainly on needle-thin heels, their hands on cocked hips.
Two women, both barely in their 20's, were squired by the man with the long thumbnail to a table. 
''I'll come back and get them later,'' the man said. 
The women sat down, each ordered an orange juice, and they talked about their work.
''I was born and raised here in Fuzhou,'' said the taller of the two. 
''There are 10 people in my family. 
My parents are retired now. 
My father was an elementary school teacher. 
My mother still works in a hospital.''
She shifted in her seat and flicked an imaginary piece of lint from her embroidered pink blouse. 
Her shoulder-length hair was frizzed and her lips were glossed with rose lipstick.
''I work in a bus station selling tickets,'' she continued. 
''It's hard work and I only make about 100 yuan a month,'' a sum equivalent to about $27. 
''This is too little. 
I was assigned to this job after I graduated from middle school. 
Now I live at home with my parents.''
 
'I Need Money'
''I need money, so I go out with people,'' she said. 
''I only go out two or three times a week because my mother is very concerned about my whereabouts. 
I spend most of my money on clothes. 
Clothes are so expensive now.''
Then, with the practice of a pawnshop owner, she touched her gold earrings (''300''), her blouse (''200''), her pink plastic shoes, (''9 yuan, a real bargain''). 
''I'd never wear leather shoes because they don't last,'' she said.
Her campanion, a head shorter, laughed and wiggled her chubby legs forward, her feet sporting pink leather shoes. 
She wore a black nylon jump suit and carried a doughnut-sized purse on a gold link chain.
She seemed more comfortable, more traveled in her work. 
''I'm originally from Xian,'' she said. 
''Now I work in a hotel in town. 
I started out working in a restaurant and cafe, but the work was too hard. 
Now I'm a receptionist at a guest house.''
Xian is about 600 miles southwest of Beijing.
''We don't do this all the time, not like those made-up girls at the bar,'' she said, her eyebrows rolled in exaggerated scorn. 
''It's a hobby for us. 
We do it for the money.''
''If my parents were short of money, I would help them out,'' she said. 
''But they earn a good pension. 
My father was an army man. 
He gets 200 yuan a month and my mother gets about 100. 
If my mother knew what I was doing she would kill me.''
The taller woman chimed in, ''So would mine.''
Both women said they were not concerned about the police. 
''If they scold anybody, they'll scold us,'' said the shorter woman. 
''They can fine us or pick us up. 
But it's never happened. 
Even if they do get you, the police are like everyone else. 
They like girls.''
While prostitutes do work the hotels of Beijing, the climate of political rectitude and tighter security in the capital goes a great distance toward limiting their numbers. 
But in Shanghai, and in coastal cities south to Canton, prostitution is thriving.
China's authorities have not ignored the resurgence of prostitution, although the looser attitudes in the country's south have hampered police efforts to stamp out the practice. 
At the same time, health authorities are for the first time sounding alarms over the spread of venereal diseases, which were once thought to have been eliminated from the country.
In the Shenzhen Economic Zone, which abuts Hong Kong, the police rounded up 122 prostitutes and 100 customers, including Shenzhen policemen, Communist Party officials and Hong Kong truckers, in raids on 10 hotels in June.
Ye Ganyun, chairman of the National Consulting Committee for Preventing and Curing Venereal Diseases, told the China News Service that venereal disease was spreading rapidly in southern China.
There is little information available about the sexual spread of acquired immune deficiency syndrome. 
The Chinese authorities maintain that the handful of AIDS cases reported in the country so far have been caused by contaminated blood supplies.
When the two women in Fuzhou were asked if they were worried about AIDS, they showed little concern.
''You're the foreigner,'' the taller woman said. 
''The foreigners get AIDS. 
You should know.''
In Canton, the police arrested more than 7,000 prostitutes last year. 
But it is widely believed that most are back at work after paying small fines or submitting to brief periods of ''re-education.''
In the small town of Deqing, about 100 miles west of Canton, a man accused of being a pimp was executed.
But despite these highly publicized cases, the two women in Fuzhou were unfazed. 
''We're not afraid,'' the shorter woman said. 
''My only worry is whether I'm getting too fat.''
