
L. R. SHANNON is an editor on the staff of the Travel Section.
 
BY L.R.SHANNON
Many American travelers to foreign countries optimistically arm themselves with English-to-Ruritarian phrase books to help them navigate through menus and ruins, to restrooms and post offices. 
Generally, such language guides are divided into categories - dining, drinking, touring, and so on - with what are considered useful words and phrases for each.
At first blush, these books seem a good idea, although only someone already fairly skilled in the language in question might be able to tell from reading one whether ''zhay fam'' is likely to indicate you are hungry or henpecked, or ''ic MOC-tuh I-nuh pen-SYOHN'' get you a German boardinghouse or retirement pay. 
And they all leave you in the quandary of wondering what to do if you rattle off ''How much time have you spent doing manual labor in the countryside?'' in perfect Mandarin and the rehabilitated revisionist actually answers.
Discussion of language guide books for travel in China
As travel to China has increased in recent years, the number of guidebooks and phrase books for visitors to that country has increased at a rate that would warm the hearts of a publishers' production brigade. 
The idea is that you find what you want to say in the English translations and then point to the adjoining Chinese characters. 
(Given the recent abominable record of most publishers' proofreading of English, one does wonder how trustworthy the Chinese is.) Some of the books also offer English phonetic renderings of the Chinese.
A trial of the phonetic version of ''I am happy to be visiting your commune'' on a Chinese-speaking friend produced the testy reply that it was rather late in the day to bring up Quemoy and Matsu and threaten to unleash Sen. William F. Knowland.
A recent day spent armchair-traveling in China in the company of three guidebooks, each containing a supplementary language section, plus a pocket Chinese phrase book, underlined some of the potential pitfalls. 
(Actually, I did it on a sofa, but when you travel in imagination you have to say you did it in an armchair. 
Sofatraveling is very cumbersome.) Most of the sentences are basic and undoubtedly apt, but among them are several questions one doubts ever got asked and propositions one doubts ever got proposed.
Following is a lightning imaginary trip to China, as illustrated by useful sentences and helpful hints drawn from ''The Morrow Travel Guide to the People's Republic of China,'' by Ruth Lor Malloy (Quill); ''The American's Tourist Manual for the People's Republic of China,'' compiled by John E. Felber (International Intertrade Index); ''China Companion,'' by Evelyne Garside (Farrar Straus Giroux), and ''China Traveler's Phrase Book,'' by Bennett Lee and Geremie Barme (Eurasia Press). 
They are all available in paperback.
At the Hotel
''Your room boy or girl will probably walk into your room unannounced but be nowhere to be found when you want something.''
(Garside)
''Where do I register?''
''What is my room number?''
''When will it be ready?''
''The hot water is cold.''
''Do you have a megaphone?''
On Tour
''A combination public address and radio speaker bring forth marches, classics and setting up exercises in the morning. 
One will find the Chinese trains in immaculate condition and quite modern.''
(Felber)
''Trains are fairly comfortable, although heating and ventilation are dispensed sparingly and radio broadcasts over-generously ...you may discover that the standard of cleanliness and service varies.''
(Garside)
''Usually no air-conditioning. 
Very hot in summer. 
The toilets are filthy.''
(Malloy) ''How much money do you make a month?''
''If she is nursing her baby, how many hours with pay does she get a day to feed it?''
''Please forgive me if I am asking too personal questions.''
''May I see your composting techniques?''
''Is there a barefoot doctor in this production brigade?''
''What a bore!''
Dining
''Many say (the food) is the finest in the world.''
(Felber) ''It is only in the large and relatively modern cities ...that you can hope to find a good restaurant.''
(Garside) ''To best enjoy a meal, never ask what a particular morsel is.''
(Malloy) ''Where is the dining room?''
''We would like four dishes and a soup.''
''What was the name of that dish?''
''My stomach is upset.''
''How long bed rest?''
Drinking
''One of the stronger wines is Mou T'ai Chiew or better known in its short form, 'mou t'ai' (chiew) meaning wine in Chinese. 
It has a very high proof, some say stronger than vodka. 
It is served in tiny shot glasses and it's not uncommon for ten or more to be served or at least offered at special occasions.''(Felber)
''Where is the bar?''
''But you have been so kind and I feel I will be indebted to you for the rest of my life.''
''How many work points would you make per day if you spent the day weeding?''
''Bottoms up.''
Most language guides suggest that you master a handful of sentences (however many sentences make up a handful) of wide utility - of the ''hello,'' ''pardon me,'' ''where is the bathroom?'' sort. 
Western travelers to China, in this writer's opinion, should thoroughly learn to say ''wo bu xihuan chi gourou'' and use it frequently, even compulsively, whenever in the slightest doubt.
How much trouble can you get in by constantly repeating that you do not like to eat dog meat?
