SPEAKING VOLUMES
Bookshops in New York tend to grow in clusters, the remnants of the old Fourth Avenue secondhand center still in the neighborhood of 12th Street and the larger general-trade emporiums on Fifth Avenue in the upper 40's and 50's. 
One of the most exotic bookstore regions anywhere is on lower Fifth Avenue, between 18th and 21st Streets, where four stores each carries large stocks for completely different clienteles.
The Soviet Union has a literary corner in the Four Continent Book Corporation at 149 Fifth, at 21st Street (533-0250). 
This large store stocks Soviet letters, Russian grammars, periodicals and other publications from nonpolitical to most political. 
The bulk of these are in Russian, with one larger section in Ukrainian and smaller sections in such other tongues as Armenian and Yiddish, which is placed on a hard-to-get-at bottom shelf but has perhaps a few dozen titles. 
Open 9:30 A.M. to 5:30 P.M. Mondays through Saturday.
Going Out Guide highlights upcoming cultural and entertainment events
At No. 125, north of 19th Street, is China Books and Periodicals (677-2650), less imposing quarters than those filled by books from the Soviet store a block north. 
The books are mostly in English, although one wall is devoted to works in Chinese. 
The publications here also deal with third-world politics as well as with grammars for learning Chinese and nonpartisan guides for visitors to China. 
Open 10 A.M. to 6 P.M., Mondays through Saturdays.
There is a distinctly continental change by the time one reaches the attractive and vast French and Spanish Book Corporation, 115 Fifth, just north of 18th Street (673-7400). 
One section is for French books of all sorts, another for Spanish, while a third is a marvelous repository of dictionaries for all languages, including the most obscure. 
As visitors enter, they can get into training for the stock here by choosing from the language-learning books clustered in a small enclave. 
Open from 9 to 6 Mondays through Fridays, from 10 to 6 Saturdays.
The doyen of bookish lower Fifth Avenue is Barnes & Noble, 105 Fifth, at 18th Street. 
The language in this large store of texttooks and instructional material is mostly academic, although general and avid browsers can pleasantly exhaust themselves in the equally large annex across Fifth Avenue, which is filled with paperbacks, publishers' overstocks and other books, ad infinitum. 
Open Mondays through Fridays, 9:45 to 6:45; Saturdays from 9:45 to 6, Sundays, 11 to 6.
ART
They take cultural matters seriously at District 1199, which has a gallery in the union headquarters, 310 West 43d Street (947-1944), in which exhibitions are regularly on display as part of the organization's ''Bread and Roses'' program of art, theater, dance and other forms of artistic expression offered to members and others.
The current show, ''Latino New York,'' the first exhibition of Latin-American artists by a union, displays the work of five painters born in this country or in Puerto Rico, but all working in New York.
They manifest a variety of approaches to a variety of subjects, from whimsy to social message by way of Exit Art to collages. 
The artists are Papo Colo, Marina Gutierrez, Vilma Maldonado Reyes, Lee Quinones and Juan Sanchez, all young people whose minds follow new and independent paths.
Open, free, Mondays through Fridays from 10 A.M. to 8 P.M. through March 4.
WRITING
Four talented writers will be discussing how they make the change from the teamwork of working on films to the lonely discipline of novel writing in a program at 8 P.M. sponsored by the American PEN Center (255-1977) at the American Place Theater, 111 West 46th Street.
''Double Identities - a Screenwriters Roundtable'' will involve Steve Tesich (''Division Street,'' ''Breaking Away''), John Sayles (''Union Dues,'' ''Return of the Secaucus Seven''), Judith Rascoe (''Yours and Mine: A Novella and Short Stories,'' ''Road Movie'') and John Guare (''House of Blue Leaves,'' ''Atlantic City''). 
They will speak with Nora Sayre, film critic and writer.
Admission: $8, first come, first served, doors open at 7:30. 
After the talk, a reception.
