
Senator Barry Goldwater said today that the United States had offered Peking a new assurance to settle the dispute over arms sales to Taiwan. 
Under the plan, Taiwan in the future would not receive any more or better arms, of any type, than it gets now.
The Senator, a Republican from Arizona, disclosed the American offer in a telephone interview. 
The Senate Foreign Relations Committee held a closed hearing on the issue on Tuesday.
WASHINGTON, July 28 - Senator Barry Goldwater said today that the United States had offered Peking a new assurance to settle the dispute over arms sales to Taiwan.
Administration officials refused to comment on the details but said there had been no final answer yet from the Chinese Communist Government in Peking in the exchanges with Washington on the issue.
President Reagan, at his news conference tonight, balanced an assertion that the United States wanted ''to continue developing a relationship'' with China with a more forcefully expressed commitment ''not to abandon our longtime friends and allies on Taiwan.''
In declaring that he was ''going to carry out the terms of the Taiwan Relations Act,'' which calls on the United States to meet ''the defense needs'' of the Chinese Nationalists in Taiwan, the President gave the clearest public indication so far that he intended to proceed with earlier decisions to authorize co-production of F-5E jet fighters in Taiwan.
With the current negotiations with Peking evidently in mind, he gave the added assurance to Taiwan and to pro-Taiwan conservatives in Congress that ''we have no secret agreements of any other kind or anything that should cause the Government or the people of Taiwan to have any concern about'' his living up to the Taiwan Relations Act.
''It is a moral obligation that we will keep,'' the President said. 
John H. Holdridge, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, who briefed the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on Tuesday on American exchanges with Peking, re-
