
Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. arrived here today for three days of talks with the Chinese leaders. 
He intends to stress to the Chinese that there is ''a strategic imperative'' for the United States and China to establish closer political, security and economic ties because of a growing Soviet military threat to both nations,
Reporters traveling with the Secretary of State were told that as part of the Administration's decision to enhance relations with China, President Reagan would meet privately in Mexico in October with Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang when they attend a North-South summit meeting of industrialized and developing countries.
 
A Chance 'to Clear the Air'
That meeting, in turn, could serve as a prelude to a Chinese-American summit be announced during Mr. Haig's visit.
Mr. Haig is carrying a message from Mr. Reagan to Chinese leaders, but American officials have refused to discuss details.
Secretary of State Alexander Haig arrives in China; intends to stress mutual goal of resisting Soviet threat
In February, it will have been 10 years since President Nixon's historic journey to Peking, and many of the Americans in Mr. Haig's delegation, including himself, were deeply involved in those first years of official contact.
Mr. Haig clearly sees the China trip as the most important mission so far of his five months in office. 
He said Friday that he wanted ''to clear the air'' with the Chinese on Reagan Administration policies.
 
Crucial Party Meeting Planned
Mr. Haig's aides say a review of relations is crucial because the Chinese leadership is still undergoing stresses and differences on many issues, including relations with Washington. 
During the past few days, China has said that the development of strategic relations between Washington and Peking could not progress if the United States continued selling arms to Taiwan. 
(Page 17.)
The Peking leadership is expected to discuss its problems in a Communist Party meeting that may take place just after Mr. Haig leaves Peking Wednesday. 
During that meeting, Hu Yaobang, a protege of Deng Xiaoping, the paramount leader, is expected to replace Hua Guofeng, the party chairman selected by Mao before his death.
Mr. Haig is scheduled to meet with Mr. Deng, Prime Minister Zhao, Foreign Minister Huang Hua, Defense Minister Geng Biao and Deputy Prime Minister Bo Yibo, who is in charge of economic planning. 
There is no plan for him to meet with Mr. Hu.
Reporters were told that the need for strategic collaboration with China had grown since the early 1970's because of increased Soviet military ''expansionism'' in Asia and the rest of the world. 
They were told that the Soviet Union, in addition to using the former American base at Cam Ranh Bay, Vietnam, for ships and planes, had built an elaborate intelligence- gathering station there that is second in size only to a Soviet station in Cuba.
 
Unofficial Ties With Taiwan
In briefings in Washington and Hong Kong, reporters were told that Mr. Haig intended to make these points in his talks:
- The Administration will manage relations with Taiwan strictly in an unofficial way so as to avoid jeopardizing the normalization agreement with Peking in which the United States severed formal ties with Taiwan. 
In pre-election statements, Mr. Reagan angered China by talking often of establishing a more ''official'' relationship with Taiwan, but this is not now the Administration's intention.
- On the question of arms sales to Taiwan, the Administration will continue to supply ''defensive'' equipment at the rate of about $700 to $800 million a year, but there is no urgency about providing advanced aircraft sought by Taiwan. 
Peking has strongly objected to the possible deal.
- The United States shares China's concern about Vietnamese and Soviet ''expansionism'' in Southeast Asia and is interested in coordinating policies with China and the non-Communist countries of the region on ways of restraining the Vietnamese and Russians.
- To improve China's ability to withstand external pressure, the United States will sell it so-called ''dual purpose'' technology, meaning it will be permitted to buy equipment with possible military uses, such as some computers, certain types of radar and transport planes. 
This follows up proposals advanced by the Carter Administration.
- The United States wants to have a thorough exchange with China on security questions and to learn whether it actually wants to buy military hardware, as distinct from technology to produce the hardware itself.
 
No Talks on Specific Arms Deals
Mr. Haig plans to hold a discussion on ''the broad framework'' of possible sales, reporters were told yesterday, but is not ready to talk about specific items. 
From all indications, Mr. Haig would like to be able to provide the Chinese with such ''defensive'' equipment as antitank weapons if they ask, but his aides said such a move awaited further discussions with the Chinese and policy decisions in Washington.
Mr. Haig intends to brief Peking officials on the Reagan Administration's strategic outlook. 
A similar review was given by Zbigniew Brzezinski, President Carter's national security adviser, when he visited Peking in May 1978.
The purpose of the briefings, to be conducted by Mr. Haig and Richard R. Burt, the Director of Politico-Military Affairs at the State Department, is to show the Chinese the common ground between the two Governments and to demonstrate that the Reagan Administration believes it is taking a more active confrontational approach toward the Russians than its predecessor.
The trip, reporters were told, ''is a manifestation of President Reagan's own appreciation of the importance of our relationship with the People's Republic of China, a friendly, nonaligned country with which strategic relations are a strategic imperative.''
 
Interests Are Said to Converge
Reporters were told that the relationship was being based on several principles, including ''convergence of strategic views between the People's Republic of China and ourselves, common concerns about Soviet expansionism and the activities of Soviet proxies globally and in the region, common concerns about stabilityI and progress in the Asian Pacific region itself, and finally, the historic friendship of the American and Chinese people.''
The reference to China as a ''nonaligned country'' stems from the Administration's desire to persuade Congress and the American public that, despite Peking's continuing description of itself as a
