
Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. has said that ''extremely sensitive discussions'' are under way with Peking over the Taiwan issue and that he is ''not in a position to predict the outcome.''
American officials previously said that talks were going on over the United
 
Excerpts from interview, page 12.
 
States' decision to continue arms sales to Ta iwan, something Peking regards as infringing on its sovereignty. 
But Mr. Haig's remarks, in an interview in his office Friday, seemed to indicate concern for future relations not voiced previously.
''It would be counterproductive to go into details, because things are at a delicate stage, but speaking candidly, some diffi cult issuesare involved, '' he said. 
''We are making a major effort to bridge these differe nces. 
I will be just as frank when I tell you I am not in a position to predict the outcome.''
Secretary of State Alexander Haig says "extremely sensitive" discussions on Taiwan are underway with ChinaPeking Arms Sales Shelved
He also said plans to discuss the sale of American arms to Peking had been shelved and were ''hostage'' to resolution of the Taiwan talks.
Asked whether the problem seemed serious, Mr. Haig nodded affirmatively and said, ''It has been serious.''
Mr. Haig is scheduled to leave on Sunday for Madrid, where he will represent the United States at a meeting of the conference on East-West security and cooperation in Europe.
At the conference, he and other Western foreign ministers intend to accuse Poland and the Soviet Union of violating the human rights provisions of the Helsinki Final Act by imposing the military crackdown in Poland.
 
Reagan Threatened Further Steps
President Reagan has said that if there was no improvement in the situation, he might take further steps against Poland and the Soviet Union beyond the economic and political curbs announced earlier.
But in recent weeks, American farmers have expressed opposition to any curbs on the sale of agricultural products. 
They have been supported in their campaign by the Secretary of Agriculture, John R. Block.
Mr. Haig, when asked about further economic sanctions, refused to rule anything out, but he hinted that he personally opposed an embargo on grain sales because the Soviet Union would be able to buy enough elsewhere.
''I think the basic question in the area of economic sanctions has always got to be: Will it be effective?'' he said. 
''Nothing could be more foolhardy than to unilaterally punish all or segments of American industry or agriculture with meaningless sanctions.''
The main question, he said, is whether such actions would be ''meaningful, lacking coordinated and comparable measures by other grain-producing nations.''
''The answer to that is unfortunately rather clear; that is, it would be circumvented,'' Mr. Haig said. 
On another contentious issue - the Administration decision to pay domestic banks $71.3 million that Poland had not repaid on schedule rather than announce that Poland had defaulted - Mr. Haig affirmed his support for the move, despite criticism of it by Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger.
Mr. Weinberger is reported to feel that he was not adequately consulted. 
He has also made the point that the decision was an interim move and would be reviewed again when other debts come due. 
Mr. Haig concurred on that point.
Mr. Haig said that it was an Administration-wide decision and that the Defense Department agreed with it.
 
Cash Problem for Soviet Seen
''The basic issue is, do you relieve the Poles and the Soviet Union from the obligation of meeting their international obligations or do you continue to press for the repayments, given the growing cash dilemma in the Soviet Union,'' he said.
He said he did not want to become involved in a dispute whether Pentagon officials had known about the decision, but he acknowledged that it would be reviewed again.
''I don't mean to suggest by that that there is any inclination to depart at this time from a decision that was made, because we feel unanimously that it was the right decision,'' he said.
Mr. Haig's attention was called to a number of articles in the press suggesting that, as a result of the decision to move William P. Clark from the post of Deputy Secretary of State to that of national security adviser to the President, Mr. Haig would find himself increasingly isolated. 
The articles suggested that Mr. Clark, an old friend of President Reagan, would have increasing influence and would advocate positions different from those held by Mr. Haig.
 
Haig Avows Close Ties to Clark
When asked about such reports, Mr. Haig laughed and said, ''It is inconceivable that I will be isolated.''
''I may have some surprises in store, but I sense precisely the opposite there,'' he said. 
''I have been very , very close to Bill Clark, and I remain very close to him. 
We are in constant contact allday long.''
He said it was ''very normal and natural'' for an Administration at the end of its first year to make changes in the way it handled foreign policy management and ''we are not finished yet.''
 
The China q uestion has been one of the most difficult ones for the Reagan Admini stration and Mr. Haig made no effort to disguise it. 
Mr. Reagan, as a candidate for the Presidency, had made a number ofstatements ad vocating closer ties with Taiwan. 
This provoked expressions o f concern from Peking even before Mr. Reagan took office.
The Communists in Peking contend that the United States, in recognizing them as the Government of China in 1979 and in ending official ties with the Nationalists on Taiwan, had given up the right to sell arms to Taiwan.
 
No Loud Protest by Peking
The Carter Administration, however, promised to maintain Taiwan's ability to defend itself, and the Taiwan Relations Act passed by Congress in 1979 also stated that the United States would ''make available to Taiwan such defense articles and defense services in such quantities as may be necessary to enable Taiwan to maintain a sufficient self-defense capability.''
Peking did not publicly protest very strongly about the Taiwan Relations Act at the time and, in fact, was rather quiet about continued American arms sales to Taiwan during the last two years of the Carter Administration.
Mr. Haig, who was in China last June, said the Administration valued its relations with China and was ''determined to do all we can'' to advance them.
''It goes without saying that since the beginning of this Administration, we have also had to face continuing disagreement with Peking over our arms sales to Taiwan,'' he said.
For most of the year there was debate over whether Taiwan would receive an advanced fighter. 
The decision announced last month was that Taiwan would not get a new fighter, but would be permitted to continue to co-produce the F-5E fighter.
 
Peking Stresses Principle of Sales
This was regarded by some officials as a concession to Peking, but the Chinese contend that it does not matter what kind of plane is being sold to Taiwan, that it is the principle that counts.
Peking says it will never be able to persuade Taiwan to unify peacefully with the mainland so long as the United States provides arms to Taiwan. 
It wants the United States to announce an elimination of arms sales over a set period - say, five years.
Mr. Haig said the United States had made its position clear in both the Carter and the Reagan administrations on selling arms to Taiwan, but ''recognizes this is an area to be approached with prudence and discretion.''
He said that ever since Foreign Minister Huang Hua was here in October, there had been ''extremely sensitive discussions'' that were continued when John H. Holdridge, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, went to Peking last month to disclose the decision on Taiwan arms.
