
PEKING TO call the United States a superpower vying with the Soviet Union for world hegemony is hardly flattering, but it is illuminating. 
The old disparaging labels that have been resurrected here reflect the insecurity with which the regime regards the Reagan Administration.
Peking complains that the promises of the Chinese-American relationship produced ''loud thunder but little rain.''
Some officials say privately they are unsure of Washington's intentions. 
Secretary of State George P. Shultz's visit next month may help dispel the confusion; new faces represent foreign policy on both sides now that Wu Xueqian has replaced Huang Hua as Foreign Minister.
PEKING TO call the United States a superpower vying with the Soviet Union for world hegemony is hardly flattering, but it is illuminating.
Professed discontent extends beyond the sensitive issue of Taiwan. 
That was supposedly defused in a joint communique in August, though some Chinese think the Americans got the better deal, since the cutoff of arms sales to Taiwan was left indefinite. 
Peking also chafes at Washington's limits on transfer of technology, which it badly wants now that modernization has replaced revolution as the national goal. 
Lesser problems include defections like that of tennis star Hu Na and civil suits against China in American courts. 
Not least are restrictive quotas for Chinese textiles; fresh talks are scheduled on Thursday. 
American textile imports from China rose nearly one-third last year, but Peking is not happy that it has been allotted a smaller share than Taiwan and Hong Kong, over which it claims sovereignty. 
Some discontent reflects internal disputes between Deng Xiaoping's followers and leftists opposed to his opening to the West. 
Chinese-American trade is expected to total $5.5 billion in 1982, with China reducing its deficit.
Far from waving their Soviet card, Chinese officials have taken pains to stress the limitations of Peking's new consultations with Moscow. 
This suggests that when the Chinese compare the United States to the Soviet Union, they don't entirely mean it, though Mr. Shultz may be hard put to get them to say so.
