
CLIFFORD D. MAY is the West African correspondent of The New York Times.
 
By CLIFFORD D.MAY
W ith travel, there is generally a tradeoff: The more exotic the destination, the more arduous the journey. 
But hard traveling need not be regarded as just the price one pays to get far away. 
On the contrary, those who truly subscribe to the view that it is better to go than to arrive also know that it is when the going gets rough that the excitement really begins.
I understood these rules subliminally at best when, along with seven friends (three other Americans, two Englishmen and two Pakistanis), I recently found myself in Islamabad contemplating a long weekend excursion into Pakistan's remote northern region. 
Within this area, three of the world's great mountain ranges - the Himalayas, the Karakorams and the Hindu Kush - converge, and eight of the world's 10 tallest mountains rise.
Highlights of traveling in Pakistan's remote northern region
The hub of the territory is a city called Gilgit, long ago a far western outpost of Tibetan Buddhism and an important trading center on the ancient Silk Route. 
More recently, Gilgit has been popular with European tourists on the overland route to the Far East; the war in neighboring Afghanistan has virtually put an end to that traffic, however.
Beyond Gilgit lies Hunza, the isolated valley that some say provided the inspiration for Shangri-La in James Hilton's ''Lost Horizon,'' and a place opened to foreigners without special permission only within about the last year. 
Finally, there is the Karakoram Highway, the artery that links these places, two narrow lanes joining Islamic Pakistan with China.
Around 1 o'clock on a Thursday afternoon we boarded a twin-engine Fokker 27 at the airport in Islamabad and settled back for what had been described as the breathtakingly scenic flight to Gilgit, 371 miles to the north. 
A tape recording of a sitar played softly. 
Tea and cakes were served with quiet grace by the hostess.
Through the window we watched the landscape grow rugged. 
On the highest peaks, among smudges of evergreens, the snow shone so brightly that it seemed to be lit from within. 
But the mood that was coming upon us was to be disturbed before we had even drained the tea from our cups. 
The ride suddenly became bumpy and islands of darkening cumulus clouds came into view ahead.
''Ladies and gentlemen,'' said a metallic voice, interrupting the strains of the sitar, ''we are sorry to tell you that due to bad weather we are having to turn back. 
Inshallah, we shall land in Islamabad momentarily. 
Please fasten your seat belts.''
The eight of us moaned. 
The other 40 or so passengers - none of them tourists, judging from the long dark veils draped over the women and the soft, flat-topped felt hats worn by the men - appeared neither surprised nor troubled by the news.
We had two choices: We could return to the hotel and hope for better luck on tomorrow's flight. 
Or we could attempt to reach Gilgit by road. 
Since the weather had already been unseasonably rainy for some days - and since the pilot prudently makes no attempt to maneuver through the tall mountains when it's even cloudy - we decided to go by land.
We hired a minibus and driver and were soon passing through fields carpeted with fresh hail. 
A light rain fell as we continued at a slow but steady clip to Hazara, in the North-West Frontier Province east of the Indus River, an area believed to have been settled by soldiers left behind by either Genghis Khan or Tamerlane.
No signpost marked the point, in the village of Havelian, where the road merges with the Karakoram Highway, constructed by the Pakistanis and the Chinese over a 20-year period. 
It is said that one life was lost for every kilometer of road. 
At the peak of the effort, 15,000 Pakistanis and 1,000 Chinese were working on the KKH, with little in the way of modern machinery.
The rain had just about stopped when we came to the village of Besham in the early evening. 
A queue of trucks lined both sides of the road, an indication of trouble ahead. 
We stopped to inquire at the local musafir khana, a sort of Pakistani truck stop, a squat cinder-block building containing rows of wooden cots, each strung with rope. 
In front of the building, tea brewed on a charcoal fire under a dim gas light.
''I'm afraid it is not possible for you to go any further,'' the man tending the fire told us. 
''The mountain is still moving.''
The leader of our group, Lieut. 
Col. Muhammad Akram Khan - a founding member of the Adventure Foundation (Pakistan), a nonprofit organization modeled on Outward Bound - explained that the recent rains had caused a landslide and the road could not be cleared because mud and rock were continuing to fall. 
''We should be able to get through in the morning,'' the colonel consoled us.
We went to a nearby guest house to pass the night. 
But when we moved out again just after dawn the trucks were still parked along the roadside. 
We pressed on until we could see the road disappear into a thick, smooth slab of mud that began high on the slope above and ended in a gorge several hundred feet below. 
We turned to Colonel Akram in despair. 
''Come now,'' he said. 
''We're not turning back yet.''
We grabbed our hand luggage and followed the colonel on a zigzagging trail down the steep, rocky mountainside. 
A line of men, some carrying boxes or trunks, some herding goats, trekked both ahead and behind us. 
Through the middle of the narrow gorge below ran a shallow stream, a small tributary of the Indus River, which splashed over smoothly rounded boulders. 
Before crossing the gorge, we looked up and listened attentively: Each time the rocks began to roll, people above whistled and yelled out a warning.
We crossed one at a time, as quickly as we could manage without losing our footing on the slick stones. 
Then, relieved that no rocks had made contact with our skulls, we began the long, tiring climb up the other side. 
The slope was so steep that we had to grab bushes for support. 
At one point, a goat just above us stopped, refusing to go farther despite the urgings of its herder and the whacks he was applying with a switch to its rump. 
The exasperated herder finally picked the goat up in his arms like a child and carried it the rest of the way up to the road. 
On the far side of the gorge, too, was a line of trucks that had been waiting since the day before. 
Colonel Akram told us to catch our breaths while he went off among them. 
Within minutes he was back, sitting next to the driver in a small Toyota diesel pickup. 
''Okay, it's arranged,'' the colonel said. 
''This man will take us at least part of the way to Gilgit. 
There will be a phone up ahead. 
I will arrange for other transport to be sent down to meet us.''
We piled ourselves and our luggage into the back and sped off along the serpentine road, high above the Indus River. 
The open cargo bed provided an unobstructed view and an extraordinarily heightened sense of speed. 
The faces of my companions - and probably my own as well - became pale as we swung from side to side, tightly grippling the railing and bouncing painfully on the metal floor.
The steep mountain slopes in which we were cradled were barren and eerily desolate. 
Only occasionally would we catch sight of a tiny plot of cultivated terraces, some no more than a few feet wide. 
Goats browsed among sparse brush nearby. 
And, looking carefully, we would invariably make out one or two small houses, constructed of the same gray stone as the mountains to which they so precipitously clung.
Until the completion of the KKH just four years ago, this area had been almost entirely cut off from the rest of the world. 
The lateral valleys beyond the road are still known as ''Yaghistan,'' which loosely translates as Land of the Unruled. 
In other words, they are tribal territory beyond the control of the Pakistani Government. 
We had been told that the people of Yaghistan could be quite hospitable; they could also draw and quarter you, more or less with impunity.
At a settlement about 50 miles from Besham our driver stopped: He didn't want to be too far away when the road was finally cleared. 
Colonel Akram arranged for us to switch to a small taxi with a canvas-enclosed bed containing two parallel wood benches on which passengers could sit facing one another. 
An assistant to the driver stood on a platform at the rear of the car, scanning the mountaintops for signs of a rockslide.
A little after 1 o'clock the car suddenly jolted and screeched to a halt. 
I had a vision of all the little headlines I had seen in newspapers over the years reporting a ''Bus Plunge'' in places very much like this. 
Luckily, we had not been going fast when the tire blew. 
The spare tire that the driver had brought along did not inspire confidence. 
It was covered in bulging patches, evidence of the many times it had been repaired.
A half hour or so farther down the road we met up with two Toyota jeeps that had set out from Gilgit following the colonel's phone call. 
We packed ourselves into these vehicles and contnued on, riding high above the silty Indus, its bone-colored sand beaches unmarred by human footprints.
At Chilas, a village about 4,000 feet above sea level, we stopped briefly at a small stone hut, another musafir khana, for milky tea, dal maash - a local dish made from yellow lentils and spices - and tandoori roti, flat round bread baked in deep stone ovens.
O n the road once more, the colonel pointed out Nanga Parbat, the Naked Mountain, with its snow-covered 26,660-foot peak. 
Finally, in the early evening, we entered Gilgit, where donkey carts rolled down the narrow streets and where the tiny stone shops in the bazaar were still crowded. 
It is said that long ago the people of Gilgit were fire worshippers. 
Then, beginning in the eighth century, China, Tibet and Arabia conquered the area in turn. 
Today the population of about 25,000 includes people of many ethnic groups: Pathans, Kashgaris, Chitralis, Tshins, Kirghizis and Hunzakuts.
We spent the night at a guest house and rose at 4:40 on Saturday morning to the sound of the muezzins calling the faithful to prayer. 
Because we were now about a day behind schedule, and because the weather looked fairly clear, we decided to set out again immediately, hoping to make it to the Chinese border and back - a round-trip excursion of a little more than 300 miles - by nightfall.
We headed out of town over the 100-year-old British-built suspension bridge that spans the Gilgit River and disappeared into a tunnel roughly carved through a mountain. 
We returned to the KKH, which twisted through bleak, infertile mountains where rare Marco Polo sheep and ibex are said to dwell. 
We neared Rakaposhi, the southernmost peak of the Karakorams, whose 25,550-foot peak was buried in clouds.
Our unofficial but well-informed guide for this part of the journey was the local police superintendent, Ali Ahmad Jan, who happened to be an old college chum of one of our fellow travelers, Syed Husain Mahmud, a freelance photographer. 
Superintendent Ali had blue eyes and a bushy blond moustache. 
His ancestors, he said, were either early Greek or Persian invaders, he wasn't sure which; he could trace only about 900 years of his family's history in this area.
It was fully light by the time we reached the Hunza Valley shortly before 6. 
We came around a turn and there, just ahead of us, three seasons seemed to coexist. 
The mountain summits were white and wintry. 
Just below them was a layer of autumnal red-brown rock. 
And down beside the river, stretched an alluvial plain, lush with pinkblossomed apricot trees, tall, swaying poplars, and neat, Lilliputian green pastures surrounded by sturdy stone fences.
The narrow Hunza Valley is not only fertile, it is also exceptionally rich in semiprecious stones. 
It is said that years ago, when soldiers of the British Empire fought there, the bullets removed from them would often turn out to be garnets coated with lead.
Until as recently as 1974, Hunza was a separate kingdom ruled by the hereditary Mir of Hunza. 
Not long after Hunza's incorporation into Pakistan, the last Mir ''died of heartbreak,'' Superintendent Ali told us. 
I asked him how he knew. 
''Oh well, he was a relation,'' the Superintendent said. 
''It happens that my mother was the Mir's sister and the Mir's wife was my auntie. 
My father and uncle simply exchanged sisters, you see.''
The people of the Hunza Valley -which is surrounded by 21 peaks more than 20,000 feet high - are famous for good health and longevity and a number of books have been written about ''Hunza health secrets.''
One does indeed see many robust old Hunzakut men and women about, but as far as I was able to ascertain there has never been any proof that these people represent a medical marvel.
The villagers of the Hunza Valley are remarkable in other ways, however. 
Hunza is said to be a basically cooperative society with little difference in wealth from family to family. 
Fruit - the apricot in particular - is the staple of the diet. 
Although alcohol is widely prohibited in Pakistan, the Hunzakuts freely - if discreetly -drink a concoction known as ''Hunza water,'' varieties of wine and brandy distilled from mulberries and grapes. 
In contrast to the people farther south, many Hunzakuts have pink-white skin, and green or blue eyes. 
Women do not hide their faces as most Pakistani Moslems do; instead they cover only their hair with a colorful scarf draped over a sort of pillbox cap.
We stopped for a brief breakfast of green tea, sheep liver fried in apricot-pit oil, porridge, potatoes, chicken, phiti - brown bread made from unrefined wheat - and jam, then quickly resumed our journey. 
In places, the shoulders of the road were piled high with snow, cleared after recent avalanches. 
Elsewhere, the mountain slopes were covered in scree, rock pulverized to a fine powder by the force of glaciers over centuries.
One of the largest glaciers in the world outside the polar regions is the 30-mile-long Batura Glacier, which we approached at about 9:30. 
This is normally as far as foreign visitors may go, but we had earlier applied for and received permission to proceed the remaining 60 miles to the border.
T he road followed the course of the clear and shallow Hunza River through a deserted landscape of dry, rocky soil, wild willow and scrub. 
About noon we came to Kara Jilga, the point where the road begins a steep climb to the Khunjerab Pass. 
The countryside was snowcovered; the river was frozen and bluish icicles hung from the rocks. 
Dark, hairy yaks trudged along in the distance, leaving a shadowy trail in the otherwise unbroken whiteness.
Finally, the road flattened out and we drove up to an unimposing wooden sign indicating that China lay beyond. 
The elevation was 15,072 feet, said to be the highest point on any paved road in the world. 
Although I was wearing several layers of clothes, I shivered with cold and my breathing was labored. 
Moving about in the snow to keep warm, I soon became dizzy and light-headed.
''When the Karakoram Highway was completed, the road gang from China and the road gang from Pakistan played volleyball right across the border here,'' Superintendent Ali told me. 
I said I thought I would drop dead if I attempted such exercise at this altitude. 
''As a matter of fact, that's just what did happen to one chap,'' he noted.
We could not spend long in the cold, rarified atmosphere of the pass. 
We climbed back into the jeeps and headed south, stopping for a snack about 5 P.M. and arriving in Gilgit just before 9.
Our plan was to fly out Sunday afternoon. 
No plane had made it to Gilgit in the last few days, but the sky was clear and we were hopeful. 
We attended a polo match after breakfast; Gilgit happens to be the place where the sport originated.
The plane did not arrive, however, and we reluctantly began the long and arduous trip by road back to Rawalpindi. 
By Monday morning we had somehow made it to the airport, more or less on schedule and more or less ready for the long flight back to New York.
Although I don't think any of us would have been prepared to make the trip again right away, we were all pleased to have done it. 
In part, that's because we had learned something about the rules of travel and did not doubt that the destination had been exotic enough to justify the hardships we had endured. 
Equally important was another rule that we were just beginning to recognize: few memories are more savored than those of a risky journey successfully completed.
 
Guide for visitors to Gilgit
The Basics The round-trip excursion fare via Pakistani International Airlines from New York to Islamabad is $2,470 in first class, $1,285 economy. 
(For stays of less than a month no visa is required.) The easiest and least expensive way to get to Gilgit is by air. 
P.I.A. has a flight that leaves Islamabad for Gilgit daily if the weather is clear. 
The Government-subsidized fare is very reasonable, about $26 each way. 
A car and driver can be hired in either Rawalpindi or Gilgit for about $10 a day plus five cents a mile. 
The best time of year to go to northern Pakistan is spring or fall. 
Days are warm, but evenings can be quite cool, especially at high altitudes. 
Rain is likely in July and August. 
Exhibition and practice polo matches are held in Gilgit (as well as in many villages in the region) at almost any time of year, but the regular season begins in late spring and ends in the fall. 
In Gilgit, the best known hotels, such as the Rakoposhi Inn and the Hunza Inn, charge about $35 a night for a double occupancy room. 
Less expensive but still quite decent accommodations are also available. 
Making Arrangements Further information can be obtained and arrangements made through the Tourism Division, Ministry of Culture, Sports and Tourism, Government of Pakistan, College Road, Shalimar, 7/2, Islamabad, and the Adventure Foundation (Pakistan), a nonprofit organization modeled on America's Outward Bound. 
The Adventure Foundation's main goal is to introduce indigent youth of Pakistan to sporting activities in wilderness areas of the country, but A.F.P. representatives are also beginning to organize excursions for American groups on a select basis. 
Contact the A.F.P. at No. 1 Gulistan Colony, College Road, Abbottabad, Pakistan. 
C.D.M.
