
For 17 years, Beate Gordon has been a sort of cultural detective. 
She travels to Asia each summer, ferreting out virtuoso performers of traditional arts and arranging for them to tour the United States.
The assignment, for the Asia Society,seems tailor-made for the 63-year-old Mrs. Gordon, whose background is as exotic as her work. 
Born in Vienna of Russian parents, both pianists, she was reared in Japan and studied dance, drama and music. 
She speaks six languages: German, French, Spanish, Japanese, English and Russian.
Her latest find, eight Mongolian musicians and dancers - the first such troupe ever to tour this country - will appear at the Asia Society, on Park Avenue at 70th Street, tomorrow through Friday.
They are the 34th group, from 13 countries, that she has brought over. 
Typically, they were assembled after some digging by Mrs. Gordon. The program will include khoomei - a technique in which a singer emits a long, low ''szzz sound,'' as she put it, ''with overtones'' - an art she had known about, but only glimpsed in the concert to which she was invited in Ulan Bator.
 
Khoomei Is Heard
''So I went to the conservatory of music,'' she recalled, ''I simply marched myself in, and talked to the receptionist. 
She was very charming. 
She ran out and came back with the man who had sung khoomei the night before!
So in the reception room he sang and I really could hear and watch how the muscles worked.''
The other artists chosen by Mrs. Gordon include players of a two-stringed fiddle, mouth harps and flutes, and an ''upper body'' dancer who performs with bowls of milk.
Mrs. Gordon, who formerly worked for the Japan Society in New York and now directs the Asia Society's department of performances, films and lectures, has many tales to tell.
There was the time a monsoon delayed her arrival in Purulia, India, and she slept on a mat in a hut until drums woke her at 2 A.M.; performers who had learned she was there were emerging from the forest to play for her.
Or her trip to the heights of Lhasa, Tibet, when she walked very slowly, as cautioned, but ignored advice not to laugh or talk - both qualities that seem natural to the impresario, whose enthusiasms break through a cordial reserve. 
So she blacked out, then had to carry around bags of oxygen while auditioning performers.
 
The Struggle for Authenticity
Speaking in her small office overlooking Park Avenue, Mrs. Gordon cited a pervasive problem: convincing cultural ministers and performers that she wants authentic, classical art, not tourist entertainment; genuine costumes, not glitter.
''What I often am shown,'' she said, ''are forms that have been changed to become more accessible, not just for foreigners but often even for their own audiences.''
In Tibet she heard ''La Paloma'' played by a 75-piece orchestra. 
In Burma, someone crooned with a microphone. 
They sang ''I love coffee, I love tea'' in Suzhou, China. 
And in the Chinese province of Fujian, she saw an anti-smoking puppet show.
''Can you imagine expecting this,'' she asked, showing a replica of a centuries-old Fujian hand-puppet in a glass case near her desk - a woman's figure wearing an intricately embroidered silk gown - ''and seeing a panda and a monkey?
The monkey's pipe kept growing bigger and bigger. 
They thought, 'Americans would love this.'
''
 
Missing the Point
Sometimes she seems to have made her point only to suffer dismay when the performers arrive in this country. 
''I have spent hours,'' she said, ''begging Indian dancers to bring their beautiful silk saris woven with gold and silver thread, only to be told that they had special costumes made for the States with hand-sewn sequins.''
Mrs. Gordon, whose research includes visits to museums and lots of questions to village elders, learned early to find a key person to put her in touch with performers. 
''You meet a patron of the arts in Madras, or a critic in Bombay who can open doors for you,'' she said.
Detecting probable anachronisms comes with experience, she said. 
For instance, she saw something amiss in South Korea when a dance that she knew originally represented the instrospective struggles of a Buddhist monk was performed by 50 people.
She spotted another alteration when dancers in Burma formed a boat with their bodies. 
There she drew on what she knew of China -that ''you might make movements of a boat, rocking side to side, or show water with a long blue scarf, but never something realistic like that.''
 
A War Intervenes
Mrs. Gordon, an only child, moved to Japan with her parents in 1929, when her father, Leo Sirota, played concerts there and stayed on to teach at the Imperial Academy. 
She attended a German school near Tokyo until Nazi teachers arrived, hardly the place for a Jewish child. 
She switched to an American school, and later moved to the United States to attend Mills College in Oakland, Calif.
Mrs. Gordon lost contact with her parents during World War II. 
While still a Mills student, she worked for the Federal Government, monitoring Tokyo Radio. 
Later she wrote broadcasts beamed to Japanese soldiers in the field - the counterpart, she notes, to Tokyo Rose.
After a stint as a researcher in New York for Time magazine, she became a civilian employee of the Army as a way to rejoin her parents in Japan. 
Assigned to Gen. Douglas MacArthur's headquarters in Tokyo, she wound up writing the womens' rights section of Japan's postwar Constitution.
She also met Lieut. 
Joseph Gordon, an interpreter, whom she later married. 
They have a daughter, Nicole, a lawyer, and a son, Geoffrey, a playwright. 
Mr. Gordon, who taught Chinese and Japanese, then switched to real estate, retired a couple of years ago and began accompanying his wife on what until then had been solo travels.
Pursuing old ways, Mrs. Gordon notes their swift passage. 
In the year since her first visit to Lhasa in 1985, she said, ''it changed from a sleepy village to a small town with a completely modern hotel, a new theater and even yakburgers.''
''With the inroads of Western culture,'' she added, ''it's wonderful to see that in some places, a lot of the original is left.''
