
The Chinese Foreign Minister arrives here tomorrow on a fence-mending mission that could pave the way for a new phase of friendship between India and China.
The visit by Foreign Minister Huang Hua is the first by a senior Chinese official since Prime Minister Zhou Enlai came here in 1960. 
Within months of that visit, the relationship deteriorated over Chinese territorial claims.
Chinese Foreign Minister Huang Hua arrives in New Delhi (India) in effort to improve relations between India and China
A border war in 1962 ended in defeat for India and the Chinese seizure of a piece of territory in northeastern Kashmir known as Aksai Chin. 
The border dispute has kept the two countries apart although India took the first step toward reconciliation in 1976 by sending an ambassador to Peking after an absence of 15 years. 
In 1979, the Indian Foreign Minister visited Peking.
Foreign Minister Hua of China was scheduled to come here last year after Prime Minister Indira Gandhi had returned to power, but he canceled the trip when she accorded recognition to the Soviet-backed Cambodian Government.
 
Border Dispute No Stumbling Block
In the last few months, friendly signals began coming from Peking and it was announced that Mr. Hua would be making the trip this summer.
Both sides have agreed that the border dispute need not be a stumbling block in the way of better relations. 
The Chinese have indicated that they would accept a boundary along the line of actual control. 
This would leave the Aksai Chin area in Chinese hands, but would confirm Indian sovereignty over the former North-East Frontier Agency, since 1972 constituted as the Indian union territory of Arunachal Pradesh.
India has said that the proposal is unacceptable and wants talks confined to the Aksai Chin area. 
The area is now crossed by a major Chinese highway linking Tibet and Xinjiang.
Indian officials do not expect any dramatic developments to come out of Mr. Hua's visit. 
But they hope to achieve the limited aim of lessening tension along the border and re-establishing trade relations and economic cooperation.
