
For the first time since the Communists took power in 1949, two major American film companies, Paramount Pictures and Universal Pictures, will distribute American films in China.
The films will be shown in 3,000 major theaters and 20,000 smaller theaters in Chinese cities and the countryside. 
Ticket admissions in China, which has a population of one billion, were estimated to be about 25 billion in 1985.
The two studios signed an agreement with the China Film Corporation of Peking, which controls the exhibition and distribution of all films in China. 
The financial arrangements of the deal were not disclosed, but Charles S. Paul, president of MCA Enterprises, which represented Universal, said that the initial financial value of the transaction was secondary.
''The primary impact will be cultural and strategic,'' he said. 
But he added that the financial structure of the agreement set a precedent for other more profitable arrangements.
 
Problems With Deals
Until now the major American movie studios have stayed out of the China market. 
The Chinese would only agree to make deals on a flat-fee basis, which Mr. Paul said was not attractive to the American companies. 
He also pointed out that China does not have stringent copyright laws, which protect against unauthorized duplication and distribution of original properties. 
However, China is working to improve those laws as a means of attracting foreign business.
As a result, although the Chinese show films from many countries around the world, only American films produced by independent companies have been shown in China for a flat fee, as well as a small number of films that were produced by independent companies, but distributed by major studios. 
For example, ''Superman'' and ''Rambo'' have been licensed for a lump sum, reportedly between $10,000 and $20,000 each.
''We asked for a percentage of the box office gross, or what is known in the U.S. as a rental fee,'' Mr. Paul said of the recent negotiations. 
''They refused.''
However, he added ''that the payment would be related to the popularity of the film, though not precisely a percentage of box office, as is the case in the United States.''
 
Seeking a Profit
''A rental fee arrangement is crucial,'' Mr. Paul said. 
''It gives the Chinese access to huge film libraries. 
And it gives us access to a huge audience, on terms that can eventually be profitable for both partners.''
From his Los Angeles office, Yongming Lu, the business manager for China Film, said his company would soon begin selecting films from the studios' libraries and dub them into Chinese, with the intent of exhibiting 8 to 10 films annually from the major American studios. 
Mr. Lu said that the Chinese, who are avid moviegoers, produced more than 140 films a year at the country's 15 production studios. 
In addition, he said that the Chinese showed about 50 foreign films a year.
Not only do the Chinese flock to theaters, but the country has more than 160,000 projection units, which are groups of people who travel around the countryside exhibiting films in informal settings. 
Admissions can range from the equivalent of about 15 cents to one penny. 
In some places admission charges are paid in commodities, said Mr. Paul, who recalled visiting a community where some moviegoers paid with eggs.
Last year, China Film, together with the Motion Picture Association of America, the industry trade group, organized a festival of five American films, of which the most popular were ''Kramer vs. Kramer'' and ''On Golden Pond.''
The other films were ''Coal Miner's Daughter,'' ''Star Wars'' and ''The Turning Point.''
Noting the strong audience response for ''Kramer vs. Kramer'' and ''On Golden Pond,'' Mr. Paul, who spent several months in China, said: ''Those films involved family issues and respect for elders. 
People could relate the problems and issues in the family structure.''
Until the war of 1949, the American majors showed their films in China and had offices there. 
Some companies, such as the MGM Entertainment Company, even owned theaters in Peking, Shanghai and other major cities, but after 1949 they withdrew.
