
Hong Kong has never been permitted an elected government by Britain, and until recently its residents left the running of the colony to British paternalism while they earned money.
''Hong Kong people by and large have been apathetic toward politics,'' said Stephen Cheong, a textile factory director who serves as an appointed legislative councilor. 
''We have in the past devoted all our energy to making a living and building up Hong Kong economically to what it is today.''
On July 18, however, the British-run government here is expected to take a small but significant step toward granting the territory's 5.5 million residents a greater voice in their future.
A green paper, as the British call draft legislation, will be issued proposing some phased electoral changes to let Hong Kong's citizens choose more of their own officials in advance of 1997, when China intends to reclaim sovereignty over Hong Kong.
 
Officials Are Appointed
Hong Kong has no elected government beyond its local district boards. 
Instead, the British Governor appoints unofficial members of the Executive and Legislative Councils, more commonly known by the acronym Umelco. 
The appointees are heavily drawn from Hong Kong's influential business leaders. 
Eleven of them sit on the Executive Council, an advisory cabinet, and 29 on the Legislative Council. 
Five members are appointed to both bodies.
The absence of elected representatives has left Hong Kong's inhabitants with no appropriate mechanism to have a say in the negotiations on their future that Britain and China are conducting in private.
Since China declared that it would take Hong Kong back when Britain's lease over most of the territory expires on July 1, 1997, some younger educated people have come to view the creation of an indigenous political system as a way to insure that their freedoms and living standards continue.
The Peking leadership has promised that Hong Kong can keep its own socio- economic system and way of life after 1997. 
But the people of Hong Kong - 2.5 million of whom fled the Communist regime on the mainland - remain nervous about its assurances.
''We have a very wide communications gap,'' said Allen Lee, another legislative councilor. 
''Umelco has been trying to close that gap, and I can tell you, we haven't been successful.''
 
Rude Reception in Peking
The advisory councils' difficulty in trying to express Hong Kong's concerns became embarrassingly clear in June when Sir Sze-yuen Chung, a respected businessman, and two other councilors went to Peking to see Deng Xiaoping, China's leader.
Their explanation of Hong Kong's confidence problem was undercut by Mr. Deng's uncharacteristic rudeness. 
He accused his guests of being under the influence of colonialism and said they did not speak for the people of Hong Kong. 
For the next week, Hong Kong talked of little else, obscuring the fact that the councils had put across their message. 
''This argument that we are not elected so we cannot represent their views is a real red herring,'' Lydia Dunn, one of the three councilors, said in retrospect.
''As long as one is knowledgeable,'' she said, ''as long as one is in contact with the people, anybody is able to reflect the worries and anxieties of Hong Kong. 
We never claimed to have representative status.''
 
'Stooge for the British'
Indeed, the councils, which advise the British Governor and address public complaints, have greater independence than China's nominal Parliament, the National People's Congress. 
But as a longtime British resident observed, ''The Chinese Government sees any representative of Umelco as a stooge for the British colonial system.''
The electoral changes in the green paper will make little initial difference. 
It will reportedly propose that some or all council members be selected from the elected members of local district boards. 
The Legislative Council may eventually be presided over by an elected official.
But direct elections have evidently been ruled out, in part because the emergence of a Western political democracy could anger Peking. 
China has suggested that Hong Kong residents should run Hong Kong, as long as they are, in Mr. Deng's words, ''patriots.''
 
'A Bit of a Dilemma'
''I have a feeling that the Chinese are very uneasy about Hong Kong's move toward a more representative type of government,'' a council source said. 
''But I also detect that they are in a bit of a dilemma. 
If they obstruct this form of government, it would be politically hard for them to justify, given what they have previously said.''
There is also little enthusiasm in Hong Kong for a plunge into representative government. 
The only established political factions are either staunchly pro-Taiwan or pro-Peking. 
A fresh struggle between them could spark social unrest and drive away investment, removing China's grounds for not interfering in Hong Kong's stabilityII and prosperity.
''There is a fear among the wealthy that democratization will become a free-for-all, and sound and prudent fiscal policies will be undermined by political factionalism,'' a British businessman said.
For those who plan to move out, the prospect of democracy does not make much difference.
''I don't know of a single Chinese executive of tertiary education or successful businessman who has not worked out plans to leave,'' the British businessman said. 
''The only people who say they won't leave are those who have no chance.''
 
68% Thinking of Leaving
An unpublished survey found that 68 percent of the professional people polled in Hong Kong were considering leaving. 
Allen Lee, who serves on Umelco, said his business acquaintances were getting visas to other countries simply as insurance. 
He said he expected many of them to wait and see after 1997.
The interest in confronting China with a working democratic system when it reasserts sovereignty in 13 years is stronger among younger businessmen, lawyers, teachers and other professionals who do not have enough money to finance a new life abroad. 
''People who are 35, if they are going to the United States or Canada, will be 48, and it will be difficult to start another career,'' said P. H. Yu, a corporate planner who is deputy chairman of the Hong Kong Observers, a group that discusses issues affecting Hong Kong. 
''The majority are still very confused. 
They have not decided what they are going to do.''
The electoral changes envisioned are unlikely to be fully put into effect until 1992, a scant five years before China reclaims Hong Kong. 
Many people think the shape of Hong Kong's future will be decided by then.
China has rejected the notion of a ''three-legged stool'' in which Hong Kong joins Peking and London as a partner in the 1997 talks. 
The Peking leadership maintains that it alone can represent the interests of Hong Kong.
Still, many younger educated people like Yeung Sam, deputy chairman of Meeting Point, another prominent discussion group, say they see an indigenous democratic system as the best guarantee of Hong Kong's future.
''If Hong Kong people don't want to run their affairs, China will send its own people,'' Mr. Yeung said. 
''We want to fight for more chance to participate, and Britain should help us before it is too late.''
