
This British colony pursues commerce and wealth so single-mindedly that its magnificent natural setting has become a mere backdrop to its driving purpose. 
Tall buildings sprout everywhere, their walls often dense with advertising. 
Open stretches of sidewalk turn into crowded markets.
Within this hectic landscape, the sleek new headquarters being built by the Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation is a striking reminder of its leading role in the colony.
In recent years ''the Bank,'' as it is known here, has grown into a force beyond the colony, too. 
The bank's modernistic headquarters - with 43 floors suspended from round steel masts, looking like a cross between a bridge and an offshore oil platform - is a fitting monument to the kind of dynamic institution it has become under Michael Sandberg, chairman since 1977.
Profile of Hongkong & Shanghai Banking Corp, focusing on rapid expansion undertaken by Michael Sandberg, its chairman since 1977, and uncertain future as Hong Kong prepares to revert to Chinese control; William Purves, who is expected to succeed Sandberg, discusses his plans for consolidating bank's operations over next few years; photo of new headquarters; graph shows bank's assets and return on assets, 1970-83 (M)
 
In Past, an Era of Plenty
But with the colony nervously preparing for eventual transfer to Chinese rule, the innovative skyscraper will say more about the era of plenty gone by than the tougher years ahead. 
Mr. Sandberg, 57 years old, took over the bank in the midst of a boom that carried Hong Kong into immense prosperity. 
His aggressive management transformed Hongkong Bank from a regional leader into an international giant, the 23d largest in the world in 1983. 
Since 1977 its reported net earnings quadrupled to about $319 million last year. 
Like the new building's architecture, the bank Mr. Sandberg fashioned was bold and imaginative.
The days of soaring expansion have ended now. 
The bank's earnings rose less than 6 percent in 1983, with the colony's uncertain future making a return to high growth rates unlikely. 
Hongkong Bank is having to adjust to a new environment, all the way up to the top.
 
A New Kind of Executive
At a bank run by consensus, the consensus seems to be that the new headquarters' formal opening late next year will bring Mr. Sandberg's tenure, already waning, to a close.
William Purves, 52, the deputy chairman and Mr. Sandberg's likely successor, is cut from different cloth. 
He is a large, heavy-set Scotsman, with a stern gaze that can wither subordinates. 
Colleagues and competitors describe him as cautious and iron-willed.
Asked about his leadership ability, colleagues recalled Mr. Purves's military experience. 
As a 19-year-old officer in the Korean War, he won one of Britain's highest military honors for rallying a unit given up as lost after an attack. 
His reputation is for tackling problems head-on and in no- nonsense terms.
Where Mr. Sandberg accepted risks like an entrepreneur, maneuvering to increase the bank's size, Mr. Purves says his objective is consolidation.
 
Aspects of Bank's Efforts
''Now I don't happen to think that growth and acquisition are necessarily the route this bank should be going,'' Mr. Purves said recently during a long interview. 
''We should be concentrating on what we've got, trying to make it work better and trying to make more profit out of it. 
A restriction on balance sheet growth may be a good thing for the next few years.''
Whether Mr. Purves becomes chairman soon or not, he already has the influence to effect that strategy. 
He controls Hongkong Bank's commercial and merchant banking operations, powers his predecessor as deputy chairman did not have.
The institution he is shaping stands apart from other international banks. 
On the positive side, Hong Kong has proved an exceptionally profitable base. 
Hongkong Bank controls nearly half of all deposits in the colony, issues more than 80 percent of the currency and acts as central banker to the colonial government.
 
Economic Projects in Asia
Hong Kong has also been a springboard into the rest of Asia, economically the world's fastest-growing region. 
Hongkong Bank is strong in China, too, having financed most of the limited opportunities open to foreign banks there, about 150 projects in the last three years, according to Anthony Russell, the bank's China area manager.
''They have their greatest strength in the area where most financial institutions most want to be,'' said Lawrence Toal, senior vice president and head of the Chase Manhattan Bank's Hong Kong operations. 
''Their intelligence and contacts in this market make you feel you have to have a relationship with them to do business here.''
In addition, Hongkong Bank shunned lending to Eastern bloc and developing countries when other banks plunged into that market. 
Instead, it has been a net lender to other banks of the Euromarket.
 
Transition to Chinese Rule
However, Hongkong Bank's once- solid base is starting to look shaky. 
It must now contend with the changes that are going to sweep capitalist Hong Kong as it begins a transition to Chinese sovereignty. 
Britain has conceded to China that in 1997, when its lease on most of the territory expires, British rule will end.
Both sides promise that Hong Kong will become an autonomous, self-administered territory with its current system largely unchanged. 
Still, most residents worry whether China's Communist authorities can resist tampering with a society so contrary to their own. 
Several senior Hong Kong government advisers acknowledged recently that any Chinese-British agreement would be an experiment, and could wreck Hong Kong if it fails to find popular support.
These uncertainties have forced businesses to ask themselves difficult new questions. 
Up to now, they could work like British companies, Asian companies or hybrids, depending on what suited their needs.
 
'Still a British Colony'
''Although they've changed the name to a territory, this is still a British colony,'' Mr. Purves said. 
''Therefore, we're a British bank. 
Having said that, we're a Hong Kong-based bank, proud of our heritage here. 
We've achieved things being based in Asia that would never have been achieved in London.''
But the colony and the companies in it may not be able to sit on the fence much longer.
Jardine, Matheson & Company, a trading concern involved in Hong Kong's founding in 1842, decided to change its legal domicile to Bermuda to assure that it will remain under British jurisdiction.
All is not gloomy in Hong Kong, though. 
Stock prices are depressed, but brokers say some investors are nibbling at undervalued shares. 
''There are short-term gains to be made here,'' said Hugh Bolland, managing director of Schroders & Chartered Ltd., a merchant bank.
 
Investment by Americans
There is steady United States investment, too, according to Mr. Toal, who is also president of the local American Chamber of Commerce. 
He explained that some American companies are attracted by the prospect of investing in what will eventually be part of China.
Even before the 1997 issue claimed headlines, Hongkong Bank decided it was too heavily concentrated in Asia, so it sought to diversify. 
Expansion overseas became Mr. Sandberg's chief objective. 
He described his strategy as creating three equal legs for the bank - in Asia (including the Middle East), in Europe and in North America.
Just months after becoming chairman, Mr. Sandberg began Hongkong Bank's largest overseas move, a bid for 51 percent of New York's Marine Midland Bank. 
The $314 million deal succeeded, but only after a long battle with state banking authorities.
 
Outsider's Role in Britain
In 1981 Hongkong Bank bid for the Royal Bank of Scotland, topping an offer by the Standard Chartered Bank. 
This time Mr. Sandberg was greeted like a party crasher. 
Standard Chartered and Royal Bank had already reached an understanding that had approval from the Bank of England. 
The central bank frowned on the uninvited guest's behavior, and the British Government intervened.
Ultimately, both bids were rejected. 
The bitter lesson for Hongkong Bank was that in Britain it was treated like a foreigner.
More important, Mr. Sandberg's international ambitions had foundered. 
Hongkong Bank spoke of another acquisition attempt in Europe, but nothing happened. 
There have been small moves, such as the purchase of the trade financing house TKM International. 
But TKM's heavy Latin American exposure made the investment a poor one. 
Hongkong Bank still has just over 40 percent of its assets in Asia and the Middle East, an additional 40 percent in North America and about 15 percent in Europe.
 
Cautious About Expansion
Mr. Purves concedes that Hongkong Bank may have run out of growing room in Asia, but he talks cautiously of overseas moves.
''We don't have to dive out and buy something in Europe,'' he said. 
''If we see the right thing, I believe we would like to make that investment, but there are not too many things we see as the right thing.''
Mr. Purves said, though, that Hongkong Bank is considering buying an interest in a London stockbrokerage firm. 
Other banks have made such acquisitions recently.
Another shift under Mr. Purves is Hongkong Bank's control over subsidiaries. 
While Mr. Sandberg often delegated operating autonomy, some are now being reined in under Mr.Purves's authority.
An example of the change is how Hongkong Bank's merchant banking unit, Wardley Ltd., renamed Wardley Holdings Ltd. last year, operates.
 
Wardley's Brisk Growth
In a break with Hongkong Bank custom, Mr. Sandberg had installed an outsider as Wardley's chief officer instead of a bank-trained executive, and it enjoyed heady growth during the boom years.
However, it lent heavily to property developers. 
When the market collapsed in 1982, millions of dollars in real estate loans went sour. 
Particularly embarrassing were Wardley's large loans to the Carrian group, which has since become the largest bankruptcy in the colony's history.
Wardley's earnings plunged to about $9.6 million in 1983 from the peak of about $25.7 million in 1981, and Hongkong Bank had to inject $25.5 million into the unit last year.
When Mr. Purves became Wardley's chairman in 1982, several executives were eased out and its loan portfolio was shrunk, with some credits transferred to Hongkong Bank. 
Now Wardley arranges financing but does little lending.
''They should be handling investment management and trying less to be like a bank,'' Mr. Purves said.
 
Tight Control Over Units
Hongkong Bank has also tightened its control over other units. 
Antony Gibbs Holdings Ltd., a British merchant bank, is now Wardley London.
All branches of the wholly owned Mercantile Bank were either merged with the Hongkong Bank's branches or sold. 
Marine Midland's Paris branch was closed and the business taken over by Hongkong Bank. 
And Hongkong Bank sharply scaled down its retail business in Britain.
Strategy may also be changing at Marine Midland. 
Mr. Purves backed off from any suggestion that its autonomy was being trimmed, but he indicated that Marine Midland was likely to become less ambitious, following its parent's formula.
Marine Midland's bottom line, Mr. Purves said, ''has not been quite as good as we would have liked, and they still have some distance to go to be up with their peer group.''
Marine Midland is re-examing its strategy, and the findings will be reported to Hongkong Bank shortly, according to Mr. Purves. ''It may be too early to say what the findings are, but I think they're finding they are likely to concentrate on their own domestic backyard.''
 
Looking for Biggest Return
''Perhaps,'' Mr. Purves said, ''they are finding that their international banking has been less profitable and less attractive and that perhaps they should build on the existing strengths of their wide branch network.''
Hongkong Bank's empire-building seems over for the moment. 
Its emphasis, Mr. Purves said, will be on profits, not size.
What Mr. Purves suggested he wants to guard against is letting Hongkong Bank's pretensions get ahead of what it can manage, with the costs of growth rising too high.
As an example, the brief given Foster Associates, the architect for the bank's new headquarters, was to create ''the best building in the world.''
Hongkong Bank got a fabulous structure - at a fabulous price of $638 million that, Mr. Purves acknowledged, will reduce profits.
''Maybe at this uncertain time in the world financial community and with the added political uncertainties over Hong Kong's future,'' Mr. Purves said, ''it will be a period of wait and see.''
