
A Canadian banker recently told of a visit from a Hong Kong businessman who said he had come to Vancouver to buy property but could spare only a week.
The banker asked how much the visitor wanted to spend. 
The reply: ''About $50 million.''
Such tales no longer astonish the citizens of Canada's most westerly province, which has been busy forging commercial and cultural links with nations around the rim of the Pacific Ocean.
Article on growth of Hong Kong investment in British Columbia, whose forests and minerals as well as port facilities have attracted resource-scarce Asian countries; recent investments from Hong Kong have included $60 million shopping mall, big hotel and high-rise office towers; Asian investors were reported two years ago to own 12 to 15 percent of downtown Vancouver (M)
''What we've done is to prepare our citizens and trading partners for the age of the Pacific,'' said Vancouver's Mayor, Mike Harcourt. 
''We're into it for the long haul.''
British Columbia's ties with Asia date to the late 19th century and the first Chinese immigrants, who helped complete the Canadian Pacific Railway and worked the mines. 
British Columbia's distance from Eastern Canada has led it to seek out commercial links with Asian countries as well as with the Western United States. 
Such regionalism is characteristic of Canada's provinces, which often find more in common with American neighbors or other countries than with each other.
The appeal of British Columbia to Asians also reflects current political uncertainties, notably those created by the British agreement to turn Hong Kong over to China when the British lease expires in 1997. 
Even before the agreement was reached, Hong Kong businessmen were pumping money into real estate in Vancouver, which claims one of North America's largest ethnic Chinese populations. 
Mayor Harcourt estimates that 125,000 ethnic Chinese live in greater Vancouver, whose population totals 1.2 million.
Recent investments from Hong Kong in Vancouver have included a $60 million shopping mall with 140 shops in suburban Richmond, a big hotel and high-rise office towers. 
Two years ago, the Vancouver Sun reported that Asian investors owned 12 to 15 percent of downtown Vancouver. 
Andrea Eng, a broker who deals with clients from Hong Kong for the real estate firm of Macaulay Nicolls Maitland International, called such estimates exaggerated but confirmed that money was flowing in from Hong Kong people who want to hedge their bets.
 
Chinese Are Welcome
The suspicions that fueled white prejudice against Chinese immigrants in the 19th and early 20th centuries have faded. 
''The Chinese are very welcome here,'' said Brian Power, a Vancouver Sun reporter who has covered the Asian scene. 
''The feeling here is that we're really blessed with these people.''
Canada's immigration policy favors entrepreneurs who will set up a business that generates jobs rather than just buy property. 
Canada, with its high living standard and political stability, becomes an attractive second choice for many who cannot qualify under the United States's tougher immigration quotas.
Yet Asian investors in British Columbia have generally stuck to real estate because they balk at the province's high taxes and aggressive labor unions. 
The more adventurous investors leapfrog to Toronto, Canada's financial center. 
Of a group of 600 entrepreneurs from Hong Kong who got immigration visas last year, 336 went to Ontario and only 94 chose to stay in British Columbia. 
But some Hong Kong Chinese, at least, find that Vancouver reminds them more of home, with its lovely harbor, mountains and vestiges of British colonial culture.
In addition to the Hong Kong-Canada Business Association in Vancouver, there is the Mokuyokai Society, which promotes trade ties and cultural links with Japan, and the Canada-Korea Business Association. 
Another group is being formed to promote trade with the countries of Southeast Asia.
British Columbia has been hoping that trade with Asia would help pull it out of a recession that has left 15 percent of the work force unemployed. 
Seventy-nine percent of Canada's exports to China, 75 percent of its exports to Japan, 64 percent of its exports to South Korea and a third of its exports to Hong Kong flowed from or through British Columbia last year.
The province's forests and minerals as well as its port facilities have attracted resource-scarce Asian countries. 
When a delegation of business and labor leaders from British Columbia visited China last month, their Chinese hosts talked about buying into a sawmill or pulp mill in British Columbia. 
China already gets three-quarters of its wood imports from British Columbia.
The province's Premier, William Bennett, proposed in February that Vancouver develop into an international banking center. 
British Columbia may find it difficult to emulate Hong Kong's success as Asia's financial capital, but the idea attracted local interest.
''I look to the west as Canada's front door, as part of a national initiative,'' said Vancouver's Mayor Harcourt, who will shortly lead his own trade delegation to Asia. 
''We're not just representing British Columbia. 
We're representing Canada.''
