
Four decades after their parents and grandparents swarmed from revolutionary upheaval in China to the safety of Hong Kong, a wave of young Chinese professionals is again fleeing Communism, packing their bags for Canada, the United States and Australia.
With less than 10 years to go before Hong Kong is returned to the Chinese motherland, more and more of the British territory's brightest lights are deciding that they do not trust China to allow Hong Kong to remain capitalist, decadent and efficient.
This year more than 10,000 will say farewell to the ''fragrant harbor,'' as this city is known in Chinese, and dolefully brace themselves for Canadian winters and other hardships still only dimly understood.
''People used to ask me vague questions about the future,'' said Wong Shikeung, a traditional fortuneteller whose premises attract middle-class Chinese. 
''Now they ask more focused questions: 'Should I stay in Hong Kong after 1997?' or 'Will foreign countries offer brighter career prospects?'
''
 
Date for End of British Rule
On July 1, 1997, it will be the marriage of the century: China, one of the most regulated societies in the world, enormous and sluggish; and Hong Kong, a monument to laissez-faire, a tiny, pulsating territory that already economically dominates a broad swath of southern China.
The amalgam will have far-reaching implications for all of China, and even now, 10 years before the nuptials, expectations of what it will bring are transforming Hong Kong.
But it is an arranged marriage, and one that gives the 5.6 million inhabitants of Hong Kong deep reservations. 
The apprehensions, which seem to be a particular preoccupation of the middle class, are compounded by the belief that Britain and China are conspiring to thwart the emergence of democracy, so that Hong Kong will not develop political institutions that could challenge Beijing. 
The colony is now governed by officials appointed by Britain.
Iris W. Y. Lam, 30 years old, a slender, curly-haired banker with an easygoing manner reminiscent of her stu-dent days at the University of Southern California, is one of those leaving. 
''My dad was in Shanghai in 1949, when the Communists took over,'' she said. 
''The Communists promised people freedom then, but they lost everything.''
Miss Lam, who leaves next month for Toronto, worries about finding a new job and regrets having to leave the world she knows in Hong Kong. 
But she has no doubts about the wisdom of her decision to emigrate. 
In time, she says, she will find new friends, or old friends will join her. 
So far this year, five good friends have left Hong Kong, and she says others are planning to leave as soon as they have earned a little more money. 
''Everybody is thinking about leaving,'' she said.
 
The Rush for Visas And a New Life
Miss Lam is just a face in the crowd of emigrants, another professional leaving behind a vacant office and an empty bank account at a time when the fall of the stock market underscores the uncertainty and volatility that will accompany the integration of the two economies.
No one knows just how big the exodus is, because Hong Kong does not keep emigration statistics. 
The Commission for Canada in Hong Kong, which gets more applications for immigration visas than any other Canadian diplomatic mission, issued 16,000 immigrant visas in the first nine months of 1987. 
That compares with 8,800 in all of 1986, although part of the increase this year is the result of a backlog of applications from last year. 
Australia granted 5,200 immigration visas in the 12 months that ended June 30, compared with 4,460 in the same period a year earlier.
The United States Consulate in Hong Kong issued 7,585 immigrant visas last year, and the numbers have been fairly steady since then because of strict limits. 
Meanwhile, about 15,000 people from Hong Kong are studying in the United States, apparently more students proportionally than from anywhere else.
Until the end of September, the United States limited to 600 the number of Hong Kong-born people who could receive immigration visas in any year, not counting spouses and minor children of American citizens. 
Many more visas were granted because many recipients were spouses or underage children of Americans, and because many were born in China but now live in Hong Kong. 
The limit was raised to 5,000 in the fiscal year that began Oct. 
1. The United States gives preference to family members of Americans and to those with special skills.
Some of those going abroad will return to Hong Kong in a few years, clutching their new foreign passports. 
But emigration advisers say that as 1997 nears, more and more of the emigrants, especially younger ones, say they will build their lives abroad.
 
Over the Decades, Rise and Fall of Tensions
The latest worries are part of a long history of tensions between Hong Kong and China. 
Lord Napier, the British officer who more than 150 years ago sought to wrest Hong Kong island from China, was mocked and given a Chinese name meaning ''laboriously vile.''
Britain obtained Hong Kong only by defeating China in the 1839-1842 war that forced the Chinese to accept the opium trade.
More recently, the Communists have sometimes seemed ready to take back Hong Kong by force. 
In 1962 a wave of 70,000 refugees suddenly poured across the border from China to Hong Kong in a 25-day period, straining the territory's resources and raising concern that China had finally begun an unorthodox invasion. 
Just five years later, China encouraged riots in the center of Hong Kong that for six months shook the territory to its core. 
While the Bank of China branch in Hong Kong used loudspeakers to call on the people of Hong Kong to overthrow the imperialists, the British drowned out the incitements with loudspeakers broadcasting the thunderous screech of Chinese opera.
Now China is again expanding its influence in Hong Kong, although in a more cooperative manner. 
Businesses based in China have acquired real estate and corporations in Hong Kong apparently worth well over $5 billion, while others are issuing stock on the Hong Kong market. 
The Bank of China is snatching business from other institutions by offering highly competitive terms, and it is building Hong Kong's tallest office tower for its new headquarters in the territory.
The head of the New China News Agency branch in Hong Kong, Xu Jiatun, is China's top official in Hong Kong and functions as the ''shadow governor,'' the counterpart of Britain's top official, Sir David Wilson. 
Ironically, neither Mr. Xu nor Sir David speak the Cantonese dialect of Chinese spoken by 98 percent of Hong Kong's population.
The main reasons for China's expansion of influence in Hong Kong seem to be to gain experience in capitalism generally and Hong Kong particularly, and to reassure residents that China does not plan radical changes in Hong Kong's way of life after 1997.
Although the brightest young professionals are unconvinced, many of Hong Kong's manufacturers are optimistic that China will allow Hong Kong to remain a place to make and keep money.
 
The Sun Is Setting On British Influence
As Chinese influence has expanded, British influence has declined. 
Last year, for the first time, Americans outnumbered Britons among the expatriate residents of the territory. 
The Hong Kong Chinese who hope to emigrate seek visas to America or Australia more than to Britain. 
And the old British companies that dominated commerce are being replaced or acquired by Hong Kong Chinese concerns. 
The tai-pans, or big bosses, had names like Jardine, Dent, Sassoon and Swire. 
Now the inheritors of the tradition of the greatest of the tai-pans - William Jardine, founder of the Jardine Matheson trading company, known to the Chinese as ''iron-headed old rat'' - have names that trip English tongues: Pao Yuekong, Li Kashing, Siu Yatfoo, Wu Yingseung.
The British tai-pans still flourish, of course. 
But as a final indignity to the old order, a New York lawyer, Brian M. Powers, was appointed this year to be the next tai-pan of the Jardine Matheson group. 
In a relatively formal society, the 38-year-old Mr. Powers is a maverick. 
He calls people by their first names unless they are over 70 years old and worth more than $1 billion.
 
The Border Blurs For Shopping and Play
Hong Kong is changing in another important way; it is becoming a part of China. 
For much of the postwar period, tight Chinese entry restrictions made it extremely difficult to cross the border and prevented information from flowing to the outside world. 
In the late 1960's China-watchers in Hong Kong assessed the violence of the Cultural Revolution partly by noting the number of bodies drifting down the Pearl River from China.
Hong Kong is becoming more integrated with cities like Shenzhen, on the China side of the border. 
Working-class families in Hong Kong take advantage of lower prices in China by crossing the border for doctor and dentist appointments and to shop for vegetables on the weekends. 
Middle-class families cross the border to tee off on Shenzhen's golf course. 
And students attend university in Guangdong Province, both because tuition is low and as a way to ingratiate themselves with their future rulers.
Among those who are neither middle class nor wealthy, there is some apprehension about the future, but it is tempered by the feeling that they have little to lose and that there is not much they can do about it. 
In addition, some with strong nationalist feelings believe that Hong Kong belongs to China and should be ruled by Chinese rather than foreigners.
A few people in Hong Kong seem to welcome the Chinese takeover; they are particularly represented in labor unions, newspapers and independent high schools that have long been associated with the Communists.
The jitters about 1997 are concentrated overwhelmingly in the middle class - which numbers somewhere less than a quarter of the population -particularly among young people who have been educated abroad. 
They may have more to lose and may feel they can do something about it - leave Hong Kong.
Not all the Chinese who go abroad will be welcomed. 
Reports abound that Chinese criminal gangs known as triads are expanding overseas from Hong Kong as 1997 approaches. 
The Hong Kong police force says it has no evidence that this is so, but a report this summer by California's Attorney General, John K. Van de Kamp, warned that Chinese triads are believed to control 20 percent to 30 percent of the heroin smuggled into the United States.
 
The Passport Merchants: Profits From Fear
''People leave Hong Kong because of fear,'' said Horatio C. S. Cheung, the director of a nonprofit organization that advises people on how to get a foreign passport. 
''They came to Hong Kong with nothing, worked hard and accumulated some wealth. 
They don't want to lose it.''
That fear has spawned more than a dozen businesses that, like Mr. Cheung's, help people emigrate. 
Tucked in the phone book between Ice Skating Rinks and Importers & Exporters is a category called Immigration & Naturalization Consultants, with 14 listings. 
They charge hundreds or even thousands of dollars to help someone obtain a foreign passport.
Even some foreign countries see the alarm in Hong Kong as a source of funds. 
The island nation of Mauritius in the Indian Ocean offers a passport in exchange for an investment of about $50,000. 
Industrialized countries are more expensive. 
Canada, which primarily admits people who are joining relatives or have special skills, offers immigration visas for some investments of $200,000 or more.
The fear of China's takeover strains the fabric of life in other ways. 
''The 1997 issue has an indirect influence on marriages, although not a major one,'' said Elsie Lam, a marriage counselor in Hong Kong. 
Families are being separated so that a member with a visa can be sent abroad to get a toehold in the hope of bringing the rest of the family later. 
In freewheeling Hong Kong, where there has been little compunction about extramarital liaisons, the separation of spouses reportedly has led to a boom in such affairs.
Chinese parents are even relaxing their standards about their children's marriage partners. 
Parents usually want their children to marry other Chinese, preferably those who trace their origins to the same region of China. 
But these days ''gweilos'' - ghostly people, as foreigners are called - are in demand on the marriage market. 
''Marrying another Chinese is important,'' said a woman in her 20's, ''but getting a foreign passport is even more important.''
