
The one clear reaction to the Chinese-British talks over Hong Kong's future has been in the colony's financial markets.
In the two trading sessions since discussions between Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and Chinese leaders ended last Friday, prices on the Hong Kong stock markets have fallen by more than 9 percent. 
In addition, the Hong Kong dollar dropped to its lowest level against the United States dollar since the local currency was allowed to float in late 1974.
''There has been nothing in the talks to give any comfort to Hong Kong investors and people,'' said Lawrence Chui, a director of Jardine Fleming & Company, an investment firm. 
''The reaction in the markets is what you would expect.''
HONG KONG, Sept. 
28 - The one clear reaction to the Chinese-British talks over Hong Kong's future has been in the colony's financial markets.
Yesterday, stock prices, as measured by the Hang Seng index, fell 83.74 points, the second-largest one-day decline this year. 
Today, the index retreated 23.96 points, closing at 988.66. 
The trading volume was extremely heavy both days, nearly twice the average daily volume last week.
 
Exchange Rate Declines
The United States dollar closed yesterday at $6.20 (Hong Kong), up from $6.11 on Saturday. 
After opening lower this morning, the local currency closed at about yesterday's level, largely because of Hong Kong dollar purchases by the Government, dealers say.
As a barometer of reaction to the British-Chinese talks, the weakness of the local currency is viewed as less significant than the stock market drop because the United States dollar is now unusually strong against all major currencies.
Stock market analysts cited three reasons for the big declines in share prices. 
First, the British-Chinese joint statement on Hong Kong, released last Friday, was less specific than many investors had hoped, giving only a general assurance that both sides wanted to maintain the ''stabilityI and prosperity'' of Hong Kong.
The differences of opinion between the two sides appear to be greater than many in Hong Kong had expected. 
Britain has made it clear that it considers the 19th-century treaties, which established its rule in Hong Kong, still valid. 
''Britain keeps her treaties,'' Mrs. Thatcher emphasized yesterday, though she added that theyzcould be ''modified.''
 
Chinese Seek Sovereignty
For its part, Peking has stressed that it must regain sovereignty over all of Hong Kong. 
Britain controls Hong Kong under a 99-year lease of 90 percent of the colony's land, which expires in 1997.
''The market was not expecting a sharp difference of views over the treaties,'' said Barry Yates, research director of Hoare Govett Far East Ltd.
The third factor in the big declines has been concerted selling by wealthy Chinese investors in Hong Kong, several market participants believe.
''It is not in the big guys' interest to see confidence or the stock market go higher at this time,'' one executive said. 
''This is a way of showing Peking and London that prosperity in Hong Kong is a very fragile thing.''
The stock markets are watched as a key indicator of business confidence in Hong Kong. 
Real estate issues represent about 40 percent of the market capitalization. 
Real estate prices, in turn, are viewed as an index of how much people want to live in Hong Kong and set up offices and factories here. 
Though still high, property values have, on average, declined 30 percent during the past year.
The Hong Kong stock markets are notoriously volatile. 
Analysts were reluctant to make specific predictions about the market outlook. 
Most agreed they would probably fall further in the near future, though they observed that the markets could stabilize and even turn up if the big Chinese investors decided to step in.
''They don't want to see things go down too much,'' one securities executive said. 
''After all, they do have the most to lose.''
