
Hong Kong announced today that newly arriving Vietnamese boat people who could not prove they fled religious or political persecution would be incarcerated as illegal aliens until they could be returned to Vietnam.
Until now, the thousands of arriving boat people have been put in camps in Hong Kong until they could be resettled in a third country.
Under the new criteria, the vast majority of boat people landing here will be isolated in detention centers and cut off from relief and resettlement agencies.
Geoffrey Barnes, the Hong Kong Secretary for Security, said the new policy was meant to send the Vietnamese the message: ''Do not come here.''
Sir David Wilson, the Governor of the British colony, called the new policy ''humane and just.''
He said the colony would use international criteria, as defined by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, to screen the boat people streaming into Hong Kong. 
#16,000 Already in Camps More than 7,700 refugees have arrived this year alone, compared with 650 for the same period last year, and the colony's overcrowded camps now hold more than 16,000 people, the highest number since 1980.
The new requirement for proving refugee status does not apply to refugees already in Hong Kong. 
Those who arrived since 1982 have been housed in camps surrounded by high wire fences and patrolled by guards. 
Under the new policy, the Government says, they will be given more freedom of movement.
As of midnight tonight, new arrivals who do not turn back will be detained in guarded camps on outlying islands.
Those who are eventually deemed refugees will be housed with the present refugee population. 
But those who cannot prove a ''well-founded fear of persecution'' will remain in detention. 
Officials estimate that barely 10 percent of the future arrivals will be deemed refugees.
Western countries have been taking increasingly fewer Vietnamese refugees for resettlement. 
At the same time Hong Kong's residents, 98 percent of whom are ethnic Chinese, have bitterly opposed the Government's previous policy of allowing Vietnamese to remain here while awaiting resettlement but forcing illegal immigrants from China to go back. 
The colony, with a population of 5.6 million, took a stand in the mid-1970's that it had absorbed as many mainland Chinese as it could.
 
Political Strain Is Cited
A senior Government official said today that it was ''political strain'' more than any economic one that had led to the new policy.
Most of the recent arrivals, Government officials said, are poor farmers and fishermen from the north and central parts of Vietnam fleeing poverty, food shortages and an economy in a state of near-collapse.
Those who are not accepted as refugess will eventually be forced to return to Vietnam, a process that Government officials said could probably not begin for at least two years.
A senior Government official said that Hanoi has made no significant movement in its refusal to discuss repatriation of the boat people, except on a case-by-case basis.
Government officials said that while Thailand and Malaysia had a surge in Vietnamese refugees since the beginning of the year, Hong Kong had the biggest jump.
Thailand now puts all arriving Vietnamese in camps without access to resettlement workers, and has reduced the number of new arrivals to virtually nothing, a Hong Kong official said. 
Malaysia has continued to accept all boat people as refugees, but has warned that its policy will be changed.
 
Ex-Leper Colony Will Be Used
The first camp for the Vietnamese arriving illegally will be on Hei Ling Chau, a small rock of an island that was once the site of a leper colony. 
Refugees housed in a camp there will be transferred to a new camp.
Relief agencies, which now provide educational and recreational services in the refugee camps, will not be allowed access to the detention camp.
Some relief officials questioned how immigration interviewers would be able to determine which boat people were fleeing persecution and which were ''economic migrants.''
Keith Holcombe, director of World Relief, an agency that aids refugees here, told of a case last summer involving four Vietnamese brothers.
''The United States uses the U.N. criteria for a refugee, and American screening officials found that two of the brothers were refugees and two were economic migrants,'' he said. 
''It's going to be sad and tricky.''
Mr. Barnes said he believed that most cases would be ''clear cut.''
A spokesman for the United States Consulate in Hong Kong said Washington had not commented on the policy.
