
A LITHE 72-YEAR-OLD WHO still exults in his back flips, Sun Martsai is the lord of Cantonese opera.
An energetic man whose hands flutter through the air as he speaks, Mr. Sun packs theaters with his fans, who are often so overwhelmed with his grace and singing that they throw rings and necklaces and money upon the stage after a performance. 
His dominance of Cantonese opera makes Pavarotti seem like a flash in the pan.
Not everyone is so impressed, however. 
His 9-year-old daughter confesses that she does not like Cantonese opera. 
She prefers Alan Tam, the Hong Kong pop singer, whose melodies resemble rock songs everywhere. 
''She likes Cantonese opera, she likes it,'' said the father. 
''I don't like it, I don't like it,'' said the daughter.
And therein lies the challenge for Cantonese opera, and indeed for much of Chinese culture: How can traditional arts such as opera or calligraphy, which flowered with one of the world's greatest civilizations, attract today's generation of denim-clad Chinese, seduced by Western songs, films and way of life?
To a foreign ear, Cantonese opera may be a musical experience rivaled only by a classroom of second-grade maestros scratching their fingernails on a blackboard. 
Yet, if the singing is an acquired taste, the grace and subtlety of movement impress even the most callow observer.
Like its northern cousin, Peking opera, Cantonese opera combines a libretto that borders on poetry with magnificent costumes and choreography. 
The movement and makeup in Cantonese opera, however, often seem more natural than those of Peking opera. 
And of course Peking opera is performed in Mandarin Chinese instead of the Cantonese dialect spoken in Hong Kong.
Older people in Hong Kong still love Cantonese opera, and prize it as the bulwark of traditional culture. 
Its heyday, in fact, came during this century, from the 1920's to the 1950's. 
At a government-subsidized performance this month in a Hong Kong gymnasium, operagoers, many of whom could remember foot binding and Imperial China, began lining up more than an hour before the performance and filled every nook of the auditorium.
''Young people don't like to see Cantonese opera; that's left to old hags like us,'' said Siu Ngankwan, a tiny 84-year-old woman with hollow eyes and memories of the operas she saw as a girl growing up in Canton.
Young people spurn Cantonese opera partly because of its complexity and subtlety - which, to others, are its virtues. 
Every gesture, every swish of a long white sleeve, every tint in the painted faces conveys meaning. 
A whip in the hand means that the actor is riding a horse; a red face suggests righteousness and a white face, craftiness.
Therefore the dilemma for Cantonese opera is whether to maintain traditional purity, or to make opera more accessible by modifying it. 
In essence it is the same question that Western culture faces: Should Shakespeare be translated into a modern idiom, or, can an Italian opera be performed in English?
Without adaptation, traditional cultural achievements - such as Tang Dynasty poetry in China or Ovid's Metamorphoses in the West - tend to wither in influence.
The quandary may be particularly acute in the Chinese world, where conformity to artistic tradition plays a greater role than in the West. 
Chinese painters, for example, traditionally copied the exact works of their masters over and over.
In the United States, it sometimes seems as if every 25-year-old director feels obliged to interpret Sophocles in a radical new way, often a tribute more to imagination than to judgment. 
In the Chinese world, on the other hand, the artist feels obliged to follow his elders. 
Cantonese opera, which dates to the first half of the 18th century, has changed in some ways. 
Early in this century many libretti were written in colloquial language. 
Western instruments are sometimes found in the orchestras. 
Sets are more elaborate, and microphones are common. 
''It is good to change, to keep good elements while allowing others to die out,'' said Leung Puikam, an expert on Chinese opera at the Chinese University of Hong Kong. 
Cantonese opera originated with troupes who wandered from village to village, performing in the streets or in teahouses. 
Even today, Cantonese opera is more the Oriental equivalent of vaudeville than of Western opera. 
In Hong Kong, an opera is a casual evening out, to which the Chinese wear old clothes and perhaps gnaw on a chicken foot during the performance.
Western opera connotes sophistication, so people might feign enthusiasm even if they do not feel it. 
But the folding chairs, constant chatter and discarded chicken bones in the audience of Cantonese opera suggest to some young people a legacy that is more embarrassing than inspiring.
Today the greatest cultural stars in the Chinese world are pop singers like Alan Tam and Anita Mui, whose rock music is based on Western and Japanese styles; or celluloid heartthrobs like Jackie Chan, a martial arts expert who is Hong Kong's most eligible bachelor. 
Cantonese opera buffs scoff at the crooners, just as devotees of Bartok or Brahms may be put off by by Bruce Springsteen or Barbra Streisand.
For all of the obstacles facing Cantonese opera, there does seem to have been a modest revival in the last few years. 
Last year, for example, some 22,000 people attended performances in the New Territories section of Hong Kong, up from 15,000 a year earlier. 
A few new troupes have also been organized. 
But even opera singers say that the principal reason for the revival is increased support from local governments.
While some young performers study Cantonese opera, there are no sweeping attempts to reinterpret the medium. 
Few new libretti are written today, and no Arthur Miller has appeared to substitute modern themes and everyday people for the old folk tales, kings and generals that usually dominate the operas. 
Even the younger students of Cantonese opera sometimes regard it as only a sidelight.
Tin Kitwan, a 25-year-old woman who has been studying Cantonese opera for three years, said that the field did not pay well enough these days to attract her as a career, so she will pursue Cantonese opera only part time.
''I want to be a star,'' she said, ''but a part-time star.''
