
Hong Kong is emerging as an increasingly important trading partner for South Africa, offering Pretoria an eager market for gold and diamonds as well as a chance to trade quietly with China.
South Africa is barred from doing business in much of Asia because of its policies of racial separation, but South Africa's trade with Hong Kong, Taiwan and Japan is booming.
''South African trade to and from the Far East is up tremendously in the last six months due to the gold trade and relaxation by South African authorities of their import restrictions,'' said Roger Poyton, manager of shipping agencies for Jardine, Matheson & Company. 
Jardine has extensive South African holdings.
Trade ties between Hong Kong and South Africa are growing
Official statistics show that South African purchases of Hong Kong goods in the first 11 months of 1980, the latest period for which figures are available, spurted by 80 percent, to $100 million. 
Manufactured items and textiles made up the bulk of this trade.
The value of goods from other countries that are transshipped through Hong Kong, primarily from China, also increased by 82 percent, to $35 million.
 
Rise in Exports Is Modest
South African exports to Hong Kong increased a modest 8 percent, to $208 million during the same period, but the official statistics do not include the bulk of gold or diamonds sold to Hong Kong and hence reflect only part of Pretoria's stake in the British colony.
Gold traders, for example, report that 170,000 Krugerrands, the one-ounce South African gold coins, were sold in Hong Kong in 1980 and that the 1981 target is 200,000. 
At an average price of $500, that will represent overall sales of $100 million this year.
''The Krugerrand has made great headway,'' said Eugene R. Hardman, general manager of Deak & Company (Far East) Ltd., a major gold trader. 
''The Krugerrand has now come to the forefront because Hong Kong has picked up an international perspective on gold.''
Mr. Hardman said Hong Kong now boasted the largest retail sales of physical gold of any city in the world. 
Zurich acts as a clearing house, London as a bullion center and New York as a futures market, he said.
Official trade figures also do not reflect the value of South African diamonds that find their way to Hong Kong by a circuitous route but that have made the colony the world's third-largest diamond marketing center -for retail sales - after the United States and Japan, according to the Diamond Information Center, a unit of De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd.
In addition, Asia's first diamond exchange is scheduled to open in Hong Kong in July, further enhancing the colony's role in marketing South Africa's gems.
 
Details Are Not Discussed
South African officials, sensitive to any threat to their Far East trade, are hesitant to discuss details. 
One trade official at the South African Consulate said Hong Kong was ''not a tremendously important market, by no means the best.''
The official position also is that South Africa is not aware of any transshipments of its goods, although interviews with traders indicate that Pretoria is buying Chinese goods and selling to China through Hong Kong.
The most sensitive trade is in South Africa's strategic metals. 
Although China is an exporter of titanium and gold, it relies on South African chrome, often transshipped via Mozambican ports or Macao, to make stainless steel.
No figures are available here on South African chrome exports, which are a closely guarded secret, even in South Africa. 
The shipments to China, however, do not involve a large amount of chrome. 
Officially, total South African transshipments to China via Hong Kong in the first 11 months of 1980 totaled $300,000, although that figure represents only a fraction of total.
''The deals are put together here although no one really knows how the stuff gets there,'' said a veteran China trader, who declined to be identified, concerning chrome shipments.
''The South African trade has to be treated sensitively,'' he said. 
''The Chinese are still trying to be friends with the blacks.''
From South Africa's point of view, its trade with China is sensitive because Pretoria does not want to risk offending the rival nationalist regime on Taiwan, which has become a major economic and military ally.
 
Payment Often in Gold
Despite the absence of diplomatic relations between Pretoria and Peking and the obvious risk of offending their allies, trade between the two countries is growing. 
Hong Kong statistics showed that, in the first 11 months of 1980, Chinese goods valued at about $20 million were shipped through Hong Kong to South Africa.
South African exiles say one reason the Chinese are eager to do business with Pretoria is that payment often is in the form of gold. 
''Even the purest, most ideological Communist never turns down gold,'' said one exile with extensive trade contacts. 
In addition to gold and diamonds, South Africa is exporting more mundane goods such as coal, iron ore, manganese, corn, soybeans, grains and sugar to Hong Kong and other Far East points. 
Manufactured items include steel products, automotive spare parts and construction materials.
One of the companies responsible for this trade is the Far East Commodities and Trading Company, which ostensibly has its headquarters in Brussels. 
The managing director, David Boddy, a South African, acknowledged in an interview, however, that his office was primarily engaged in shipping South African commodities to the Far East.
Other South African residents of Hong Kong describe the company as ''a South African organization,'' with ties to the Government, but Mr. Boddy denies that the company is controlled or owned by the Government.
Mr. Boddy said one key to his country's success in penetrating Asian markets was that its bulk commodities were shipped in such a way as to avoid identification of their origin.
''There is nobody who can look at an ear of corn and say it was grown in such and such a cornfield,'' he said.
