
In a reversal, the Hong Kong Government has begun to acknowledge that rising emigration among skilled and professional workers is hurting the thriving economy of this British colony, which is due to be returned to China in 1997.
As part of an effort to confront the problem, the Government this week announced the formation of a task force on emigration. 
The announcement marked an important policy shift for the Government, which has consistently denied that middle-class residents have been emigrating in unusually high numbers to escape the Chinese takeover. 
The official position was growing less tenable each week as new reports and surveys detailed new labor shortages linked to emigration.
The Government's position had long been that emigration patterns in this prosperous colony were normal.
But two weeks ago, Hong Kong's Governor, Sir David Wilson, acknowledged during a news conference that ''we have to face the fact that there is a problem because even though the figures have not gone up enormously, there are more people from the key middle management sector leaving.''
Cautioning that its figures are sketchy, the Government has estimated that 27,000 residents emigrated last year, almost double the number in 1986. 
The latest figure is also sharply higher than the 20,000 who emigrated annually before 1984, the year Britain agreed to return Hong Kong to China.
Experts said the official figures are conservative, and the Government said collecting reliable emigration numbers will be the first job of the task force, which will ultimately recommend measures to stem the flow.
Peter Tsao, the colony's secretary for administrative services and information, attributed the increased emigration to opportunities abroad as well as to a lack of confidence in the colony's future.
Last month, a private survey of major businesses found that emigration had increased, and that executives said they were losing college-educated, mid-level managers, many in their 30's. 
Two key sectors of the economy -trade and the finance - are among those hardest hit.
''This isn't a blip,'' said Paul Kirkbride, the author of the survey and a lecturer at City Polytechnic of Hong Kong. 
''The trend is up.''
The Government has maintained that many who leave the territory return here to work once they have the insurance of a second citizenship. 
But companies surveyed by Mr. Kirkbride estimated that only 2 in 10 emigrants return.
The Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation, the largest bank here, said it had lost 8 percent of its employees to emigration last year, compared with 3 percent in 1986. 
Two other major banks have announced cash bonuses for employees who recruit friends or neighbors to work as clerks and tellers, and one has offered a reward of more than $1,000 for any employee who brings in an assistant vice president.
While China has promised to grant the territory ''a high degree of autonomy,'' most people here are immigrants or relatives of immigrants who fled the political and economic policies of the mainland and have little faith in Beijing's promises.
Business executives and Western diplomats said privately that while they expected some professionals to emigrate as 1997 approached, they did not expect the rush to begin this early. 
As in the private sector, the Government also faces labor shortages caused by emigration. 
The colony's firefighting force, for example, has lost 10 percent of its senior fire officials, all ethnic Chinese who have emigrated in the past two years.
Both British and Chinese officials have sought to reassure the jittery, distrustful middle class that Beijing wants to preserve Hong Kong's successful free-enterprise system.
But some observers said confidence has been undercut by, among other recent political developments, the release of a draft of the basic law that will govern the territory after 1997. 
The draft was criticized by advocates of democracy here, who said it failed to safeguard the rights and autonomy of the territory.
