
IT was lunchtime in one of this British colony's finest Chinese restaurants, a plushly carpeted aerie overlooking Victoria Harbor. 
Clear skies in the wake of the annual typhoons made for a picture-postcard view of junks and freighters and Navy frigates from the United States; behind them, grey-green mountains stretched into China.
Below, in the central district, where skyscrapers produce an aura of an Asian Manhattan, sidewalks pulsed with the energy that has turned this patch of territory into one of the world's most important financial and trading centers. 
In the restaurant, the tables were filled with Chinese and Americans and Europeans brought together by the deals in the textiles, toys and electronics that pour out of the industrial districts of Kowloon, the teeming city across the harbor.
Lunchtime talk was mostly of discounts and freight rates and currency fluctuations, but three middle-aged Chinese at a corner table paused between servings of steamed prawns and beef Szechuan-style to take up a matter that has become almost all-consuming among the colony's middle class: how to obtain foreign passports or other papers that would allow them to emigrate more easily. 
An intense-looking man with gold-rimmed spectacles explained how an acquaintance recently acquired a Fiji passport. 
The man's companions chuckled, then asked for details.
A year after Britain formally agreed to surrender sovereignty over Hong Kong to China on July 1, 1997, the mood in the business community is a mixture of confidence and caution. 
With the removal of the uncertainties that arose during the sometimes bitter negotiations between London and Peking, the economy is back to a healthy growth rate. 
This year, growth was about 4.5 percent, down from the 9 percent growth rate achieved on record export levels in 1984 but a major improvement over the early 1980's, when fears of a unilateral Chinese takeover and a recession in the United States combined to bring about a slump.
The stock market, too, has achieved a four-year high. 
Parcels of luxury real estate, which fell to a fraction of their values in 1983, are once more fetching record bids. 
A decline in exports overseas has been offset by a leap in the colony's traditional staple, trade with China.
The 1984 agreement has played a major part in this, assuring investors that they have at least a few years in which business will be played by the old rules, or by something close to them. 
For the last two decades, Hong Kong has been a place where investors could pour capital into hotels, office blocks and cross-harbor tunnels and retrieve it with a profit in as little as three to five years. 
Almost everybody agrees that there is that much time, perhaps more, before the shadows of 1997 cast a pall.
Despite the inevitable crowding in this 404-square-mile territory, most of the 5.5 million inhabitants are not likely to have any choice but to stay. 
Most potential destinations, including Britain, have made it plain they could not handle an influx of refugees. 
For these people, the handover could be a nightmare - a plunge from a freewheeling society that is relatively affluent by Asian standards into one that could mirror that of China which, despite China's recent reforms, is still considered repressive and backward by most in Hong Kong.
In the past 12 months China has been energetic in trying to calm anxieties, at least insofar as they relate to the maintenance of the colony's standard of living. 
It has worked with Britain on complex technical issues such as the establishment of an independent Hong Kong shipping registry. 
It has expanded its already substantial investments here, moving on at least two occasions to save major locally owned enterprises from collapse. 
Beyond this, it has lost no opportunity to voice its determination to keep the territory prosperous. 
The message was repeated over and over during the two-week visit here earlier this month of Ji Pengfei, the former Chinese Foreign Minister who is in charge of the Peking Government's Hong Kong Office. 
That agency has responsibility for drawing up the constitution, under which the territory will operate as a ''special administrative region'' of China after 1997. 
NEVERTHELESS, talk of eventual emigration is common among merchants, brokers and lawyers, and without them, Hong Kong could swiftly turn into an expensive drain on Peking. 
Thoughts of leaving are perhaps inevitable, since more than three-quarters of the Chinese families in Hong Kong either fled or are descended from people who fled China after the revolution succeeded in 1949. 
''Remember, most of us are refugees from Communism in the first place,'' said Martin Lee, a British-trained lawyer.
Lately, Mr. Lee, who is 47 years old, has been leading a local outcry over statements from Peking that there should be no ''democratization'' of local political processes in advance of 1997. 
The British agreement with Peking refers to an elected legislature after 1997, and to the appointment ''by election or through consultations'' of a Chinese chief executive to replace the British governor.
The apparent balking at political change has raised concerns about Peking's willingness to honor other guarantees in the 1984 accord. 
These include commitments to preserve Hong Kong's ''capitalist'' system for 50 years after 1997, along with its stock market, its convertible currency and its free port.
Nevertheless, some local executives say that arguments about prospects for the territory after 1997 obscure the fact that Hong Kong even now is moving more into China's economic orbit for reasons that have little to do with the 1984 accord. 
At the end of 1984, the territory was still the world's largest exporter of clothing, fur garments and toys, and nobody here sees much danger of those markets disappearing. 
But official figures suggest that these boom industries of the 1970's are gradually yielding their dominance and that Hong Kong is re-emphasizing its historic role as the gateway to China, but this time on a much larger scale.
Hong Kong suffered a 5 percent decline in the manufacturing work force this year, but offsetting that has been an impressive 10 percent jump in employment in the wholesale, retail and service sectors - with much of the gain in businesses that are profiting from the rapid economic growth spurred by Deng Xiaoping's ''modernization'' drive in China.
The executives here say that this basic shift in the Hong Kong economy involves more than just the slowdown in economic growth in the United States, the colony's largest export market. 
They point out that Hong Kong also faces growing competition from other Asian countries, including China, that have low-cost labor, and that the colony is having difficulty moving from low-technology industries into more sophisticated fields. 
THESE trends make the China trade increasingly important. 
In the first nine months of 1985, that trade leapt by 33 percent over 1984, to a total of 88 billion Hong Kong dollars, or $11.3 billion United States dollars, more than a quarter of the colony's total trade. 
While more than half the total was accounted for by ''re-export trade,'' goods that pass through Hong Kong on their way to and from other markets, there was also a more than 50 percent leap in Hong Kong's own exports to the mainland. 
How significant the trend is for Hong Kong can be measured from figures that show total trade with China in 1979, at the beginning of Mr. Deng's reform program, to be barely 17 billion Hong Kong dollars, roughly 15 percent of the total expected this year.
Without the increase in trade with the mainland, the territory would almost certainly have been in a mild recession this year, a point that Peking's Mr. Ji made during his visit, reminding audiences that Hong Kong was becoming increasingly dependent on China's prosperity.
China is making that point in other ways. 
At a choice site near the Hong Kong waterfront, work will begin soon on a new building designed by I.M. 
Pei as the local headquarters of the Bank of China, Peking's foreign exchange bank. 
Apart from the personal gratification involved for Mr. Pei - his father was the bank's first Hong Kong manager in the 1930's -the building's triangular glass towers and its height, at 70 stories the tallest in the colony, will make for a powerful symbol. 
The new headquarters nearby of the locally controlled Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation, giant of the territory's banking industry, stands only 47 stories and has been pilloried for a skeletal appearance that one local critic compared with ''an oil-cracking plant.''
Peking has also been pumping in large amounts of money to save Conic Investment Ltd., a major manufacturer of televisions, radios and electronic components, and to prop up the failing Ka Wah Bank, which was founded by local Chinese. 
In both cases, Peking's money men consulted local experts closely before making their moves, and won plaudits for their sophistication.
''We're not dealing any longer with the baggy-suited chaps in sandals,'' one British financial official observed. 
''They still come, of course, but more and more we're seeing people who could hold their own anywhere, in tailoring or know-how.''
There are now more than 300 Chinese-owned enterprises in the territory. 
Many of these are part of China Resources Holdings Ltd., the huge trading and investment enterprise that is the mainland's answer to traditional British ''hongs,'' family-controlled conglomerates like Jardine Matheson Holdings Ltd. and Swire Pacific Ltd., whose dominance of business in the territory has faded rapidly in recent years before the challenge of local Chinese entrepreneurs. 
One reason for this, critics of the British say, is that they have been slow to adjust to new circumstances - including the importance of the China market.
But lately, even the hongs have been altering their approach. 
Since Jardine's moved its legal address to Bermuda in 1984, a largely symbolic move that deeply angered Peking, the British-owned companies have shown a new sensitivity to politics and geography. 
One example came last month, when Swire's announced that it would make a public offering of up to 25 percent of the equity in Cathay Pacific Airways Ltd., a 70 percent-owned subsidiary that has been the company's most profitable holding. 
Analysts said the move was a response to the formation of a new Hong Kong-registered airline, Hongkong Dragon Airlines Ltd., in which Peking has a substantial stake.
By admitting Hong Kong investors to part-ownership of the airline, Swire's chairman, Michael Miles, evidently hopes to give the carrier a local presence that will protect it once Peking controls Hong Kong's Kai Tak Airport, where Cathay is based. 
But the view among airline industry watchers here was that the move could be a case of too little, too late.
Dragonair's chairman is Sir Yue-kong Pao, the Hong Kong shipping magnate who has been developing close ties with Peking, and its appeal to China has been enhanced by its announcement that it will train Chinese flight crews. 
Cathay Pacific has operated in Hong Kong for 39 years and has numerous Chinese employees, but none among the 500 people it employs in its cockpits.
In some ways, the airline's dilemma epitomizes the problems facing many of the British companies that once ruled the roost here. 
The sons of Britain's upper classes who have long enjoyed the fast route into the companies' executive suites have proven no match for the nimble Chinese entrepreneurs in recent years. 
Jardine's, largest of all the ''hongs,'' has seen its assets shrink by more than a quarter in the past few years.
In the meantime, the influence of American companies has risen sharply, to the point where there are now more than 15,000 Americans living here, employed by about 800 American companies with local offices, factories or joint ventures.
For the foreigners, 1997 poses less of a problem. 
Privately, many Britons say they will return home before then. 
Americans tend to be more sanguine about the prospects - but they, too, have passports that permit a relaxed view.
 
THE RICH FOLK GO A'COURTING IN PEKING
HONG KONG -In the year since Britain signed the agreement under which Hong Kong will revert to China in 1997, local millionaires have been conspicuously courting Peking's favor. 
One name that crops up frequently is that of Sir Yue-kong Pao, known as Sir Y. K., chairman of the Worldwide Shipping Company, whose maritime interests, real estate, and other holdings have made him one of the colony's richest men.
The shipping magnate - the ''Sir'' comes from a knighthood bestowed upon him by Queen Elizabeth - rarely gives interviews. 
But associates say that he believes that China's official guarantees will matter less than the personal relationships that leaders here can build up with the top men in China, and the degree to which they can ''educate'' the Peking elite in the things that make Hong Kong tick. 
To this end, Sir Y. K. has become a frequent visitor to Peking and his native town of Ningbo, east of Shanghai, and has more than once been a guest of China's pre-eminent leader, Deng Xiaoping, in the Great Hall of the People.
Along the way he made a major contribution to the construction costs of Peking's newest luxury hotel, the Zhao Long, whose opening last month was the occasion for one of Mr. Deng's rare appearances at a public function outside the Great Hall. 
Sir Y. K. has also pledged nearly $16 million for the establishment of a university in Ningbo.
None of this is much different from the courting of the British establishment that has been going on for decades among prominent Chinese in Hong Kong. 
What has disturbed some people here is Sir Y. K.'s political stance. 
Along with Li Kaxing, another wealthy businessman, Sir Y. K. was appointed by Peking to participate in the drafting of the basic law that will govern Hong Kong after the transition. 
It is an open secret that one of his first moves in the drafting committee was to speak against direct elections.
Few here see this as a conspiracy. 
Rather, many believe that wealthy citizens like Sir Y. K. find themselves, paradoxically, sharing Peking's anxieties about popular government. 
People like Sir Y. K., it is believed, fear that elected legislators might usher in an expensive social welfare program. 
Apart from a huge public housing program that has provided homes for more than half the population, Hong Kong currently has only a rudimentary welfare system. 
Taxes are at levels low enough to be the envy of entrepreneurs throughout Asia.
