
The fight started as a routine quarrel between a tenant and the landlord who wanted to evict her from her home in the teeming Jinhua neighborhood of western Canton.
When such petty harassment as exploding firecrackers on her threshhold did not budge the tenant, Hu Siye, the landlord and his two sons battered down her door one night. 
One son beat Miss Hu's son, She Huxiaqn, with a heavy pole.
Frantic neighbors summoned not the police but the local mediation committee, who arrived as Mr. She was flourishing a cleaver.
Article on neighborhood mediation committees in China which handle nearly seven million local disputes each year and which, according to Ministry of Justice, prevented 80,000 incidents of homicide, suicide and bodily injury as well as saving considerable time and expense in judicial litigation; says recourse to mediation is rooted in Chinese tradition; photo (M)
''We talked to these two families and stopped She from using the cleaver,'' said Li Lixin, the mediation committee director. 
In the bargaining that followed, the landlord agreed to pay for Mr. She's medical treatment and repair the broken door. 
The son who hit Mr. She submitted to police detention for 10 days.
''After education and our work, the families stopped fighting,'' Miss Li reported.
 
Rooted in Chinese Tradition
In the United States, such a fight would probably have ended in court, but not in China, where neighborhood mediation committees handled nearly seven million local disputes last year. 
According to the mediation department of the Ministry of Justice, neighborhood mediation prevented 80,000 incidents of homicide, suicide and bodily injury in 1983 as well as saving considerable time and expense in judicial litigation.
The recourse to mediation is rooted in Chinese tradition, but it was also popular in the 1950's before radicals scrapped the nation's legal system in the Cultural Revolution. 
Mediation was incorporated into the civil procedure code adopted in March 1982 to revive the rule of law.
The physical limitations of China's legal system, which has only 15,000 full- time and part-time lawyers, is just one reason for the popularity of mediation. 
Ordinary Chinese have an inherent suspicion of courts and prefer to settle disputes within the family or neighborhood rather than before strangers.
As a result, most cases never reach court. 
Last year Chinese lawyers handled 72,000 criminal cases and 37,000 civil cases, according to Minister of Justice Zou Yu. 
By contrast, neighborhood mediation comittees, which have grown to more than 927,000 nationwide, resolved 6,978,179 cases in 1983.
''The purpose of setting up mediation committees is so the people themselves, not officials, can resolve problems,'' said Liu Dadan, a Jinhua committee member. 
''We have the advantage of knowing the people well, so we can accomplish the work more easily.''
While mediation has attracted the attention of some Western legal experts as a way to alleviate overloaded courts, it seems to work in China because the Communist Party promotes it and because many Chinese are sensitive to the opinions of their neighbors.
In the Jinhua neighborhood, the mediation committee handled 98 cases last year and referred only three to the courts, said Miss Li, an affable woman who displayed an indefatigable interest in the lives of those around her.
The mediation committee, whose half-dozen members are mostly retired workers with little else to do, tries to head off problems before they develop by putting up posters in Jinhua, a neighborhood of narrow lanes and quaint row houses with red tile roofs.
Miss Li said the committee had reformed all but 17 of the neighborhood's 129 known juvenile delinquents and that the remaining miscreants ''have gotten better.''
 
A Little Arm-Twisting Helps
In theory, mediation can take place only with the consent of all parties, but the Jinhua committee has sometimes done a little arm-twisting.
In one case, Li Xiaoyun, a textile worker, broke off a romance with Xie Penghui, a laborer. 
The lovesick Mr. Xie kept coming to Miss Xie's house and, when her father refused to admit him, followed her when she went out.
''She became frightened of him,'' Li Lixin said. 
''She didn't dare to go to work and stayed at home.''
The committee tracked down Mr. Xie and, Miss Li said, ''we educated him not to do this because love and marriage are something both sides must agree to.''
The mediation committee is not timid about rushing into a marital fray. 
After Li Junan, a factory worker, began beating his wife, Lan Xiaoyun, during their quarrels, she packed up and went back to her mother. 
The mediation committee visited his home and, despite his hostility, ''we stayed there and talked to him for several hours,'' Miss Li said. 
''He was moved by our serious attitude and enthusiasm.''
Mr. Li agreed to treat his wife properly and she returned home.
The committee has been as determined to discourage divorce, which still carries a stigma in China. 
Li Wenting also beat up his wife, Li Yelan, on 15 occasions. 
She returned to her mother and then applied for a divorce.
''We talked to them by turns more than 10 times over eight months,'' said Zhu Hua, a committee member. 
''We educated her husband in the marriage law and made him correct his attitude.''
His wife kept demanding a divorce until last November, when the committee got her to withdraw the application.
Miss Li conceded there were cases where mediation had failed. 
An old woman named Li Chong said that her son and daughter-in-law mistreated her by feeding her poorly and tampering with her sewing machine. 
After four tries, the committee gave up and referred the case to a court because they feared for the woman's health. 
The court ordered the couple to pay Li Chong subsistence money each month as part of their duty to support her.
When violence is likely, the committee may turn the matter over to the Public Security Bureau, as the police are called. 
''If both sides are holding knives or cleavers and it affects the peace and security of our neighborhood, we'll get help from the Public Security Bureau,'' said Liu Didan.
But in most cases, it seems, the persuasion of the mediation committee wins out.''We are convinced that with effort we can get people to adopt the right opinion and they will get on better,'' Mr. Liu said.
