
THE REVISION OF HISTORY IS A NEVER-ending process. 
Each generation, it is said, rewrites history in the light of its own experience. 
But when the historical event is defeat in war, as Japan experienced in World War II and the United States experienced in Vietnam, the impulse to ignore or explain away or tidy up the defeat is particularly strong.
In such cases, history is an embarrassment. 
If the defeat is marked by widescale atrocity on the battlefield or by initial aggression of the defeated power - as in Japan's case - the embarrassment is that much more humiliating, and the impulse to sanitize it is that much stronger. 
A country is apt to go through a period of amnesia, when its citizens simply do not want to think about the downbeat side of its recent past.
The loss of memory can go on for years. 
Sometimes, after the period of amnesia, history re-emerges in a distorted fashion. 
Its embarrassments are not as clearly recalled as its heroics or its near-victories. 
A country's own suffering is better remembered than the suffering it caused.
Inevitably, there are questions: What should succeeding generations be taught about the darker periods, what weight should those times be given?
On a recent trip to Japan, I explored such questions with a number of Japanese educators and writers and government officials, for I expected that the problems the Japanese face, and perhaps the solutions they have found, 40 years after World War II, might tell us something about America's memories of its own dark periods. 
IN A SPARE, UNADORNED CLASSROOM AT HIROSHIMA University, across from the only structure on the campus to survive the atomic blast, a frail Asian scholar named Humio Kobayashi began his lecture in a course titled ''Comprehensive View of War and Peace.''
Speaking softly, he opened with a challenge.
''You are,'' he said, ''ignorant of your country's aggressive past. 
You are not responsible for that ignorance, because you have been forced to be that way. 
But if you are to have a true concept of peace, you need a historical context.''
An unrelenting two-hour discourse on the bellicose instincts of the Japanese nation in the 20th century followed. 
With quiet intensity, Professor Kobayashi spoke of Hiroshima, with its military port of Ujina, which became the chief military depot for the invasions of China in 1894 and 1931; of the victory over Russia in 1904 and 1905 that validated Japanese imperialism in Korea and originated the prejudice against Korean people by the Japanese, which endures today; and of the atrocity at Nanjing in 1937 that showed the Japanese potential for barbarism.
In a hushed classroom, Professor Kobayashi drew his conclusion: ''It is said that over 200,000 people were killed in the atomic-bomb attacks on Hiroshima and Nagasaki. 
. . . But this tragedy of Hiroshima happened as a natural course of events. 
From 1931 to 1945, we Japanese killed more than 10 million Chinese, the majority civilians. 
Have you heard about that?
''Some say, 'But that was different. 
Chinese are different from us.'
Even some survivors of the atomic bomb here sometimes say that. 
Of course, atomic bombings can not be countenanced. 
But there was a reason. 
Japanese were the aggressors, and so it was inevitable that they would end up as victims.''
At the end of two hours, two graduate students, both of whom had been born in the 1960's, when Japan's era of economic growth took off, approached the front of the classroom to discuss their trip to Nanjing the year before with Professor Kobayashi. 
The first student spoke softly of walking along a road near a site where reportedly 10,000 Chinese had been slaughtered by Japanese soldiers. 
The area had recently been excavated and human bones were clearly visible. 
As he spoke of his shame, the youth's voice cracked, and he concluded quickly with the hope that the students in the class could see this for themselves.
The professor was not surprised by the young man's reaction.
''When I take students to China . . . students who were brought up in affluence,'' Kobayashi said, ''who have never seen poverty anywhere and don't know it exists, who have lived entirely in a peaceful Japan, they go through culture shock. 
This is what I can do as an individual. 
All educators must share this kind of mission, for if this present trend of beautifying the seamy side of our history continues, history could repeat itself.''
T HERE IS A SENSE now that Japan has arrived at a historical bench mark, at which economic power alone begins to seem hollow. 
Concerns about the ''Japanese soul'' are moving to the fore. 
For the first time in 40 years, basic institutions are being questioned; among them, education is one of the most hotly debated.
Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone has declared that the postwar era of Japanese history is now at an end. 
Forty years after Japan's humiliation, a new era, unassociated with that humiliation, must begin. 
All institutions, especially those imposed upon Japan after its defeat, must now undergo a ''total re-evaluation.''
Using accountants' parlance, he asserts that it is time ''to settle accounts'' and ''to close the books.''
A new educational system must match the social changes and the cultural developments of the last 40 years. 
To that end, he has formed the Provisional Council on Educational Reform. 
From its early draft proposals, the commission -whose members are, for the most part, conservative and nationalistic - is clearly looking for ways to strengthen traditional values and moral education.
But all this talk of new societies, of reviving traditional values, of reinforcing moral education, make some Japanese nervous indeed. 
It is, they say, merely a code for reviving prewar imperial values: what Nakasone is really up to is a master plan for the remilitarization of Japan; for scrapping the peace constitution with its total renunciation of war; for teaching a patriotism that is dangerous.
The controversial novelist Kenzaburo Oe feels, for example, that talk of a new era is nothing short of an attempt to nullify the lessons of World War II and to undermine the unique Japanese vision, molded in the ashes of defeat. 
That vision was of a world without nuclear weapons, in which Japan would be the world's spiritual leader. 
For Oe, whose work examines the spiritual emptiness of a nation fixated upon material wealth, the authenticity of Japan's spiritual leadership is rooted not only in the wretchedness of a nuclear holocaust, but also in the honest acknowledgment of the Nanjing massacre as a poisonous seed.
The official visit of Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone in August to the Yasukuni Shrine for the Japanese who died in World War II only served to exacerbate fears of a new militarism and a state Shintoism. 
Although the Prime Minister tried to put the worries to rest, the symbolic move aroused condemnation at home and abroad. 
In its first official reaction, China attacked the visit, contending that it ''pandered to and has actually emboldened those in Japan who have always wanted to deny the aggressive nature of the war and to reverse the verdict on Japanese militarism long condemned to the dustbin of history.''
Then, in September, on the anniversary of the Mukden incident in 1931 that led to the Japanese invasion of Manchuria, more than 1,000 students marched in Peking, shouting anti-Japanese slogans and protesting Nakasone's visit to the shrine. 
Again, the Japanese seemed to be caught out at the virulence of the reaction. 
Just this month, bowing to Chinese sentiment, Nakasone canceled his intended second visit to the Yasukuni Shrine. 
Nonetheless, two weeks ago, the topic of a revival of militarism arose at talks between the Foreign Minister of Japan, Shintaro Abe, and the Foreign Minister of China, Wu Xueqian.
Americans might take offense at Nakasone's official homage as well. 
In a prominent place at the Yasukuni Shrine, a letter from a 15-year-old Okinawa boy is displayed. 
He was embroiled in the battle for Okinawa - one of the bloodiest of World War II - in which 12,000 American soldiers died. 
''I wear the uniform of the Iron Blood Imperial Corps to demolish the United States and Great Britain,'' the letter, in graceful calligraphy, reads. 
''There will come a time when Okinawa sees victory.''
Three years ago, worries about militarism surfaced in Japan in a curious way. 
Over a period of four months, torrid headlines charged that the Ministry of Education was out to ''water down,'' ''prettify,'' ''sanitize'' or otherwise ignore the unpleasant facts of modern Japanese history. 
Extraordinarily, the controversy became a serious diplomatic flap, when China and Korea leaped in with emotional official protests.
At issue was a pattern of textbook revisions that made historical embarrassments more palatable. 
In Japan, the education ministry validates all textbooks for use in elementary and secondary schools. 
It is called the authorization procedure, and is justified on the notion of insuring a standard level of excellence in the schools.
Authorization systems of this sort are scarcely unheard of in democratic countries. 
In Germany, the 11 states approve school texts, and each state has specific guidelines for sensitive subjects, such as how to deal with the Third Reich. 
In France, the Ministere de l'Education Nationale decides what French schoolchildren should be taught about the French debacle in the Algerian war and the weak resistance during the Nazi occupation. 
An old saw about French education holds that at any given minute in the school year one can know the precise page of the precise textbook that every sixth grader in France is studying.
The Japanese position that its own authorization system has only to do with standards of excellence foundered, however, when, in 1982, it came to light that the newly authorized high-school textbooks used semantics to obscure painful historical memories. 
Just as the United States' invasion of Cambodia was presented as an ''incursion'' and the invasion of Grenada was painted as a ''rescue mission,'' so the Japanese invasion of China in 1931 had been recast as an ''advance.''
Still worse, the Nanjing massacre of 1937 had become an episode of ''mob confusion,'' during which ''innumerable civilians and soldiers were killed'' -no mention by whom, no mention that fatalities numbered between 200,000 and 300,000. 
The Chinese Government was outraged, and the official Peking Review charged that, in distorting historical facts, the education ministry sought to ''obliterate from the memory of Japan's younger generation the history of Japan's aggression against China and other Asian countries so as to lay the basis for reviving militarism.''
In Korea, where Japan tried systematically for 40 years to merge the Korean identity into the Japanese empire, the Government was livid at the new ''updating'' of history. 
Not only had the annexation of Korea in 1910 become an ''advance'' of Japanese forces, but the March 1 uprising of Korean resisters in 1919 had become a ''riot.''
The outlawing of the Korean language became ''education in the Japanese language.''
Koreans were ''conscripted'' rather than forcibly impressed into service. 
Prayer to the Japanese spirits at Shinto shrines was ''encouraged,'' not required. 
The last Korean king simply ''resigned.''
No mention was made of the fact that during World War II young Korean girls from the countryside were forcibly packed off to the front lines to serve as ''wartime ladies of consolation'' for Japanese troops.
Within the conservative education ministry, there was consternation at the virulence of the official Chinese and Korean protests. 
Privately, the intrusion from abroad was deeply resented: ''How would you feel if another country complained officially that the teaching of Pearl Harbor in your schools was inaccurate and provocative?'' asked Teiichi Sato, until recently the head of the textbook division at the ministry.
But diplomacy takes precedence over education and, because both China and Korea made Japan's remorse about the past a ''principle of major importance'' in diplomatic relations, Japan capitulated. 
Good relations with her two neighbors are just too important for the future. 
The Japanese promised to reinstate the words ''aggression'' and ''invasion'' to its future history texts.
Japan also promised to rectify 14 of the 19 changes demanded by Korea. 
(As yet, it has not agreed to deal with ''wartime ladies of consolation.'') The tone of national regret was evident in a note to the Korean Government. 
Acknowledging ''the great pain'' Japan had inflicted on Asian peoples, the Government pledged itself ''not to repeat such past deeds.''
Today, resentment over the meddling from abroad lingers at the education ministry.
''We are in transition, trying to go beyond the psychology of the postwar era,'' said Isao Amagi, formerly the vice minister of education. 
''The American attitude after the war was that everything before the war was wrong. 
After the war, we were cut off from the past. 
We cannot deny history, good or bad. 
But we have a long history on our back. 
While we must be aware that the Chinese and Korean people still hold anti-Japanese feelings, we don't want to exaggerate past bad events.''
Akio Nakajima, the senior division chief in charge of textbooks for elementary and secondary education, was more blunt: ''For 30 years, we have criticized ourselves severely. 
This should pass. 
There is no need for continuous cleansing now. 
We must see history from a more neutral point of view.''
In searching for a ''neutral point of view,'' Nakajima and others at the education ministry are struggling with the subtle problems of the defeated nation, while they try to find the right emphasis for certain historical embarrassments.
Clearly, education must avoid propagandizing, which was so evident in imperial Japan. 
Then, education was a tool of indoctrination. 
History textbooks for children began with the divine origins of the Emperor at Ise, and every school had a copy of the Imperial Rescript on Education, defining the virtues of the good Japanese citizen: filial piety, affection for friends, love of parents, respect for elders and obedience to the Emperor. 
Regularly, the Imperial Rescript was read at school functions; once, when it was misread, the bumbling principal committed suicide to atone.
After World War II, American occupation authorities censored Japanese school books, blacking out whole sec-tions of text. 
After the occupation, new texts rarely referred to the Emperor, and the Russo-Japanese War was described in a paragraph. 
In that lesson, the picture of a victorious Japanese admiral outside Port Arthur was replaced with a photo of President Theodore Roosevelt adjudicating the 1905 Treaty of Portsmouth between Russia and Japan in New Hampshire.
In effect, Japan was cut off from its cultural heritage. 
Historical heroes vanished from the texts, and the pendulum swung toward a ''scientific'' approach to history, one not so very different from the new genre in this country called ''Vietnam revisionism.''
Social structures and economic forces, rather than the acts of individual men, were said to move history. 
But, in the opinion of many educators, the pendulum swung too far. 
Now the problem of the education ministry is to find the correct median point between imperial propaganda and the influences of American conquerors. 
It is trying to rehumanize Japanese history. 
''We need more heroes now, not just political and wartime heroes, but cultural heroes,'' said Isao Amagi. 
''We must teach young people what those heroes did and how they served the nation.''
What about historical villains?
Upon this tender point, it is very hard to get any forthright opinion at all, much less a consensus. 
The prime candidate would seem to be Gen. Hideki Tojo who, as the Japanese Prime Minister at the time of Pearl Harbor, symbolizes to Americans the bushido spirit of Japanese military fanaticism in World War II. 
But he is scarcely mentioned in the textbooks. 
Masanori Komiya, a 19-year-old honors student at a superior Tokyo high school, knew of Tojo only as ''a bad politician'' who failed to control the military. 
When pressed for reasons for the war and for names of those who might be accountable, he blurted out: ''We don't have anything inside of us that compels us to ask our fathers why. 
Nothing to suggest blame or placing responsibility.''
In his inability to identify culprits, young Komiya was, to some extent, exhibiting an essential Japanese trait. 
In a country long ruled by consensus and factions, responsibility is seldom placed on individual leaders.
I was struck by this fact during an interview with Ryotaro Shiba, perhaps Japan's best-known historical novelist, who is something of a cross between Bruce Catton and Gore Vidal. 
Referring to Tojo as ''the midget who held the magic stick of supreme military power,'' Shiba said: ''He was a ghost - or a skeleton. 
It is a waste of time to look for answers in him. 
It is important to try to define the magic that lay in the policies then, and to see how those policies of collective leadership were executed.''
Japanese bridle at the association of Tojo with Hitler, for time has softened the once-harsh attitude toward Tojo. 
(For years, Tojo was disdained and ridiculed for his bungled attempt at suicide when American G.I.'s ar-rived at his home to arrest him.) ''The Germans could blame everything on Hitler,'' said Teiichi Sato. 
''His discrimination policy was his own. 
In our case, leadership was collective. 
Everyone has to bear the burden of the past.''
When everyone is guilty, individu-als are exonerated. 
Historically, the acceptance of collective guilt took the form of a statement on Aug. 
28, 1945, by Prince Higashikuni, who was the Prime Minister of a caretaker Government for the first two months after the war. 
Known as the ''confession of a hundred million people,'' it implicated every Japanese citizen in the war and in the defeat. 
Higashikuni felt that collective confession was the first step toward reconstruction of Japan.
Some trace this unwillingness to consign political blame back to the imperial system. 
Only the Emperor could declare war, thus the political leadership behind him was absolved. 
And yet, in this, the 60th year of Emperor Hirohito's reign, few are ready to castigate the kindly old man. 
Instead - again a matter of emphasis - it has become a hallowed verity in Japan that the Emperor, not the Americans, graciously ended the Pacific war by breaking a deadlock between the fanatics and the doves in the war cabinet with his vote for the nation's surrender.
Meanwhile, in Aichi prefecture, Gen. Hideki Tojo is buried alongside the six other men executed by Americans as war criminals. 
The inscription on the sepulcher reads: ''The Tomb of Seven Martyrs.''
Other potential villains are even less likely to be recognized: Nobusuke Kishi, Tojo's minister of commerce and industry, who was tried as a Class A war criminal and sentenced to three years in Sugamo Prison, is known as a leader of the Reconstruction Era in Japan who signed the United States-Japan Security Treaty. 
Between 1957 and 1960, he was Japan's Prime Minister. 
Today, the 89-year-old statesman wants to eliminate Article 9 from the Japanese Constitution. 
That article renounces war as an instrument of national policy. 
Old voices, even from the old militarist past, are still respected.
A T SOPHIA UNIVERSITY, Prof. Masao Kunihiro turned over his politics and economics class to me, so that I might ask his students a few questions.
Virtually every student in the class of 200 said that he had been taught nothing of Japanese history from 1930, or only the sketchiest details. 
The emphasis was on ancient eras and the Middle Ages. 
By the time a teacher reached the Meiji Era, which commenced in 1868, the pace of instruction started to pick up speed. 
Many students told of their teachers' ''running out of time'' at the end of the school year, just before reaching 1930, and of being instructed, if students were interested, ''to read the rest of the book'' on their own. 
Not a single student could remember having been asked a question relating to modern Japanese history on the all-important college entrance examinations they had taken.
Thus, it became clear that all the questions about what cast to give events such as the Nanjing massacre, Pearl Harbor, the invasion of China, the atomic bombs and the colonization of Korea, are really moot. 
As a practical matter, history from 1930 is simply not taught. 
Teachers consider the post-1930 period too fraught with political awkwardness. 
Nor is there much interest in the 30's among scholars in Japanese universities. 
(This contrasts sharply with Germany, where scholarship on the 1920's and 30's is voluminous.) As a result, young Japanese have virtually no notion of how Japan got into World War II, what major leaders were responsible, or whether Japan's cause was righteous or immoral. 
The cataclysm simply happened in the ''flow of history.''
It was something like a typhoon, which could not have been stopped and for which no one, least of all Emperor Hirohito, was held to be responsible.
One hears a great deal about Japanese ''peace education.''
But there is an irony to this; the curriculum is superficial, inconsistently used and lacking in grounding or follow-up. 
What instruction does exist emphasizes Japan as the victim of the war. 
''Peace education days'' are designated by the dates of American attacks on Japanese areas: June 23 in Okinawa, the day the battles ended there; May 29 in Yokohama, when the city received its most devastating bombing; July 7 in Kofu, for the same reason, and, of course, Aug. 
6 in Hiroshima and Aug. 
9 in Nagasaki.
In response to official pressure, the graphic detail with which the bombings at Hiroshima and Nagaski were once described in school texts has been watered down over the years. 
Recently, there has been a sharp decline in visits by schoolchildren to the frightfully realistic Peace Memorial Museum in Hiroshima. 
Such visits, students told me, are strongly discouraged now by high-school administrators, who prefer instead that students visit Kyoto or Nara, the graceful ancient capitals of Japan where an affluent young citizen can learn lessons of Japan's culture and past. 
Atomic bombs are downbeat. 
''The trend now is to emphasize the upbeat side of our modernization,'' novelist Kenzaburo Oe commented, ''Japanese are supposed to talk of Toyotas, not Toyota traffic.''
A current high-school text in wide use, written by three well-known Tokyo University professors, devotes part of only one sentence to the nuclear events. 
It reads: ''While the Japanese Government was trying to deal with the Potsdam Declaration, on Aug. 
6 in Hiroshima and Aug. 
9 in Nagaski, the United Stated dropped atomic bombs.''
There is nothing written about the special nature of the devastation, and there is no picture. 
By contrast, a 1953 text contained a bizarre Goya-esque painting of humans at the epicenter -next to copious details of the holocaust.
The way in which textbooks handle the atomic blasts is at the heart of the case of Prof. Saburo Ienaga. 
In 1963, Ienaga, professor emeritus of the Tokyo University of Education, submitted a revised version of his Japanese history for authorization to the education ministry. 
It was not approved. 
Of the 300 complaints leveled by the ministry, Ienaga considered two-thirds of them to be political in nature. 
Two offending pictures dealt with Hiroshima -a mushroom cloud and the demolished city. 
These, Ienaga was told, were ''too gloomy'' for children. 
Another showed a war casualty with a gruesome artificial arm standing next to a sign asking for donations. 
Underneath, the author's caption read: ''We should never have this kind of victim in war again. 
That is why we have the Peace Constitution.''
The ministry objected, said Ienaga, because the picture was ''too cruel for children.''
In 1965, Ienaga sued the Government. 
Twenty years later, his case is still in the courts. 
It is famous now in Japan, and behind the professor is a nationwide organization that claims more than 20,000 adherents. 
Its purpose is to destroy the authorization system. 
Of the controversial picture of the maimed casualty, Ienaga commented: ''The education ministry camouflages its control with this talk of what is suitable for children. 
Their objection to that picture is an excuse. 
That picture is not cruel. 
I was restrained. 
I could have used other pictures.''
Ienaga withdrew for a moment to his library and returned with a picture book, opening it to a double-page spread depicting bodies strewn across a field after the firebombing of Tokyo by United States planes, resembling somewhat the photographs of My Lai:
''One picture of a maimed victim?
Compared to the enormity of war, that one picture is nothing.''
Often, throughout modern Japan, one feels a visceral revulsion of war, even though there is no thorough understanding - or any widespread attempt to understand - the causes of war. 
For the most part, one hears only: ''It must never happen again.''
''That is the kind of promise my adolescent son would make,'' a social psychologist at Keio University said. 
''It is a promise made and quickly forgotten.''
