
The abrupt ouster of Hu Yaobang, China's Communist Party chief, raises the question whether the move was engineered by Deng Xiaoping, the country's paramount leader, or was forced on Mr. Deng by increasingly powerful hard-liners in the party.
State Department officials sought today to play down the importance of the dismissal of Mr. Hu, long the protege of the 82-year-old Mr. Deng and apparently his choice as successor.
''Deng has now got to find a new successor, but there is evidence that he decided he wasn't ready to retire and didn't like feeling being pushed out by Hu,'' one official said.
But a number of academic specialists disagreed, contending that Mr. Hu's ouster could be a serious setback to Mr. Deng's plans to create a more orderly political system and modernize the country's economy.
''This has to be seen as a serious development and one that runs counter to much that Deng was attempting to change over the past eight years,'' said Michel Oksenberg, a professor of political science at the University of Michigan who was the China specialist on the National Security Council under President Carter.
Among the effects of Mr. Hu's ouster, Mr. Oksenberg said, could be the disruption of Mr. Deng's plans to insure an orderly succession and to reassure the country's intellectuals that the Communists will not slip back into the political struggles of the Cultural Revolution.
Mr. Oksenberg, like other academic experts, acknowledged that he had been caught by surprise by the dismissal of the 71-year-old Mr. Hu, a leading advocate of introducing more market forces in China's economy and loosening the Communist Party's tight political controls.
 
Protests by Students
Mr. Hu's ouster came after a wave of demonstrations by students demanding greater democracy and after resistance by hard-line Communist officials to Mr. Hu's efforts to offer more freedom. 
But exactly what caused Mr. Hu's downfall remained uncertain, Mr. Oksenberg and others said.
''I think the student demonstrations were only a pretext, the straw that broke the camel's back,'' said Merle Goldman, a professor of Chinese history at Boston University. 
''His fundamental problem was that he had alienated the conservatives, who put pressure on Deng.''
As an example of the political changes that Mr. Hu championed and that annoyed the hard-liners, Mrs. Goldman recalled that in 1984 he overturned a decision to have the Communist Party present a pre-selected slate of officers at a national writers conference.
Instead, after some writers appealed, Mr. Hu told the gathering to vote by secret ballot, and several outspoken liberals were elected, including Liu Binyan, China's most popular and widely read author.
 
'It's a Great Shame'
Mr. Liu, whom Mr. Deng attacked by name earlier this week for helping foster the liberal mood in which the student protests took place, was a close friend of Mr. Hu. He had told associates that only Mr. Hu protected him from earlier reprisals for his frequent writings about corruption among party officials.
Roderick MacFarquhar, a professor of government at Harvard University, said Mr. Hu's ouster raised the question whether a Communist nation such as China ''can liberate itself'' to pursue the kind of rapid economic growth that has transformed the other countries of Asia.
''The rights and wrongs of what happened to Hu are not as important as the institutional question,'' Mr. MacFarquhar said. 
''What Deng has done is undermine the succession process which he had so laboriously set in place. 
It's a great shame, because China is now no further along than it was under Mao. 
When Deng goes, struggle will break out again over the succession.''
Mr. Hu, who joined the Communist Red Army guerrillas as a 14-year-old and took part in the Long March, was like a son to Mr. Deng, Mrs. Goldman said. 
He served under Mr. Deng as a youthful army political commissar in the late 1930's and they were purged together in the Cultural Revolution.
But Mr. Hu also had a brusque, impetuous personality that often brought him into conflict both with hard-liners in the party and some intellectuals, who found him uneducated.
 
Resistance in the Army
A State Department official said today that there had been indications for a year that Mr. Hu was in trouble and might not end up as Mr. Deng's successor. 
Mr. Deng had been expected to give up his post as head of the party's Military Affairs Commission at a scheduled party congress next fall. 
But there were reports that senior army officers did not get along with Mr. Hu and would not accept him on the military commission, the official said.
''It's possible Deng decided Hu wasn't up to his shoes and then saw the reaction to the student demonstrations as a neat opportunity to get rid of Hu,'' he added.
The official recalled that Mao Zedong had turned on several of his supposed successors, including Liu Shaoqi, then the head of state, and Lin Biao, the military commander who was actually designated the successor in China's Constitution during the Cultural Revolution.
Mr. Oksenberg agreed that Mr. Deng may have been outraged by Mr. Hu's failure to curb the student protests, which spread to at least 11 cities. 
But he said it was difficult to discern whether Mr. Deng had acted under pressure from the hard-liners or just moved dramatically, as he has done inthe past, to assure his own authority.
