
King Hussein of Jordan and an Arab League delegation arrived in China today, hopeful of winning Chinese support for a Middle East peace compromise.
King Hussein and the delegation arrived from Pakistan, where they dined with President Mohammad Zia ul-Haq during a 17-hour stopover en route from Moscow.
The tour is aimed at winning support from the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council for the Arab League peace plan agreed upon at Fez, Morocco. 
King Hussein will travel to the United States this month.
PEKING, Dec. 
5 (UPI) - King Hussein of Jordan and an Arab League delegation arrived in China today, hopeful of winning Chinese support for a Middle East peace compromise.
China's new Foreign Minister, Wu Xueqian, met the delegation, and talks with senior Chinese officials were expected to begin Monday.
 
'There Are Many Questions'
At a 15-minute airport news conference in Islamabad, King Hussein raised the possibility of a compromise between President Reagan's plan for Middle East peace and the eight-point plan drafted by Arab heads of state at Fez.
''This is what we are attempting to ascertain during the coming phase and hopefully the situation would become clearer as we proceed and progress,'' King Hussein said. 
''There are many questions we would like to receive answers to.''
King Hussein did not specify on which points in the Reagan plan the Arabs would seek clarification. 
China has consistently supported the Palestine Liberation Organization and opposed Israel. 
The Arab League's eight-point proposal calls for a full-fledged Palestinian ''state'' on Israelioccupied territory, while Mr. Reagan's plan calls for a Palestinian ''homeland'' linked with Jordan.
 
Held Talks With Andropov
King Hussein is believed to be exploring the attitude of world leaders toward an affiliation between Jordan and the P.L.O. 
In Moscow, King Hussein and the Arab delegation held talks with the new Soviet Communist Party leader, Yuri V. Andropov, who said the Reagan plan was useless.
King Hussein was asked in Islamabad how he would procede now that Mr. Andropov had rejected the Reagan plan and Washington had opposed the Fez plan.
''Our mission has been to explain the eight-point Fez plan,'' the King said. 
''This is what we have concentrated upon throughout our visits so far, and once we have a complete picture we will put it together to see where do we go.''
