
Paul Goldberger is the architecture critic of The New York Times.
 
The architect I.M. 
Pei, creator of the East Building of the National Gallery in Washington, the New York City Convention and Exhibition Center and some of the most conspicuous skyscrapers of the last decade, does not normally design relatively modest 325-room, low-rise hotels. 
But few of the small hotels he would be likely to disdain as unworthy of his time are intended for a hillside 25 miles outside of Peking, and so when the Government of China invited him to design such a building in 1978, he did not say no. 
He returned to China - where he had been born in 1917 - and began to produce what in short order became the most eagerly awaited piece of architecture in recent Chinese history. 
The building is called Xiangshan (meaning ''Fragrant Hill'') Hotel, and it will not be entirely completed until this spring, when it will serve as a luxury hotel mostly for foreign visitors. 
Its first wing opened last October, before a gathering of Chinese dignitaries and Americans, including Pei's friend Jacqueline Onassis, at whose behest he had designed the John F. Kennedy Library near Boston. 
Fragrant Hill resembles neither that building nor the National Gallery, nor any of Pei's other well-known works; it is no exaggeration to say that it is a mix of Chinese and Western architectures the likes of which have never been seen in China or anywhere else. t is too soon for a formal critical evaluation of Fragrant Hill, which is impossible in any event without a visit to the building, which this critic has yet to make.
Paul Goldberger profiles architect I.M. 
PeiBut no visit is necessary to explore the other aspects of this building that make it a project of compelling international interest: the process by which I.M. 
Pei designed it, the role it plays in the evolution of Mr. Pei's own work, the unusual blend of Chinese and Western technology that built it, and, beyond this, its effect on contemporary Chinese culture in general.
''The Fragrant Hill Hotel initially seems unimpressive. 
It even appears strange,'' is how Renmin Ribao, the People's Daily, began its description of the building. 
If the newspaper's unnamed critic is typical, the Chinese were clearly bewildered, for Pei's building neither derives entirely from any of the traditional Chinese styles which they have long known, nor is it altogether in the sleek, boxy Western style that the Chinese - like the people of the developing nations, especially the Middle East - have recently begun to find appealing as a badge of increasing sophistication.
Renmin Ribao's writer went on to speak of the facade of Fragrant Hill as ''severe,'' but then listed respectfully the varied architectural effects to be found within the building, and the overall conclusion was a positive one. 
What was fascinating -almost as much, in a sense, as the building itself - was the extent to which the review underscored how new and even perplexing the very idea of architecture is to the Chinese. 
There has been virtually no serious Chinese architecture since the People's Republic was founded, and the landscape is a mix of ancient imperial and religious structures, hovels and banal modern buildings constructed quickly and cheaply. 
Until recently, the Government chose to expend neither time nor money exploring the notion of architecture as an expression of cultural values; it regarded buildings primarily as shelter. 
The Pei hotel, in a sense, is modern China's first attempt to see building as something more than that - as something symbolic of a culture's aspirations.
For I.M. 
Pei, the hotel is also an attempt - and this is perhaps the most important part of it all for Pei - to lead the Chinese toward some sort of modern architectural vernacular, or common language of building, that might be used in other projects elsewhere in the country. 
What he was seeking was a building that would ''feel'' Chinese and yet modern at the same time.
''The Chinese have to find such a vernacular if they are to build towns and cities that are decent - that do not look like the dreary structures the Russians put across the landscape,'' Pei told an interviewer on his return from China. 
''The urgent problem for them is to find some sort of building-type that they can afford to build with their limited resources that will still respect their culture.''
The origin of the project was in a visit Pei made to lecture in China in 1978. 
It was his second trip there since he had left his homeland to study architecture in the United States in the 1930's; he had led a group of American architects to China in 1974, soon after China had begun to invite travelers from the West. 
By the time of Pei's second visit, the Government's effort to modernize China had begun in earnest, and the Chinese were actively negotiating with Western real-estate developers and hotel operators to create several Western-style skyscraper hotels in Peking.
Although Pei's reputation in the West had been based on his skyscraper designs - such as the John Hancock Tower in Boston and the Texas Commerce Tower in Houston - as much as anything else, he found himself disturbed by the idea of tall buildings in Peking. 
''The early conclusion of the Government and the city planners was that there had to be skyscrapers, simply because there were not enough sites in Peking with Page 30 modern utilities to spread the needed number of hotel rooms out in lower buildings,'' he said recently. 
''But I wasn't sure that was right - I urged the Chinese to move cautiously, to remember that they could do great damage to their city. 
Once they create skyscrapers, they could never again recapture Peking as it was, and I wanted to ask if there weren't some alternatives.'' few months later, Pei was asked to discuss the question of planning Peking with high Chinese officials, who were seeking outside advice without seeming to be turning over control to others. 
Pei, as a native-born Chinese with an international reputation - and as a man of extraordinary diplomacy and tact - was an ideal figure for the Chinese Government to rely on. 
He sought to reassure the Chinese of the importance of their own heritage, telling them that the highly technological Western culture that he himself had so relied upon throughout his career was not by itself the answer to their needs. 
By the time of his second visit for the project, Pei had become firmer in his view that while tall buildings might be acceptable in Western cities or in already built-up Far Eastern cities such as Hong Kong and Tokyo, they would be a mistake in Peking, with its important historic core of low buildings and unobstructed vistas. 
The municipal government - acting both on his advice and on a growing realization of the enormous construction costs of tall buildings - decided to ban skyscrapers from the historic center of Peking.
''It was just in time,'' Pei recalls. 
''By then, a Japanese group was beginning work on a 60-story building.''
The Chinese invited Pei to take on a project of his own in Peking, and to select a site. 
By then, he had established himself as a critic of dense center-city development - ironically, in view of how much of his work in the United States consists of such projects - and he chose to build a new hotel at Fragrant Hill Park, a rural area near Peking that had long had a small and rather primitive resort hotel.At Fragrant Hill, there could be no thought of the skyscraper construction that Pei found so inappropriate to Peking.
It is a site of unusually beautiful trees, many of which are quite old, and it is nestled in a cradle of mountains. 
The land at Fragrant Hill is another world altogether from Peking, or from any community at all; though it is but 45 minutes by car from Peking, it gives the impression of being a distant wilderness.
Because Fragrant Hill is a place apart from the hurly-burly of a city, it could serve easily as a kind of laboratory in which to experiment with the issues of design that were on Pei's mind. 
As part of his search to find a kind of new Chinese vernacular, an architecture that would look neither Western nor ancient Chinese, he considered especially earlier Western styles that had served well as vernacular architectural styles. 
He looked very hard at Georgian architecture, he says, and went to China with slides of London to prove the point that Georgian architecture makes so well - that an architectural language can be rich and complex, yet capable of being used not only for grand public buildings but for small private ones.
Pei took to China a group of architects from his office in New York and encouraged them to travel about in search of traditional Chinese vernacular styles. 
The team, which ultimately included Preston Moore and Kellogg Wong, his associate part-ners, and his son C.C. 
Pei as the associate in charge of design, reassembled in New York and began the design process.
Pei is involved in determining the basic design concept for most of the projects his office creates, but his interest in Fragrant Hill was so intense that he remained active through every stage of the design process. 
''It is the first time I ever saw him actually sitting at a drafting table,'' said a Pei associate. 
''I.M. really wanted to be in the middle of this, all the time.''
Spurred on both by Pei's enthusiasm and by the tight schedule the Chinese had set, the team completed a design in about three months, considerably faster than normal for so complex a project.
The design Pei created strives to evoke traditional Chinese forms without literally imitating older architecture. 
It is not surprising that the Chinese found it a bit severe: the exterior seems cool, and at first glance the building design calls to mind the architectural vocabulary of Western modernism that is Pei's normal language.
The Fragrant Hill Hotel is low and sprawling, much in the manner of many Western suburban office buildings. 
Its facades, however, employ the traditional Chinese materials of white stucco and gray tile, and such details as the design of the windows are taken, sometimes literally and sometimes with variation, from Chinese precedent.
The building is organized around several courtyards, one of which is treated essentially like a Western atrium and covered with a glass and metal frame. 
The other courts, however, are open to the sky and treated in the manner of traditional Chinese gardens - they are miniature landscapes, organized around specially crafted rocks, and their goal is no less ambitious than to create a metaphorical model of the universe. 
Unlike those in traditional Chinese buildings, the gardens at Fragrant Hill are
Pei Jump
fairly similar to one another; they are intended as parts of a larger whole, and they are all seen by the architect as subservient to the larger landscape that surrounds the building.
''I saved every tree that I could,'' Pei said. 
''That led to the building twisting and turning, but, in the end, the trees came back to bless us -the whole site became an instant garden.''
The rocks in the Fragrant Hill garden were not molded by human hands over a long period, as are those of the classic Chinese gardens. 
They were, instead, imported to the site from the so-called ''Stone Forest,'' a huge deposit of weathered limestone, 1,500 miles from FragrantHill in the province of Yunnan. 
The site is well known to the Chinese, and Pei himself first learned of it when he saw a photograph of it in a travel brochure. 
He was so enamored of the landscape of rock that he looked into means of transporting the huge stones, and tried to persuade the city government that moving them would cost less, in the end, than crafting rocks by hand closer to home. 
He won that dispute, and a kind of instant rock garden was created by bringing in rocks from Yunnan to the site.
The precedents in Chinese architectural history come almost entirely from central China, far south of Peking, and this explains in part why the northern Chinese found the building a bit perplexing. 
Peking and the immediate vicinity of Fragrant Hill offered Pei little that was useful in terms of architectural precedent - much of the architectural heritage of northern China has disappeared, and the remaining structures are mostly palaces and temples, buildings with the traditional gold tile roofs and red columns. 
The roots of that style are both royal and religious, and as such, it is not a style that either Pei or the Chinese Government officials would have been comfortable translating into a hotel.
So Pei went south to his family's home city, Suzhou, where the houses of a 19th-century merchant class - including the residence of the Pei family, which contains a celebrated garden - are still intact. 
There he rediscovered the plum-shaped windows, simple gray tiles, the stucco, and the cool, ordered formality that represent as significant a part of China's architectural heritage as the gold tiles and pagoda roofs that have by now, to Western eyes, become something of a cliche. 
And so it was to this other Chinese architecture, geographically distant from Fragrant Hill but in his view symbolically more appropriate, that Pei turned - moving, in a sense, to his own past for his inspiration.
The building that resulted appears in photographs to be serene and self-assured, with a sense of texture to it that is absent from much of Pei's sleeker Western work. 
The texture comes not from traditional ornament, but from Pei's mix of white stucco, trelliswork and gray tile set in geometric patterns around each window opening. 
These elements, along with the diamond-shaped pieces of tile set into the facade, function as a kind of abstract ornament. 
(Pei says of the gray tile that it is ''a unique Chinese material - but I have used it in a Western way.'') Glass, a material Pei has used extensively in his Western work, is absent except in small window openings and the roof of the central court, and its scarcity emphasizes the sense one has of this as a traditional masonry building.
Indeed, the only element that lends a Western sleekness to the facade is the stark white color of the stucco -which did not come about precisely in the way Pei had intended. 
His design had called for the stucco to have a natural finish of white but with a hint of gray to it. 
Yet sample after sample of the stucco refused to yield the proper tone. 
Finally, the decision was made to paint the facade instead - and the Chinese mixed a tone similar to Pei's favorite paint color, ''seed pearl,'' from the American manufacturers Pratt & Lambert.
The color change was but one of many last-minute adjustments that made the process of constructing Fragrant Hill entirely different from the way such a project would proceed in the West. 
Everything was more ad hoc: There were frequent substitutions of materials of a sort that would rarely be proposed in a large-scale, high-design project in the West. 
And it is rare that a graphics designer would have to explain to a hotel manager what kind of silverware and glassware had to be ordered for a restaurant, as Tracy Turner, who designed all of the graphics, signs and menus for the hotel, had to do. 
Miss Turner, who spent four months in Peking devising a system of signs in both English and Chinese and finding manufacturers to make them up, said that she had a particularly odd conversation with the hotel's assistant manager, who, when confronted with a list of 25 basic items of tableware needed for a Western-style banquet, ''threw down his hat on the table and exclaimed, 'How can you keep track of all this?
We eat with two chopsticks, and, when we throw a banquet, our idea is to add 25 more dishes, not utensils!'
''
Miss Turner also devised a logo for the hotel that is Western in its general look, but is based on a four-part leaf found on the site of Fragrant Hill. 
Each part of the leaf contains a Chinese character, and the hotel's name, in Roman type, is set to the left of the leaf. 
Miss Turner also designed a T-shirt with the hotel logo, and managed to convince the hotel's shop manager to print 15,000. 
One size sold out almost immediately - to the construction workers, it turned out.
I.M. Pei had ordered that as many elements of the hotel be made in China as possible. 
Still, his own authority was, in general, more restricted than on a Western project. 
He could not give orders to a general contractor, in part because protocol would not permit it and also because there was no general contractor in the first place.
The government of the city of Peking was the official client of the hotel, and a department called the Peking First Service Bureau, which is in charge of hotels, directly supervised construction. 
But there was no clear line of authority, and some problems and disagreements were referred to the Mayor of Peking for resolution.
''We could not give orders - only advice, and the Chinese do not make decisions lightly,'' Pei says. 
''We had to meet with group after group and go through committee after committee. 
The approval process is very cumbersome and time-consuming. 
It is something like the community boards in this country, a kind of grass-roots representation. 
The workers got to have their say, and Peking's architects were given a chance to review the design, and they asked every possi-ble question - and it was not only, 'Why do you need this gray tile here?' but also along the lines of, 'Why should someone from America tell us how to build in China?'
But we tried our best to explain what we were trying to do, and in the end the architects came to be very supportive.''
Although the long and complex bureaucratic process necessary for approval of the original design and of any proposed changes made for frequent delays, the size and energy of the work force tended to offset this. 
The crew averaged between 400 and 500 workers (as opposed to the no more than 200 who would raise such a building in the West) and at times there were as many as 1,500 workers on the site. 
''The Chinese were capable of incredible bursts of effort,'' Pei says. 
''Things would seem to move very slowly, and then they would suddenly all come together at the last minute.''
There was occasional friction between the Chinese workers and the security guards, and at one point near the hotel's opening it broke out into a scuffle that even led to a brief work stoppage. 
The actual construction process, however, mixed Western-style technology and Chinese hand labor. 
Large-scale machinery was used where it was absolutely necessary, but because the amount of it the Chinese possess is limited, pieces of machinery remained only briefly at the site and sometimes were replaced by horse carts. 
Some things went very fast - an entry road Pei thinks would have taken a Western crew three weeks to build was finished in less than a week. 
Elements of the building that required skilled labor moved with painful slowness - but were usually completed to high standards. 
Chinese craftsmen made a set of reproductions of a French chair that Pei had specified for the lobby, and the architect later compared them happily to the original.
Portions of the work at times had to be redone because the Chinese, inexperienced at this kind of construction, did not always proceed with each part of the building process in its most logical order. 
In some cases, for example, walls were plastered before electrical work was finished, requiring the plasterer to come back and duplicate his work after the electrician had finally finished. 
And decorative elements such as fine carpets were often brought in while painting was still going on.
But there is no doubt, at least in I.M. 
Pei's mind, that the effort of Fragrant Hill was worth it. 
When he speaks of this project, Pei, a man who normally makes his enthusiasms public but keeps his passions private, displays no restraint. 
''It was a marvelous experience,'' he said not long ago. 
''The Chinese have never been challenged as this project has challenged them. 
We have begun to learn about building in China. 
We still have a lot to learn - but I am elated.''
