
AS ALWAYS in this season, Japan is consumed with memories of its suffering at the end of World War II. 
Wednesday was the 41st anniversary of Hiroshima's nuclear destruction. 
Yesterday thousands of people gathered for remembrances of the Nagasaki bombing. 
On Friday, Japanese will pause to recall the day in 1945 when the Emperor told them to ''endure the unendurable'' by surrendering.
Little - virtually nothing, in fact - is said on these occasions about how much suffering was inflicted by Japan, especially on its Asian neighbors. 
But Asia does not easily forget, and recent events underline how shadows of the war continue to influence this country.
This summer has brought new flare-ups of old disputes over Japan's sensibilities, including what it teaches its youth about the war.
A Government-authorized history textbook plays down Japanese atrocities such as the murder of tens of thousands of Chinese civilians in Nanjing in 1937. 
Until the Education Ministry ordered revisions, the manuscript had referred primly to the massacre as the ''so-called Nanjing incident'' and made no mention of casualty figures.
For its part, the ministry acted only after the Chinese denounced the book as an attempt by some Japanese to ''distort their dishonorable history.''
A fresh controversy swirls over whether Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone will repeat his diplomatic gaffe of Aug. 
15, 1985, when he made an official visit to Yasukuni Shrine in central Tokyo.
 
A Symbol of Militarism
In prewar Japan, Yasukuni was the home of state Shintoism and a powerful symbol of militarism. 
A visit to Yasukuni is equated in some circles with a desire to send Japanese troops on the march again. 
While the link is tenuous, it is still enough to set off alarms in Asia, especially in China.
Peking's attacks last year were so strong that they unsettled Mr. Nakasone. It seems likely that to avoid the risk of giving further offense the Prime Minister will forgo a trip to the shrine this week.
In dealing with Asia, Japan often succumbs to what at first appears to be a war-induced guilt complex. 
It spends considerable energy trying to convince wary neighbors that it means no harm, either with its gradual but steady military buildup or with its relentless exports. 
This policy, however, serves a purpose. 
Japan's goal as a prosperous trading nation is to stay on good terms with everyone; it is obviously bad business to make the customers distrustful.
Compared with West Germans, the Japanese indulge in fewer self-reflections on their wartime responsibilities. 
Rather, the imperative here is to pick oneself up quickly after a disaster and to resume life without unproductive dwelling on the past.
''Japanese so easily forget about their past,'' said Kiyoko Takeda, a professor of social and intellectual history at Tokyo's International Christian University.
As early as 1957, Japan felt sufficiently comfortable to choose a convicted war criminal, Nobusuke Kishi, as Prime Minister. 
There were protests from the political opposition.
But they lacked the sting of the recent furor in Austria over Kurt Waldheim, who, whatever the truth about his past, was convicted of nothing.
Many Japanese, perhaps most, assume no moral blame for their country's expansion across Asia in the 1930's. 
It certainly was no worse, they say, than decades of European and American colonialism; its failings were political miscalculations that led to a ruinous war.
 
Fear of Retaliation
A similar concern nags at Japan these days as it registers countless victories in trade and high finance. 
Too much success may invite retaliation, and that worry is one reason why Mr. Nakasone now calls for more Japanese imports and fewer exports.
''Unless we change,'' said Naohiro Amaya, a Government economic adviser, ''we will get a storm from outside.''
Still, some Japanese despair of knee-jerk reactions to outsiders' complaints. 
They suspect these attacks are occasionally disingenuous. 
The South Koreans, for instance, have attacked the new Japanese textbook far less forcefully than they did in a similar dispute in 1982, when, coincidentally or not, they were angling for a big aid package from Japan.
It is time to stop apologizing, many Japanese say. 
The conservative new Minister of Education, Masayuki Fujio, bemoaned his country's ''Yasukuni allergy,'' for which he blamed the postwar American Occupation.
''It's wrong to think that prewar Japan was all bad and Occupation-period policies were perfect,'' he said.
In a remark that caused considerable stir, Mr. Fujio was also quoted as saying, in somewhat rough language, that ''those guys'' who attacked the textbooks ''should look back themselves to see if they didn't commit similar acts in world history.''
Not surprisingly, China and South Korea took umbrage. 
Mr. Fujio insisted he was misquoted, but, in another display of Japan's edginess toward its neighbors, the Government issued a formal apology nonetheless.
Correction
A Tokyo dispatch in The Week in Review on Aug. 
10 misstated the dispositon of the case against Nobusuke Kishi, who was Commerce Minister in the Japanese Cabinet during World War II. 
Although imprisoned from 1945 to 1948 as a suspected war criminal, Mr. Kishi was never convicted.
Correction-Date: December 7, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
