
Chinese intellectuals who associate the ''Hundred Flowers'' campaign of 1956 with the Communist Party's most notorious betrayal of the principle of intellectual freedom have been faced with a new version of the campaign in the past few weeks. 
The new version comes complete with the slogan that continues to chill many of those who were punished for speaking out 30 years ago.
The slogan, ''Let a hundred flowers blossom, let a hundred schools of thought contend,'' is firmly associated with Mao Zedong, who used it in a series of speeches in early 1956 to start what was ostensibly to be a broadening of intellectual debate. 
When this prompted an outpouring of criticism from the intelligentsia, some of it directed against Communist rule, Mao responded with a campaign the following year that sent thousands of people to labor camps.
In later years the slogan became so controversial - despised by party theoreticians, who associated it with dissent, and distrusted by intellectuals - that it was excised from the official volume of Mao's speeches and writings that covered the period of the ''Hundred Flowers'' campaign. 
By reviving it now, the party apparently hopes to spur new efforts on behalf of the country's modernization campaign, and to do so in a way that depicts Mao, who has been heavily criticized in recent years, in a more favorable light.
 
A Series of Anniversaries
Westerners who watch Chinese politics have been intrigued by the new campaign for another reason, which is that 1986 offers the party leadership a number of vexatious anniversaries. 
In addition to the 30th anniversary of the ''Hundred Flowers'' campaign, the year holds the 20th anniversary of the onset of the Cultural Revolution and the 10th anniversary of the death of Mao.
The difficulty confronting party propagandists trying to popularize the ''Hundred Flowers'' idea is essentially the one they faced when the slogan was new. 
Like Mao, they have been concerned with spurring intellectual activity that could be socially useful.
But it has also been clear that the kind of free thinking they have in mind is to be limited to professional endeavors in the arts and sciences, and not to spill over into free political debate, which has remained proscribed under the program of social and economic relaxation adopted by the current top leader, Deng Xiaoping.
 
Regulation vs. Freedom
Western critics have often contended that the distinction is impossible to sustain in a society where virtually every human endeavor is subject to party regulation. 
Nonetheless, the insistence that people's minds should range freely in matters related to their work, while holding within approved parameters when considering the personalities and policies of their rulers, is one that Mr. Deng has steadfastly upheld.
Mr. Deng's attitudes are illuminated by his remarks about the events of the ''Hundred Flowers'' campaign, which took place when he was the party's General Secretary. 
In recent years he has said that the idea was a good one, but that the party's political enemies abused it for what a 1980 party document described as ''a wild attack on the party and the nascent socialist system.''
Although this justified a counterattack, Mr. Deng has said, the 1957 crackdown and his own role in it were excessive.
In the current campaign, efforts have been expended to present the ''Hundred Flowers'' idea as directed from the first at scientists. 
An article in a party-controlled journal, Beijing Review, said an important impetus for the 1956 campaign came from events in the Soviet Union, where the 20th Communist Party congress that year was the occasion for Nikita S. Khrushchev's ''secret speech'' denouncing Stalin.
The speech marked the end of the tyranny in Soviet genetics of Trofim D. Lysenko, a Stalin protege, and made the Chinese leadership realize that genetics here - and science in general - were in thrall to Soviet models, the journal said.
 
Special Freedom for Scientists
The idea that scientists above all should be intellectually unbonded is important to the reform-minded leaders around Mr. Deng, who believe that technology will carry China out of its backwardness into the next century.
The Beijing Review article, and others, have offered assurances to scientists that they will not again be labeled as ''rightists'' or ''counterrevolutionaries'' for reaching conclusions that conflict with political preferences.
In practice, this is likely to be difficult. 
An illustration of the complexities comes from the bitter controversy raging over whether the country should proceed with a hydroelectric dam across the Yangtze River. 
A number of scientists have criticized the plan, saying it would be an ecological disaster, but several political leaders have made it plain that they favor going ahead.
Still more vexing are the questions that arise in the performing arts. 
A number of those who took the policy at its word, following their creative instincts, have found themselves in trouble, with avant-garde plays canceled within days or novels condemned for ''bourgeois'' tendencies.
Predictably, the reception accorded the new ''Hundred Flowers'' campaign has been cool. 
A Peking University professor whose experiments in free speech during the 1957 campaign earned years of harassment said this week that he and many of his friends were ''profoundly grateful'' for the much wider academic freedoms that have developed under Mr. Deng.
''But when the party speaks of 'a hundred flowers,' we are cautious,'' he said. 
''There are memories that do not fade.''
