
At dawn, when a crescent moon lingers on the horizon, the donkey carts are on the move in this old Islamic town. 
Through an open doorway in a whitewashed wall, the murmurings of young boys reading the Koran filter into an alley. 
Old men in leather boots gather silently on a nearby bench, watching the sun spreading a wash of pink across the distant Pamir peaks.
For more than 2,000 years Kashgar has lived by its own rhythms, absorbing only as much as it has cared to from the alien tides that have flowed through the town.
The Chinese first made their power felt here in the Han dynasty, in the third century B.C. The Russians were a pervasive influence for a century and a half before World War II, and in between the dusty streets were trod by Tibetans, Mongols, Indians and British, among others.
Because the town stands at the furthest fringe of the deserts that cushion China from the west, it has always attracted conquerors, adventurers and traders. 
But none has made more than a passing impact on the Uighurs, a Turkic-speaking people who migrated from the western perimeter of Mongolia and who had been predominant in Kashgar for at least eight centuries when Marco Polo passed through in 1275. 
Today they account for about 90 percent of the town's population of 180,000.
 
Geography Has Been Ally
Geography has been the Uighurs' ally. 
It is more than 2,000 miles from here to Peking, most of it desert. 
Travelers from the capital take two days to arrive by plane, longer if flights are canceled because of sandstorms that sweep the Gobi and Taklamakan, the vast seas of dune and scrub that cover much of the Xinjiang Uighur Autonomous Region in which Kashgar is situated.
As if nature's isolation were insufficient, the Communist authorities declared the town closed to foreigners in the 1950's, an edict not lifted until 1983.
Whether approached from the east, across the desert, or from the west, across the 25,000-foot mountains that run like a shield across China's Central Asian frontier, Kashgar has always provided respite to the traveler. 
Now, once more, it is opening doors to strangers, and doing so in the tradition of Uighur friendliness that has impressed virtually every sojourner except Polo, who found the local merchants mean.
A few days here furnish vivid memories of free donkey cart rides, of spontaneous invitations to private weddings, of friendly chatter at dusk in the precincts of the Id Kah mosque, where the muezzin's cry has been heard for 1,000 years.
''Hospitality is a part of our culture,'' said Abdullah Shakir, a carpet salesman encountered in the Hong Kong Bazaar, so named for its profusion of inexpensive goods. 
#20,000 Visitors Expected This year, with the opening to foreigners of the Karakoram highway that crosses the mountains from here to Pakistan, officials expect 20,000 foreign visitors. 
Backpackers, in particular, are arriving in force.
The local foreign affairs director, Abdullahjan Dawud, a Uighur with Chinese subordinates, says the town is the most authentic of all surviving Uighur towns in Xinjiang, whose population of 13.5 million includes a diminishing proportion of Uighurs, now about six million.
''Kashgar,'' said Mr. Dawud with a smile, ''is keeping to its ethnic characteristics.''
This was a polite way of saying that here, unlike the Xinjiang capital of Urumqi, the Uighurs have managed to maintain their culture and religion without major inroads by the Chinese.
The sense of being carried back across the centuries comes most vividly on Sundays, when the citizens of Kashgar and outlying villagers mingle at the weekly market. 
In a clearing off a poplar-lined road that enters the town from the west, as many as 70,000 people crowd together to trade, to eat and to gossip. 
Most travel by donkey, some by horse or camel. 
Whole families ride together.
Officials say the market accounts for 30 percent of the commerce, an underestimate that serves the pretense that Kashgar's economy is predominantly Goverment-controlled.
Every Uighur need is met. 
Whether it is bolts of silk, top boots fashioned from yak hides, or camels - available for as little as $100 for a high-mileage specimen, as much as $450 for an animal that is still breaking in - the Uighur trader retains the shrewdness that sat ill with Marco Polo. 
Hours can be spent haggling over a few dollars.
 
Bargaining Can Be Cantankerous
As a customer, the Uighur is no less narrow-eyed. 
Beyond the market's five-cent haircuts and its silk-clad tumblers performing in the open air, traders gather beside a dusty track where draft animals are taken through their paces.
Old men with fierce countenances and jutting beards spend an hour or more testing camels and horses. 
When the animal has been rated the bargaining begins, often in the most cantankerous way.
During Mao Zedong's Cultural Revolution, which began in 1966, the market was disbanded. 
But the Uighurs revived their trading in a cemetery beyond the town and, in the late 1970's, saw their entrepreneurship embraced and Mao's brand of Communism condemned.
Mao's 40-foot statue still gazes solemnly northward from a plinth on the Chinese side of town, but a local Uighur official says quietly that it is there solely as ''a reminder of our worst times.''
Mao is only one of the alien influences whose course in Kashgar is run. 
Not far from the market is the yellow stucco compound that served as Britain's most remote diplomatic outpost in Asia until it was closed in 1950. 
Once celebrated for its watercress sandwiches, it is now a crumbling relic that serves as a cheap hotel. 
Across town, the Neo-Classical buildings of the old Russian consulate have been transformed into a higher-class guesthouse.
 
Past Contacts Recalled
To the Chinese the buildings are redolent of imperialism. 
Uighurs, by contrast, seem pleased to recall past contacts with foreigners. 
A walk in the maze-like alleyways of the old Uighur city is virtually guaranteed to produce invitations into courtyard homes that hide behind high mud walls.
Inside, guests are seated on raised platforms covered with the richly colored carpets for which the region is famous, and, over cups of thick black tea, invited to discourse, among other subjects, on Islam and carpet-making.
A common topic is the matter of relations between Uighurs and Chinese. 
Barely five years ago the town was convulsed with riots that erupted after Chinese youths killed a young Uighur and lost one of their own in revenge.
Uighurs say relations have improved greatly since. 
''After Mao, things were certain to improve,'' said an Uighur doctor who works among Chinese. 
''We still lead our separate lives, but we have learned to co-exist. 
''
