
China, amid some ceremony, acquired a fleet of Cadillac limousines today.
At a formal handover, Chinese officials lined up to accept the 20 dark blue limousines, described in Cadillac brochures as ''the car of the stars,'' each equipped with a built-in television set, refrigerator and bar.
It was the kind of occasion that left Westerners with memories of Mao Zedong's China shaking their heads in disbelief. 
The ceremony was held only a short bicycle ride from the stadium where Mao's enemies were once paraded in duncecaps as ''capitalist roaders.''
China acquires fleet of 20 Cadillac limousines, each equipped with built-in television set, refrigerator and bar; stretch version festooned with red bunting, stands at steps of 29-story skyscraper that makes its own debut as symbol of China's new directions; executives of General Motors and O'Gara Coachworks, Los Angeles-based company, attend ceremony in Peking; photo (M)Parked Next to Skyscraper
An extended-wheelbase, or ''stretch'' version of the car, 18 feet long and festooned with red bunting, stood at the steps of a 29-story skyscraper that was making its own debut as a symbol of this country's new directions. 
The building, the tallest in Peking, was specially cleaned up ahead of its official opening to allow speech making by executives of General Motors and O'Gara Coachworks, a Los Angeles-based company that delivered two similar, armor-plated vehicles for use here by President Reagan last year.
Beyond a wrought-iron railing separating the building from a broad avenue that sweeps across Peking, hundreds of people returning from work stopped to gaze. 
Their comments, initially, at least, were a public relations executive's dream.
''Magnificent!
The most beautiful cars I've ever seen,'' said Huang Liang, a 25-year-old construction worker as he watched from the saddle of his Flying Pigeon bicycle. 
''How much do they cost, three or four thousand yuan?''
At the official rate of exchange, his estimate came to just about $1,600.
Told that the version of the limousine that had caught his eye sold in the United States for $39,000, an amount it would take him 115 years to earn at his construction job, he was dismayed. 
''That's a laugh,'' Mr. Huang said, with an expression of surprise. 
''Tell me you're joking.''
Chinese officials were evasive when asked who would use the cars. 
Even under Mao the most powerful figures in the country were chauffeured around in impressive limousines, but the vehicles used then were almost exclusively the Chinese-made Red Flag cars that looked like a cross between a Soviet Zil and a Cadillac of the 1960's. 
The Red Flag has now fallen into disfavor as unreliable and unwieldy, and Western engineers have been consulted on ways to improve it.
 
Deng Said to Favor Mercedes
Deng Xiaoping, the man who succeeded to Mao's power and who has proclaimed Western-style economic changes, is believed to favor a Mercedes-Benz for his own travel. 
One official at the handover ceremony today said ''state leaders'' would be among those using the Cadillacs. 
Others said that the main reason for buying the cars was to provide the comfort expected by ''foreign guests'' and that it was ''unclear'' if officials like Mr. Deng would use them.
''It will depend on the opportunities,'' said Rong Yiren, chairman of the China International Trust and Investment Corporation, which bought the cars.
Although General Motors executives described the Cadillacs as the first ever delivered to China, Mr. Rong knew better. 
He acknowledged after the ceremony that he had driven one in the 1940's, when his family was one of the richest in China, owning a string of textile mills near Shanghai. 
When the Communists took power in 1949, most of the family fled to Taiwan or the United States, but Mr. Rong, now in his late 60's, remained.
In Communist eyes that made him a member of the ''national bourgeoisie,'' which meant Mr. Rong was honored as a patriot until 1966, when Mao unleashed the Red Guards.
When the Cultural Revolution ended, Mr. Deng redeemed him and appointed him to his present position, where he channels Chinese investments abroad and foreign investments in China.
At the ceremony, wearing an immaculately tailored gray suit and blue button-down shirt, he could have passed for a top executive in any boardroom. 
But the crosscurrents that flow behind the scenes of Chinese politics were represented in the mixture of high-buttoned Mao-style tunics and loose-fitting, open-necked shirts worn by his companions, some of whom seemed ill at ease during the florid speeches by the Americans.
John Grettenberger, general manager of General Motor's Cadillac division, suggested that the limousines should be seen as a symbol of the new era in China. 
Like the country, he said, the cars had ''an enduring tradition,'' but they also had a ''sophisticated future.''
Arthur W. Hummel Jr., the American Ambassador, assured the gathering that ''dollar for dollar, I think you will find that the Cadillac will give you a smoother ride than any other car.''
 
Lining Up for a Ride
After Mr. Rong accepted a set of gold keys from Mr. Grettenberger, dozens of Chinese officials lined up for a demonstration ride. 
Officials who ride bicycles to work and live in apartments with no hot water disappeared behind darkened glass windows into a world of air-conditioning, plush seats and iced drinks. 
Later, they rubbed shoulders with Cadillac dealers from New Jersey, Florida and Illinois at a lavish reception in one of the city's new Western-style hotels.
Before leaving the ceremony, Mr. Rong was asked if he was concerned about a revival of the attitudes prevalent during the Cultural Revolution, when anyone owning or using Western-made luxuries was liable to be punished by Red Guards.
''The Cultural Revolution was bad,'' he replied.
