
The orthodox Marxists who have dominated politics and culture in China for more than five months are coming under increasing attack from other Communist Party members who support the economic and social changes introduced by the country's senior leader, Deng Xiaoping.
Western diplomats here infer that a serious struggle for power is under way within the country's leadership four months before the party's 13th National Congress is scheduled to begin in October. 
The congress, normally held every five years, charts the country's direction and names its new leaders.
''Clearly there is a major struggle going on,'' a senior Western diplomat said. 
''Now it seems that the reformers led by Zhao are coming out on top.''
Zhao Ziyang is both Prime Minister and Acting General Secretary of the Communist Party.
 
Warnings on 'Leftism'
Since the former party chief, Hu Yaobang, was forced to resign in January, a coalition of ideological hard-liners has clamped down on freer expression in the press, the arts and in universities and has opposed those who advocate Western political ideas. 
The hard-liners also have sought to rein in components of the economic modernization pushed by Mr. Deng and Mr. Zhao.
Now, in newspaper editorials, public statements and private meetings, supporters of the policies of Mr. Deng and Mr. Zhao are warning of the dangers of leftism and ossified political views.
''The conservatives don't have any credible alternative,'' a Western European diplomat said. 
''They don't have any economic program.''
A Communist Party member who identifies closely with those who support change said: ''What do the conservatives want?
They want to go back to the 50's. 
Who wants that?
Nobody.''
 
A Sign of Change
One sign that the hard-liners may be on the defensive, according to diplomats here, was Mr. Zhao's choice of Wan Li, a Deputy Prime Minister, as Acting Prime Minister, and Hu Qili, a senior Politburo member, as temporary party head when Mr. Zhao visited Eastern Europe two weeks ago.
Both men are regarded as strong proponents of economic change. 
Prominent party conservatives were overlooked for the temporary appointments, according to these diplomats.
Still, some diplomats said, it is by no means certain that Mr. Zhao and his supporters have regained the political initiative necessary to dominate the upcoming congress. 
With Mr. Hu's political demise, a new party leader must be named and a new Politburo must be formed. 
The faction that controls the Politburo, diplomats here say, can set China's economic and ideological course through the end of the decade.
The diplomats pointed out that the inner workings of the Communist Party leadership remained tightly guarded. 
Their conclusions came from close readings of newspapers and scrutiny of public statements.
 
Accounts of Crime for Profit
Western diplomats are divided about whether Mr. Zhao and his supporters have beaten back the hard-liners. 
The articles championing the benefits of economic innovation have coincided with a crackdown on illegal publications and criticism of some private business practices.
In recent weeks, China's papers have been full of accounts of illegal dealings by private businessmen and brazen crimes for profit. 
In an economic climate that encourages making money, a diplomat said, unequal wealth and crime are easy targets for hard-liners who believe that innovations not only depart from true Communism but also induce social disorder.
In their counterattack, the so-called reformers have equated strident leftism with poverty. 
The phrase ''socialist poverty'' revives memories for many Chinese of the hysteria and social upheaval of the Cultural Revolution of 1966 to 1976, when Mao Zedong and his allies maintained that ''eating socialist grass'' was better than partaking of capitalist food.
''As poverty is not a characteristic of socialism, it is imperative to develop productive forces,'' Shanghai's party secretary, Rui Xingwen, said in a recent speech.
 
Support for 'Open Policy'
For such advocates, this means strengthening programs intended to loosen central controls and relying more on market forces to stimulate production.
Even the party's theoretical journal, Red Flag, which has become an outlet for hard-liners in the last six months, defended economic change recently. 
''Without reform and the open policy,'' the journal said in a major editorial, ''our socialism would have stagnated or ossified and socialist construction with Chinese characteristics would be nothing.''
For the first time in six months, a vague program for separating the Communist Party from the state's administrative apparatus is being discussed. 
This week, Mr. Deng told a Yugoslavian visitor that ''political reform is the order of the day and will be the major topic for discussion at the 13th National Congress.''
