
PEKING CHINA, a land where almost no natural resource goes overlooked, has mounted the world's largest and most determined effort to generate substantial quantities of methane gas for rural household use by fermenting human and animal wastes.
The program has advanced well beyond the experimental stage, and millions of backyard fermentation tanks on communes and farms are supplying up to 35 million peasants with fuel for cooking, lighting and heating that would be otherwise difficult to obtain.
China's experience in producing ''zhaoqi,'' or marsh gas, was described by Zhang Jigao, a prominent agricultural engineer, at a recent seminar in Peking entitled ''The Changing Rural Habitat.''
The seminar, sponsored by the Aga Khan Foundation, brought experts from nine countries together to share locally developed technologies.
Christopher Wren describes program in China which uses human and animal wastes to generate methane gas for fuel
''We now have built seven million tanks, which we call digesters. 
Their main use is for living - cooking three meals a day and heating hot water,'' explained Mr. Zhang, who is affiliated with the Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences.
The notion of extracting energy from human and animal wastes may strike Americans and Europeans as bizarre, but the Chinese cannot afford to overlook any potential fuel source. 
A recent survey on the use of energy in rural China, where more than 800 million peasants live, found that about 70 percent of the households lack enough fuel.
The gleaning of firewood, straw and weeds, which account for threequarters of the energy consumed in the countryside, is not only a time-consuming chore but has also contributed to soil erosion in many regions.
Recognizing that China does not have sufficient conventional fuel for its needs, Yu Qiuli, a Deputy Prime Minister, told a session of the State Energy Commission in Peking last month that the energy shortage in rural areas should be met by building more methaneproducing digesters, as well as by reforestation.
Chinese studies on producing methane gas from wastes contend that the fermentation system also improves rural sanitation and produces an organic fertilizer rich in nitrogen, potassium and phosphates. 
The New China News Agency reported last week that the digesters were providing 40 million tons of fertilizer matter as a byproduct.
Nightsoil, as human wastes used to fertilize crops are euphemistically called, has often been used in poorer countries, but it also poses a health hazard for both farmers and consumers. 
In an interview, a Chinese public health specialist here said that with proper fermentation in the digesters, bacteria and parasites were killed, making nightsoil safe.
The conversion idea is not new in China. 
In 1936 Zhou Peiyuan, a well-known Chinese scientist, constructed an underground hydraulic pressure tank in Jiangsu Province for cooking and lighting. 
An indoor tank in Hebei Province, built a year later, is still reportedly in operation. 
Similar digesters have been tried in other countries, notably India, with less success.
The technology has been widely introduced in China only within the last decade and has been kept intentionally simple. 
The peasants dig a pit in the backyard and construct a fermentation well of concrete blocks or rocks and cement. 
The tank is then buried, except for a removable concrete cap tightly fitted on top.
A feedstock pipe slants down into the tank from the nearby latrine and pigsty. 
On the opposite side is a storage chamber into which fertilizer is pushed under gas pressure. 
Mr. Zhang said that the feedstock often consisted entirely of human wastes, though straw and other crop stalks might be added.
Once the cap is closed, the contents are left to ferment under pressure for a month to 40 days. 
Because gas pressure building within the fermentation tank could be unstable, the process requires careful tending, though Mr. Zhang insisted that ''acidity and temperature control has been well mastered in China.''
 
Temperature Is Important
The methane gas produced by the fermentation is later drawn through a hose into the farm kitchen for cooking with stove rings adapted to function at low pressure. 
After the gas is spent, the remaining waste is pumped out and carted to the fields for fertilizer. 
Then the process is started again.
The system's efficiency depends heavily on the climate because fermentation will not take place in the tank below 50 degrees Fahrenheit. 
Not surprisingly, most of the digesters -about five million - have been built in Sichuan, a southern province with a generally mild winter.
Mr. Zhang also said that digesters were operating nearly year-round in Guangdong, another southern province. 
The current cost of building a medium-size digester of eight cubic meters, to provide fuel for a family of four or five, is about $56, with communes and farm households generally sharing the cost.
 
Zhaoqi Is 'Easier to Manage'
The New China News Agency estimated that 68.3 billion cubic meters of methane gas could be generated annually if just half of the human and animal waste in rural China were put to use. 
Larger digesters have been tried in some urban areas, particularly Shanghai. 
But Mr. Zhang noted, ''The main purpose of zhaoqi is for the farmer. 
It is easier to manage there and we save on pipes and accessories.''
As energy costs rise, the digester has become more attractive to the third world as an alternate fuel source. 
A Western economist familiar with process estimated that China's digesters were already supplying the energy equivalent of 4 million tons of oil.
The Chinese experience has caught the attention of some officials in the United Nations Development Program. 
And Roger Carmignani, an energy specialist from the World Bank who attended the seminar in Peking, remarked, ''It is apparent that developing methane production is one of the most efficient ways of solving the problem of rural energy resources.''
