
The brooding face of Eugene O'Neill stared out from the window of the Yaxipai motorcycle dealership on Zhongshan Road. 
Farther on, his face appeared on the rough brick wall of a herbal medicine shop.
Throughout this city that hugs the south bank of the Yangtze River, huge blood-red posters, stark with a stern portrait of the American playwright, declared the arrival of the Nanjing-Shanghai O'Neill Theater Festival.
''It's a triumph for us,'' said the chairman of the English department at Nanjing University, Prof. Liu Haiping, who is the organizer of the festival and an accompanying conference on O'Neill's work in honor of the playwright's centenary.
''We were told at first that it would be impossible to have a conference on such a figure as O'Neill,'' Professor Liu said. 
''Only with someone like Tolstoy could a conference be devoted to an individual artist. 
I told them that O'Neill's influence was growing and that he had a direct relation to China.''
 
Discussion and Debate
Professor Liu won the day and last week on theater stages around town the Tyrone family quarreled and agonized, the Emperor Jones ruled and the Mayos were transplanted to a southern Yangtze River village. 
During the day, scholars from three continents discussed, debated and applauded O'Neill's vast dramatic work.
When Cheng Jianxun strode onto the stage of the Qianxian Drama Theater as the unshaven James Tyrone in ''A Long Day's Journey Into Night,'' the Chinese audience remained riveted to the drama, silent and attentive, a departure from the usual noisy crowds that attend Chinese theatrical performances.
The production, staged by the drama troupe of the Nanjing military command of the Chinese Army, is believed to be the first by an army theater group of an American play, and it was also the first time ''Long Day's Journey'' had played in China.
But the road to the production, indeed to the festival and conference, was not easy. 
For Professor Liu, it was an exercise in patience, stubbornness, and the conviction that it was important for China to explore the complexities of O'Neill's tragic vision.
 
A Year at Harvard
Mr. Liu, who was banished to work on a farm during China's Cultural Revolution, was a professor of modern English and American drama at Nanjing University but had never seen a production of the plays he taught until he spent the 1983-84 academic year at Harvard University. 
He returned to the United States in 1986 to read a paper on Taoism in O'Neill's plays at a conference on the playwright at Suffolk University in Boston.
''Actually, the idea came during a conference on O'Neill in Boston in 1984,'' Professor Liu explained in an interview. 
''One of the professors said, 'Why don't you hold a conference on O'Neill in China so we can see your country and bring O'Neill to China?'
It seemed a joke to me at the time.''
As time passed, though, the idea gripped his imagination and Professor Liu approached the administrators of the university with his project. 
Even after he persuaded the administration that O'Neill warranted the attention of Chinese scholars and dramatists, the school told the professor that without money, approval could not be granted.
''There was actually a Catch-22,'' he remembered. 
''In order for me to get money, I had to get approval from the university. 
But to get approval from the university, I had to get funding for the conference.''
This was February 1987.
''So I sat down at my typewriter and sent letters to major U.S. foundations and joint venture companies in China,'' he said. 
''One letter came back with a positive response. 
They gave us $1,000. 
But that was a start.''
 
Lack of Money
''We had no money in the beginning,'' he said. 
''We had to save on stamps because international postage is very expensive. 
But then the Amity Foundation in the United States provided $8,000 and another $8,000 came from the China Fund.''
As money came in, the attitude of the university changed and permission was granted for Professor Liu to go ahead. 
In the end, the more than 30 scholars from Japan, the United States, Sweden, Belgium and Britain who traveled to Nanjing were all required to pay their own way, Professor Liu said.
For Professor Liu, who has just published a book on China's treatment of O'Neill since the 1920's, the growth in interest in the playwright reflects a profound step in China's intellectual and dramatic landscape.
 
Alternative to Ibsen
''Eugene O'Neill was fairly popular in the 1920's,'' Professor Liu said. 
''China had established its own drama, huaju, by then. 
Although Ibsen was the most influential playwright then, people wanted someone different from Ibsen. 
O'Neill was the second most important playwright mainly because of his Expressionistic work 'The Emperor Jones.'
''When the director Hong Shen saw a performance of 'The Emperor Jones' he was impressed by the techniques and came back to China and staged a production here. 
He restaged the Emperor Jones as an army official who stole rations from his men and ran away. 
He used the drums the same way the original production did. 
It was the first introduction of Expressionism onto the Chinese stage.
''After that, Cao Yu - one of China's best-known playwrights -argued that China didn't know how to use Expressionism. 
In an influential article in the 1930's, he said that we should learn from O'Neill's one-act plays, that we should start simply.''
From the 1940's until 1979, O'Neill vanished from the Chinese stage, buried by war, revolution and political orthodoxy. 
''After 1979,'' Professor Liu said, ''he emerged as one of the most-read playwrights.''
''One reason for this revival of interest is that those of us of the younger generation see him as very modern,'' he said. 
''He has absorbed a lot of European influence: Nietzsche, Freud, Schopenhauer. 
Graduate students like to write about O'Neill because he is seen as contemporary, not a classic playwright like Shakespeare. 
And though O'Neill's Expressionism is old in the West, it is still very new here.''
''Further, there is a newly released enthusiasm about America,'' he continued.
The limits of Chinese understanding of O'Neill, however, was discussed in one of the papers delivered at the conference. 
Zhao Yu, a graduate student at Nanjing University, noted that two of the plays - ''Desire Under the Elms'' and ''Mourning Becomes Electra'' - are ''beyond the horizon of expectation of Chinese readers because of different esthetic standards.''
 
The Meaning of Tragedy
''As Chinese tragedians are concerned about the happiness of man in the present world, all the problems they put forward usually are solved right within the plays,'' Ms. Zhao said. 
''But this is not the case in 'Desire Under the Elms' and 'Mourning Becomes Electra.'
In China, it is a rule that tragedies, especially classical tragedies, end in happiness.''
Long Wenpei, a professor of literature at Fudan University in Shanghai, was enthusiastic about the revival of O'Neill in China, however. 
''Human nature is no longer off-limits for us,'' he exclaimed. 
''O'Neill is a real writer who looked at the meaning of life.''
