
Hong Kong is a city of ceaseless conspicuous wonders. 
It supports the world's biggest neon sign, the 328-foot-long Citizen watch sign atop Elizabeth House in Causeway Bay. 
It has the densest concentration of Rolls-Royces, 580, or one for just about every mile and a quarter of Hong Kong road, according to Asia Magazine. 
Its new stainless steel subway carries 1.2 million people a day over its 16-mile length. 
It has the world's longest escalator ride, a 700-foot moving stairway in its Ocean Park recreation center. 
Its Star Ferry boasts a 9-cent harbor ride. 
It is the largest exporter of clothing, watches and toys in the world.
As if all of that weren't sufficient, Hong Kong also has perhaps the best collection of restaurants anywhere. 
To be sure, there may be better individual restaurants in other cities, though even that opinion might occasion some argument in Hong Kong, but there is no place that boasts so many good restaurants.
Not only is the eating wonderful in Hong Kong, so are the varieties of its restaurants, their vitality and their restlessness. 
The restaurant scene is one of constant change. 
Last year I made two trips to Hong Kong, the last just before the end of the year, and in the eight months between those visits scores of new restaurants were opened, this in a city that boasts more than 20,000 restaurants as it is. 
Each time I go to Hong Kong I try as many new places as I can to determine if they are indeed new, exciting, yet true to their Chinese culinary heritage, and each time I find many that please.
Following are 10 of the best of Hong Kong's new restaurants, all of them opened in the last year. 
Unlike what I found on some earlier visits, these restaurants are not all in East Tsimhatsui, that burgeoning enclave of malls, hotels and restaurants in Kowloon. 
Some are in Kowloon proper, and some are on the developing waterfront on Hong Kong Island, across Victoria Harbor from Kowloon.
As with virtually all restaurants in Hong Kong, they are not expensive. 
Such delicacies as shark's fin soup and bird's nest soup can, of course, run up your bill, but for two to three courses of the foods mentioned below, dinner should not be more than $15 to $20 a person. 
The food is the thing; the more rare the more expensive. 
Nor is elegance a sole index of price. 
Such restaurants as Lai Ching Heen and Ziyang Szechuen are decorated in good taste and can be a bit more expensive, but food in far less glossy places can cost as much or more.
All of these restaurants are open from about 11 A.M. to 11 P.M., but those noted as serving dim sum will customarily open several hours earlier, usually about 8 A.M. As important as being new is the fact that these restaurants represent all of the four regional cuisines of China.
Perhaps the most outlandish is the North Sea Fishing Village (first and second basements, Auto Plaza, East Tsimshatsui; telephone 3-7236843), which has a full-size Chinese junk moored in its center. 
On the deck of the junk is a sushi bar at which fresh raw octopus, abalone, conch, lobster and many varieties of raw fish are prepared. 
Sushi, while not common in Hong Kong, is becoming more well known. 
The Chinese call it yueh sang, which translated literally means live fish. 
Tanks of live turtles, crabs and lobsters are piled on the deck of the junk as well.
The restaurant's specialty is the freshest of seafood, and on the junk sit many tanks of filtered water in which swim sea bass, garoupa and pomfret. 
You select your fish; it is netted and cooked as you wish. 
The best method, in my opinion, is to have it steamed with shredded ginger, mushrooms and scallions. 
The restaurant is also fine for dim sum, that traditional Cantonese brunch of different kinds of dumplings and scented tea.
For elegance and Cantonese cookery raised to the level of high art, Lai Ching Heen (Regent Hotel, Salisbury Road; 3-7211211) has few competitors. 
This restaurant on the basement level of the hotel, which sits on the border between East Tsimshatsui and Kowloon proper, is all gray velvet walls and antique Chinese blackwood furniture. 
The table setting consists of a square plate of green jade, a holder of carved green jade that contains a spoon of silver with a jade handle and ivory chopsticks banded in silver and a condiment dish, also of green jade.
Do not miss roast suckling pig in Lai Ching Heen, a dish served nouvelle style, glistening, cross hatched and crisp, or other Cantonese classics such as steamed crab with its roe or roasted pigeon with freshly ground spicy Sichuan peppercorns. 
And all the while enjoy the traffic of the harbor as it passes by your window.
Outstanding examples of the cooking of the people of Chiu Chow, many thousands of whom live, and cook, in Hong Kong, are found at City Chiu Chow Restaurant (East Ocean Center, 98 Granville Road, East Tsimshatsui; 3-7245383). 
The food of the Chiu Chow, who live on the southern coast of China, is one of sharp tastes. 
They use much garlic and white vinegar in their cooking and season the food with a sauce of tangerine juice and ground chili peppers. 
A specialty of the Chiu Chow is pomfret fish, smoked in tea leaves; this restaurant does it superbly. 
Another specialty is large crabs from the China Sea, boiled then served at room temperature so that they can be cracked and eaten in the style of a New Orleans crab boil. 
A custom here is to have Iron Goddess tea before and after the meal, initially to cleanse the palate, finally to cut the pungency of what has been eaten and to help you digest it. 
The tea, widely available, even in the United States, is also known as Ti Kuan Yin.
In Kowloon, one of best of the new is the Ziyang Szechuen Restaurant (45D Chatham Road South; 3-687177), the brainchild of Allan Koo, whose two previous Hong Kong restaurants were Italian and named Valentino and Leonardo. 
Why?
''Because I spent so much time in Italy. 
Italian food is family-style food. 
I like spaghetti,'' says Mr. Koo, all of whose reasons seem sensible.
Ziyang has gray suede and pink marble walls, caged parakeets that chirp incessantly, a guitarist nightly, chairs from Italy that cost Mr. Koo $200 each, and Sichuan food of an exceptionally high order. 
We had wonderful fried dumplings, thinly sliced loin of pork in a garlic, soy and vinegar sauce, bean threads dressed with hot peanut and sesame sauce, prawns in searingly hot chili and dry-fried shredded beef, a difficult dish to make because it often resembles used shoelaces. 
Not here.
The Shing Tao Restaurant (6-8 Jordan Road, Jordan House; 3-7243832) divides its menu equally between Sichuan and Peking cooking. 
It is just off Nathan Road, in the traditional back lot of Kowloon, away from much of the Tsimshatsui glitter, but its food is worth the trip.
When you sit down, a plate of peanuts that have been stewed in cinnamon, eight-star anise and Sichuan peppercorns is put before you to nibble on while you consider the menu. 
We had Yunnan ham with fresh honey in steamed buns, duck smoked in tea leaves and camphor and as a final course Mongolian-style grilled beef. 
A curved cast-iron grill that looks like one side of a waffle iron is placed over a small fire in the center of the table. 
Beef is placed on the grill and cooks in seconds. 
This is then dipped into a bubbling mixture of soy sauce, wine, sugar, white pepper and peanut oil and eaten with shredded leeks. 
A spectacular dish.
A fashionable, though tiny, establishment in Kowloon that is serving some of the best Shanghai food in Hong Kong is the Wu Kong Shanghai Restaurant (27 Nathan Road, Alpha House; 3-667244), a white marble place entered from Peking Road, just around the corner from its nominal address. 
The restaurant is the creation of Bill Kong and his chef, Wu Chow, who was born in Shanghai and has been cooking the food of his native city for 30 years.
The food is classical Shanghai in execution: so-called drunken pigeon, the bird marinated in Hsao-Shing wine before being lightly braised; tiny shrimp poached with egg white and sauteed quickly so that they look like a snow drift; eel, shredded so that it resembles pasta, then braised with bean sprouts and minced garlic in wine vinegar and soy sauce.
Across the harbor, on Hong Kong Island, many new restaurants have opened in recent months. 
Most of them are Cantonese, as are most restaurants in Hong Kong, but one of the best is the East Ocean Seafood Restaurant (25 Harbour Road, third floor, Harbour Center; 5-8938887), where, as its name suggests, the menu is heavily accented with fish and seafood. 
The restaurant's strength lies in elaborate, banquet-quality preparations, and even though you might not want to indulge in a 10-course binge, a selection from the banquet menu is advised.
We had, for example, whole prawns steamed with garlic and served in small bamboo steamers; double-boiled whole shark's fin cooked with wintermelon and Yunnan ham and octopus fried with snow peas and fresh ginger. 
Then as a respite from seafood we were served a whole chicken that had been marinated in Grand Marnier, fried, then presented with a bit of lemon juice and Sichuan peppercorns and sea salt, ground together. 
It was outstanding.
In Hong Kong Central, up the slope from Queen's Road, is the West Villa Restaurant (1-5 On Lan Street; 5-212196), which is one of Hong Kong's best fowl, bird and game restaurants. 
The dishes are classic (but often overlooked) Cantonese. 
For example, you can eat, as we did, partridge cooked in a closed porcelain jar with sugar cane, Yunnan ham and ginger, a striking preparation. 
We have had pigeon stuffed with shark's fin, then braised, and crab meat with beaten egg whites, a snow white mountain of softness bordered with bright green flowers of broccoli.
The chef, Peter Tang, cooks what he calls ''the food of the home'' and says he pays ''obedience to the old masters'' of Chinese cookery, those master chefs called Mon See Fu, and when he cooks such delicate things as eel, first double boiled, later steamed in hollowed bamboo, his respect for elegance is understood. 
There is a similarly named restaurant on the Hong Kong waterfront, the West Villa Admiralty Restaurant (18 Harcourt Road, ground floor, Admiralty Center; 5-298333), which is said to have several partners in common with the other West Villa. 
Whether it does or not, the restaurants are totally different, the West Villa Admiralty specializing in Shanghai cuisine.
It serves drunken shrimp, a rare delicacy consisting of live shrimp marinated in rice wine, then slowly cooked in the wine in their shells. 
The restaurant cooks shredded beef with fermented black beans and fresh shallots, makes quite a rich wintermelon soup filled with duck meat, shrimp, fresh lotus seeds and frog legs and steams Hong Kong's native fish, the garoupa, with scallions and fresh sliced ginger.
Finally, there is another of those new and elegant Cantonese restaurants, the Tao Yuan Restaurant (23 Harbour Road, third floor, Great Eagle Center; 5-738080) near the new Hong Kong Arts Center. 
It looks out over the harbor, and on its tables are pink cloths and table settings that are adequate copies of Ching Dynasty porcelain.
The Tao Yuan has wonderful dim sum in the morning, then in the afternoon it becomes a place to eat minced quail, mushrooms, cucumbers, water chestnuts and celery wrapped in cool lettuce leaves, crisp goose with sweet plum sauce, scallops stuffed with mashed taro root, then fried, and hot bouillon into which are dropped puffy fried vegetable fritters.
This is the sort of food being cooked in Hong Kong. 
It is inventive, yet true to its Chinese roots, and is extraordinarily well prepared by a growing band of young Hong Kong-born and Hong Kong-trained chefs. 
It is food worth making a trip more than halfway around the world to taste.
