
Westerners who live in China are accustomed to being told how fortunate we are. 
But for us there is a company of foreigners still more to be envied, those who journeyed here before the Communists closed the outlying reaches of the country to the world. 
One has only to read the accounts of Somerset Maugham, who visited here in 1921, or of Peter Fleming, who was here in 1935, to know the beguiling possibilities of a China where travel was less hindered.
As the Government has extended its list of ''open'' areas, this chagrin has eased. 
Most of the regions newly accessible to foreigners are in the Chinese heartland, but one of them has made possible a journey to an area remote even by the standards of those who explored the country before 1949. 
With the opening on May 1 of the Karakoram Highway, Peking licensed any foreigner to relive one of the most daunting experiences of Marco Polo, the most fabled China traveler of them all.
It was during his confinement in a Genoese prison that Polo dictated his account of his travels to a cellmate, Maestro Rusticello, a fact that has made the adventurer's precise route from Venice to Khanbalik, the modern Peking, a matter of scholarly dispute. 
But it is certain that his path, by horse and camel, led over the towering mountain passes, some more than 16,000 feet, that admit to China from what is now its western frontier with Afghanistan and Pakistan. 
It is over this terrain that the Karakoram Highway runs, a 795-mile triumph of engineering that was built over a period of 18 years before 1978 by army road crews from China and Pakistan.
The story of the Karakoram is of the road, a narrow strip of asphalt and graded gravel that runs through forbiddingly rocky lowlands, along sinuous corniches extending hundreds of feet above stony riverbeds and up into the crystal freshness of three of the world's highest ranges, the Pamirs, the Himalayas and the Karakorams. 
It is a tale, too, of Kashgar, a town of biblical simplicity that is the road's starting point on the Chinese side, of the unaffected friendliness of upland people who live much as they did in Polo's time, and of the lovely mountains and orchards of the Hunza Valley of northeast Pakistan.
On the day the highway opened the Chinese reserved the few four-wheel-drive Jeeps in Kashgar for dignitaries attending ceremonies in the Khunjerab Pass, the 16,072-foot border point with Pakistan. 
Accordingly, our party of eight - five reporters, a New York banker based in Peking, and two of our wives - resolved to spend time exploring farther east in the sprawling Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region. 
This introduced us to the arid fastnesses of the Gobi and Taklimakan Deserts, nearly 2,000 miles of sand and scrub that fill most of the terrain between Kashgar and Peking.
At the searing oasis of Turpan, where summer temperatures reach 125 degrees, we measured the rigors that confronted the traders, adventurers and marauders who journeyed along the Great Silk Road, the romantic thoroughfare that linked the Mediterranean of imperial Rome to the China of the contemporaneous dynasty of the Han. 
At Gaochang, a ruined city outside Turpan, sacked by Mongols not long before Polo ventured across the Taklimakan, we gazed westward across the desert from ancient ramparts and knew how the desert got its Turkic name, meaning ''Enter, and you won't return!''
We reached Kashgar on a Saturday evening, marveling at our first aerial view of the 2,000-year-old town with its poplars, its wheat fields and its vines. 
After the biscuit-brown expanses of sand that stretch like a ruffled carpet before the Tien Shan Mountains buffering Xinjiang from Soviet Kirghizia and Kazakhstan, the greenness was like cooling air. 
Looking down on the shaded forecourts of the mosques, we understood how Peter Fleming felt - ''Few people can ever have enjoyed a bath more than we did'' -when he arrived here in a camel train after a five-month journey from Peking in 1935.
It is a safe bet that none of the 244 Chinese cities and towns now open to foreigners provides a less altered appearance to contemporary travelers than Kashgar. 
No Japanese taxis here, only donkey carts that, unsprung, carry visitors through the mud-walled back streets of Yumlakshakulbishe, heart of the old town. 
In back alleys and courtyard homes hidden behind whitewashed walls, the curious can find the unchanging rhythms of life among the Uighurs, who constitute 90 percent of Kashgar's population of 180,000 and about half of the 13 million people in Xinjiang.
In two days we were invited to a wedding, to a courtyard school where youngsters recited the Koran, and to an evening with a Uighur doctor living in the spacious home his family has owned for more than 200 years. 
Sitting beneath the stars, cross-legged on a carpeted platform over cups of thick black tea, we spoke, in Chinese, of the matters that preoccupy Uighurs' minds. 
Our host, who had doffed the Uighur's long cotton coat and boots for a dusty business suit, told us that relations with the Chinese, who established their influence here as early as the third century B.C., have improved radically since Peking scrapped the tyrannical policies of Mao Zedong.
The Uighurs, who once had an empire of their own, are essentially a trading people now, a talent displayed in Kashgar's sprawling Sunday market. 
All pretense of a collective economy is abandoned as a gigantic crowd gathers in an open area beyond the town. 
Among sellers of cart wheels and camels, we met a gregarious Uighur, Abdullah, who had learned English working with the British in India before World War II. 
He led us to the bazaar in the center of town, where a wily trader relieved us of $300 for a muted old Xinjiang carpet of the kind that graces virtually every Kashgar home.
You cannot be in Kashgar long without being drawn toward the mountains, their snowy flanks shimmering in the haze to the north and west of town. 
At noon on our third day, we paid our bills at the old Russian Consulate that does service as the Kashgar guesthouse and headed for Pakistan. 
Leaving behind our Peking interpreter, who lacked the pass necessary for Chinese entering border zones, we boarded a Toyota Landcruiser driven by an impetuous young Chinese and headed for the Pamirs. 
In the next 48 hours the driver's insistence on daredevil driving was virtually our only vexation. 
About 25 miles down the road, at the village of Upal, we came across reminders of the earthquake hazard that has plagued the area for centuries. 
In August last year a major quake hit the Keshi prefecture, leveling several villages and killing dozens of their inhabitants. 
The tomb of Mahmoud Keshgeri, the 11th-century Turkic scholar who is thought by some to have been the author of the world's first dictionary, was destroyed but has been already been rebuilt, a shimmering edifice of painted white tiles on a rise looking to the Pamirs. 
In the village, naked boys splashed in a river yards from the remains of mud-walled homes.
In the Pamir foothills, the scope of the road building began to strike home. 
Led by the Engineering Troops of the People's Liberation Army, who did the bulk of the blasting, leveling and bridge-building on both sides of the frontier, the crews spent years in regions of burning heat and numbing cold, using pack horses to carry equipment where no vehicle had ever been, menaced by avalanche, landslide or explosion. 
Often, charges had to be placed hundreds of feet up sheer cliff faces, hand-drilled into the rock by men suspended from ropes.
In all, 408 men died, many of them buried beneath simple cairns. 
Although the largest number of these were Chinese, most of the serious mishaps occurred on the Pakistan side, where the graduated plateau that carries the highway for long stretches inside China gives way to more intimidating going. 
In the Hunza and Indus River valleys, the road clings to precipitous mountainsides, with only occasional posts to keep vehicles from plunging into the riverbeds below. 
During the spring runoff, in April and May, subsidence from above is a constant threat.
In the worst cases, hundreds of tons of rock plummet down the mountainside, obliterating the highway and any bridge standing in the way. 
Road crews from Pakistan's Frontier Works Organization, which deploys 10,000 soldiers for road maintenance, are usually on the scene within an hour, but it can take days to clear the rubble, and slides can recur at any time.
Our worst moment came an hour after crossing the Pakistan frontier at Sust, above the Hunza Valley, when the American-made Willy's Jeeps we had transferred to at the border halted before a pile of rock four or five feet high that had been washed across the road by a torrent of water from a nearby glacier. 
While we dismounted and forded our way across 100 yards of rubble, our Pakistani drivers amazed us by challenging the pile with their four-wheel drive and regaining the unshattered continuation of the road. 
Two hours later a major landslide at the same spot closed the road for 48 hours.
A lesser worry was altitude sickness. 
Of the total of 36 hours of driving between Kashgar and Islamabad, nine are spent at altitudes above 10,000 feet, and those, either side of a night stop at Taxkorgan, 250 miles from Kashgar, are spread over the better part of a day. 
We traveled with an amateur dispensary that included tablets for altitude sickness prescribed by an Australian doctor in Peking. 
But none of us took the pills, and perhaps as a result each of us suffered to some degree from heavy limbs, headaches and labored breathing.
Between myself and my wife, Jane, a smoker, the odds for trouble seemed to lie with her. 
But it fell to me, a 41-year-old nonsmoker, to suffer most. 
The trouble started over lunch by a lake in the lee of Muztagata, one of a number of peaks along the highway that hover around 25,000 feet. 
While Jane prepared a meal - canned baked beans and sausages brought from Peking, supplemented by chocolate - I set out to photograph a passing camel. 
We had risen 8,000 feet in five hours since leaving Kashgar, and now, at 12,500 feet, I began feeling dizzy. 
But the symptoms eased overnight in Taxkorgan, at 14,000 feet, and when we reached the peak, 2,000 feet higher, I felt no more than listlessness and a minor headache. 
We were amply rewarded for the physical discomfort. 
Although there are long stretches of nearly barren road, even they offer unexpected relief. 
In a rocky section two hours out of Kashgar, where the road crossed a bridge over an icy brook, a heavily laden camel stood tied to a lean-to made of rocks. 
Smoke curled upward from a chimney, and beside the door stood a weather-beaten old man, white beard falling to his chest, in ankle-length coat and boots. 
This was a trader taking a rest on the way to Kashgar, much as Polo and his caravan must have paused on their journey through this region in 1275.
Elsewhere, habitation took the form of felt-lined yurts, the circular tents favored by the armies of Genghis Khan. 
The Uighur and Kirghiz herders of these uplands, mostly nomads, migrated more than 1,000 years ago from areas to the northeast, near Mongolia, but little in their customs has changed. 
Unlike ethnic Chinese, who are often wary of admitting strangers to their homes, herders' families came forward in greeting when our Landcruiser pulled up, inviting us into the rug-lined comfort of the yurts and offering mugs of fermented yak's milk or tea.
Our stop in Taxkorgan offered another reminder of the ethnic tides that have swept across the old Silk Road. 
After hours of rough driving the road emerged into a landscape of green pasture stretching to the mountains, reminiscent of Ireland's County Galway. 
By a river of crystal-clear water, a group of herders' children were taking the last rays of the sun, dangling their feet over the bank. 
Turning smiling faces to the camera, they were a revelation - blue eyes, proud noses, features wholly European.
This was our first glimpse of the Tadzhiks, a people of Persian origin said to have migrated at about the time that the armies of Alexander the Great pushed eastward from Greece. 
Contemporary Taxkorgan, a few streets of whitewashed homes with an army barracks and blaring loudspeakers, is no more than a century old. 
But closer to the Soviet frontier, 20 miles distant at this point, lie the ruins of an earlier town of the same name, leveled by earthquakes, that was mentioned as the ''gateway'' to China by the mathematician and geographer Ptolemy when writing in the second century.
China demurred for several years before acceding to Pakistan's suggestion that the highway be opened, and one reason was probably the proximity of the road to Afghanistan. 
The Wakhan Corridor, the eastern finger of Afghanistan, meets the Chinese frontier about 50 miles southwest of Taxkorgan. 
The corridor has been occupied by a heavy concentration of Soviet troops since 1979, and it is a fair assumption that the Chinese have fortified their own defenses. 
The only clue we saw was the unsignposted road that breaks westward toward the Wakhan, its surface rutted by trucks.
Another reason for the Chinese to demur was obvious at the Pamir guesthouse in Taxkorgan, used until recently by the Pakistani and Chinese travelers who were the only permitted users of the road. 
Although an effort had been made to upgrade the 160-bed hotel, its washing facilities consisted of an outhouse and a galvanized steel tank with ice-cold water outside each room. 
When one of our party opened a door off his room and spied a bath, the Tadzhik room attendant swiftly locked it. 
The baths are to be activated when running water is available, but nobody was sure just when.
The road, hitherto washboard gravel, turns to asphalt shortly before the Chinese border post at Pirali, and is paved thenceforth all the way to Islamabad. 
In our case, the relief from the gravel was offset quickly by a bureaucratic snafu at the Chinese border post, when our banker friend was found to have an invalid exit visa. 
As usual with foreigners in China, a lengthy discussion and expressions of good will were enough to surmount the problem, and we were soon under way for the final stretch to the frontier proper, at the pinnacle of the Khunjerab Pass.
There, beside a stone plinth recording the official commissioning of the road, we gathered for a group photograph. 
The heavy winter clothing we had brought with us proved superfluous in the brilliant sunshine but the altitude made itself felt in other ways, mainly on our breathing. 
Two days later, overnighting between Gilgit and Islamabad, we could only marvel when a party of British mountaineers enroute to K2, at 28,250 feet the world's second highest mountain, told us that they planned to ascend the mountain's unconquered northwest ridge without oxygen.
In the Kirghiz language Khunjerab means ''Valley of Blood,'' a name the pass earned centuries ago from the activities of the Khanjut brigands who made a livelihood attacking caravans. 
The worst dangers to be faced in our passage, and thereafter through 500 miles of driving to Islamabad, came not from brigands, though even 20 years ago they had not entirely disappeared, nor even from landslides, but from a still more deadly hazard, the Pakistani driver. 
Times beyond number, we stiffened as our Jeep approached a blind corner on the highway to find the entire roadway filled by a careering truck or bus.
The heavy vehicles are mostly British Bedfords with custom-made superstructures that have been extravagantly painted and filigreed, a popular Pakistani folk art. 
Designs include wrestling lions, iridescent peacocks, mountainscapes and mosques. 
High above the Indus, on our fourth day out from Kashgar, we followed a lavishly decorated truck with a rhyming Moslem couplet inscribed in Urdu on its rear door. 
''Oh God, protect me and those who travel with me,'' it began. 
On the Karakoram Highway, with an 800-foot drop beside us, we too felt the need of Allah on our side. 
Three weeks after our journey, a Bedford truck carrying 47 people swerved off the highway near Chilas, south of Gilgit, killing 11 in its plunge into the Indus.
Fortunately, we had fortified ourselves for this last, most taxing part of the journey with a day's rest at Karimabad, in the heart of the Hunza Valley. 
It was a tossup between Kashgar and the Hunza for the highlight of the trip, for in the lee of 25,550-foot Mount Rakaposhi we found what must be one of the loveliest spots in Asia. 
Viewed from Baltit, a medieval village situated hundreds of feet above the valley floor, the Hunza in spring is a carpet of pink and white blossoms, rising to the green of terraced fields on the mountains' lower slopes, and above all the pristine whiteness of the peaks. 
Here, two hours' drive from the bleakness of the Khunjerab, is a vast orchard of apricots, peaches and plums, nurtured by a people renowned for their longevity and their gentle hospitality. 
For at least 1,000 years this has been a stronghold of the Ismailis, the Moslems of Persian origin whose spiritual leader is the Aga Khan, and it was among Ismailis that we relaxed at the $7-a-night Tourist Park Hotel. 
We felt we had found much that was best among them in our young guide, Irfanullah Baig, who charmed us with his chiseled good looks, his porcelain blue eyes and his intense loyalty to the race-horse-owning multimillionaire who is the sect's current leader, Prince Karim Aga Khan. 
''He has his faults, of course,'' he said. 
''But he is ours, and we love him.''
At Baltit, we found traces of the ''great game'' played out between Russia and England for a century and a half after 1800 for dominance in the strategic fastnesses of Central Asia. 
At the 600-year-old Baltit fort, home until 1948 of the mir of Hunza, traditional ruler of the valley, the aging caretaker scurried forward to a dusty mantelpiece and snapped to attention as he displayed the item that seemed to delight him most of all - a sepia-colored photograph, duly autographed, of Field Marshal Lord Roberts of Kandahar, hero of the Indian Mutiny of 1857, who visited the fort after British-led troops marched up the valley in 1891 in furtherance of Britain's policy of controlling the Himalayan passes.
Lower down the valley, at Gilgit, there were reminders of the price that great powers have paid for their efforts to entrench their influence in the region. 
Outside the town, in a shaded grove, stands a granite monolith surrounded by 88 concrete tombs, each containing one of the Chinese who died in building the Karakoram Highway. 
A mile or two away, near the bazaar on the northern side of town, protected by barbed wire, are the crumbling remains of the old British cemetery. 
There, on tablets shattered by vandals or overgrown with weeds, are inscriptions to pioneers ''most cruelly murdered'' in the Pamirs, to missionaries who fell victims to typhus, and to mountaineers killed while tackling Himalayan peaks.
As we drove southward toward Islamabad, rarely losing sight of the torrents of the Indus, one tablet in particular kept coming to mind. 
It was simple in its grief, yet a powerful reminder of how the harshness of geography in these parts has so often triumphed over man. 
''In loving memory of our only son, Harold S. Eldred,'' the inscription read, ''Captain, Sikh Pioneers, Kashmir Infantry, accidentally drowned while fording the Indus, Dec. 
1, 1929, aged 33. 
'Until the day breaks and the shadows flee away.'
''
 
THROUGH THE KHUNJERAB PASS -
Planning Few trips in China fall easily into place, but this is one where careful preparation can be especially important. 
Particularly on the Chinese section of the highway, limited hotel space, Jeeps and air service create potential bottlenecks. 
Although Pakistan, too, has only recently begun to develop the route for tourism, matters there are somewhat easier.
The journey can begin from either end of the highway, in Kashgar or Islamabad, but uncertainties of transport on the Chinese side make it easier, for the time being, to begin in Kashgar. 
Barring serious landslides, the entire 795-mile distance from Kashgar to Islamabad can be covered in approximately 36 hours of driving. 
In our case, with a day's rest stop in Karimabad, in the Hunza Valley, and an afternoon's layover in Gilgit, the journey took five full days, with eight to 12 hours' driving on each of four days.
Travel arrangements must be made separately for each side of the border, since Chinese and Pakistani vehicles are currently permitted to serve only their own section of the highway.
 
When to Go
For now, the highway is open to travel by nationals of countries other than China and Pakistan from May 1 to Oct. 
31 each year for group travel and from May 1 to Nov. 
30 for individuals. 
Eventually both countries hope to keep the route open year round, but currently problems with snow clearance and general road maintenance dictate the limited season.
 
Visa Requirements
A standard Chinese tourist visa is accepted for entry and exit at the frontier post at Pirali. 
In the first weeks after the highway's opening, Pakistan required special visas for those making the journey, but this has now been dropped for all but two categories of traveler - journalists and nationals of countries that do not enjoy 30-day visa-free entry to Pakistan for tourist reasons. 
In the case of Americans and most Westerners, no visas will be required by Pakistan regardless of whether your trip begins in Kashgar or Islamabad.
 
Group Tours
A number of American companies specializing in China are offering Karakoram Highway trips. 
Mountain Travel (1398 Solano Avenue, Albany, Calif. 
94706; 415-527-8100 or 800-227-2384) is offering two 23-day group tours departing June 14 and 22 next year that are priced at $3,575 a person, based on double occupancy, not including round-trip air fare from the United States. 
However, the price for the trip does include extensive travel inside China, besides the Karakoram Highway. 
Lindblad Travel is planning to include the highway on its trips to the region next year (1 Sylvan Road North, Westport, Conn. 
06881; 203-226-8531 or 800-243-5657).
 
Independent Travel
Costs can be considerably lowered by making arrangements yourself, but where the Chinese side of the journey is concerned this may be difficult to arrange from outside China, and commitments made by the China International Travel Service can be infuriatingly unreliable. 
The large numbers of backpackers making the journey in May in both directions proved, too, that for those willing to accept delays of days at a time - and to entrust themselves to the public buses that run on either side of the frontier - the journey can be made with practically no advance preparation.
Agencies to contact in China include the Peking branch of the China International Travel Service (domestic bookings, 755272) and the branch in Urumqi, capital of Xinjiang (25794). 
In all probability, direct contact with Urumqi through the international operator will be more effective. 
The Urumqi branch can make bookings on the five weekly flights between Urumqi and Kashgar, a three-hour leg on a twin-engine Antonov-24 that is one of the major potential bottlenecks; if sandstorms ground flights, a common occurrence, the only other means of covering the Urumqi-Kashgar leg is by public bus or minibus, a three-day journey across the desert. 
By minibus, the cost is about $600.
Jeep or minibus bookings from Kashgar to Sust, on the Pakistan frontier, are another potential bottleneck, since there are fewer than 20 vehicles available for the journey in Kashgar. 
The standard rate for a Toyota Landcruiser between Kashgar and Sust, where the highway crosses into Pakistan, is about $350. 
Here again, the best contact is the Urumqi office of C.I.T.S., which will seek reservations by telephone through the travel service's Kashgar branch. 
Most C.I.T.S. officials answering the telephone in Urumqi speak English.
For arrangements on the Pakistan side, the easiest course is to contact one of Pakistan's best-known travel agencies, Travel Walji's Ltd. 
(Walji's Building, 10 Khayaban Suhrawardy, Box 1088, Islamabad; 828324 and 826621, telex 5769 WALJI PK or 5836 WALJI PK). 
Arrangements can be made for a Jeep or minibus for all or part of the journey on the Pakistan side, including having a vehicle waiting at the Pakistan frontier on your arrival from Kashgar. 
The company will also book hotel rooms and air flights, including the crucial Islamabad-Gilgit leg, which cuts 15 hours of driving off the journey for those who decide to forego the journey through the Indus Valley. 
Walji's drivers are excellent, and the company's other services impeccable. 
Costs vary according to vehicle and distance, but for a jeep journey over the entire length of the highway on the Pakistan side will run about $325, regardless of the number traveling.J. 
F. B.
