
He was seated at a table in the prison dispensary, dressed in a white dustcoat. 
From the anguish in his eyes and the awkward way he rose to his feet, it was plain he was no ordinary doctor.
What brought Zhao Guomin to the Shanghai Municipal Prison was not medicine but murder. 
On Dec. 
28, 1968, he and four other men beat to death the 38-year-old scientist who was head of the Shanghai Pharmacological Institute in a case that was swallowed up for a time in the general tumult of the Cultural Revolution.
Now 43 years old, Mr. Zhao has about 18 months of an eight-year prison term still to serve, and he counts himself a lucky man. 
''I could have been executed,'' he told a visitor. 
Tears welled in his eyes as he spoke of his victim's family and of the travails of his own wife and son as they await his return.
Article describes conditions at Shanghai Municipal Prison, China, where many young people arrested during country's Cultural Revolution remain incarcerated; some efforts have been made by Government of Deng Xiaoping to help prisoners prepare for better life (M)
Mr. Zhao's story is one of many in the forbidding edifice at 147 Changyang Street in central Shanghai that have their origin in the ''10 years of calamity,'' as the Cultural Revolution is officially known. 
When Mao Zedong set out in 1966 to turn Chinese society upside down, he unleashed forces that shattered hundreds of thousands of lives, and the legacy is still felt in every corner of the nation's life.
A tour of the Shanghai prison is a sobering affair. 
More than 60 percent of the 3,700 inmates are under 35, men and women who belong to what Chinese call the ''lost generation'' of youth whose education and family life were uprooted when the Cultural Revolution closed schools, set children against parents and licensed mayhem against anybody standing for the established order.
 
Cultural Revolution Is Blamed
''What we have here in many respects are the victims of the Cultural Revolution,'' said Wu Jichen, the prison's deputy governor, as he led a visitor through workshops and classrooms that cluster around granite cell blocks built by the British between 1903 and 1923. 
''They belong to a generation that was told by the Gang of Four that education was useless, so they grew up without culture, without any sense of right and wrong.''
''What we try to do is to engage in a process of remolding, to try and help the inmates distinguish what is right from what is wrong, what is beautiful from what is ugly, what is lawful from what is not.''
Similar accounts have been offered for many years in Chinese jails, but officials acknowledge now that much of what was said in the past was false or at least exaggerated. 
The picture that has emerged since the ascent of China's current leader, Deng Xiaoping, is one in which the country's vast network of jails and labor camps, indeed the entire legal system, was fatally prejudiced by arbitrariness and brutality.
Not all of this has changed. 
In two years, under a crackdown on crime begun by Mr. Deng, thousands of people have been executed, some within days of their offenses. 
The central authorities' insistence on a broader use of the death sentence has led to thousands of executions since the autumn of 1983, nine in Peking on one day in January alone. 
Troubling questions remain about the fairness of court procedures, including limited opportunities for defense.
 
Greater Effort Visible
Nonetheless, a visit to the Shanghai prison suggests that greater effort has been made under Mr. Deng to give substance to Mao's instruction that prisons be turned into factories, farms and schools where inmates can prepare for a better life. 
A visitor passing through workshops where prisoners make clothing, electrical components and ornaments has the impression of generally healthy men and women unafraid to talk about their yearning for life outside.
The prison sits off a busy street, shielded by a succession of three steel doors, by guards with automatic rifles and by a 20-foot granite wall topped by glass shards. 
According to Mr. Wu, the deputy governor, sentences range from 20 years to six months, with ''seven or eight'' inmates under suspended death sentences that can be commuted for good behavior after two years.
The case of Dr. Zhao suggests that there is still much that is arbitrary in the sentencing. 
As he told it, he was press-ganged into joining an ''investigation team'' that came to the pharmacological institute to press charges of spying against the party secretary. 
Because torture was to be involved, the team wanted a doctor present, but as things progressed Dr. Zhao became an accomplice in the beating.
Dr. Zhao said the death was covered up at the time, but the case was reopened at the widow's instigation after the overthrow of the so-called Gang of Four - Jiang Qing, who was Mao's wife, and her associates - in 1976. 
Two of the five assailants were tried, and Dr. Zhao received the stiffer sentence. 
After two years at hard labor and two more in another prison, he was assigned to the dispensary. 
On his release next year, he expects to be reassigned to medical work in Shanghai.
 
Song Shows New Attitude
Against this, other sentences seem relatively severe. 
Chen Jingcai, conductor of the prison orchestra, is serving a 15-year term for ''molesting women'' while interviewing them for posts with a Shanghai ensemble. 
Since there is a charge of rape under Chinese law, his offense evidently was less severe. 
Now he spends his days teaching prisoners the violin, flute and other instruments and rehearsing lusty renditions the ''Ode to Joy'' movement of Beethoven's Ninth Symphony and American songs such as ''Oh!
Susanna'' sung with Chinese words.
Even in the orchestra, prisoners are expected to work at remolding attitudes. 
Zhao Derong, a former glassmaker serving a four-year term for stealing bicycles, exercises his strong tenor in a prison ballad he composed, ''Don't Worry About Me, Mother.''
In the refrain, he sings of his wish to study hard, learn skills and ''make my contribution to the motherland.''
Work is the center of prison life. 
Inmates labor eight hours a day, six days a week for three yuan, or $1.07, plus monthly bonuses of up to 20 yuan. 
All are required to attend classes and to work toward at least a junior middle school certificate, the equivalent of 10th grade. 
Each block has a television set, a library and a Ping-Pong table. 
A half-hour family visit once a month is permitted, and about a fifth of the prisoners are allowed to go home for a couple of days each year.
At night, two inmates are locked into each of the cells, which measure about 8 feet by 5 and have steel doors and a sliding peephole that opens from the outside. 
Bedrolls stacked against the wall are laid on concrete floors. 
Regulations pinned to the wall forbid discussion of crimes and sentences between cellmates and command them to ''seriously repent'' their wrongdoing.
According to Mr. Wu, the deputy governor, the last time anybody escaped was in 1975, clinging to the underside of a delivery truck, and he was caught in hours. 
Although guards are unarmed, officials say none have been attacked in memory. 
''What we aim for is to achieve the kind of relationship doctors have with patients,'' said Mr. Wu. ''You can see for yourself, there is no hostility between wardens and prisoners.''
