
A group of Indian pilgrims who for the first time in 22 years were permitted to visit a lake sacred to Hindus in southwestern Tibet have returned with descriptions of monasteries that were destroyed in China's Cultural Revolution.
The 13 worshipers who entered Tibet through the Himalayas traveled 300 miles by horse, mule and truck in a region that has rarely been visited by outsiders since the Chinese conquest of Tibet.
As part of efforts to thaw relations between India and China, Peking permitted pilgrims to travel to the lake, which is known as Manasarowar in India and as Mapam in Tibet. 
The deep blue lake, at an altitude of 14,000 feet, is considered holy by both Hindus and Buddhists. 
Before the Chinese invasion, eight large monasteries housing thousands of monks ringed the slopes around the lake.
Indian pilgrims, permitted for first time in 22 years to visit sacred areas of Tibet, see ruins of temples destroyed in Chinese Cultural Revolution
The travelers had cameras with them but said they were frequently discouraged by their guides from photographing the vandalized sites.
 
Buddhist Palace Is Destroyed
The travelers said that the gompas, as they are called, were all empty shells, having been systematically blown up. 
''Our Chinese guides told us that the destruction had all been the work of the Gang of Four,'' one of the travelers said, referring to Mao Zedong's radical associates who have been blamed for the excessses of the Cultural Revolution.
The traveler added that the same guides did not permit the pilgrims to make close inspection of the ruins. 
One gompa, measuring nearly half a mile in length, had been reduced to rubble.
The summer palace of a Buddhist order was also destroyed. 
However, one of the Indian visitors said local residents had apparently salvaged some ancient prayer stones and built ramshackle chapels. 
Above one ruin there flew a solitary prayer flag that had apparently been recently put in place, attesting to the tenacious hold of the religious culture even in the absence of monks.
According to the pilgrims, the group's guides, both Chinese and Tibetans, said several times that they had heard reports that the Chinese Government was preparing to rebuild the religious buildings.
The travelers said that they were kept at a distance from settlers but that they spent some time in the town of Taklakot, now known officially in Tibet as Burang. 
It is a settlement where local herdsmen exchange yak wool for food smuggled in by Nepalese traders, and Tibetans live in huts of stone.
Flags flew from official buildings, the visitors said, but they saw no pictures of Mao or any other revolutionary figures. 
''My impression,'' a young traveler said, ''was that the authorities had given up doing anything for the local people and that the Tibetans were living as hard a life as they had for centuries.''
There was no sign of the kind of rich ceremonial life that dominated the lives of local people. 
There were no communes and no schools, the travelers said, and there were no temples and no monasteries, just high gravel expanses without vegetation and some hardy goats, sheep and people.
In their trek the Indian pilgrims came upon the remains of Shershung, where fairs used to be held on days of the full moon. 
The site is now rubble, the travelers said, marked only by burial mounds of inscribed prayer stones.
