
A hand-cranked telephone still stands between Ma Tianying and his hopes of becoming the richest peasant in his village in Sichuan Province.
Mr. Ma runs his own small sawmill, repairs trucks and tractors and makes prefabricated housing slabs. 
Last year he and his family earned the equivalent of about $6,000, making him the second wealthiest resident of the village of Chengbei.
But Mr. Ma, a stocky man whose business attire is a T-shirt and baggy blue trousers held up by an old army belt, has yet to catch up with Zhang Daishen. 
She got a head start in turning out the prefabricated concrete that is in demand because of the housing boom touched off by recent changes in agricultural policy.
Agricultural specialist in China has estimated that as many as 70% of China's peasants are economically superfluous and Chinese Government, hoping to better utilize peasants, is encouraging them to stop tilling soil and set up small workshops, service trades and specialized occupations that will keep them gainfully employed; photos; map (M)
Miss Zhang earned about $6,800 last year and installed the village's first and only private telephone.
 
Rivalry Is Encouraged
Miss Zhang and Mr. Ma personify the kind of rivalry that the Chinese Government likes to encourage. 
The country's agricultural output has soared since 1979, when a new policy let farmers keep whatever they could grow beyond a quota set by the state. 
But the new productivity has revealed the extent of underemployment that long existed among China's 800 million peasants.
Because China has too many farmers and too little arable land for them to cultivate, the Government wants more peasants to stop tilling the soil and set up small workshops, service trades and specialized occupations like raising livestock that will keep them gainfully employed in the countryside.
Du Runsheng, a leading agricultural specialist, estimated three months ago that as many as 70 percent of China's peasants were economically superfluous. 
The cities could not afford to absorb them, he said, so new jobs must be created for them in rural areas.
Mr. Du, who heads the Rural Policy Research Center of the Communist Party's Central Committee, said at a news conference that he envisioned a strategy of shifting 30 to 40 percent of China's rural labor force out of traditional farm work and into sideline occupations and small industries.
 
A Policy for Development
''In a situation of surplus rural labor,'' Mr. Du said, ''this may be a proper way to increase employment and people's incomes, to raise their cultural level and to speed up rural development. 
In short, this is a policy for comprehensive development of the countryside.''
A directive since issued by the Cabinet-level State Council and the party's Central Committee has made clear that Mr. Du's views are more than academic. 
It urged that by the end of the century 40 percent of the rural labor force, or about 200 million peasants, should be performing jobs not in the fields.
The directive noted that 31 million peasants already worked in commune- run enterprises and that two million others had set up their own businesses.
Chengbei village, set in the rolling hills and bright green rice paddies of Ziyang County in Sichuan, has benefited from the changes. 
The village head, Zhang Chenming, said that his community had 395 households with 1,584 people, but only 61 acres of farmland, which is a fraction of the meager national average of a quarter acre per person.
 
No More Handouts
Before the 1979 changes, Mr. Zhang said, the village was crippled by leftist egalitarianism and so poor that it relied on annual state subsidies of grain and money. 
After the land was contracted out to individual households, the peasants began working harder and the handouts stopped. 
Last year Chengbei's annual per capita income reached about $230, which is nearly three times the income in 1979.
''The responsibility system is like an elixir for the people,'' Mr. Zhang said. 
''In the past, we all ate from the same big pot. 
Now we have broken the iron rice bowl.''
Mr. Ma, who is 45 years old, earned 55 cents a day under the old commune system. 
When the new policies let him stop, he set to work for himself repairing tractors and machinery, then took up making concrete housing slabs. 
He borrowed about $3,000 from the state bank and later invested $4,000 that he had saved. 
Recently, he built a large new three-story house with his workshops on the ground floor and two rooms for each family member on the upper floors.
 
Success Is Not Resented
Now that peasants are allowed to go into long-distance hauling, Mr. Ma bought a secondhand truck and plans to buy a couple more so that he can compete with the state-run transportation companies.
Asked if the neighbors resented his success, Mr. Ma said, ''No, because all of us are trying to become well-off.''
Mr. Ma said he also wanted to get a telephone, to let him compete better with Miss Zhang. 
She insisted her rival was actually her brother-in-law, Liu Zifu, who broke away from her business to set up a workshop of his own.
''At the beginning, our family was the only one making building materials here,'' she said. 
''Later on, some people learned from our example. 
Now more than 20 households are doing the same job.''
Miss Zhang, who is 36, started out as a fieldhand, earning only work points from the commune. 
She also pulled a handcart carrying charcoal and coal. 
Now, she said, she employs 10 other villagers in her enterprise, which makes asbestos tiles as well as concrete slabs, and raises poultry on the side. 
She has not hired her husband, Lu Ziling, who works as a purchasing agent for the local marketing cooperative and earns far less than she does.
 
Phone a Status Symbol
''We have very serious competition now,'' said Miss Zhang. 
''I try to offer lower prices and better quality.''
To solicit orders from the provincial capital of Chengdu, 50 miles away, Miss Zhang bought a black telephone with a hand crank. 
The installation cost about $140, nearly as much as an average Chinese peasant earns in a year.
The telephone is a status symbol in Chengbei, where there is no one else to call. 
But Miss Zhang explained that ''it does provide a lot of convenience for business.''
