
An organization of more than 400 American companies forecast today that trade with China would increase by $1 billion next year from the $6 billion estimated for 1984.
The National Council for U.S.-China Trade also said that American companies formed 31 ventures with Chinese partners in the first nine months of 1984 - more than the total of the preceding four years.
''We're quite upbeat,'' Christopher H. Phillips, president of the council, commented in an interview.
''Having lived with this thing for the last 12 years, we've learned to avoid extremes of euphoria and pessimism,'' he said. 
''But because of what the Chinese themselves are doing, the situation now is more encouraging than it's ever been.''
National Council for US-China Trade forecasts that trade with China will increase by $1 billion in 1985 from $6 billion this year; says American companies formed 31 ventures with Chinese partners in first nine months of 1984--more than total of preceding four years (M)
The council, formed after the Nixon Administration's opening to China in 1972 to promote commercial links, today has a membership of 430 companies. 
Its president, Mr. Phillips, is a former diplomat and banker.
 
Direct Investment
The group placed at $700 million the value of direct American investment in China. 
Much of this - $588 million - is committed to offshore oil exploration. 
But, Mr. Phillips said, ''the tempo is picking up'' in direct investment outside the oil sector.
In recent months Peking has taken these steps:
- Promulgated a law to protect patents, which takes effect next April 1.
- Opened 14 coastal cities to foreign investment, in addition to the four originally designated Special Economic Zones.
- Decentralized government control over local enterprises to encourage more efficient management.
- Shortened the approval process for foreign investment.
- Allowed foreigners greater access to the domestic Chinese market.
 
New on the Scene
Among companies that are starting new ventures are the McDonnell Douglas Corporation, the Foxboro Company, Admiral International, the AVX Corporation, the Fedders Corporation and the Midland-Ross Corporation.
McDonnell Douglas plans to assemble passenger planes in Shanghai. 
On the outskirts of Shanghai, Foxboro will make instruments to control industrial processes. 
The R.J. 
Reynolds Tobacco Company has just entered its second joint venture to produce cigarettes, at a plant in Xiamen in Fujian Province.
The American Motors Corporation is already producing four-wheel-drive vehicles in Shanghai. 
The Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Company makes Scotch tape and other products in Shanghai. 
And the Gillette Company makes razor blades in southern Manchuria.
 
Trade Surplus for China
American exports to China should top $3 billion next year and grow faster than China's exports to the United States, according to council projections. 
China had a surplus of about $400 million in trade with the United States this year but that is expected to be wiped out in 1985.
Most of the rise in American exports will come in manufactured goods and high-technology products, Mr. Phillips said.
Machinery sales to China, for example, have been rising steadily. 
This year they will approach $1 billion, accounting for about 30 percent of total American exports to China.
Next year, the council notes, a number of large contracts will raise the figure further. 
It cited equipment orders for the Eastman Kodak Company's $100 million color film factory in Fujian Province, orders for machinery for the huge open-pit coal mining project under way in north China, and orders for oil well pumps, drill bits and other oil equipment to support offshore exploration.
Also likely to swell the export totals next year are sales of passenger aircraft and helicopters.
 
Commodity Figures
American commodity exports, while remaining significant, are expected to shrink as a proportion of total exports. 
Grain sales should be somewhere between $500 million and $1 billion, even in the absence of a long-term agreement.
Under a 1980 grain agreement which expires at the end of this year, Peking was committed to purchasing 6 million metric tons of wheat or corn annually. 
As of late November, China had purchased only 4.4 million tons for 1984. 
It had been short 2.2 million tons of its commitment for 1983.
The council foresees continued growth of Chinese exports here. 
Textile sales, which accounted for nearly one-third of Chinese exports in 1984, will continue rising, especially as the Chinese shift toward higher value- added textile products, the council forecast.
The two-way trade with China of nearly $6 billion this year was almost three times the value of goods the United States and the Soviet Union exchanged in 1984.
