
The Commerce Department said today that it is investigating whether Chinese textiles and apparel exported to the United States are being illegally subsidized.
The department said it started the countervailing duty investigation Monday. 
It was set off by complaints filed last month by several domestic textile and apparel groups that the Chinese textiles are subsidized through dual exchange rates and therefore can be sold in this country below their real production costs.
US Commerce Department probes whether Chinese textiles and apparel exported to US are being illegally subsidized through dual exchange rates; investigation poses novel legal issue because it is first brought by department against a non-market economy, one in which prices are set by government order and not by market forces (M)
An example of a dual exchange rate, variations of which are used by a number of countries, is one in which a nation employs one exchange rate for trade payments and another for tourism. 
If a trade rate artificially undervalues the dollar, the price of goods might not reflect their actual cost.
The investigation poses novel legal issues because it is the first brought by the department against a non-market economy, Commerce Secretary Malcolm Baldrige said. 
The department considers a non-market economy one in which prices are set by government order and not by market forces, often the case in Communist- bloc countries.
The Commerce Department said in a release that the law requires it to investigate ''where the U.S. industry alleges subsidies and provides information to support its allegations, as in these cases.''
The complaints come at a time when Reagan Administration is engaged in an effort to expand trade between the two countries.
The Commerce Department said that a Nov. 
3 hearing will consider the issues of whether the countervailing duty law covers non-market economy countries and whether dual exchange rates can in fact be considered a subsidy in cases where the exchange - in this case Chinese currency - is not freely convertible into dollars and the exchange rate for payment of exports and imports is set arbitrarily by government order.
The department said it will decide by Dec. 
6 whether, and to what extent, textile products from China are subsidized. 
If the textiles are found to be subsidized, importers will have to post bonds in the amount of estimated duties for all goods named in the case that enter the United States on or after the date the preliminary decisions are published.
 
1,000 Categories of Imports
The Commerce Department's investigation covers the bulk of the Chinese textile exports to the United States. 
Last year, the United States imported about $870 million worth of textiles that are the subject of the current investigation. 
More than 1,000 separate import categories, as the department classifies them, are being studied.
The complaints were filed by the American Textile Manufacturers Institute, the American Apparel Manufacturers Association, the Amalgamated Clothing and Textile Workers Union and the International Ladies Garment Workers Union.
