
Dragonair, a 22-month-old airline that owns one plane and leases another, has a burning ambition. 
It wants to become a major international carrier.
Standing in its way is Cathay Pacific Airways, which has everything Dragonair does not: passengers, profits and prospects.
Regarded as among the world's best airlines, along with other Asian carriers such as Singapore Airlines and Thai Airways International, Cathay Pacific has expanded rapidly in recent years and now uses Hong Kong as the hub of 494 flights each week, on 22 aircraft. 
Most of the flights are within Asia, but it also serves destinations ranging from Amsterdam to San Francisco. 
More than 4.3 million passengers flew Cathay last year.
 
Byzantine Struggle
The battle is more than just for business: It is a prime example of the Byzantine struggles in Hong Kong for China's patronage before Beijing resumes control of this territory in a decade's time.
''Cathay Pacific is the image of Hong Kong past, and we're the image of Hong Kong future,'' said Stephen H. Miller, the feisty general manager of Dragonair, formally known as Hong Kong Dragon Airlines Ltd.
Seven weeks ago, many analysts might have agreed with that assessment. 
Dragonair was viewed as having Beijing's backing, through the crucial web of relationships known in Chinese as ''guanxi,'' the key to getting what you want in China. 
Of the Chinese businessmen associated with the airline, the most prominent is Sir Yue-kong Pao, a shipping magnate who is one of Dragonair's largest backers and is serving as chairman. 
He has good links with Beijing and is often mentioned as a future candidate for governor of Hong Kong. 
Meanwhile, Cathay Pacific, with its crew of 100 percent non-Chinese pilots and flight engineers, was seen as being British-backed.
Then abruptly, at the end of January, China's investment bank, the China International Trust and Investment Corporation, purchased a 12.5 percent stake in Cathay Pacific for $245 million (United States).
Dragonair's managing director, Helmut Sohmen, likened the Cathay move to ''pushing panic buttons,'' but in the airline industry it was seen as a brilliant maneuver that robbed Dragonair of its status as the fighter in Beijing's corner.
Dragonair has hardly wilted under the pressure. 
On New Year's Eve, it announced that it had placed firm orders for two of the McDonnell Douglas Corporation's new long-haul planes, the MD-11 - even though Dragonair as yet has no long-distance routes.
Then, shortly after the China International investment in Cathay, Dragonair's shareholders announced they would double the paid-up capital, to $51 million.
Cathay formerly was 70 percent owned by Swire Pacific, a Hong Kong conglomerate that in turn is controlled by John Swire & Sons, a diversified London concern. 
The remaining 30 percent was owned by the Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation. 
However, last year, the two owners decided to make a public offering and issue stock.
Traded on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange, the issue was 52 times oversubscribed, a measure of Cathay's premier role in the territory - and of the profits that are anticipated. 
In 1985, the last full year for which figures are available, Cathay Pacific earned $100 million on revenues of $965 million.
For the present, Dragonair is losing money - reportedly $500,000 a month - although Mr. Miller, the managing director, said that when two more planes are in service later this year the airline could break even.
