
Iran's Foreign Minister forcefully denied today that his country had received any weapons from China, including antiship missiles, and he warned both the United States and the Soviet Union to stay out of the Persian Gulf.
He added that if Iraq would stop attacking ships in the gulf, Iran would do likewise.
Iran has manufactured its own missiles, the Foreign Minister, Ali Akbar Velayati, said while speaking to reporters at the Iranian Embassy. 
He added that China did not help build the missile production installation.
He made his remarks in response to reports that China has sold Iran surface-to-ship missiles of the type known in the West as Silkworm.
China has denied selling Silkworms to Iran, but Reagan Administration officials have said they do not believe Peking's denial.
Mr. Velayati, speaking through an interpreter, said that Iran was ready to purchase weapons from any country in the world except Israel and South Africa. 
''We meet our armament requirements from any place we deem suitable,'' he said.
 
Arms Traced to North Korea
The Foreign Minister, who met today with the Chinese head of state, Li Xiannian, has just completed a visit to Pyongyang, North Korea. 
Several European and Asian diplomats said this week that Iran had obtained great quantities of Chinese arms via North Korea.
Mr. Li told Mr. Velayati that the United States and the Soviet Union ''have taken advantage of the situation, making the turbulent gulf situation even more complicated and tense,'' according to the New China News Agency.
Both the United States and the Soviet Union have agreed to fly their flags over Kuwaiti tankers to deter attackers and justify protection by their warships. 
China said earlier this week that it, too, was considering a request by Kuwait to register vessels under the Chinese flag.
 
A Warning to the Kuwaitis
Mr. Velayati said Kuwait's effort to protect its ships by using the flags of other nations would not succeed. 
What the Kuwaitis have done, he said, is to provide a kind of invitation to intervention.
He added that Kuwait had ''miscalculated the political situation.''
Instead of easing dangers in the Persian Gulf, he said, the reflagging has contributed to a hightening of tensions.
The Foreign Minister refused to specify what action his country might take if foreign warships tried to protect Kuwaiti ships or refused to respond to Iranian Navy challenges.
