
Several Western broadcast news organizations, including the British Broadcasting Corporation and a CBS crew led by Walter Cronkite, have experienced difficulty with the Chinese Government in negotiating to film stories there in recent months. 
In each instance, the Chinese have requested substantial payments in return for permission to do the stories.
The British Broadcasting Corporation, which has produced a large number of documentaries in China during the last eight years, has not filmed there since January. 
It was then that the Central Broadcasting Administration of China -one of several Chinese bureaucracies that handle requests from Western news organizations - demanded a large sum from the BBC for permitting it to film a series of stories in China during 1981.
Discussion of difficulties encountered by western broadcasting groups in China focuses on high fees demanded by Chinese
It is common for broadcast crews filming in China and elsewhere to pay their hosts for direct services rendered, including hotels and meals, technical support, transportation and interpreters. 
However the BBC put the Chinese request for fees in another category.
 
Against Lump Fees
''We did not agree to the principal that we should give lump sums for unitemized services,'' said Dina Lee, a correspondent for the Far Eastern Economic Review who speaks Chinese and regularly negotiates on behalf of the BBC.
In the current edition of The Listener, a BBC publication, Aubrey Singer, managing director of BBC radio, suggests an explanation for the practice of seeking fees.
''The Chinese are building a new television centre in Peking,'' Mr. Singer writes. 
''To do this they need foreign currency and they have to persuade their government that they can be a foreign currency earner. 
Under the new Chinese economic rule this would qualify them to spend foreign currency. 
Seen in this light, the reasons for the policy become all too apparent.''
 
Cronkite Has Difficulty
Mr. Cronkite and his crew flew to China last month to do three stories for the CBS science series ''Universe'' and also ran into some difficulties. 
Two of the stories were completed, but the crew was unable to get permission to go ahead with the most coveted one: a report on the acclaimed panda project near the central China city of Chengtou.
When one of the CBS producers decided to try filming pandas at the Peking Zoo, she was told that it would cost CBS $80 for each minute of filming. 
A second CBS producer who went to film pandas at a zoo in Chengtou was told that a Japanese crew had recently paid $30,000 to film there. 
According to Jonathan Ward, producer of ''Universe,'' both CBS producers declined to pay, and ultimately were permitted by the Chinese to shoot without any additional cost.
John Fisher, a producer for New Cinema Ltd. of Ontario, Canada, also faced a request for payment during his early negotiations to do six one-hour programs in China.
''They said they wanted an administrative fee that was exorbinant - in the hundreds of thousands of dollars,'' said Mr. Fisher. ''We took the position that we wouldn't pay a fee for the license to shoot, but we were certainly prepared to pay for any services rendered.''
An agreement covering what Mr. Fischer calls ''fair and reasonable costs'' was finally reached.
 
A Product to Sell
''The Chinese want as much hard currency as they can get, and they believe that they have a commodity that has a value on the open market'' Mr. Fisher explained. 
''It's very capitalistic, but by and large they haven't had a lot of experience in this area, and they really don't know what to ask for.''
ABC News had such difficulty getting approvals for a documentary it had planned on the performing arts in China that the project was finally abandoned after more than six months of discussions.
The ABC ''Close Up'' unit intended to do a documentary about the performing arts in China and how they reflect the country's political situation. 
During the early discussions last fall, according to Dick Richter, senior producer of the ABC unit, the Chinese seemed enthusiastic about the project. 
Then the delays in approvals began.
''It became apparent that the Government was becoming more restrictive in terms of freedom of expression in the arts,'' Mr. Richter said. 
Finally in March, an agreement was reached and plans were made for ABC producers to do a survey trip, to be followed by four weeks of shooting.
 
Untenable Restrictions
The survey trip began, but according to Mr. Richter the Chinese imposed untenable restrictions. 
''They told us we couldn't film on this street or that, that we couldn't talk to anyone outspoken or turn on cameras without permission. 
They also wanted to charge us extra for almost everything, even shooting in the street.''
The project was shelved last month.
Not all Western producers have experienced difficulties, however. 
Peter Larkin, foreign editor for CBS News, said that his relations with the Chinese have never been better. 
The only time that CBS did agree to a fee, Mr. Larkin said, was for exclusive United States rights to a Chinese special report about the so-called Gang of Four shortly before their trial began last winter - just as the network might pay for historical footage from a library.
During that same winter period, CBS News was able to produce 32 stories in China, including a large number about the trial. 
''We've never had to pay fees for any of them,'' said Mr. Larkin. ''We have explained that it is not our policy to pay for stories. 
They understand the distinction between news and stories from which we could derive a profit.''
