
From a small room below street level in a student hostel at Hong Kong University, there is likely to issue, any day or evening, the crackling of broadcasts from China, the murmur of a cultivated Central European voice dictating Communist propaganda into a tape recorder, the noble lines of a Bach sonata for violin solo played by an accomplished musician or the barking of a robust German Shepherd dog.
The nameplate says ''1. 
La Dany,'' which gives no clue except to those in the know, because Father Laszlo Ladanyi of the Society of Jesus works anonymously. 
Those in the know are toilers in the same vineyard as the priest - students of contemporary China. 
Father Ladany, as he now spells his name on his personal stationery, is a leading practitioner of the craft of China-watching, widely respected even by those who do not always share his conclusions.
Analysis of current political climate in China focuses on seeming shift away from liberalization of past several years
In a field where backbiting is not uncommon, Father Ladany could listen in on the private conversations of his colleagues without embarrassing them. 
''He is pre-eminent,'' said Robert Elegant, a veteran journalistic China-watcher before he turned novelist. 
''His track record is better than anyone else's.''
On the other end of the spectrum from Mr. Elegant, whose admiration for Communist China has always known limits, are China's former friends, the countries of the Soviet camp. 
''Most of their embassies in Peking are on my mailing list,'' said the priest contentedly, puffing on a pipe that had gone cold.
Father Ladany's mailing is the oldest journal of China-watching, China News Analysis. 
Now a fortnightly, it was founded in 1953; the current issue is No. 1,204. Except for 76 quarterly issues devoted to Vietnam, the journal is the work of Father Ladany. 
Each issue is a seven or eight-page essay devoted to a single theme, rather than a newsletter giving snippets of current news. 
''My files go back 30 years,'' said the gaunt and grey-haired Jesuit.
At 67, the Hungarian intellectual is slightly weary because nothing seems to happen that hasn't happened before, but also intellectually alert, because he does not appear to have abandoned hope that something new and better might come along. 
''When I want to write about a subject, I read the files and then go for a walk and think, 'What's new now?'
''
Father Ladany's views are remarkably free of ideology, Communist or Roman Catholic. 
Having spent 41 years in China and Hong Kong, he sees events through the prism of millennia of ebb and flow in the history of the Middle Kingdom. 
In a long afternoon of conversation, the priest-historian betrayed neither adulation for a hero nor hatred of a villain. 
''Only one thing is certain in China,'' he said. 
''Every few years, the whole system changes. 
Between dynasties, it takes 50 to 100 years until the new emerges,'' he continued. 
''We are in that period. 
The Chinese think like that; you Americans don't. 
In your system, everything changes every four years.''
His disabused view has put Father Ladany occasionally at odds with his fellow China-watchers and subscribers, but he is taken seriously even by those who disagree, and the journal, sold by subscription only at $135 a year, is self-supporting. 
''He has been unfashionable at times,'' an American China-watcher said, ''because he is usually right.''
While the opening of the United States Embassy in Peking has reduced the number of American China-watchers in Hong Kong, the United States Consulate General continues the work. 
Its Chinese staff members are free from restrictions that affect all Chinese working for embassies in Peking. 
They point out the nuggets of new information and interpretation that appear in Chinese media, while those in Peking are under evident instructions to be no more than clinically neutral translators.
'A Very Nervous System'
American diplomats in Peking think Father Ladany too pessimistic; he finds many Americans interested in China insufficiently skeptical and too eager to believe the facade presented by a regime that represents one billion prospective customers. 
Presently, Father Ladany believes that the liberalizations instituted by Deng Xiaoping have already run their course and have in most respects already been reversed. 
''The whole population must say that nothing has changed,'' the priest said. 
''Before, everything was all wrong; now, everything is all right. 
They must say the reversal has not taken place.''
In Father Ladany's apparent view, a Stalinist regime can reverse course publicly only when the leadership has been unseated; leaders still in power cannot admit to having been unsuccessful or wrong.
The priest believes that conservative pressures, coming largely from the military, have forced Mr. Deng to abandon his liberal positions. 
''The Russian system is stupid but stable,'' he remarked. 
''The Chinese are always intelligent but Utopian and unrealistic. 
It is a very nervous system.''
Father Ladany has a staff of five Chinese who help him to read about 15 Chinese newspapers, monitor broadcasts, read the publications of the Hong Kong Communist community, which he considers the most enlightened, liberal and avant-garde of the Chinese party, and to receive Chinese visitors who have left for exile. 
He sees few foreigners, he said, because they either ''discover China as if they were Columbus'' or, ''like Germans, take down all the data when they visit a commune, multiply it by the number of communes and think they know China.''
Nothing in early life predisposed Father Ladany for his present calling. 
The son of a physician, he was born in Budapest, obtained a doctorate in law and studied the violin at the conservatory until he discovered his priestly vocation. 
He was sent by the Jesuits to Peking in 1940 to study Chinese, not at his request, was ordained in China in 1946 and left in 1949. 
His order imposes no other priestly functions on him, he said, ''because we believe God created the whole world and not only church buildings.''
He began to publish his journal anonymously and divided his name into two parts because in the early years he still had close relatives in Hungary. 
He returned there for a visit in 1976 and came back with his violin, a 19th century Italian instrument, which he had left with relatives when he joined the church. 
Life has rarefied his musical taste to unaccompanied Bach only. 
He thinks in Chinese and English now, he said, having forgotten some Hungarian. 
It appears fluent, as are his German, French, Italian and Latin.
Father Ladany charitably did not discuss his critics, but in a note delivered after the conversation, he recalled with delight that Simone de Beauvoir once wrote that his journal was ''une publication venimeuse (poisonous).''
He believes that China will survive all Utopian experiments. 
''China has a vitality which is well beyond that,'' he said.
