
''Gung Hay Fat Choy!''
400 pupils roared yesterday at the Edward Hart Elementary School in Flushing, Queens.
Perhaps a third of the students were Chinese. 
Most of the others, though, were for the first time hearing and saying ''Happy New Year'' in Cantonese, one of the dialects used by a fifth of the planet's population.
The pupils who were able to get through the snow to the school, also known as Public School 21, gathered to hear Chinese stories, watch Chinese dances and learn a little Chinese history.
 
A Time for Ethnic Sharing
The idea behind the event was ''to encourage ethnic sharing at a very early age,'' said Teresa Ying Hsu, executive director of Asian-American Communications, which organized the event. 
The group, based at Teachers College of Columbia University, visits schools from time to time in its role as a liaison between Asian communities and others.
Yesterday's event was one of the first celebrations of the Year of the Rabbit, which, on the lunar calendar, begins on Thursday. 
For Chinese, Koreans and other Asians, the 60th day of the Gregorian calendar used in the West is the first day of year 4685.
The Rabbit is one of 12 animals whose names are given successively to each year. 
As the Year of the Tiger dwindles to its final courageous days, people born in the Year of the Rabbit can begin to take comfort in the positive nature of the traits said to be possessed by them.
Rabbit people are talented, affectionate, seekers of tranquility and get on swimmingly with Sheep people and Boar people. 
Rabbit years are said to be good for world peace.
 
Proclamation by Koch
The New Year's doings began Friday when Mayor Koch proclaimed the week beginning yesterday Chinese Heritage and Cultural Week. 
The celebration continued last night with a dinner at the Flower Drum restaurant given by the Chinese Chee Yue Community Association, an organization dedicated to helping new immigrants.
Today at P.S. 
130 in Chinatown, students who six months ago were in mainland China will perform the Silk Ribbon and other dances.
The big event comes about 10 P.M. Thursday, New Year's Day, when thousands of people will pour into Chinatown's Mott Street amid long, bright-red dragons, lion dancers and the snap of firecrackers. 
On Saturday the drum and bugle band of the New York Chinese School will march in Mott Street.
 
Classical Dances Performed
In Flushing, at P.S. 
21's celebration of the year of the Rabbit, a high point was two Chinese classical dances, adeptly performed by 29 dancers chosen from 120 who had auditioned. 
The first featured a giant bok choy plant, a Chinese cabbage, as a cardboard prop.
The star of the performance was clearly Damian Williams, an 11-year-old sixth grader who switched parts to replace a dancer absent because of the snow. 
Damian and his compatriots said his prowess at Chinese dancing was only to be expected: he is the school's most accomplished break dancer.
But the real high point for most students was discovering what has always been the most pleasant part of the holiday for Chinese youngsters -gifts of red envelopes containing money. 
Ms. Hsu passed them out for such feats as guessing in which of three years the first Chinese immigrants arrived in the United States. 
(The answer is 1848.) In the shower of coins, the students' enthusiasm was such that the principal kept jumping up to remind the students where they were and exactly what they were not going to get away with.
