
The sanctum of Chinese Communism opened its doors today to the American evangelist Billy Graham, who is visiting China for the first time.
Prime Minister Li Peng, who also is on the five-member Standing Committee of the party, met Mr. Graham today inside the compound that is home to party and Government leaders.
''We don't have the same God, but that doesn't matter,'' said Mr. Li, in his welcoming remarks for Mr. Graham. ''It doesn't prevent us from having a good talk together.''
Since the end of the violent political tumult of the Cultural Revolution in 1976, Christianity has become increasingly tolerated under the umbrella of officially approved churches. 
While statistics on the number of Christians in China are impossible to verify, the Government says there are four million Protestants and more than three million Catholics. 
The State Department offers an estimate of 10 to 20 million Christians.
At the same time, there is thriving underground Christian activity, both Protestant, serving those believers who do not wish to take part in the Government-approved churches, and Roman Catholic. 
Catholics are forbidden by law from adhering to the teachings of the Vatican. 
An unknown number of Chinese have been imprisoned for their religious beliefs, some of whom have been designated by Amnesty International, the human rights group, as prisoners of conscience.
Mr. Graham, a Southern Baptist, declined to discuss his talk with Mr. Li in detail, urging that questions be posed to the Chinese. 
Asked of his impression of Mr. Li, who assumed his post just last week, the evangelist would only say: ''I was tremendously impressed with his warmth, his courtesy. 
He certainly knew a lot about religion.''
''I've never been to China,'' Mr. Graham said in an interview. 
A fundamental purpose for his trip, he said, was to present ''the Gospel of Christ,'' and ''to make a contribution to world peace.''
Mr. Graham's wife, Ruth, was born into a missionary family in Huai'an, a small town in the coastal province of Jiangsu. 
She left China when she was 17. 
During his stay, Mr. Graham said, he will preach to Chinese four or five times.
He met with a group of students and teachers at Beijing University on Thursday. 
''They were interested in philosophy and religion,'' Mr. Graham said. 
''They asked why I believed in God.''
When asked in the interview about Chinese Christians who were imprisoned for their beliefs, Mr. Graham declined to criticize Government policy. 
''The situation is so much better than it was 10 years ago,'' he said. 
''I think of it more positively than negatively. 
I think religious freedom will grow.''
In his discussions with Chinese officials, Mr. Graham said he would only raise the problem of imprisoned Christians ''indirectly.''
''I talked about human rights,'' he said, explaining why he preferred not to criticize the Government directly. 
''There are some things I think I can accomplish in a private way.''
Although Christianity has skimmed over the surface of Chinese history since the 16th century, Mr. Graham said that the message he brings to China is no different than the preaching he does elsewhere in the world. 
''The human heart is the same the world over,'' he said. 
''The Gospel has never changed.''
Mr. Graham said he was not discouraged by China's official policy of atheism. 
''There is something innate in man,'' the evangelist said. 
''Man is not born to atheism. 
He is born to believe. 
They're not different deep down in their search for meaning. 
The message is always the same.''
Mr. Graham is accompanied by an entourage of about 20 people, including a television film crew that is producing a documentary on the his visit.
This morning, Mr. Graham visited the Temple of Heaven, the site where emperors used to officiate at religious ceremonies. 
Mr. Graham wandered the spacious grounds surrounded by reporters and followed by crowds of Chinese. 
In the inimitable fashion of an American politician, he picked up a Chinese baby on his walk.
