
A Cabinet minister who caused a stir with recent comments about Japan's wartime role embroiled himself in fresh controversy today by saying that the Japanese invasion of China five decades ago was not a war of aggression.
The remarks of the Cabinet minister, Seisuke Okuno, created serious political and diplomatic problems for Prime Minister Noboru Takeshita, and produced opposition calls for Mr. Okuno's resignation or ouster.
As he did last month, Mr. Okuno played down Japanese wartime aggression, first on Monday during parliamentary debate and again today while talking with Japanese reporters.
Discussing Japan's military attacks against China in the 1930's, Mr. Okuno, who is director general of the National Land Agency, told reporters: ''I don't want to describe it as an aggressive war because both many Japanese and Chinese were killed.''
On Monday, answering questions in Parliament, he said that Japan ''had no intention'' of invading China. 
In fact, Japanese troops overran much of eastern China, killing several million people in the process.
After World War II, an Allied tribunal in Tokyo convicted Japanese leaders of war crimes, and sentenced seven to death, including Prime Minister Hideki Tojo. 
The verdicts, Mr. Okuno said Monday, were a case of ''victors' punishment on the losers.''
But he insisted that that he wished ''to establish friendly Japan-China relations,'' adding, ''I have never spoken ill of China.''
Nevertheless, his insistence on repeating comments that China has labeled offensive put Mr. Takeshita in a bind, especially since the Prime Minister hopes to visit Beijing this summer. 
The Chinese reacted strongly to similar Okuno observations last month. 
When Japan's Foreign Minister, Sosuke Uno, visited Beijing last week, he was rebuked by his Chinese counterpart, Qian Qichen. 
Mr. Qian was quoted as complaining about a Cabinet member who had ''made remarks that lack good manners.''
 
Official Position Stated
On April 22, after visiting the Yasukuni Shrine for Japan's war dead, Mr. Okuno said that ''Japan fought the war in order to secure its safety.''
He added: ''The white race had turned Asia into a colony. 
Japan was by no means the aggressor nation.''
Today, the Government's main spokesman, Chief Cabinet Secretary Keizo Obuchi, told a parliamentary committee that Japan's official position continued to be that it indeed was an aggressor in World War II. 
But he added that he would find out the ''true intention'' of the 74-year-old Mr. Okuno, who during the war was a prefectural director of the Kempeitai, the notorious secret police.
The Okuno episode is hardly the first instance of a senior Japanese official seeking to gloss over Japan's aggression and atrocities before and during World War II, when it occupied most of Asia. 
Periodic protests have come from China and, to a lesser degree, from Korea, which were divided in 1945 after 35 years as a Japanese colony.
In 1982 and 1986, China and South Korea issued formal protests over attempts here to sanitize textbook accounts of Japanese wartime role. 
A similar uproar arose in August 1985, on the 40th anniversary of the end of the war, when Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone made the first official visit to the Yasukuni Shrine by a postwar Japanese leader.
The following year, Mr. Nakasone dismissed his Education Minister, Masayuki Fujio, for saying that the colonization of Korea was ''legitimate'' and that the 1937 massacre of Chinese civilians known as the ''Rape of Nanjing'' did not violate international law.
Last January, a Japanese film distributor asked that newsreels of the ''Rape of Nanjing'' be cut from ''The Last Emperor'' before it could open in Japan. 
After the request became known, the embarrassed distributor backed down, and the footage stayed.
Only two weeks ago, a group of 41 right-wing members of the ruling Liberal Democratic Party issued a statement supporting Mr. Okuno, saying they agreed that Japan has been unfairly criticized about World War II.
