
An oil discovery off China this year by a Japanese drilling company, part of the first major foreign oil exploration in Chinese territorial waters since the Communist revolution, appears likely to galvanize trade between the two nations, trade officials said here.
The discovery, announced by the state-owned Japan National Oil Corporation, which has been drilling under a joint-production agreement with China, offers the prospect of the first significant Japanese production of Chinese oil since World War II.
The oil strike comes at a critical time for China, which is beset by inflation for the first time since the Communist revolution in 1949. 
China, under the leadership of Deng Xiaoping, is also troubled by shortfalls in onshore oil production that threaten to undermine plans for industrial expansion and are also causing a serious lack of foreign exchange.
Japan's discovery of oil off coast of China may stimulate trade between two countriesTrade Tripled in Three Years
Oil is the key to Chinese-Japanese trade, which has nearly tripled to more than $9 billion a year in the three years since China and Japan concluded a long-term, $20 billion trade agreement in early 1978.
China exports its oil primarily to Japan; it shipped eight million tons here last year. 
These exports help pay for imports of vital Japanese industrial plant and equipment. 
China's long-term development plans appear to hinge on oil production, which totaled 106 million tons last year.
''Oil and the foreign exchange that China obtains abroad, mostly from Japan, are the keys to Deng's plans,'' said a trading house executive. 
''Without these to help him, Deng's plans to open the economy at least halfway to Western enterprise could crumble.''
 
Also Crucial to Japanese
Industry executives here say that the oil is also crucial to Japan in the long run. 
The oil, found under Pohai Bay at Japan National Oil's No.1 well, where drilling began last year, is light, low in wax content and ideal for Japanese refineries that are designed to process Arabian light grades, not the heavy, waxy oil supplied to Japan from such Chinese onshore fields as Daqing.
Japanese planners have sought for 20 years to diversify supply sources away from the Middle East, which still supplies threequarters of all oil consumed by Japan. 
Japan has virtually no domestic oil, and nearby Pohai offers a secure source of the type that Japan has so far lacked.
The Japanese Government, which finances the national oil company, and about four dozen Japanese concerns that are minority partners with the state company in the Pohai Bay exploration stress security of supply, not profit, and are offering China attractive terms.
 
Seismic Surveys Completed
The discovery came just after dozens of Western companies had completed seismic surveys in the South China Sea at their own expense. 
They are expected to tender bids for the first joint production opportunities that China will offer in that part of its 2,800-mile coastline, and the Atlantic Richfield Company and the Philips Petroleum Corporation have already reported such an agreement.
Japanese and French concerns, led by the Compagnie Fran,caise de Petroles, went ahead with China faster in Pohai Bay than private Western companies elsewhere along the coast. 
Their rapid success in finding oil suggests that Western estimates in the 1970's of offshore Chinese reserves of close to four billion tons may be conservative.
Oil is not expected to flow from Pohai Bay until about 1984. 
But Japan National Oil is scheduled to sink five wells in Pohai Bay this year, and some unofficial Japanese estimates put reserves there as high as 10 billion tons.
 
Hopes May Be Too High
Press reports here have put the likely yield from the field found by the Japanese at 300,000 to 400,000 barrels a day, or between 15 million and 20 million tons a year, with Japan to pay all costs and receive 42.5 percent of the oil. 
But one Japanese executive described the forecasts as ''perhaps wishful thinking - it's just too early to tell.''
American geologists in Peking believe that Pohai Bay's oil is scattered in rich but small pockets and that the oil-bearing strata have been disrupted -and made hard to tap - by earthquakes in the region. 
If the warnings are justified, then Japanese hopes may be pitched too high.
Reports from Peking say that Deputy Prime Minister Gu Mu has forecast that China's onshore production may drop by 10 million to 20 million tons a year by the mid-1980's. 
Tokyo executives said that the new finds offshore were timely, to make up for this possible decline, and because of the tentative shelving by China of $1.5 billion worth of contracts for industrial plants from Japan.
