
Japan's past militarism and its present-day diplomacy converged today as the country paused to recall its surrender 42 years ago to end World War II.
Hoping to avoid ruffling his country's unsettled relations with China, Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone conspicuously stayed away from a Shinto shrine associated in many minds with Japan's wartime aggression, which included an invasion of China.
Mr. Nakasone touched off a diplomatic storm in 1985 when he became the first postwar Japanese leader to make an official visit to the Yasukuni Shrine, which honors the 2.5 million Japanese soldiers killed in wars over the last century. 
The overwhelming majority died in World War II.
Soon after the Nakasone visit, China denounced him as having ''pandered'' to those who wanted to expunge Japan's war guilt, which had included an invasion of eastern China and atrocities against civilian populations.
To keep from offending Beijing further, the Japanese Prime Minister did not go to Yasukuni last Aug. 
15.
His decision to stay away again today assumed added significance because relations between Japan and China have reached their lowest point since the two countries restored normal ties in 1972.
The decline began with the ouster last January of Hu Yaobang as China's Communist Party leader. 
Mr. Hu had advocated close ties with Tokyo, and since his departure Beijing has maintained anti-Japanese statements.
 
A Turn for the Worse
Matters took a turn for the worse in late spring when Japan's Deputy Foreign Minister, commenting on critical comments made by Deng Xiaoping, the Chinese leader, said in off-the-record remarks that Mr. Deng may have ''become a man above the clouds.''
When his comment became known, the Japanese official, Kensuke Yanagiya, was forced to apologize to China. 
He later left office in what was officially described as a ''voluntary retirement.''
Four decades after the war, Chinese criticism of Japan often evokes the specter of old militarism. 
And as demonstrated today by Mr. Nakasone's avoidance of the shrine, Japan tends to step gingerly here.
Still, what seems to be a growing number of Japanese also believe that they should not have to keep apologizing for a long-ago war, and that they have as much right as anyone else to honor their war dead. 
This is a view that Mr. Nakasone has often taken.
''It is only natural,'' he said in 1985, ''that people should give thanks to those who gave their lives for the country. 
Othewise, who will give his life?''
Reflecting this attitude, most of the Prime Minister's Cabinet - 16 of 20 members - went to pray today at Yasukuni even though he himself did not. 
In addition, about 200 members of Parliament from the ruling Liberal Democratic Party paid a visit, including at least two men who hope to succeed Mr. Nakasone this fall, Noboru Takeshita and Shintaro Abe.
The shrine is a short walk from the Nippon Budokan, a martial-arts hall behind the Imperial Palace. 
There, at the stroke of noon, Emperor Hirohito bowed before an altar set in a field of chrysanthemums and led his country in a remembrance of the moment exactly 42 years ago when he called on them to surrender.
As usual, the Government-sponsored memorial service was attended by Mr. Nakasone and other senior officials, and by relatives of the 2.3 million Japanese soldiers and 800,000 civilians who died in the war. 
Also as usual, the ceremony was boycotted by left-wing opposition parties, which held their own gatherings elsewhere.
The strong Japanese penchant for tradition and fixed procedure was much in evidence at the Budokan, where the rituals have changed little since they began 25 years ago. 
There was certainly nothing different in the remarks of the Emperor, who showed his 86 years as he went to the stage.
''I mourn the war dead and pray,'' he said, reading from a prepared text.
''Even now,'' Hirohito said, using the identical phrases he has uttered many times, ''my heart aches when I think of the many people who fell in the war and of their bereaved families.''
