
Struan and Company (was) the greatest house in Asia, and so rich and powerful that the other China traders had named it in awe and jealousy The Noble House - noble because it was first in riches, first in largess, first in trade, first in clippers, but mostly because Dirk Struan was Tai-Pan, the Tai-Pan among all the tai-pans of Asia.
- ''Tai-Pan,'' by James Clavell
 
 
IT is not power so much as magic that swirls about the tai-pan of the Jardine Matheson group - a legacy of opium and intrigue that goes with being the ''big boss'' of Asia's famous trading company. 
Chronicled as Struan and Company in James Clavell's novels, Jardines is more than an international conglomerate; it is a legend.
At least nine streets in Hong Kong are named for tai-pans at Jardines, which has towered over the British territory for 145 years, dealing in opium and silk in the last century and everything from ice cream to investment banking today. 
The tai-pan of the Noble House - or the Princely Hong, as Jardines is also known - inherits the mantle of William Jardine, the first tai-pan, a shrewd Scotsman nicknamed by the Chinese ''iron-headed old rat.''
Most of the tai-pans - whose arrivals in earlier days sometimes were greeted by cannon salutes - come from branches of the same family tree, serving in the Hong Kong hot seat before retiring to London or the family estate in Scotland. 
So Hong Kong gasped at the announcement that a 37-year-old American investment banker, with just 14 months' experience at Jardines, is set to become its next tai-pan.
Brian M. Powers is a 6-foot 2 former football player, sandy-haired with a hint of gray, who looks a bit too affable to be tai-pan. 
But he can rake the landscape with his speech: Ideas and quips and analyses fly through the air like shotgun pellets. 
And for years - ever since his first job at a New York law firm - he has set himself apart from others with his long workdays, even in offices where absurd hours were the norm.
On his wedding day eight years ago, Mr. Powers was busy with a real-estate transaction and had to rush to the church at the last minute - only to discover that he had left the ring behind. 
The bridal party watched aghast as he searched his pockets before racing back home to get the wedding band.
Last fall, during negotiations on a Jardines sale of some of its American oil interests, he flew to San Francisco for the day to try to get a better price - a move that worked and that impressed the man who counts most at Jardines: Simon Keswick, the current tai-pan and a distant relative of William Jardine.
''People in Hong Kong think they work very hard,'' Mr. Keswick said in his office 48 floors above Hong Kong's bustling central district. 
''I think Brian has demonstrated that people in New York work even harder.''
And so the 45-year-old Mr. Keswick (pronounced KEH-zick) announced earlier this month that he would relinquish his position of managing director of the Jardine companies to Mr. Powers. Mr. Keswick will remain as chairman, but, he says, he will spend more time outside Hong Kong than in it. 
He calls Mr. Powers the ''heir-elect,'' and says he already regards Mr. Powers as tai-pan.
THAT may be a bit premature, so long as Mr. Keswick is still in town. 
But the expectation, within Jardines and without, is that moving vans will appear sometime over the next year or so at 35 Mount Kellett Road, the residence of the tai-pans, on the Peak on Hong Kong Island. 
Mr. Keswick, the whispers say, will retain the title of chairman from London, just as his uncle, Sir John Keswick, did two decades ago.
Mr. Powers will presumably inherit the keys to the Mount Kellett Road home, as well as to the tai-pan's second residence at Shek O, along the water. 
He apparently will also assume a seat on the board of the Hong Kong and Shanghai Banking Corporation and the coveted position as steward of the Royal Hong Kong Jockey Club.
But most of all, there is Jardines to command. 
As managing director, Mr. Powers will head up a network that sells cognac in Japan, operates the renowned Oriental Hotel in Bangkok; runs Pizza Huts in Hawaii and 7-Eleven stores in Malaysia; oversees ship management in the Pacific, construction in China and investment banking throughout Asia.
The empire - with 1986 revenues of $1.3 billion and after-tax profits of $61 million - employs 61,000 people in 22 countries and includes Jardine Matheson Holdings, Jardine Strategic Holdings and controlling interests in the Hongkong Land Company, Mandarin Oriental Hotel Group, and Dairy Farm International Holdings.
To this may be added some large American company. 
Mr. Powers says the group is looking for acquisitions in the United States and Britain, though he says this could be a single $2 billion deal or a string of $100 million purchases. 
Mr. Keswick says he would like a major American presence, and he adds that Mr. Powers might want to return to the United States in five years or so and run the American wing of Jardines.
But familiarity with the American market was not the reason for choosing Mr. Powers. Indeed, his nationality may even have worked against him a little, in the clubby world of British-run Hong Kong companies. 
His Yankee frankness has ruffled some feathers here, he acknowledged. 
''The business style is different,'' he said. 
''The Brits are much more civilized than Americans.''
And though Mr. Powers has joined the Jockey Club and he and his wife have dutifully entertained at their home on the Peak, their presence in Hong Kong's social circuit is subdued. 
''I like Hong Kong,'' he said, ''but I work very long hours and I'm very committed to my job.''
But if Mr. Powers has not always displayed proper enthusiasm for drinking port, no one doubts his mastery of law and finance. 
Those skills seem to have been key to his meteoric rise, after arriving at Jardines in April 1986 as ''chief strategist.''
The conglomerate was then in the process of slimming down - after some disastrous investments in real estate, shipping and oil.
Rivals for power within Jardines had their own credentials, but they could not compete with a financial alchemist at a time when the group was so absorbed by financial matters. 
Mr. Powers immediately set to work planning a restructuring of Jardines that included spinning off subsidiaries and creating a complex web of corporations that own each other. 
He also registered some more of the group's assets in Bermuda, in the belief that foreign-registered corporations might fare better when China takes over Hong Kong in 1997.
That grasp of finance and corporate strategy seems to have impressed many people in Hong Kong, in and out of Jardines. 
''Maybe U.S. financial people are more on the ball than British people,'' mused one British executive at Jardines. 
''Nobody here has the financial know-how to take all those companies apart and register them elsewhere and watch those share prices rocket.''
FOR Brian Powers, the road to becoming tai-pan began in Massapequa, L.I. 
The second-youngest of four children, and the son of a stockbroker, he devoted most of his energy in high school to football. 
He even turned down Yale initially to go to Holy Cross because of its more rigorous approach to athletics. 
He transferred to Yale after two years.
''When he played football, his favorite position was defensive end,'' his wife recalled. 
''I think that's because reading the other side is what he finds fun and intriguing about a situation.''
An economics major, Mr. Powers graduated with average grades and then went to the University of Virginia Law School, where he excelled. 
He graduated near the top of his class and, after a year as a teaching fellow at Stanford Law School, he became an associate in the New York law firm of Debevoise & Plimpton. 
He is remembered there as a hard worker and a quick study who was fortunate to specialize in mergers and acquisitions just as the wave of mergers was beginning in the United States.
After two years at Debevoise & Plimpton, Mr. Powers accepted a job as an attorney with the Ford Foundation. 
However, almost immediately he was put in charge of a large investment portfolio that included venture capital and real estate.
One of his first acts was to foreclose on two big real estate developments in the belief that the Foundation could run them better than the developers. 
Colleagues noticed that. 
Some thought him brash. 
Most - including his boss, Jon L. Hagler -were impressed. 
''I haven't seen a better negotiator,'' said Mr. Hagler, who now runs a Boston investment firm. 
''He had it all.''
Mr. Powers was at the Ford Foundation when James D. Wolfensohn, an Australian-born financier, gave him a call. 
Mr. Wolfensohn was planning to set up a New York investment bank, and had heard about Mr. Powers from a Debevoise & Plimpton partner. 
So after four years at the foundation, Mr. Powers joined Mr. Wolfensohn, becoming his right-hand man at James D. Wolfensohn Inc.
SOON after the firm opened, a man named Simon Keswick called. 
He was in the New York office of the Coudert Brothers law firm, and wanted to know if Mr. Powers could come by that evening to help structure a deal. 
With characteristic bluntness, Mr. Powers asked the tai-pan: ''This is a terrible question, but who are you?''
From that inauspicious beginning, a relationship grew between the two. 
Mr. Powers handled more and more Jardines business, including an extremely complex sale of sugar interests in Hawaii that included a leveraged buyout with commercial and government financing. 
''That was an extraordinary piece of work,'' recalled Mr. Wolfensohn.
Indeed, it was one of the accomplishments that led Mr. Keswick at the end of 1985 to ask Mr. Powers if he would like to come to work for Jardines. 
Mr. Powers's initial response was that he was happy at Wolfensohn and that his wife, Paula, had a job in New York and was not mobile.
Mr. Keswick persisted, and Mr. Powers finally arrived in April of last year, with a seat on the board and a mandate to direct financial strategy. 
Paula Powers, who was teaching at Columbia Law School, was willing to move to Hong Kong, and both parents thought it was the ideal time for their son, Jeremy, to live abroad. 
Mr. Powers has so far not studied Chinese, but six-year-old Jeremy is learning the local dialect and already knows important words like ''su tiu,'' which means french fries.
Mr. Keswick seems to have raised the possibility of succession with Mr. Powers when he was first hired, but both say that no commitment was made. 
There were a number of other candidates: David J. Davies, the head of the Hongkong Land Company until he resigned last year rather than see it dismantled; Martin G. Barrow, board member and head of a key subsidiary until he was promoted out of both positions earlier this year, and Nigel Rich, the current chief executive of Hongkong Land.
As the new tai-pan, Mr. Powers will face a number of challenges. 
Despite diversification, a large share of the company's assets remain in Hong Kong. 
The property market and business climate here are extremely sensitive, even though Beijing has promised that it will allow Hong Kong to maintain its capitalist way of life for at least 50 years after 1997.
Then there is the rise of a new breed of competitor in Asia: local entrepreneurs who in the last two decades have built their own conglomerates to challenge British interests. 
In Hong Kong, such Chinese entrepreneurs as Sir Y.K. 
Pao and Li Ka-shing have often outmaneuvered Jardines in the last decade.
These entrepreneurs are not only rivals but also potential threats, for Jardines could become an acquisition target. 
One reason they have gained on British interests is that they know the market better - and that could be all the more true when Jardines is run by a man who is a newcomer to the region.
Nor is it clear exactly how much control the Keswicks will continue to exert. 
The family is the company's largest shareholder, with about a 10 percent interest. 
Simon's older brother, Henry Keswick, is a former tai-pan now living in London who remains deeply involved in Jardines.
''I think the Keswicks will still pull the strings from London,'' said William Phillips, the managing director of Baring Securities Hong Kong Ltd. 
Others say Jardines will still be run out of Hong Kong, but that there will be constant consultations.
Mr. Powers may want to keep an active chairman. 
He says he approves of separating the top job, to spread the power. 
Otherwise, he says, there is a risk for the tai-pan that ''if things go reasonably well, you can easily believe you're God.''
