
After Jardine Matheson, the Hong Kong trading company, disclosed last Wednesday that it planned to move its legal residency to Bermuda, The Hong Kong Standard likened the shock to hearing that the Queen of England was emigrating to Australia.
Jardine Matheson & Company Ltd., after all, helped found the British Crown Colony in 1841, only nine years after the company itself was born in Canton, China. 
Jardine has long since outgrown its opium-running origins to become a major conglomerate with investments in Asia ranging from real estate to financial services to shipping. 
More than any other company, it epitomized Hong Kong's commitment to free-wheeling capitalism.
Article examines impact on Hong Kong of disclosure by Jardine Matheson & Co Ltd that it plans to move its legal residency to Bermuda; full details of relocation decision will not be known until company's annual report on May 14, but number of Hong Kong business people and other analysts have concluded that Hong Kong Government's characterization of legal relocation as only 'a commercial decision' is not far off; illustration (M)
The full details of the decision to move will not be known until the company's annual report is issued to the stockholders on May 14. 
The decision will then come up for approval at a general meeting in June.
But in the few days since the jolting announcement was made, a number of Hong Kong business people and other analysts have concluded that the Hong Kong Government's characterization of the legal relocation as only ''a commercial decision'' is not far off.
There are potential psychological ramifications, say the analysts, but they believe that it will not touch off a hemorrhage of business confidence in Hong Kong's future after 1997, when China intends to reclaim sovereignty.
''Nobody wants to pull out of Hong Kong,'' said one United States businessman. 
''There is too much money to be made. 
There are no sales in Bermuda.''
In making the unexpected announcement, Jardine's chairman, Simon Keswick, acknowledged that the plan to set up a parent holding company in Bermuda reflected the prevailing uncertainty over what will happen to businesses when Hong Kong reverts to Chinese sovereignty.
Mr. Keswick, who came from Britain to take over as chairman less than a year ago, said that as an international corporation allocating its investments, Jardine found it ''undoubtedly a disadvantage to have to deal with questions regarding the long-term future of Hong Kong.''
As a British-run business, Mr. Keswick said, ''we wish to remain as long as possible under that jurisdiction.''
As Mr. Keswick noted, Jardine is not physically pulling out of Hong Kong in changing its legal registration. 
The head office and fixed assets will remain in the colony and business activities here will continue.
But the Bermuda connection is meant to ensure that Jardine continues to operate under British laws after Britain's lease over most of the colony expires in 13 years. 
One business analyst described the plan as ''a legal maneuver on where the tax will be paid.''
In practical terms, this means canceling the company's shares issued in Kong Kong and replacing them with equal new shares issued in Bermuda. 
Jardine's Hong Kong stock is now valued at about $5 billion (Hong Kong), or $641 million (United States).
Mr. Keswick linked the decision in part to an 80 percent drop in his company's net earnings last year over those of 1982, caused by financial jitters over the colony's future.
Jardine's announcement has already affected the colony's equities market. 
Last Thursday, the Hong Kong stock market plunged more than 61 points in the worst one-day loss this year. 
On Friday, it slipped nearly 43 more points, to close at slightly over 1,014 points on the Hang Seng index. 
The Hong Kong dollar has been unaffected because it was pegged to the United States dollar following its fall to a record low of 9.5 Hong Kong dollars to the United States dollar last September.
A local architect who follows the stock market suggested that ''now is the time to buy. 
The stocks are cheap and they'll come up again.''
 
Political Reaction Sharper
Politically, reaction has been even more negative, since the decision came while Britain and China remain engaged in sensitive and secret negotiations on a Hong Kong agreement before the September deadline set by Peking.
Several members of the colony's Legislative Council called Jardine's plan bad news. 
One council member, Selina Chow, told reporters ''this is definitely a manifestation of the lack of confidence of some of the business community in Hong Kong's future.''
Stephen Cheong, another member, said that ''the damage to the delicate flower of confidence has been done.''
The Chinese Government, apparently caught off guard, has been conspicuously silent. 
But the leftist Hong Kong press, which tends to reflect Peking's thinking, has criticized Jardine's plans and questioned its motives. 
The daily newspaper Wen Wei Po contended that the ''unwise'' decision could not have been made without the collusion of the British.
Other analysts do not fault Jardine for refusing to wait until China and Britain announce their plans for the transition of authority in Hong Kong. 
The secrecy surrounding the talks, which resume in Peking on April 11, prompted Hong Kong's legislative council to vote last month to open its own debate on the colony's future. 
Peking has objected to such a public voice.
 
A 'Justifiable Question'
''What Jardine has done is to raise a very justifiable question,'' said a Western resident of Hong Kong. 
''Under which law are we going to operate once China takes over this place?
How can we stay here to play a game whose rules are not known to us?''
Chinese officials have promised that Hong Kong can operate with its own political, economic and legal system as a special administrative region after it reverts to Chinese sovereignty. 
The Foreign Minister, Wu Xueqian, was quoted in a recent magazine interview as saying that China would ''scrupulously implement'' the agreement that it reaches with Britain.
The major concern now is that other companies, seeing Hong Kong's most prominent firm register an apparent lack of confidence in the future, may decide to follow suit and look for their own bases outside Hong Kong, a move that could dampen further investment in the colony. 
Particular attention is focusing on Swire Pacific, another company that originated as Jardine's major rival nearly a century and a half ago.
Another question is whether Peking may be angry enough to retaliate in some way against Jardine's business ventures in China. 
Such vindictiveness could also hurt China's credibility with Hong Kong investors, the analysts say.
