
The American Motors Corporation expects to sign an agreement later this week with China to jointly produce Jeeps in Peking and export some of them to other nations in the Far East.
The four-wheel-drive vehicles are to be produced by the Peking Jeep Company, a joint venture of Peking Auto Works and A.M.C., which is the smallest of the American automobile companies and the only manufacturer of Jeeps. 
Production is expected to reach 40,000 vehicles a year, which are to be sold in China and other Asian countries.
''This is probably the largest individual joint venture in China,'' said A.M.C.'s chairman, W. Paul Tippett, at a briefing last week before he left for China for the scheduled signing. 
He added that negotiations for the project had been in progress for more than four years and had been initiated by A.M.C., which sought access to the potentially huge Chinese market. 
It also wanted a low-wage area to manufacture vehicles to compete with Japanese companies in overseas markets.
SOUTHFIELD, Mich., May 2 - The American Motors Corporation expects to sign an agreement later this week with China to jointly produce Jeeps in Peking and export some of them to other nations in the Far East.
A.M.C. executives had hoped to withhold public announcement of the agreement until the actual signing, they said, to avoid angering Chinese officials and possibly endangering the accord. 
They declined, in fact, to comment today on reports appearing in Ward's Auto World, a trade publication, that said the formal announcement of the agreement was due shortly. 
However, last week, company officials, in advance briefings for reporters, said the signing was planned for Thursday in Peking.
The Chinese-made vehicles are not intended to be sold in the United States, Mr. Tippett said. 
The A.M.C. agreement, if it is signed, will be the first joint production agreement in China by an American auto manufacturer, an agreement that could result in the start of actual production this year or next.
Nevertheless, Volkswagen of West Germany has a preliminary contract to start making a new-model car in 1988 in a joint venture at a plant in Shanghai, where Chinese auto production is centered. 
The Ford Motor Company has been attempting to set up a joint venture to produce trucks and tractors.
A number of other American companies have established themselves in China, including the R.J. 
Reynolds Tobacco Company, which has been producing cigarettes there, and Avon Products Inc., which is marketing cosmetics. 
The largest single-project agreement apparently is a $230 million coal-mining development to be undertaken by the Occidential Petroleum Corporation.
Peking Jeep will be in a factory owned by Peking Auto Works, which now produces about 20,000 units a year of an older-design, fourwheel-drive vehicle based on a 1954 Soviet design for a Soviet Army jeep. 
A.M.C. will invest $8 million in cash and $8 million in technology for a 31.4 percent share of the $51 million joint venture. 
A.M.C.'s share could rise to as high as 49 percent under the terms of the agreement.
The initial plan for the joint venture, Mr. Tippett said, is for A.M.C. to update the existing Chinese 212 model with A.M.C.'s new four-cylinder engine and other engineering improvements intended to make the vehicles more fuel-efficient and to increase their carrying capacity. 
The engine is to be manufactured largely in China.
Within a few years, Mr. Tippett said, the objective is to develop a new vehicle, based in large part on A.M.C.'s CJ7 Jeep, the company's basic model.
''This is important to the Chinese and to us,'' Mr. Tippett said. 
He noted that, in China, autos are largely confined to urban areas while four-wheel-drive vehicles are necessary for the primitive rural road system. 
''The Chinese view transportation as one of their top five priorities in terms of economic development,'' Mr. Tippett added.
For A.M.C., he said, the venture gives the company an inside position in what could develop into a vast market for utility vehicles for all types of use in rural areas. 
It also gives the company a pool of 4,000 factory workers at the Peking plant whose pay averages 60 cents an hour, compared with about $12 an hour in labor costs in Japan and more than $20 an hour in the United States.
The average-equipped Jeep manufactured by American Motors in the United States sells for $11,500. 
Mr. Tippett did not indicate what the price of the vehicle built in China will be.
 
President to Be From A.M.C.
The president and chief operating officer of Peking Jeep will be an A.M.C. executive, although the chairman will be Chinese. 
''Basically, we plan to run it,'' said Mr. Tippett, who added that 8 to 10 A.M.C. executives would be permanently assigned to Peking with others visiting as needed. 
None of the American executives of the venture have yet been named, he added.
Mr. Tippett also said that officials of Renault, the French auto company that controls 46.4 percent of A.M.C.'s stock, had not been involved in the Chinese negotiations, other than to approve the transaction at the board level.
The agreement was initialed about a month ago, while a delegation from China was visiting here, he said. 
The formal signing was put off so that it could be done in the Great Hall of the People in Peking and publicized from there, Mr. Tippett said.
(In Peking, reports had circulated that a deal with American Motors was near for the venture, but there had been no official comment.)
 
Long-Term Strategic Move
The joint venture, Mr. Tippett said, will permit competition with Japanese companies that now sell 97 percent of all the 100,000 fourwheel-drive vehicles purchased in Pacific basin countries each year. 
A.M.C. now sells 2,000 to 3,000 of its Jeeps in the Pacific area, out of a total of 91,000 jeep-type vehicles sold in this country and abroad last year. 
''This is a long-term strategic move by A.M.C.,'' he said. 
''It will be a long time before there is much in the way of profit, but the opportunities seem very great to us in the long run.''
Mr. Tippett said Chinese officials would handle distribution and sales within the country while A.M.C. would use its own marketing channels for export.
Mr. Tippett said the only restriction on bringing profits back to the United States was that they not represent a drain of hard currency on China. 
Sufficient export sales of the vehicles should satisfy that requirement, he added.
