
Politicians, movie actors and leaders of industry shielded their eyes from the glare of flashbulbs and the sparkle of costumes Wednesday night at the Textile Museum here.
''The entire resources of NBC, Procter & Gamble and the Chinese and Italian Governments are assembled here,'' said John Houseman, the actor. 
He smiled and added: ''What more do you want?''
The party at the museum was held to unveil 30 of the costumes designed by Enrico Sabbatini of Italy for ''Marco Polo,'' a 10-hour mini-series that will be shown on NBC-TV for four nights beginning on May 16. 
The series is being sponsored by the Procter & Gamble Company. 
RAI-Radio Televisione Italiana, in cooperation with the Chinese Government, produced the film.
Politicians, movie actors and leaders of industry shielded their eyes from the glare of flashbulbs and the sparkle of costumes Wednesday night at the Textile Museum here.Mongolian Court Gown
''They are an inspiration - the colors, the simplicity,'' said Ulla Wachtmeister, wife of the Swedish Ambassador, Count Wilhelm Wachtmeister, as she touched a sweep of embroidered blue silk on a Mongolian court gown.
''That looks like something Diane Keaton would wear,'' said another guest as she looked at a mannequin that was wearing an intricate layer of Persian shawls, overskirts and petticoats.
''If you really want a good room, go to where the duck and the pig are,'' shouted another guest in the noisy room, referring to the pieces of Peking duck and roast suckling pig, wrapped in miniature pancakes, that were being served.
Lee Kimche, former director of the Institute of Museum Services, said the costumes were of ''museum quality.''
She said she had been meeting with officials of RAI-Radio Televisione Italiana to discuss the possibility of showing the costumes in other cities.
 
A $7,000 Embroidered Robe
''I'm so intrigued with this kind of detail,'' said Mary Jane Wick, wife of Charles Z. Wick, director of the International Communication Agency, as she looked closely at the ornately embroidered dragons on a ceremonial robe. 
The robe, with the help of gold-leaf embroidery, cost $7,000.
Robert Mulholland, president of NBC, admired the costume of a woman of Tabriz. 
After he was told that an ornate clasp on the mannequin's outfit was an antique safety pin, he quipped: ''I thought it was a chastity belt.''
George Clifford, a Washington writer, added: ''They don't have a thing in 44 long.''
It took Mr. Sabbatini three years to design 4,000 costumes and 3,500 handmade shoes, ranging from Mongolian boots made of goat fur to silken court slippers, for the series. 
He said he had made two trips to China, where he visited museums and talked with historians in an attempt to re-create the 13th century. 
He returned to Rome with thousands of square feet of silks, cottons and cashmeres and more than 1,000 furs. 
He said: ''The embroideries were done in China, the hand-hammered armor was made in Italy and the jade was hand-carved for the Mongol belts and the breastplate of Kublai Khan. 
Even the undergarments are authentic.''
Burt Lancaster, who plays Pope Gregory X in the series, said the costume he wore weighed 80 pounds. 
''We had a papal delegate working with us to authenticate details,'' he said, ''and he told us the materials in our costumes were much richer than what the Pope himself wears today.''
Mr. Houseman, who plays the Patriarch of Venice, recalled: ''Sabbatini kept draping me in more and more of the stuff. 
He virtually built the costume on me.''
Leonard Nimoy plays the role of Kublai Khan's regent. 
He said that ''the character does have a bit of a problem - he has a healthly lust for women and has 30 wives and 400 concubines.''
The $25 million film tells the story of the 20-year journey of Marco Polo, who was played by Ken Marshall. 
The actor was not able to attend the party.
Some of the filming was done at the Great Wall of China and in Peking's Forbidden City. 
Inner Mongolia, Fez and Marrekesh in Morocco were other location sites. 
The series had 180 speaking parts and used 5,000 extras, including two regiments of the Mongolian Cavalry.
Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr., was billed as one of the party's hosts, along with Chai Zemin, the Chinese envoy to the United States, and Rinaldo Petrignani, the Italian Ambassador. 
But the Falkland Island crisis prevented Mr. Haig from attending and Assistant Secretary of State Robert D. Hormats extended Mr. Haig's regrets to the gathering. 
The crowd included J. Carter Brown, the director of the National Gallery of Arts, and his wife, Pamela; George Stevens, a television producer, and his wife, Elizabeth; William Cafritz, a Washington businessman, and his wife, Buffy; Ambassador Ashraf F. Ghorbal of Egypt; Commissioner Barbara Thomas of the Securities and Exchange Commission, and Grant Tinker, chairman of the board of NBC.
