
South Korea continued tonight to hold a Chinese torpedo boat that drifted into its waters with six dead crew members, killed in what some reports described as a mutiny after some crewmen tried to defect.
The South Korean Government made no direct response to a Chinese request for the return of the naval vessel and its crew ''as soon as possible.''
(China and South Korea were reportedly holding talks on the return of the boat and crew through officials they maintain in Hong Kong.)
 
2 Reportedly in Hospital
Two crew members, reportedly shot but not critically wounded, were in a hospital in the South Korean port of Kunsan, on the Yellow Sea. 
A total of 10 or 11 other crewmen were also believed to have been taken to Kunsan, but their whereabouts could not be determined. 
Their boat was apparently offshore.
South Korea continues to hold Chinese torpedo boat that drifted into its waters with six dead crew members, killed in what some reports described as mutiny after some crewmen tried to defect; two crew members, reportedly shot but not critically wounded, are in hospital in South Korea, and South Korean Government makes no direct response to Chinese request for return of vessel and its crew 'as soon as possible'; photo (M)
It was not clear whether any of the sailors sought political asylum in South Korea or preferred to be sent home.
South Korean officials seemed to deal cautiously with the episode, which threatened to undercut recent attempts by the two countries to pursue friendly contacts even though they have no diplomatic relations.
 
'A Simple Scuffle'
A statement issued tonight in Seoul by the Minister of Culture and Information, Lee Won Hong, did not mention a mutiny or any deaths.
''It was determined, based on facts so far obtained, that casualties aboard the Chinese torpedo boat were due to a simple scuffle among the crewmen and that no political reason was involved,'' Mr. Lee said.
Officials interviewed by telephone from Seoul declined to give details. 
But several foreign diplomats in South Korea described the incident as a mutiny that seemed to have begun on Friday when some Chinese crew members tried to defect to Taiwan.
 
Demand by Crewman
A Western diplomat said available information suggested that one crewman had held a rifle and demanded that the vessel - apparently part of a naval exercise in the Yellow Sea - be diverted to Taiwan. 
The Japanese press, citing unidentified sources, reported that at least two Chinese crew members sought political refuge.
No details were available about who shot whom or what happened after the gunfire ended.
But according to Mr. Lee and other officials, the torpedo boat's engines failed during the incident, and the vessel drifted into South Korean waters, where it fired flares to signal it was in distress.
By then the Chinese Government had become aware that one of its boats was missing and was heading toward South Korea. 
China alerted the Seoul Government through the South Korean Consulate in Hong Kong, diplomats said.
 
Sighting by Fishing Boat
On Friday night, a South Korean fishing boat sighted the torpedo boat and towed it to Hawangdung Island, 45 miles west of Kunsan. 
From there, survivors and the bodies of slain crewmen were taken to the mainland.
Through American diplomats, South Korea sent a ''stern protest'' to Peking over the entry of three other Chinese military ships into South Korean waters. 
The three ships apparently followed the torpedo boat, and one was said to be a missile destroyer.
A Government statement issued this afternoon in Seoul said the three ships had returned to international waters after warnings and a ''show of force'' by the South Korean Navy and Air Force. 
The nature of the ''show of force'' was not clear, but diplomats said no shots had been fired.
China later acknowledged that its vessels had entered South Korean waters. 
But it said they had done so ''inadvertently'' while searching for the stricken boat and had turned around once they realized the error. 
Peking did not respond directly to a South Korean demand for an apology.
 
Seoul Plays Down Episode
By tonight, Mr. Lee's statement dropped all references to the three intruding ships and his Government's earlier protest.
It appeared to reflect a decision to play down the episode after an evening of meetings by senior officials, including Prime Minister Lho Shin Young and Foreign Minister Lee Won Kyung. 
A decision on a matter of this importance almost certainly had the imprimatur of the South Korean leader, President Chun Doo Hwan.
The fact that South Korea had not said after more than 24 hours what it would do with the Chinese boat suggested to some diplomats that officials in Seoul were weighing political as well as diplomatic consequences.
The closest parallel to the situation was a hijacking in May 1983 in which six Chinese seeking asylum in Taiwan forced a Chinese airliner on a domestic flight to land in South Korea. 
In that incident, senior Chinese airline officials visited Seoul to negotiate the return of the airplane, a journey regarded by South Korea as a political coup.
Diplomats said Seoul may hope for similar gains this time.
 
Trade Is an Open Secret
Both China and South Korea have given signs of wishing to ease the deep bitterness that has divided them since they fought during the Korean War. 
Trade between them is more or less an open secret, with most goods passing through Hong Kong.
South Korea expects China to attend the Olympic Games in Seoul in 1988. 
It also regards Peking as a moderating influence on North Korea. 
A fundamental assumption in Seoul is that Chinese pressure has been a main reason for the mildly improved climate between two Koreas over the last 15 months.
In the 1983 hijacking, South Korean courts convicted the six Chinese but handed out mild sentences. 
Last Aug. 
13, adhering to a pattern set in previous defections, South Korea ignored China's objections and allowed the hijackers to go to Taiwan, where they were given homes and jobs.
