
In keeping with the rapid expansion of United States trade with China in the last few years, five American law firms have now established what amount to permanent offices in Peking.
The new legal interest in China was underscored last month when Jerome Alan Cohen, who is widely regarded as the foremost American authority on Chinese law, resigned as professor of law and associate dean at the Harvard Law School to accept an offer as a senior partner at the New York firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison.
Mr. Cohen, 51 years old, had been intensely courted by at least two other major Wall Street law firms, including Coudert Brothers, for whom he had worked as a consultant on American-Chinese trade over the last 10 years. 
He had also been one of the leading candidates for dean of the Harvard Law School last spring.
5 American law firms establish permanent offices in Peking (China)
Mr. Cohen took a two-year leave of absence from Harvard to help Coudert Brothers set up an office in Peking after the normalization of relations with China in 1979.
 
A Doubling of Trade
American trade with China last year amounted to $4.8 billion, more than double the 1979 figure. 
American trade with the countries of East Asia as a whole has also climbed rapidly in the past decade and reached $139 billion in 1980, more than the total of the United States' imports and exports with Western Europe, which amounted to $114 billion, according to the Department of Commerce.
''But American law firms were very slow to take note of this trend,'' Mr. Cohen said in an interview. 
Officially, China still does not permit Western legal firms to have offices in Peking. 
This is partly because of Chinese suspicion about what the foreign lawyers are doing and partly because of a shortage of housing and office space.
There is intense competition among foreign businessmen, bankers, lawyers and journalists for hotel rooms in Peking. 
Mr. Cohen will use a suite at the Peking Hotel that he got when he was working for Coudert Brothers in 1979.
 
Seminars Paid Off
Coudert Brothers was able to secure permanent rooms there because Mr. Cohen gave a series of legal seminars to officials of the Peking city government, which runs the Peking Hotel.
In this stay, Mr. Cohen will give a course for a Chinese Government ministry on United States contract, investment and trade law.
The other American law firms that have offices in Peking are Baker & McKenzie of Chicago, Graham & James of San Francisco and Heller, Ehrman, White & McAuliffe of San Francisco.
Stanley Lubman, a partner with Heller, Ehrman, said he now spends one-third to one-half his time in China. 
Mr. Lubman, who speaks Chinese, said that, from 1979 and 1980, a series of laws issued by the Chinese Government on taxation, foreign investment and joint ventures had made it easier to do business with China.
 
Legal System Is Different
But he cautioned that lawyers should not expect the Chinese legal system to be as complete and relatively free of ambiguities as United States codes.
In negotiating any deal with the Chinese, he said, it was his experience that ''it is a matter of shrinking the American contracts and stretching the Chinese ones.''
''The Chinese contract,'' he said, ''will emphasize what should be done, the American contract will also emphasize what happens if the project isn't done, and that's where the big differences come up between us.''
Both Mr. Cohen and Mr. Lubman began to study Chinese law in the early 1960's with grants from the Rockefeller Foundation. 
At the time, Mr. Cohen recalled, China and the United States were bitter enemies, and his wife and friends thought ''I was losing my mind.''
''It's a wonderful thing to study,'' his wife, Joan Leobold Cohen, counseled him, ''but this is a field that has absolutely no practical application. 
We'll have to live off our academic salary.''
