
HALLS OF JADE, WALLS OF STONE Women in China Today. 
By Stacey Peck. 
Illustrated. 315 pp. 
New York: Franklin Watts. 
$15.95.
STACEY PECK, a professional interviewer who has worked for the Sunday magazine of The Los Angeles Times, traveled in China for two months in late 1983, recording conversations with Chinese women. 
As she acknowledges, she lacked the background in Chinese culture and language that would have enabled her to move beyond the official progam arranged for her by her host organization, one of China's major newspapers.
The women with whom Mrs. Peck was allowed to meet included a large proportion of officials, model workers and others trusted by the Communist Party. 
Many of the intellectuals and artists mentioned the foreign studies of their children or their own travels outside of China, usually an indication of privilege or status; the peasants she was taken to see were so well off that her interpreter exclaimed, ''Their living conditions are better than mine!''
Despite its limitations, however, this collection is noteworthy as the largest group of interviews with Chinese women to be published since the Cultural Revolution of 1965-76. 
In today's more relaxed climate, even what is said to an American stranger in official meetings is frequently interesting.
Many of the women speak of the improvement in their lives over those of their mothers and grandmothers before the Communist victory, but their complaints about men who do not share the housework and child rearing, about stereotyped attitudes toward the capabilities and talents of both sexes, and about women's lack of political power will sound quite familiar to Western women. 
In openly discussing such problems, the women Mrs. Peck interviewed were not departing from the official position of the All-China Women's Federation, a Government organization whose English-language publication, Women of China, often contains even more outspoken statements on the status of women than those included here.
Very different in tone are the interviews conducted with Chinese in the United States. 
A temporary expatriate tells Mrs. Peck, ''You interviewed many women in China, and I don't think they would lie to you but . . . some questions they might not answer at all or just omit certain information.''
One of the best interviews was conducted with a computer scientist in Los Angeles who speaks of claiming her father's corpse after his ''persecution to death'' during the Cultural Revolution: ''At the door to the morgue a policeman said, 'Your father was a reactionary, so you are not allowed to cry when you see him.'
Then they took me into the room, and I saw him for the first time since he had been arrested.''
The same woman describes her 10-year marriage to a man from whom she was separated because of their state-assigned jobs, an all too common situation in China: ''We tried very hard to work in the same city so we could live together. 
But we never could, so he's really a stranger to me. 
. . . We only saw each other on our twelve-day vacations every year, but I do know he's a nice person and very honest.''
In a final section, Mrs. Peck interviews several of the long-term foreign residents of Peking; she is apparently unaware that the reason they are often unexpectedly disappointing informants has to do with the unusual adaptations they have had to make to survive in China for so many years. 
Although she does speak with one more recent arrival, it would have been more useful and quite easy, even within the modest framework Mrs. Peck has chosen, to interview a few of the hundreds of Western students who have spent several years at the major universities, many of whom have no language barrier and have formed deep friendships with the Chinese. 
Their anecdotes might have given a sense of what the women of China would have said in a less official context.
