
Yin Yongcheng, a beige snap-brim cap planted firmly on his head, walked among his orange trees, their fruit harvested now, and wondered about the future.
''I'm not sure I can go on,'' Mr. Yin said, scanning the 11-acre orchard that prickled the otherwise barren mountain like a four-day growth of beard.
A slight man who has worked the soil of this part of the northern province of Shaanxi much of his life, Mr. Yin has become a minor cause celebre in China. 
The People's Daily, the official organ of the Communist Party, has portrayed him as an aggressive agricultural entrepreneur who has reached the brink of failure, undermined by the rigid bureaucratic attitudes of village officials and ill-disguised local jealousies.
The plight of Mr. Yin, who in many ways represents the direction agriculture in China must go if it is to modernize, points also to the obstacles faced by the country's senior leader, Deng Xiaoping, and Zhao Ziyang, the leader of the party, in their effort to insure the compliance of localities with national policy.
 
Encouraged by Changes
For Mr. Yin, of course, the cosmic problems of China's agricultural policies are at most a remote concern. 
Rather, it is the health of his mountain where his trees grow and the antagonism of the village head, Yin Jinxue, and the township boss, Zhao Qiwen, that preoccupy him.
''I was a farmer,'' the 38-year-old Yin Yongcheng explained. 
''Like everybody else, I grew paddy rice, some corn, cotton, peanuts. 
We were organized into a collective. 
Nobody had their own land at that time. 
That was 1983.''
''I'd heard about the reform policies and was encouraged,'' he continued, referring to the national policy, begun in 1978, of disbanding collective agriculture and distributing land to individual households.
An agricultural school in nearby Hanzhong had started planting orange saplings on a hillside above the village in 1982. 
Mr. Yin said that it seemed to him that by taking care of those trees and planting more saplings and some grape vines a profitable fruit farm could be built.
The problem, of course, was that for a single individual to control so much land was almost unheard of.
''I went to talk to Yin Jinxue,'' Mr. Yin said. 
''I told him that this area is poor land and wasn't being used. 
I said I just wanted to try it. 
They decided to let me try.''
On June 30, 1983, Yin Yongcheng signed a contract with the village to care for the existing orange trees and expand the orchard further. 
With loans from the local agricultural bank, he hired workers and over the next four years transformed the hilltop into a flourishing orchard.
This year, for the first time, his trees and vines produced a good crop and he began repaying his loans. 
But this year also his problems with local officials began. 
''I need to build a pond to irrigate the trees,'' Mr. Yin said. 
''I put forward the plan to the village and the township for a loan to go ahead. 
I asked for 28,000 yuan,'' or about $7,500. 
''They would not provide the money.''
As a result, Mr. Yin was prepared to abandon the orchard until a reporter from The People's Daily arrived in the village this fall. 
It is here that accounts differ. 
According to The People's Daily, local officials refused to make the loans to Mr. Yin because he had only a 10-year contract, the maximum permissible, and were afraid the money would not be repaid. 
At the same time, the officials would not consider extending the contract.
An unidentified village official was quoted as having said, ''Maybe on the ninth year of the contract we'll discuss whether Yin will be allowed to prolong his contract.''
When questioned again recently, the officials seemed evasive. 
Zhao Qiwen, the township leader, blamed the backwardness of the region. 
''We started to carry out the system of contracts and individual responsibility four years later than other places,'' he said. 
''We had no idea what difficulties we would meet.''
Yin Jinxue, the village chief, said: ''Even if The People's Daily hadn't come the problem would be resolved. 
It took time because it needed the two sides to discuss it.''
But Yan Kejian, an official in the foreign affairs department of nearby Hanzhong city, the agency that supervises contacts between foreigners and Chinese in this region of Shaanxi Province, conceded that the two local leaders were less than candid. 
''They didn't tell the truth,'' he said.
 
Villagers Called Resentful
Yin Yongcheng said some of his problems also stemmed from the resentment among villagers that he was better off than they were. 
Where once an old ramshackle mud brick house stood on the mountain ridge, he has built a five-room red brick home that, though plain, seems less bound to the soil than the mud houses in the village below.
''My grandfather was landlord of this village,'' Mr. Yin said. 
Then, with a sigh, he continued. 
''I heard people saying that I was another landlord, that things were going back to the way they were.''
Next year, Mr. Yin said, he hopes to double the crop of oranges. 
But whether the orchard can, in the long run, survive without the irrigation pond that local officials do not seem willing to let him build, he said he did not know.
For The People's Daily, the newspaper that speaks for China's leadership, Mr. Yin's problems are the truest test of whether the country will move ahead.
''The problems he has encountered are faced in varying degrees by others who contract to run enterprises,'' the paper wrote. 
''We hope that the telling of Yin Yongcheng's story will attract widespread thought and discussion.''
Mr. Yin is still waiting for his loan.
