
Not quite two years after Britain and China fashioned a formula for the return of Hong Kong to China, Portugal and China have agreed to open negotiations on a similar deal for Macao, the oldest European enclave on the China coast.
The talks will begin at the end of June in Peking and are expected to conclude more quickly than those on Hong Kong, which took three years.
Compared with the frenetic British colony that lies 40 miles away across the mouth of the Pearl River, this has always been a quiet and unstressful place, and so it is proving as the China talks approach.
Unlike Hong Kong, which went through a stock market plunge and associated jitters on the road to agreement with Peking, Macao's 400,000 people, only about 12,000 of them Portuguese, are generally sanguine about the prospect of returning to Chinese sovereignty sometime in the next 10 to 15 years.
'Hope for the Best'
''I wouldn't say that people here like the idea, but they accept it and hope for the best,'' said the Rev. Domingos Lam, the vicar general of the colony's Roman Catholic Church.
Father Lam has more to worry about than most, given the repression experienced on the mainland by priests who insist on their loyalty to Rome. 
But even on this score he is optimistic, saying he doubts the Communist authorities of the future will require him to remove the oil paintings of popes and bishops that line the upper gallery in the 18th-century villa that serves as the church's main office here.
''If they ask for that, they may as well tell me to get out,'' the chain-smoking priest said, chuckling. 
''I will simply tell them, 'No!'
''
Besides the Catholic Church the mainland rulers have much else to contemplate as they prepare for their negotiations with Portugal's chief delegate to the United Nations, Ruy Barbosa Medina, who will head Lisbon's delegations in the talks.
Macao's largest source of revenue is its 24-hour casinos, which draw more than three million Hong Kong gamblers a year onto the ferries and high-speed jetfoils that cross the choppy waters between here and Hong Kong.
Although gambling and licentiousness have raised their heads in China, the authorities repeatedly crack down on what they call the threat to China's ''spiritual civilization.''
In Macao, unless there is a radical change in the colony's economic fortunes, they are not so much a threat to the way of life as the pillar of it.
 
Peking Seems Little Bothered
So far, Peking seems little bothered by the colony's ways. 
Tens of thousands of mainlanders make their way here each year, and it is easy to spot the short haircuts and baggy suits of the typical Communist officeholder among the pleasure-seekers at the Lisboa's ''crazy Paris show.''
Along with this, the authorities in Kwangtung Province, beyond the archway that straddles the border with China, have boosted the mainland's stake in the Macao economy, to the point where Communist-owned banks, construction companies and trading houses account for 10 to 20 percent of local business.
Partly to protect the economic upswing Macao is experiencing, Peking has sketched out the agreement it expects from the talks. 
The basic pattern will be the same as those for Hong Kong, which provide for the extension of the British colony's capitalist system and the laws that underpin it for 50 years after the handover in 1997. 
But a Peking political newsweekly, Outlook, recently spoke of the need to meet the ''specific conditions of Macao,'' implying that there may be some special provisions here.
Portuguese and Chinese opinion leaders hope that one difference will be the timing of the transition. 
With 1997 barely a decade away, they say, Macao is far less prepared for the autonomous existence envisioned in the Hong Kong formula.
''We will need more time,'' said Joaquim Marinho de Bastos, the Portuguese lawyer who is the colony's tourism director as well as the leader of its Social Democratic Party, which has majority support among the Portuguese officials, professionals and businessmen.
 
Few Chinese Officials
Mr. Marinho noted that the administration here remained almost entirely in Portuguese hands, unlike Hong Kong, where the bureaucracy is predominantly Chinese and has begun to yield some of its most important posts to local people.
China is unlikely to want Macao back before 1997. 
Hong Kong, which has 5.5 million people and is one of the world's most important economic centers, weighs far more heavily with Peking than the six square miles of Macao.
A recovery date for Macao that preceded Hong Kong's would risk the confidence that British and Chinese officials are trying to develop in the British colony. 
''If things went wrong here, it could have a devastating effect in Hong Kong,'' Mr. Marinho said.
An important role in the bargaining over Macao's future is being played by wealthy Chinese businessmen who have fostered close ties with Peking. 
The most important is Ma Man-kei, a multimillionaire in banking and real estate, who makes his priorities clear in the portraits that adorn his office above an antiques shop on the Praia Grande promenade. 
A large photograph of Deng Xiaoping, the Chinese leader, dwarfs a much smaller shot of the former Portuguese President, Antonio Ramalho Eanes.
Mr. Ma has already helped obtain revisions to investment rules on the mainland, and Portuguese officials, including some who have not always trusted him, say they believe he can perform a similar ''educating'' role for Macao.
