
China and Portugal reached agreement today on returning this small gambling haven, a Portuguese colony for 430 years, to China in 1999.
The agreement means that Portugal, which here became the first European power to establish a beachhead on the Asian mainland, will be the last colonial power to leave.
Macao, a dot on the South China coast 40 miles southwest of Hong Kong, is home to 420,000 people, 97 percent of whom are ethnically Chinese. 
The enclave is sprinkled with casinos and massage parlors and has a reputation as Hong Kong's playground. 
The economy depends on the 4.2 million tourists who visit each year, mostly from Hong Kong.
'The Holiday Is Finished'
''We have had a long summer holiday, but the holiday is finished,'' the Rev. Domingos Lam, the Roman Catholic Vicar General of Macao, said today. 
''Everything will change.''
The agreement, which followed nine months of negotiations, was announced in a brief statement by negotiators in Beijing. 
The terms of the accord were not disclosed, and apparently will not be, at least until it is initialed in Beijing on Thursday by chief negotiators for both Portugal and China. 
[A Portuguese diplomat in Beijing said the accord would be signed next month by Prime Ministers Mario Soares of Portugal and Zhao Ziyang of China.] But reports in Macao, Beijing and Lisbon agree on major aspects of the agreement. 
The accord is similar to the one by which Britain will return Hong Kong to China in July 1997.
According to these reports, Macao will return to Chinese control on Dec. 
20, 1999. 
Like Hong Kong, Macao will be guaranteed 50 years of noninterference in its way of life and capitalist system. 
A committee of Portuguese and Chinese negotiators will resolve other issues, such as the political institutions and legal system.
''I think the agreement can be considered a fairly good one,'' said Carlos Monjardino, the acting Governor. 
''But for now there is no significant reaction here.''
Indeed, most people interviewed here seemed relatively unconcerned about the agreement. 
In part, this reflected the lack of information about the accord. 
In part, many people said, it also reflected the view that there is not much that residents can do about it, whatever they think. 
'Small People Cannot Go'
''We have worries, but what can we do?'' asked Danny Cheung, whose small shop here sells traditional medicines and bird nests used to make soup. 
''We are not millionaires, or we could fly to another country. 
We are small people; we cannot go.''
Mr. Cheung and several others interviewed said they doubted that China would continue for long to tolerate the gambling casinos and strip shows that are the enclave's economic foundation. 
But a senior Government official here said that the gambling would definitely continue, and other analysts note that China would face substantial economic pressure if it closed the casinos -which supply 20 percent of economic output here and a large proportion of government revenue.
''The mind-set here is entirely different from China's,'' said the 36-year-old well-dressed owner of a small shop. 
''But I'm not worried. 
I have a green card to go to the United States. 
I figure I have 10 more years here.''
#1999 Is Considered Distant Many people here stressed that 1999 was still very distant, and that much could happen before then.
''I'm not anxious about 1999,'' said C. K. Lo, a pawnbroker. 
''My main worry is whether I can find a meal today.''
Macao's economic dependence on vice has caused problems for China before. 
Soon after the Portuguese revolution of 1974, some Portuguese officials traveled to Beijing to suggest that the colony be returned to China. 
They were rebuffed. 
Chinese officials said they wanted Macao back but not just yet. 
Apparently they were unsure how to reconcile Communism with blackjack, and afraid that if they interfered the jitters would spread to Hong Kong and disrupt that territory's economy.
Although Macao, which was permanently settled by the Portuguese in 1557, has the architecture and relaxed atmosphere of Portugal, and shop signs must be in Portuguese as well as Chinese, the Portuguese influence is minimal. 
Only 3 percent of the population speaks Portuguese, and almost no one knows streets by their official Portuguese names. 
Instead, they are known by their Chinese names.
A Portuguese official here said that his country had insisted in the negotiations on favorable trade arrangements as parthedding its colonies - such as Angola, of Macao. 
No formal trade concessions - such as increased purchases by China of Portuguese exports - were adopted, but an informal understanding was reached, the official said. 
Issue of Dual Nationality A more contentious issue was the rights of some 80,000 ethnic Chinese residents of Macao who hold Portuguese passports. 
China refused to regard them as dual nationals, and at one point last week Portugal reportedly threatened to suspend the talks because of disagreements on the subject.
But China is reported to have agreed that while it would regard dual passport holders as solely Chinese nationals, they could retain their passports and claim Portuguese nationality while traveling outside China.
The agreement also serves Portugal's interest in allowing it a more gracious departure than it experienced from its other colonies. 
Portugal was widely criticized in the mid-1970's for shedding its colonies - such as Angola, Mozambique and East Timor - without adequately preparing them for self-government. 
In the final years of its stewardship, Portugal is trying to increase its role in Macao, and is considering leaving a ''farewell gift'' such as an airport or other major project for Macao.
