
ANCESTORS
900 Years in the Life of a Chinese Family.
By Frank Ching.
Illustrated. 528 pp. 
New York:
William Morrow & Company. 
$22.95.
Shortly after Frank Ching arrived in the People's Republic of China in June of 1979 to set up The Wall Street Journal's first Beijing bureau, he found himself embarked on an odyssey of personal and historical discovery that lasted nearly a decade. 
Beginning with an exploration of his immediate ancestry, his quest, by the time he finished, had drawn him back to the Song Dynasty (960-1279) on a seemingly endless trail of family genealogies, dynastic records, local gazetteers, oral histories and other historical and literary works in both Chinese and English. 
The result is ''Ancestors: 900 Years in the Life of a Chinese Family,'' a stunning accomplishment in which, by recounting individual lives of members of his own clan, Mr. Ching brings to life the last nine centuries of Chinese history and culture as almost no other work in the English language has done. 
But, equally important, Mr. Ching's long narrative of personalized Chinese history reveals to us the myriad ways in which, despite the defiant ''antifeudal'' rhetoric of the Chinese Communist Party, both Mao's tumultuous socialist revolution and Deng's unprecedented capitalist counterrevolution share common roots with China's past.
Among other American correspondents in Beijing, Frank Ching quickly acquired a reputation for being not only a thoughtful journalist, but for having the best Chinese sources. 
Those were the days when unauthorized contact with a tourist, a businessman or even a visiting scholar from abroad was often enough to cause serious trouble for a Chinese. 
Association with Western journalists - who were viewed by the Government as little more than thinly camouflaged spies - often caused arrest and ruination. 
But, being a Chinese-American, Frank Ching, who was in any event a paradigm of civility and discretion, was able to slip quietly away from the pack of other newly arrived American reporters and disappear on his own into the other side of that stark divide which, in the minds of most citizens of the People's Republic, still separated them from ''foreigners.''
To those of us whose alienness kept us so bound within the confines of the foreign community, Mr. Ching's aunts and uncles, some of whom were rumored to have high positions in the Chinese party hierarchy, seemed like unimaginably forbidden and exotic sources.
Mr. Ching's family contacts doubtless helped him unravel the events that propelled Chinese life during those first years of political reform in Deng Xiaoping's China; his reporting was indeed excellent. 
But, as we now learn, these family connections ended up having consequences of far more significance for him than simply providing a little extra information for his regular dispatches, or even for the kind of obligatory post-tour-of-duty book many of his colleagues wrote on returning home. 
For Mr. Ching, finding his contemporary relatives led to a rediscovery of a long-lost family that stretched back for more than a millennium and that ultimately unsealed for him not only his family history but the history of his native land.
Returning to his native country was an awakening for Mr. Ching, who left mainland China as a 5-year-old and who had grown up beyond the borders of the land and culture in which his own family and clan had for centuries been so deeply immersed. 
His reconnection with lost family members in post-Mao China made him aware for the first time not only of his clan's fate in the People's Republic, but also of the distinguished part it had played during the dynastic period as well. 
In fact, it was not until his return to China that he found out about his own father, who until then had remained an elusive figure for Mr. Ching. A prominent Shanghai lawyer and supporter of republicanism in the 1920's and 30's, by the 40's the elder Ching had become discouraged by war and revolution, and finally sent his family to Hong Kong, where Frank Ching was born in 1940, as part of that great diaspora of refugees that fled China before Mao's ''liberation'' in 1949. 
The family returned to Shanghai in 1942, but then left again in 1946.
Having stumbled on a genealogical history (''zong pu'') of his clan, Mr. Ching began research that soon resulted in a domino effect: the discovery of each successive generation of the illustrious Qins (the name ''Ching'' is simply a different transliteration of the character for ''Qin'') only set Mr. Ching off in search of its predecessor.
Reading this family genealogy is like visiting a Confucian ancestral hall that every great family in ancient China once maintained as a means of keeping up a connection between the living and the dead, and where each tablet placed in memory of a departed member is able to speak. 
As Frank Ching, who left The Wall Street Journal in 1983 to complete this book, takes us back through the generations of his own kinsmen, one has the sense of being in a moving time capsule, on a biographical tour of Chinese history, which is ineluctably moving forward toward present time. 
Returning to his hometown, Wushi in Jiangsu Province, one of the main seats of high literati culture in ancient China, Mr. Ching began his expedition of familial archeology by searching out and finding the grave of his Song dynasty ancestor, the poet Qin Guan, who lived from 1049 to 1102. 
From then on, he guides us through generation after generation of Chinese life, so that as we meet scores of long-departed family members, each in his way emblematic of the time and culture in which he lived, we feel almost as though this is a cautionary tale meant to illustrate the vicissitudes of Chinese culture and politics. 
The list includes Qin Kui, the infamous chief councilor of the Song dynasty in the 12th century, who was alleged to have sold out the country to marauding Jurchen tribesmen; Qin Yubo, the just Yuan Dynasty (1279-1368) official who ultimately became the patron god of Shanghai; Qin Jin, the celebrated Ming dynasty (1368-1644) minister to the Jiajing Emperor; and Qin Yong, philosopher and stubborn Ming loyalist; Qin Songling, a Qing dynasty (1644-1912) official par excellence and keeper of the Imperial diary for the Kangxi Emperor; Qin Huitian, illustrious official and minister of punishments under the Qianlong Emperor - and, coming closer to remembered time, Qin Guojun, Mr. Ching's grandfather and highly esteemed district magistrate; Qin Jiajun, Mr. Ching's half-brother and a Communist martyr who died with Mao's Fourth Army in 1942 while fighting the Japanese; and finally Qin Liankui, Mr. Ching's father and 20th-century Shanghai pioneer of legal reform. 
Each generation added its chronicle to the family genealogy.
Getting a meaningful overview of Chinese history, particularly dynastic history, has never been easy for Westerners. 
Specialists, professors and graduate students have tended to approach it in segments, so that their research often misses the marvel of its sweep and cultural continuity. 
On the other hand, generalists and students in introductory college courses who have little background, are forced to confront its enormity as a whole, so that its three millenniums end up appearing as little more than a repetitive, blurred, not to say dull, cycle of emperors and rising and falling dynasties. 
By allowing members of his own family to speak for the times in which they lived, Mr. Ching has personalized the vastness of this historical panorama, thereby allowing his readers to become generalist and specialist at the same time. 
By focusing on the microcosms of individual lives, he makes history immediate, and by stringing these generational portraits together, he also succeeds in highlighting those themes and cultural and political traits that have endured right down to the era of Deng Xiaoping.
For instance, Mr. Ching's depiction of Qin Songling, a scholar-official and member of the prestigious Hanlin Academy who lived from 1637 to 1714 during the Qing dynasty and who served under the Kangxi Emperor when the Qin clan was at the height of its glory, presents not only a telling portrait of life at that time, but a reminder of how hauntingly similar the fates of officials then could be to their contemporary Communist counterparts. 
Qin Songling, like Deng Xiaoping, was twice disgraced, dismissed from office and then rehabilitated. 
In a way that is also suggestive of the present, Mr. Ching describes how Songling served on a project to write an official history of the previous Ming dynasty, in which, because the emperor was offended by the incorrect use of Ming loyalist reign titles favored by the enemies of the Qing, earlier compilers had been executed. 
Moreover, even the family members of these unfortunates, considered tainted by their association with the accused, were extirpated as traitors in an orgy of persecution.
The custom of giving enemy designations to all the family members of any accused individual foreshadowed all too accurately the later Communist practices during the Anti-Rightist Campaign and the Cultural Revolution when the ''bad'' class or political ''background'' of any individual was grounds for cashiering all their kith and kin. 
Moreover, when Songling was first digraced and removed from office on a trumped-up charge of tax evasion, he readily accepted guilt, evincing the same kind of contrition and willingness to submit to government authority that was characteristic of so many party officials accused of ideological crimes during more recent times. 
One can see in the insistence on orthodoxy and the admissions of guilt and self-confessions of each period how deeply the notion of obedience to one's ruler has been inculcated into the Chinese psyche, and how fundamental the idea of an inviolable ''correct'' or ''orthodox'' political line has always been in Chinese politics.
The unpredictable ups and downs of Qin Songling's career in government are a mirror of the present in other ways as well. 
We are reminded how the absolute power of emperors, constrained by little more than whatever moral restraint each ruling member of the imperial family chose voluntarily to exercise, cast the die for future patterns of leadership. 
Mao Zedong was every bit as imperial in his way as the most autocratic of emperors. 
And we are reminded how parlous public service in China is even now, bearing out the old adage that ''keeping company with the emperor is akin to keeping company with a tiger.''
Indeed, what comes through most clearly in Mr. Ching's portraits of his relatives who served so many dynasties and emperors, are the manifold ways in which both republican and Communist history of our century share cultural genes with China's past. 
During both those periods, one is struck again and again by the fate of just bureaucrats and officials who because of the paranoia or caprice of a ruler are tarred with the brush of unorthodoxy and treason and defrocked. 
Whether animated by devotion to the Confucian notions of loyalty and obedience, or the Communist notion of party discipline and hewing to the ''correct line,'' officials throughout Chinese history have been deeply imbued with a sense of political conformity that has led them to bear their humiliations and defrockings in a way that is almost unimaginable to Westerners.
From this tour of Mr. Ching's gallery of historical profiles, we can see how the ''self-criticisms'' demanded of intellectuals in the Maoist era grew organically out of the compulsory admissions of guilt expected by the emperors of officials accused of wrongdoing. 
We see also how deeply rooted are the traditions of rank and hierarchy, intolerance of diversity, and the stress on the Confucian virtues of obedience, loyalty and filial piety. 
And we cannot help but note how factional struggle, political infighting, informing, intrigue, the humiliation of adversaries, the absolute and arbitrary power of supreme leaders have always been the heart and soul of Chinese politics. 
Finally, we are made abundantly aware how ill-equipped all this traditional political culture now makes China to deal with the Western ideas of democracy and human rights. 
By way of criticism, it must be said that in poring through all the family genealogies, ancient ''veritable records'' of departed emperors, and so forth, Frank Ching sometimes succumbs to a weakness characteristic of many Chinese dynastic historians - namely, an overemphasis on the compilation of detail and fact. 
While Mr. Ching's research is impressive, we are often left yearning for the kind of interpretive connective tissue that helps make an abundance of fact more meaningful. 
In this respect, we wish Mr. Ching had allowed himself to be more present in his work, and had played the role not only of dispassionate chronicler of his family, but of interpreter. 
For what keeps his narrative moving is precisely our knowledge that the Qin clan does finally culminate in such a curious way, namely in the guise of its newest genealogist, the expatriate Frank Ching himself. 
And so, we are left wanting to know more about him; what he got out of this unusual project, how it made him see his homeland and its history differently, and how he now feels about these fathomless layers of family records he has unearthed. 
As it is, we are left with tantalizingly little by way of his own sensibility and thoughts.
But never mind. 
''Ancestors'' is a tour de force in its own right. 
It not only leaves one with a new appreciation of Chinese history, but reminds one that while China may have been one of the most revolutionary societies in the 20th century, it has in many ways been one of the least rebellious. 
Deeply steeped in its own history and conservatism, even Mao's monumental paroxysm of militant socialism was finally unable to detach the vast nation from its past. 
While Mao still lived and his socialist ideology was still being blared from every media outlet in China, Chinese and foreigners alike most often drew attention to the ways in which the society had changed. 
But now that the Great Helmsman has gone, and the process of de-Maoification has begun, what books like ''Ancestors'' bring out in bold relief is the continuity that still surges on through Chinese history like a powerful if sometimes unseen subterranean current.
 
NEW RELATIVES AND OLD
HONG KONG
When Frank Ching was researching his family's history for ''Ancestors,'' he was so immersed in his work that he dreamed vividly about relatives he had never known or met. 
''In one very clear dream, I was asking my father, whom I never really knew, to tell me about my grandfather, who died 30 years before I was born,'' Mr. Ching said in a recent interview. 
''It was very intense.''
After beginning his research, Mr. Ching realized that ''trying to discover my family origins was a very Chinese characteristic.''
And he found that he shared with his father an interest in politics combined with a resolve not to become a politician.
Even while he was working on ''Ancestors,'' Mr. Ching never quite put away the present for the past. 
When he finished his book, he began writing a political column for the leading English-language newspaper here. 
A member of a small band of progressive reformers in Hong Kong, Mr. Ching, who is married to a Chinese lawyer, believes that before Britain returns the colony to China in 1997, colonial officials should set up a strong, representative government because the territory might need the protection of democratic institutions even from the new, more liberal China.
Mr. Ching underscored his point with an anecdote of a friend from Beijing who, a few years ago, came to Hong Kong on business. 
''On the phone he talked about how things had changed in China and he said he was eager to see me because we could now speak openly and freely,'' Mr. Ching recalled. 
Then he threw back his head and laughed: ''I met my friend later and he told me he had to say all those things because there was someone in the room with him.''
 
BARBARA BASLER
