
A year ago Feng Lanxiu seemed a discouraging prospect for marriage. 
She was totally deaf and unable to speak even in sign language, and she was still being cared for by her parents.
Now Miss Feng, who is 34 years old, has a doting husband who kids her gently about not yet producing their first child. 
Her husband, Liu Jinli, 32, also cannot hear or speak. 
He met Miss Feng and married her last July through an unusual matchmaking service.
Profile of matchmaking of handicapped people in China
In this Manchurian city, an agency run by amateur marriage brokers tries to find spouses for physically handicapped people who in traditional Chinese society were long considered unmarriageable.
Hong Zhiguo, director of the city's Society for the Disabled, said regular employment had been found for 92 percent of Harbin's 6,000 handicapped adults. 
Their disabilities have been turned to advantage sometimes. 
Many of those who are deaf work in a local truck assembly plant where the noise does not disturb them.
 
46 Have Registered
This reduces the burden on their families, Mr. Hong said, but does not guarantee the disabled an independent life. 
So early last year his society set up its marriage service.
About 100 people have visited the bureau so far and 46 have registered. 
Two couples got married last July, and a third couple is preparing for marriage. 
Three other couples are courting and expect to wed, Mr. Hong said, ''so basically we have a success rate of 25 percent.''
The introductions are arranged by Li Shuqing, a staff member, every Monday and Wednesday morning in her small office, which is over a bottlecap factory. 
''The job of matchmaking is new to us; we have no experience at all,'' Miss Li acknowledged.
With the decline of traditional family-arranged marriages, Chinese cities have enjoyed a boom in matchmaking centers. 
But Miss Li said her responsibilities went well beyond the simpler task of bringing ordinary people together.
 
'This Job Is Delicate'
''Because marriage is a major event in the life of young people, it is concerned with their happiness or bitterness,'' she said. 
''So I know that this job is delicate. 
They are disabled physically but not mentally, and they have this desire for marriage and happiness.''
Miss Li said her handicapped clients made good marriage partners because ''they may be more considerate and careful than normal people.''
But because they are self-conscious about asking for a spouse, the first tense visit to the matchmaking office often includes anxious relatives and even translators for sign language.
''They fear that it will be difficult to find a partner or that they won't find someone, so they come together with their parents,'' Miss Li said. 
''We tell them that is it normal and natural for young people to marry and there should be no problems.''
''They are very shy at the first meeting,'' she said. 
''They don't talk much. 
They may arrange the next meeting by themselves, at a park or movie theater, and then report back to us.''
 
Handicaps Are Also Paired
In addition to trying to match hobbies, interests and family backgrounds, Miss Li said she also usually paired physical handicaps, reasoning that those sharing the same problems would be more sympathetic to a partner's needs.
But sometimes weeks of effort by Miss Li end in failure. 
She recalled introducing a 25-year-old man, ''crippled in both arms but good-looking,'' to a 25-year-old woman who could not walk and got about with a hand-cranked tricycle. 
Both were working hard to become foreign language translators, he in Japanese and she in English, so Miss Li decided that ''in my opinion, they were a very good match.''
But she could not negotiate the stairs to his second-floor apartment, and she worried that he would not be able to carry a child. 
''So they didn't make it,'' Miss Li said with a sigh.
On another occasion Miss Li introduced two deaf people who were each married before and had a child. 
''At their first meeting they got along very well, but then it broke down,'' Miss Li said. 
The two people worried that if their children quarreled, they could not hear it and family harmony would be upset.
 
Problems After Marriage
''Sometimes we feel discouraged, but the difficulties of the disabled are bigger than ours,'' Miss Li said. 
''So we try to persuade ourselves to be patient and to keep working.''
While the office is also prepared to mediate problems that may develop after marriage, the couples so far seem to have made their own adjustment. 
Shao Kuihe, a husky 30-year-old, is proud of saving $750 in preparation for his marriage to Sheng Lijuan, who is 28. 
Neither can hear nor speak. 
Mr. Shao explained in sign language through an interpreter that he and Miss Sheng communicated by writing messages and watching the shape of each other's mouth.
Once a couple decides to marry, the office refers them to specialists at a Harbin medical college to determine whether they should have a child. 
Mr. Hong said heredity was not involved in the disabilities of the couples matched so far.
The matchmaking service is open to those who are blind as well as to those who are deaf and mute or handicapped in some other way. 
It has not turned down anyone for being too disabled.
''We do have some severe physical cases, but if the problem lies within the bounds of the marriage law, we will try our best to make it possible,'' Mr. Hong said. 
''For some people, we have to tell them in advance that their case will be difficult, so they must be patient.''
