
HONG KONG In Hong Kong, where making money is a national pastime, nothing is more applauded than a consummate deal, and no individual is more revered than the businessman who can make one. 
Most revered of all is Fung King Hey, an immigrant from China whose formal education stopped at about the eighth grade. 
Widely recognized as king of the deal makers, he has built a real estate, securities and banking empire larger than any other in Asia.
Mr. Fung and Merrill Lynch & Company are planning to sign a deal early next month which, although beneficial to both parties, has clear advantages for Mr. Fung's Sun Hung Kai Securities and Sun Hung Kai Bank. 
And it advances what some people believe is a rather eerie company motto: ''With our feet in Hong Kong, with our back against China, with our face towards the Asia-Pacific region, with our eyes open, we scan the world.''
Colleagues describe the financial wizard in terms that suggest science fiction rather than high finance. 
Physically, he could have been designed by a graphic artist: a pencil-thin body which seems to be powered by a dozen glasses of water a day, an angular head and spare features with hardly a wrinkle after 60 years.
Profile of Fung King Hey, Hong Kong entrepreneur, describes his new deal with Merrill Lynch & Company
Mr. Fung does not grant interviews, but his efforts to stay out of the limelight have been thwarted by his deals, which have brought much attention his way. 
Those deals are considered here to exemplify a business encounter of the most ingenious kind.
''He is an exceptional businessman,'' said Robert Fell, Hong Kong Commissioner for Securities. 
''He has a keen sense of timing and he is not afraid to take chances. 
He has made some mistakes, but he is very clever.''
The latest development, under which Merrill Lynch is acquiring 25 percent of Sun Hung Kai Securities and 15 percent of the Sun Hung Kai Bank, could make Mr. Fung the largest individual shareholder in Merrill Lynch & Company, parent of the United States' largest securities firm.
The arrangement, said William R. Arthur, chairman of Merrill Lynch International, ''will greatly strengthen our ability to serve individuals, corporations, institutions and governments throughout the Pacific region.''
But it is Mr. Fung who is being congratulated on this side of the world for pulling off a classy deal. 
He personally will make $60 million, and it gives him possibly the largest foothold of any Hong Kong businessman in the United States market. 
Through it, his companies are expected to gain considerable foreign expertise, security and clout.
The Merrill Lynch agreement, which has been valued at $81.5 million, calls for Merrill Lynch to buy 20 percent of the outstanding stock of Sun Hung Kai Securities directly from Mr. Fung. Sun Hung Kai Securities has assets of $478 million and reported 1981 aftertax profits of $32.6 million.
Merrill Lynch will also buy 17.3 million shares, or 10 percent, of the outstanding stock of Sun Hung Kai Bank directly from Mr. Fung. Formerly known as Sun Hung Kai Finance, the bank received its license only two months ago. 
The bank has assets of about $760 million and its aftertax profits were $12.5 million in 1981.
Mr. Fung will be paid in Merrill Lynch convertible debentures, which if exercised will give him 4 percent of Merrill Lynch. 
No decision has been made yet on whether or when Mr. Fung might convert his debentures.
In the same deal, Compagnie Financiere de Paris et des Pays-Bas, known as Paribas, will sell some of its holdings in Sun Hung Kai Bank to Merrill Lynch, cutting its holdings in the bank to 25 percent from 30. 
By reducing Paribas' holdings, the bank can now offer higher deposit rates than allowed by top-tier banks, which include banks with foreign bank holdings of more than 25 percent. 
But Paribas will lift its holdings in the securities firm to 10 percent from five and with Merrill Lynch, it plans a limited tender offer for another 10 percent of Sun Hung Kai Securities.
By bringing Merrill Lynch into the bank and the securities firm, Mr. Fung took care of his obligations to Paribas and his plans for expansion into the United States while realigning operations and eliminating the need for numerous foreign partnerships.
''Even before Banque de Paris et des Pays-Bas became a minority shareholder in 1978, Sun Hung Kai had already mapped out a strategy for cooperation in Europe, America and Asia,'' said Mr. Fung through the buffer of executives who isolate him from the press. 
''Objectives were set for the desirable distribution of share holdings. 
After that, it was a question of waiting for the right opportunity. 
When this presented itself, Sun Hung Kai was able to reach agreement with Merrill Lynch almost immediately.''
Sun Hung Kai is expected to end a five-year-old joint venture with ACLI International, a commodities brokerage house owned by Donaldson Lufkin Jenrette, a rival of Merrill Lynch's, and end a nine-monthold arrangement with Bear, Stearns & Company to market United States securities.
ALTHOUGH there are no figures to substantiate the claims, Bear S terns and Sun Hung Kai, which controls 25 percent of the trading in H ong Kong stocks, were said to be the largest brokers of United S tates securities in Hong Kong last year.
Bear Stearns will stay in Hong Kong, but the partnership will be dissolved because ''obviously there would be a conflict,'' said Michael Tarnapol, general partner of Bear Stearns. 
In Hong Kong it is felt that Bear Stearns was just an interim step for Mr. Fung, who wanted an American link to market United States securities.
Mr. Fung has not just been working on strengthening ties to the United States market. 
Mr. Fung, who had a money-exchange business in Canton before the Communist takeover and began his China trading ventures in 1978 with his Sun Hung Kai China Ltd., is considered the chief China link in Hong Kong. 
There are no other businessmen quite as well connected with China trade as Mr. Fung or with a company big enough to handle the trade on a large scale.
In Hong Kong, it is felt that although Merrill Lynch was able to get a foothold in Hong Kong, it wanted China trade connections and broader access to Southeast Asian markets. 
Sun Hung Kai China has liaison offices in Peking and Shanghai, and it enters joint undertakings with American and European multinationals mostly in equipment and technology projects.
Mr. Fung, who lives in Hong Kong's exclusive Victoria Peak area, is quiet and unassuming, say people who know him. 
He loves European antiques and has an exceptional memory, but he is most excited by a deal, his associates relate. 
The deal, not the money, interests him. 
He is, some say, embarrassed by his wealth and prefers to ride in a Cadillac than in the Rolls Royce that serves as his company car.
Yet he is not a traditional Chinese businessman. 
His son is in training on the company's board, but Mr. Fung recruits managers from all over the world to run the company while he plans for the future and does his deals. 
He does not get involved much in day-to-day operations, but delegates authority and likes innovation. 
He is considered a gentleman and not vindictive, but most executives here are careful not to offend him - in word or deed - because his business empire is so vast that they will have to deal with him sometime or other.
In style, Merrill Lynch and Sun Hung Kai seem well suited. 
In Hong Kong, Sun Hung Kai was the first to market stocks to the man in the street. 
Stock markets had been exclusive clubs. 
No one offered shares to taxi drivers and hawkers until Sun Hung Kai set up retail brokering operations.
A trial-and-error businessman, Mr. Fung came to Hong Kong after the Communist takeover to take advantage of trade opportunities. 
In one of his earliest efforts, he tried to ship tropical fish to Taiwan. 
But en route he became so seasick that he was unable to keep the oxygen bubbling through the containers holding the fish. 
When he arrived, the fish were dead. 
Undaunted, he loaded the ship with bananas for the return trip, but bad weather delayed it and the bananas rotted.
During the Korean war, he made money selling supplies to Macao. 
When refugees began pouring into Hong Kong from China in the 1950's, Mr. Fung with two partners began a property concern, which prospered until 1967 when riots inspired by the Cultural Revolution soured Hong Kong business. 
He fled to Canada.
After returning to Hong Kong, in 1969 he began building the Sun Hung Kai empire with the formation of Sun Hung Kai Securities and Sun Hung Kai Finance. 
His retail-brokering operations were helped by a credit plan that allowed small investors to finance stock purchases through Sun Hung Kai Finance. 
Most of these investors do not speak English so the firm does stock research in Chinese. 
Because Mr. Fung also does not speak English, he has developed an entire department that translates, interprets and analyzes documents, publications and research in Chinese.
Sun Hung Kai Securities was the first non-banking financial Asian institution to enter the Eurobond market, and with Marsh & McLennan, it began an insurance brokering and consulting business. 
Last year it established a joint venture with West Germany's A.E.G.-Telefunken to set up a link between China, Germany and Hong Kong. 
''Mr. Fung makes wonderful deals,'' said David K.P. 
Li, manager of the Bank of East Asia. 
''He's a natural.''
