
In preparing for the visit of Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. to China next week, the Reagan Administration is moving toward decisions that will give more of a military cast to Chinese-American relations.
Specifically, according to American officials, there is strong pressure to remove China from the list of Communist countries subject to special export controls. 
This would allow for the transfer of military technology such as the engine and electrical equipment from the new F-16 fighter plane and for the sale of TOW antitank missiles.
 
Common Anti-Soviet Front Sought
A number of officials see this as a way of strengthening a common anti-Soviet front, but some also see the prospective offer as an effort to induce Peking to accept the sale of an advanced type of fighter plane to Taiwan.
Military aid for China considered as Haig prepares to visit Peking
It is the prospect of this sale to Taiwan, and the concern that ''Taiwan not be allowed to get in the way of the Chinese-American strategic consensus against Moscow,'' as one Chinese diplomat put it, that has activated Chinese lobbying.
Ambassador Chai Zemin held two dinners last week for Reagan aides and State Department officials. 
While circumspect in these talks, the Chinese said they were concerned that the pro-Taiwan lobby in the Republican Party would succeed in turning the clock back in the relationship between the United States and China and that selling the FX fighter to Taiwan would damage relations most of all.
The National Security Council met today in the White House to consider whether the Chinese were bluffing, what negative reactions might be expected from Moscow and Tokyo and what could be done for Taiwan to keep the Republican right wing happy. 
The council also intended to work out the objectives of the Haig mission.
Officials said earlier that no specific decisions on sales of military equipment would be made, but that there was a consensus to transfer more arms and technology to both China and Taiwan. 
The major decision on China is expected to come in proposed visits by Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger to China or by Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang to the United States.
In interviews, American officials have discussed these elements:
- Government experts are still reacting to a remark by a visiting Chinese military delegation last year that China wants the same kind of security relationship with the United States that Egypt has. 
In the absence of a more specific Chinese explanation, the Americans have taken this to mean the desire for military credits and the F-16 plane. 
The Chinese have long held the public position that they do not want an explicit security relationship with any country.
- Pentagon officers, reversing their judgment, have concluded that Taiwan does not need the advanced FX fighter, which is still on the drawing boards. 
The officers have come around to the view that China does not pose a major threat to Taiwan and that China is more important to the United States than Taiwan. 
But the officers do not want to make this judgment public for fear of a fight with conservatives.
- Chinese diplomats are stressing their policy of seeking an ''evolutionary'' reunification, which they say would leave Taiwan ''autonomous'' with its own government, armed forces and economy and possibly give its ruling Nationalist Party a role in Peking.
 
Key Issue Is Export Controls
The major specific issue for the White House meeting today was to be the largely symbolic, but important question of the export control category in which China should be placed.
It could continue to be treated in the same category as the Soviet Union, meaning restrictions on exports of materials with potential military applications. 
It could be put a special category with Yugoslavia, in which exemptions can be made for items of a military use. 
Or it could be placed in the general category with Britain and India, with virtually no restrictions.
In any event, when it comes to exports of potential military items, the Commerce Department makes the decision case by case, regardless of the category.
There is virtually total agreement in the Government that China should not be treated the same way as the Soviet Union. 
A typical statement, from the State Department, was: ''It is nonsense to treat China like an unfriendly state like Russia and be prepared, in principle, to sell anything to a state like India which buys arms from and has a friendship treaty with Moscow.''
 
Only Nonlethal Equipment Allowed
A related decision is what to do about China's standing on the munitions control list, or list of actual weapons, which is administered by the State Department. 
As of now, China is restricted to nonlethal equipment such as trucks and radios.
If the United States were to go ahead and actually sell arms and transfer the technology to build weapons, the most likely candidate seems to be the antitank missile. 
The Chinese prefer buying the technology and producing the weapons more cheaply themselves.
As an economy measure, for example, they are understood to seek only the engine and the electrical equipment of the F-16 so that thay can install these components in a plane they would design themselves. 
But in the case of the antitank missiles, they have told the United States that they need them now and that it would take too long to produce their own.
In the meantime, the Chinese have made clear that they want the Haig visit to be a success, and that they regard him as the one in the Administration who best understands their situation. 
Administration officials say the Chinese have been the ones pushing for the visit, urging that it take place soon, and saying that unless policies are satisfactorily clarified soon, there could be retrogression in the relationship.
