
There once was an extraordinary monkey who could be found only in the opera until he came to America and scampered about in a circus, which is something he would never do back where he came from.
If the story is to be told properly, the ''once was'' should be changed to the present tense, because this is happening now under a big tent at Lincoln Center where, through Jan. 
9, the Big Apple Circus is bringing a taste of the Far East to Manhattan's far West Side. 
It is a story about a Chinese clown in the guise of China's legendary Monkey King who is having the time of his life in a role he has studied for 30 years and will probably never repeat when he goes home.
The Monkey King has been a favorite of Chinese readers and operagoers for nearly 500 years. 
He is the hero, in his own mischievous way, of the entertaining novel ''A Record of a Journey to the West,'' based, in a manner barely more than coincidental, on an actual pilgrimage by a monk to India, home of Buddhism. 
In the novel, the adventurer is the Monkey King, a formidable and impish simian endowed with extraordinary powers. 
He can, in one leap, vault thousands of miles. 
He can chew up one of his own hairs and spit it out in the shape of an army of monkeys.
Buddha assigns him to bring back some scriptures from India, and the journey is marked by fabulous contretemps, all of them characterized by the Monkey King's irrepressible urge to be a prankster. 
His story has become a staple of Chinese opera, which incorporates acrobatics and clowning in a way that might bring confusion to devotees of the Metropolitan Opera.
The fact that the Monkey King is capering about under the Big Apple's big top, next to the Metropolitan Opera House, may also cause some consternation among devotees of the Beijing Opera. 
In China, the Monkey King has never appeared in a circus, only in opera. 
By further coincidence, almost fictional in itself, it was an appearance by the Monkey King in a program by the Beijing Opera at the Met more than half a dozen years ago that helped spark the world debut in the part at this year's Big Apple Circus by Yang Xiao Di, master acrobat and clown of the Nanjing Acrobatic Troupe.
This company of 25 performers is a main element in ''The Big Apple Circus Meets the Monkey King.''
Its members spin plates with a skill that puts to shame the most dexterous hash-slinger. 
They ride a bicycle en masse in numbers that make rush-hour subway cars seem empty. 
Mr. Yang has been made the centerpiece as a Monkey King who serves both as performer and as something of a master of ceremonies.
To the Chinese all this is more revolutionary than it may sound to a jaded American audience accustomed to having characters and performers appearing outside the roles they are associated with. 
In China, where tradition persists somehow through the most tumultuous of changes, one might easily believe that employment of a Monkey King in a circus is the sort of thing only an American would dream of.
''When I told the Chinese I wanted a troupe and a Monkey King, there was a sort of shock and surprise,'' said Paul Binder, founder and director of the Big Apple Circus. 
''Then Xu Shu Er, the Minister of Culture and an actress herself, said, 'I don't see why not.'
That informed everyone that that nut from New York was preparing something different.''
For Mr. Binder, this was a major step in his effort to stage an unusual show that would be particularly meaningful on both sides of the International Dateline. 
''I wanted to do a collaborative show, one in which we could question differences between two cultures,'' he said, explaining that he had wanted to do it ever since he saw a performance by an acrobatic troupe from Shenyang on television in Washington in 1962.
In the summer of 1986, he went to China as a guest of the Government and was shown nine troupes, eight of them first rate and the other presented to let him know that the balance sheet on acrobatics was not entirely one-sided.
''The Chinese had honed in on the Nanjing troupe, and I felt that this one had a youth and energy about it, a sense that the troupe really wanted to do this job,'' he recalled.
The Chinese selected Mr. Yang to be the Monkey King from members of the Nanjing company. 
''When we met him in Nanjing, we knew within 10 minutes that we spoke the same language of presentation and entertainment,'' Mr. Binder said.
Mr. Yang, who passed his 43d birthday in New York last month, was born in Shanghai. 
''When I was a child, I started learning acrobatics from a famous teacher, Pan Ying, who had many students,'' he said. 
''Pan Ying trained people for acrobatic troupes and for the opera. 
My father, who was a chef, wanted me to concentrate on the opera but I liked doing the funny parts.
''So, by accident, I studied the acrobatics. 
I performed on the teeterboard and the swing, learned martial arts, juggling tridents and learned walking on a rolling globe. 
My teacher often explained Beijing Opera to the students. 
This is the first time I play the Monkey King.''
Mr. Binder interpolated: ''They told me he had studied the part for 30 years. 
I was leery. 
I saw more acrobatics than I wanted in the role. 
I kept saying I was concerned about the delicacy of gesture. 
He didn't worry. 
He kept saying he understood the difference between Chinese and Western clowning. 
Don't worry.''
Mr. Binder did worry. 
''I wanted him more accessible to American audiences. 
In Beijing opera, the Monkey King is more soberly colored as befits a black sheep of a monkey. 
The character is more complex.''
At Lincoln Center Mr. Yang appears in a saffron suit, wearing a leopard apron, red kerchief, dark tie and yellow headgear. 
His Monkey King face is elaborately and loudly yellow with a heart-shaped motif in red that surrounds his eyes and converges below the mouth. 
His nimbleness comes in a mischievous package that seems even more charming because he is 5 feet 2 inches tall.
Mr. Yang explained why he is especially happy about his temporary reign on the Monkey King throne, which will end after the Big Apple Circus's tour of the Northeast planned for late this spring.
''When I return, I will not keep the Monkey King role,'' he said. 
''I will return as a face in the crowd and there will be no problem,'' Mr. Yang said, adding, as though to be sure no one could construe modesty and dedication to ensemble work as prideless humility, ''Even before I did this, I have been quite well known in China. 
I am also a director of the troupe and I train newcomers. 
You might say that, even in China, I am a famous clown.''
