
To Carl Guardino, owner of the Sea King Sea Food Market here, the problem of East-West trade barriers is no longer simply the stuff of international summits.
Mr. Gzardino has taken a decidedly microeconomic approach to the issue: to sell seafood to his increasingly Oriental clientele, he has posted the Japanese names of all the fish he stocks.
''I can also say, 'Thank you very much' in Japanese and 'What else do you want?'
'' Mr. Guardino said.
To Sara Small's third-grade class, the Far East does not seem too exotic anymore. 
Among the 18 students in the class at the Greenvale Elementary School in Eastchester, two are from Korea, five from Japan, one from China and another from Thailand.
Although their numbers are small, Asians are the fastest-growing group in the suburbs of New York City, according to planning officials in Westchester, northern New Jersey and Long Island. 
In several counties, they are also the racial group with the highest average income and the highest average level of education.
Planning officials say the growing Asian population is concentrated in some of the most affluent communities in the suburbs, including Great Neck, L.I., Fort Lee, N.J., and Scarsdale in West-chester. 
These communities are also known for the quality of their schools, something that is a high priority among Asian residents.
''Most of my customers ask me first thing, 'How about the school?'
'' said Han Chung, a Korean-American real-estate agent who works in Scarsdale. 
''As far as Koreans are concerned, the first thing is schools.''
Sociologists say the influx of Asian-Americans into New York City's more affluent suburbs is, to a large extent, simply a result of increased immigration. 
They point out that between 1970 and 1980, Asian immigration to this country increased dramatically as a result of liberalized quotas. 
#10-Year Growth Rate: 200% While the Asian population in New York City roughly doubled during the 1970's, according to United States Census data, in the suburbs it tripled.
A recent report by the Westchester County Department of Planning shows that during the 1970's, the county's Asian population increased by 200 percent, to more than 15,000. 
A similar jump was recorded during the same decade in both Suffolk and Nassau Counties. 
No more recent data are available, but many local officials say the trend is continuing.
In Bergen County, where the Asian population more than tripled during the 1970's, planning officials say they expect the growth rate to remain high through the 1980's. 
''I think it may be even faster,'' said Jim Hulsizer, supervising planner for the Bergen County Planning Board.
Many of the Asians living in the suburbs are temporary residents, such as Japanese business executives and their families, who will return after a three- or four-year stint here.
In Hartsdale, where Japanese executives for many years have brought their families, there is now a Japanese hair salon complete with Japanese editions of Cosmopolitan magazine. 
The late-night commuter train to town ''we call 'the Orient Express,' because there are so many Japanese fathers on it,'' said Mikiko Taga, a Japanese journalist who lives in Scarsdale.
Much of the growth is also due to the increasing affluence of Asian-Americans who, in a pattern well established by other immigrant groups, seek to escape the crowded city. 
Most of the towns with large groups of Asians are residential communities where one-family homes are the rule, ''so yes, it is the fulfillment of the American dream,'' Mr. Hulsizer said.
Because the nation's immigration laws tend to favor well-educated and highly skilled immigrants, many recent arrivals find the path to affluence much shorter than it was for their predecessors.
''The Asians who are coming in tend to be more skilled than any group of immigrants we've ever seen,'' said Kevin McCarthy, an expert on immigration with the Rand Corporation.
 
Sushi at P.T.A. 
Meeting
''In two or three years, you will see many Koreans here,'' said Unsuk Hung, whose family recently opened a Korean grocery store in Scarsdale. 
Mrs. Hung said that she expected many Korean families to move from Flushing, Queens, where there is a large Korean community, to Westchester and other suburbs as soon as they could afford to. 
''They want a good school, that's the most important reason,'' she said.
In Eastchester, there is a Japanese analogue to the P.T.A. that meets to address the concerns of Japanese parents. 
''So many Japanese are not familiar with the language,'' said Nobuko Shida, who heads the group. 
''Always they are wondering how their children are doing.''
And at a recent P.T.A. meeting at the Greenvale Elementary School in Eastchester, Japanese parents provided salmon sushi and rice crackers instead of the usual coffee and doughnuts. 
After the predictable resolutions condemning poison ivy in the school playground, there was a demonstration of ikebana, the Japanese art of flower arranging.
Like other ethnic groups that have moved to the suburbs, Asians often live in enclaves where one nationality predominates. 
''Each town is getting a unique Asian group,'' Mr. Hulsizer said. 
''In Englewood Cliffs, it is Chinese; in Closter, Koreans are the largest group.''
 
Segregation in Housing
Some Asian-Americans speak against what they see as a tendency toward self-imposed segregation. 
George Shimamoto, honorary president of the Japanese American Association of New York and a resident of Fort Lee, N.J., said he regretted that many Japanese residents of the community, most of them stationed in this country temporarily, socialize only with one another.
''If they congregate among themselves, they do not face the need to learn English, to learn American customs,'' he said.
In general, though, Asian-Americans report that ill will and prejudice have played little role in suburban life. 
''I have lived in Tarrytown 14 years, no problems,'' said Alice Buck, who is Chinese-American. 
Mrs. Buck said if Chinese residents do ''feel their neighbors are against them, they just ignore them.''
