
The acting Chinese party leader, Zhao Ziyang, said today China must intensify the restructuring of its economy along Western lines if it is to escape poverty.
Mr. Zhao, who is also Prime Minister, speaking at the opening session of the Communist Party's 13th congress, lashed out at ''major defects'' in the party leadership. 
He also declared that Government offices needed to be completely overhauled and called for the creation of a civil service system.
''We must be soberly aware that we still face a great many problems and difficulties, many more than we anticipated,'' Mr. Zhao told the 1,936-member congress. 
''There are not a few failings in our work of leadership.''
Mr. Zhao's speech marked the first party congress China has held in five years. 
Leaders who have gathered from around the country will spend the next week discussing and approving plans for the Government and the economy, which has already undergone the biggest changes in any Communist nation.
Before adjourning, the congress will also elect a new Central Committee, which in turn will name members of the new Politburo that will rule China.
It was the first time that the party, which was founded in secrecy in Shanghai in 1921, has opened its congress to foreign reporters. 
As copies of Mr. Zhao's address were handed out in six languages, spokesmen said China was permitting foreign reporters to attend as part of its efforts to become more open to the world.
The congress started this morning with Deng Xiaoping, China's senior leader, striding into the auditorium of the Great Hall of the People to applause from the delegates. 
He was followed onto the dais by the rest of the leadership, including the former party chief, Hu Yaobang, who was removed in disgrace in January after a tide of nationwide student protests. 
Mr. Deng, who looked tan and fit, was praised by Mr. Zhao for ''his courage in developing Marxist theory'' and ''his foresight and sagacity.''
For two and a half hours, Mr. Zhao read his 32,000-word report to the congress, sitting and pausing to sip tea from a white ceramic cup. 
As he spoke, some delegates appeared to nod off. 
Chen Yun, an 82-year-old member of the Politburo's standing committee, left the dais supported by two nurses in the middle of the speech.
While reaffirming the nation's adherence to socialism, Mr. Zhao said China would accelerate the introduction of many economic and financial methods integral to Western capitalist economies.
''Some of the things we have introduced in the process of reform such as expanded markets for means of production, funds, technology and labor service and the issuance of stocks and bonds are phenomena which are not peculiar to capitalism,'' he said. 
''Socialism can and should make use of them, trying in the meantime to minimize their negative effects in practice.''
The 68-year-old Prime Minister also called for a thorough reordering of China's pricing system, so that market forces would regulate supply and demand.
Whenever Mr. Zhao or his supporters discussed the need for pricing changes over the last year, party hard-liners blocked his proposals by labeling them capitalist. 
The opponents object to having market forces govern the decisions of industrial managers, a traditional role of state planners. 
Today, Mr. Zhao appeared to have imposed his position on the party.
''We should gradually establish a system under which the state sets the prices of a few vital commodities and labor services while leaving the rest to be regulated by the market,'' he said.
While the state should have a role in industrial policy, he said, other mechanisms besides free prices, like taxes, bank credit and other new financing arrangments, would also influence industrialization.
 
To Maintain Private Sector
He acknowledged that China's small private sector would continue to play a role in development.
A growing class of private entrepreneurs has emerged in both urban and rural areas. 
Orthodox Marxists in the leadership have voiced opposition to the growth of individual private enterprise because of its unabashed capitalist nature.
''Practice has proved that a certain degree of development of the private sector promotes production, stimulates the market, provides employment opportunities and helps in many ways to meet people's needs,'' Mr. Zhao told his fellow Communists. 
''It is thus a necessary and useful supplement to the public sector.''
Mr. Zhao spoke repeatedly and with unusual bluntness of problems of leadership, corruption in the party and a bureacratic style in Government.
''There are major defects in our system of leadership, in the organizational structure and style of work,'' he said. 
He cited as problems the overconcentration of power, excessive bureaucracy and lingering ''feudal influences.''
He described in broad terms how the Communist Party should remove itself from the administration of Government, industry and public life.
Resistance to economic restructuring has been most pronounced among the party organizations that oversee many industries and rural areas. 
By calling for the reduction of the party's influence in day-to-day management, Mr. Zhao appeared to be devising a way to overcome the resistance.
He proposed establishing a civil service system based on examinations, which he said would help make the Government less subject to the caprice of party officials and more professional. 
He said a state administrative college would be established. 
Government posts are now filled by party committees, which select officials from lists they maintain.
Mr. Zhao concluded his address by attacking widespread imperiousness and corruption in the party, which he said meant that ''members of a party in power tend to become divorced from the masses.''
But, he said, the restructuring of the economy and China's opening to the outside world should not change just because of ''those few cases of corruption.''
