
A report published today by Tass, the Soviet press agency, said Mongolia had forcibly repatriated some Chinese residents to China.
The report, based on an account in a Mongolian newspaper, Hodolmor, denied a Chinese Foreign Ministry statement that Mongolia had begun a widespread policy of expelling Chinese.
Instead, the Tass account said, the expulsion was being used only against ''individual Chinese citizens who systematically and maliciously violated'' Mongolian law. 
At the same time, Tass repeated the Mongolian newspaper's charge that the overwhelming majority of Chinese in Mongolia ''shirk socially useful work,'' a characterization that was once common in statements about China but that has disappeared as Moscow has tried to improve relations with Peking.
MOSCOW, June 3 - A report published today by Tass, the Soviet press agency, said Mongolia had forcibly repatriated some Chinese residents to China.
Mongolia, a nation of barely 1.5 million people sandwiched between the Soviet Union and China, has had close ties with Moscow since its establishment as an independent nation in 1921 and is effectively dominated by Moscow. 
The approximately 8,000 Chinese in the capital, Ulan Bator, have more than once found themselves hostages to deteriorating relations between Moscow and Peking.
 
Move to Northern Farms
According to the Tass account, the Chinese, many of them vegetable growers and construction workers, and ''other foreigners permanently resident in Mongolia'' were included in a program to move people who do not have permanent jobs to agricultural projects in the north, where climatic conditions for farming were said to be favorable.
Tass said Western reports that Mongolia had tried to resettle Chinese forcibly in desert areas were ''slanderous fabrications,'' as were allegations that those who refused resettlement were being expelled.
The agency said, ''The question of Chinese citizens leaving Mongolia for their homeland is their personal matter.''
''The Mongolian authorities never prevented some or other persons from among the Chinese citizens resident in Mongolia from returning home,'' Tass said. 
''This is also the case nowadays. 
The Chinese citizens refusing to work in the People's Republic of Mongolia and expressing the wish to leave it are issued permits to leave solely on a voluntary basis.''
The Chinese Foreign Ministry account, corroborated in part by Western travelers returning from Ulan Bator, was that Mongolia has been expelling many Chinese in recent months and ignoring representations from Peking. 
One traveler said that Chinese refusing resettlement inside Mongolia have been told that they would all have to leave the country by August.
Western diplomats here said the Tass account underlined a hardening of Soviet attitudes that seems to have occurred since talks with Peking ended here in March.
 
----
 
China Protests to Mongolia
PEKING, June 3 (AP) - China called in the Mongolian Ambassador today and protested that his country had expelled 1,764 Chinese nationals, many of whom were stripped, subjected to humiliating searches and forced to flee with only their clothes.
The protest that was read to Ambassador Puntsagyn Shagdarsuren was later distributed to reporters and carried by the official New China News Agency.
The note said the expulsion of the old, the sick, pregnant women and babies, as well as employed men was continuing despite 14 Chinese protests since March.
China demanded that Mongolia stop the expulsions and intimidation and return the belongings of the evicted Chinese. 
A senior Chinese official said Chinese workers had been given 14 days to report to two desolate state farms on the Soviet border. 
When they refused to leave their jobs, he said, they were ''forced to sign a 'voluntary' pledge to leave the country.''
