
China's foremost movie studio director has publicly assailed a senior Communist official for interference in the work of the Xian Film Studio and the arts.
The director, Wu Tianming, who has become the patron of China's tiny young generation of innovative filmmakers, denounced Mao Shengxian, the head of the propaganda department of the party in Shaanxi province, as a bureaucrat driven to control the political content of China's best movies.
''He is a typical bureaucrat,'' Mr. Wu said in an interview here. 
''He doesn't understand films but he wants to control film making. 
He's a bureaucrat who is influenced by leftist thinking. 
He is a conservative and ossified thinker.''
It is virtually unheard of for a well-known Chinese artist or intellectual to criticize an official in the Communist party to a Western reporter. 
Last year, for instance, when several prominent intellectuals were expelled from the party for supposedly advocating the spread of Western values, none of them spoke out against the party officials who had had them removed.
 
Films Left in the Can
Over the last year, many of China's artists have expressed their despair over the policies of Communist Party officials toward the arts, which became more stringent after last winter's pro-democracy student protests. 
Painters have been deprived exhibition space, movies have been kept in their canisters and publishers have refused to print novels and works of poetry.
Mr. Wu's comments, the first by a prominent Chinese artist to attack a party official directly, appear to reflect a growing confidence among some artists that they have the prestige and support of at least some leaders in Beijing to speak out.
Named director of the Xian Film Studio in October 1983, Mr. Wu in October won the grand prize at the second Tokyo International Film Festival for his film ''The Old Well.''
As studio head, he has shepherded virtually every politically controversial and avant garde Chinese film into production in the last four years and has supported and protected young directors who have sought to go beyond the bounds of conventional propagandistic movie making.
But last winter, after Liu Binyan, a nationally known investigative reporter for People's Daily, was expelled from the party, Mr. Wu said his troubles with the propaganda bureau of the Shaanxi province Communist Party began.
''After Liu Binyan was driven out of the party, some leaders of the provincial party committee wanted to lump me together with Liu Binyan,'' Mr. Wu said. 
''For a long time I have had contradictions with the propaganda department of the provincial party. 
They were unhappy because I didn't do what they said. 
Mao Shengxian, who is the head of the propaganda department, said I was a representative of bourgeois liberalization,'' a phrase used by hardline Marxists to attack those whom they saw as deviating from the tenets of orthodox Communism.
''But I opposed him,'' Mr. Wu continued. 
''He actually has no qualifications to be a leader in the arts.''
 
Almost Complete Control
The provincial propaganda bureaus are charged with overseeing cultural and publishing activities in their respective provinces in addition to their activities in publicizing decisions made by the central leadership. 
As part of their work, officials, or as they are called here, cadres, are sent to fill posts in universities, news organizations, film studios and official art groups where they often exercise almost complete control over the substance of these groups' work.
Mr. Wu said the Shaanxi propaganda bureau, at Mr. Mao's direction, had sent three groups of officials to review the work of the studio. 
The first of the investigation teams, Mr. Wu said, appeared last winter, stayed for one month and issued a report stating that Mr. Wu was ''without selfishness.''
Mr. Wu said: ''He didn't believe that report, so he sent a second group of eight people for another investigation. 
Originally they said they wanted to discover my crimes. 
The first crime was that I was against the leadership of the party in literature and art. 
The second crime was that I took bribes and used public money for my own purposes.''
''The result of this investigation was, as they put it, Comrade Wu Tianming was a good comrade, he just has some arrogance,'' said Mr. Wu.
 
'To Check on Our Finances'
''In July, he sent another group of people to check on our finances,'' he said. 
''They still haven't finished. 
It seems if they can't find anything they never finish their investigations.''
Mr. Wu said he remained uncowed by the actions of Mr. Mao and other party officials, but that the constant investigations had demoralized the people in the studio. 
''Because of the persecution by Mao Shengxian, he has sabatoged the enthusiasm of the studio and has set back reforms in it.''
The use of the word ''reform,'' a broad term referring to the modernization efforts pushed by the country's senior leader, Deng Xiaoping, and the party leader, Zhao Ziyang, is often used by Chinese managers and intellectuals to describe the process of draining away purely political criteria in decision making.
''The high officials of the party Central Committee and the average people want reform,'' said Mr. Wu. ''Some mid-level leaders are obstacles to reform. 
Mao Shengxian is one of these people.''
Mr. Wu said he was not intimidated by Mr. Mao's investigation teams or by fear of losing his job as director of the film studio.
''I told him, if I lose my position as studio head, I can be a director,'' Mr. Wu said. 
''If you lose your job as chief of the propaganda department, what can you do?''
