
Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of Britain named a ship for a Hong Kong millionaire in a Chinese shipyard today and described it as a symbol of the close relationship between China, Britain and Hong Kong.
Mrs. Thatcher had flown to Shanghai from Peking where she had talks with leaders there on the future of Hong Kong, the British colony of five million people over which Peking claims sovereignty.
On arrival in Shanghai, China's biggest city, Mrs. Thatcher had lunch with Sir Y.K. 
Pao, head of Hong Kong's worldwide shipping group.
SHANGHAI, Sept. 
25 (Reuters) -Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of Britain named a ship for a Hong Kong millionaire in a Chinese shipyard today and described it as a symbol of the close relationship between China, Britain and Hong Kong.
She then went to the Jiangnan shipyard and performed the naming ceremony for his 27,000-ton freighter, World Goodwill. 
She told Shanghai's Mayor, Wang Daohan, ''The ship is a symbol of the close relationship between China, Britain and Hong Kong. 
''What could be more fitting than a Hong Kong ship launched by a British Prime Minister in China's most famous port.''
 
Age-Old British Tradition
Mrs. Thatcher told Chinese guests she would like to use the age-old British formula for launching ships. 
''I name this ship World Goodwill,'' she said. 
''May God bless her and all who sail in her.''
Her comments were translated and the crowd, including several Communist officials, broke into applause. 
Mrs. Thatcher later attended a banquet given by Mayor Wang. 
She leaves Sunday for Canton, where she will make a brief stopover to meet the governor of Guangdong Province, Liu Tianfu, before going on to Hong Kong.
Mrs. Thatcher's visit to Shanghai comes a few weeks after the British Government announced it would reopen a consulate in the city. 
The last British mission in Shanghai was forced to close in 1966 at the start of Mao Zedong's Cultural Revolution because the staff were harassed by Red Guards.
There had been no British consul general in Shanghai since the Communist victory over Nationalist forces in China in 1949.
 
Seeking Expansion of Trade
The Prime Minister said in a speech Friday night that the decision to reopen the consulate, taken after Mayor Wang visited London last year, was a sign of the growing substance of British-Chinese relations.
''It will enable us to make further efforts to promote Sino-British trade and other forms of economic cooperation, particularly in Shanghai and central China,'' she said.
Mrs. Thatcher said at a news conference Friday night after three days of talks in Peking that consultations to resolve the Hong Kong question would start immediately.
A joint statement stressed that the aim of both sides was to maintain the stabilityI and prosperity of the colony. 
Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang said before discussing the issue with Mrs. Thatcher Thursday that China intended to recover sovereignty over Hong Kong.
But Peking has so far given no public indication of what this would mean in practice and whether it would exclude future British involvement in the administration of Hong Kong.
It has also not said when it would recover sovereignty. 
More than four-fifths of the territory is ruled by Britain under a 99-year lease that expires in 1997, and Hong Kong's people are concerned about what China will do then.
