
When the propaganda loudspeakers atop the concrete bunkers of the Nationalist-held island of Quemoy blast away at the Chinese mainland barely a mile distant, the anti-Communist broadsides are mercifully interspersed with the songs of Teresa Teng.
Taipei's most effective psychological weapon against the Communist Government in Peking is not Taiwan's higher living standards or its less stringent society, but Miss Teng, its pop singing star, who is known on the mainland by her Chinese name of Deng Lijun.
The Nationalist authorities like to tuck in a recording of Miss Teng when they loft a balloon laden with propaganda and small gifts across the Strait of Formosa. 
But thousands of Miss Teng's tape cassettes have been smuggled into China for profit, whether overland from Thailand and Burma into Yunnan Province or by fishing boat into Guangdong and Fujian Provinces, along with contraband wristwatches and cassette recorders.
One of Taiwan's most effective psychological weapons against mainland China is Teresa Teng, Taiwanese pop singer who sings of unrequited love; Nationalist authorities include one of her recordings in balloons laden with propaganda and gifts and sent across Strait of Formosa; thousands of her recordings are smuggled into China for profit; photo (M)A Target of Peking Campaign
Miss Teng's songs have grown so popular with young Chinese that she was an unspoken target of China's recent campaign against ''spiritual pollution,'' as the Communist ideologists have labeled unwelcome Western influences.
Young workers at one Peking factory were recently instructed to surrender their Deng Lijun tapes, though the word was that not many did so. 
And a restaurant in Peking once serenaded diners with Miss Teng's records until the authorities found out and stopped it.
Her music sounds tame by Western standards. 
She lately lent her clear soprano to a discoth eque tune from the American motion picture ''Flashdance,'' but Miss Teng is known foremost for sentimental ballads that dwell on unrequited and unconsummated love.
With titles like ''Forget Him'' and ''Goodbye, My Lover,'' her songs do not encourage the building of socialism, which helps explain why they are banned on the mainland. 
A pamphlet printed in Peking on the evils of decadent Western music admitted that it was really songs from Taiwan and Hong Kong that created ''a social problem of common concern'' among Chinese youth.
 
She Says She Is Puzzled
Miss Teng is a kind of Debbie Boone of Chinese pop music, not only on the mainland but also in Hong Kong and elsewhere in Southeast Asia. 
In an interview before one of her sold-out performances in Taipei, Miss Teng professed puzzlement that her music was objectionable to Peking.
''I don't know why,'' she said in graceful English learned when she studied in Los Angeles for a couple of years. 
''I think it is rather disappointing, rather sad. 
I don't understand it.
''They're basically love songs,'' she said. 
''In my music, I express a lot of my feeling, my emotion. 
Everything I have, I sing out. 
That's probably why they don't like it.''
Miss Teng said she had received fan mail addressed to ''The Famous Deng Lijun'' from the mainland, so she knew she was popular there. 
''They say they love my singing and they admire my songs,'' she said. 
''The letters come from people my age, from the early 20's to the 40's.''
The Chinese Government should feel fortunate that Miss Teng is not circulating around the mainland on video cassettes. 
She looks barely half her 30 years, with wide eyes and glossy black hair. 
When she struts about the stage with a quartet of male dancers in attendance, her tight-fitting Chinese ''qipao,'' slit to the hip, flares open to reveal slender legs.
 
Girl-Next-Door Innocence
Yet Miss Teng projects a girl-next- door innocence. 
''The way you think a Chinese girl should look like, that's the way Teresa looks,'' said Jim Teng, one of her four brothers. 
When Miss Teng was interviewed, her mother watched quietly from the corner of the dressing room, and one of her small nieces romped on the floor.
Miss Teng was born in central Taiwan in 1953, the daughter of an army officer who joined the Nationalist retreat from the mainland when the Communists took over. 
The family was from suburban Peking, and she was raised on the folksongs sung by her mother.
''When I was very young, I was very influenced by many Chinese ethnic songs and music,'' said Miss Teng, who prefaces some of her songs by reciting snatches of classical poetry. 
''I appreciate Chinese music more than Western music.''
By the time she was 15, she cut her first record and was singing so often that she had to drop out of high school. 
''The school was quite conservative,'' she said. 
''They wouldn't allow me to go out as a professional singer.''
In the last 15 years, Miss Teng has recorded 100 albums and sold over 7 million copies, according to Leo Y. Chu, a public relations executive for Polygram records in Taipei who used to be her producer.
''We gather some songs from Chinese composers, rewrite them and change the rhythm,'' Mr. Chu said. 
''They are all written in Taiwan, but we record her songs in Hong Kong and Singapore.''
 
She Has Toured Widely
Miss Teng recently toured Singapore, Malaysia and Thailand, all of which have large numbers of overseas Chinese. 
She has also sung for ethnic Chinese audiences in New York, San Francisco and Los Angeles. 
For the last Chinese Lunar New Year, she performed at Caesar's Palace in Las Vegas, her brother Jim said.
When performing, Miss Teng often kisses grandmothers and shakes hands with children as she works her audience.
She confessed to having a male friend but would not divulge any details. 
''I will make some time this year to get to know this person,'' she said, ''because I am now 30.''
She agreed to let the Taiwan authorities broadcast her latest Taipei concert, complete with political commercials, to her fans on the mainland. 
''Last time, my show was broadcast from Las Vegas,'' she said, ''but this time, I can really tell them how I feel. 
It's a free country here, and I want them to know it.''
