
A Chinese military vessel whose crew apparently mutinied entered South Korean waters today and was taken into port, according to the American Embassy in Seoul.
No hostilities were reported between the Chinese ship and South Korean vessels. 
Six of the 18 Chinese crew members were killed in the mutiny and three were wounded, according to Harry Dunlop, political counselor of the American Embassy.
American Embassy in Seoul reports Chinese military vessel whose crew apparently mutinied entered South Korean waters and was taken into port; no hostilities are reported between Chinese ship and South Korean vessel; six of 18 Chinese crew members are reportedly killed in mutiny and three are wounded (S)
Mr. Dunlop said he did not know whether any crew members had requested political asylum in South Korea.
A Government source in Seoul said that the vessel had been towed into the port of Kunsan and that the crew had sought asylum, Reuters reported from Seoul.
In Peking, a Foreign Ministry spokesman said a torpedo boat engaged in military exercises was ''lost,'' and ''we are looking for it.''
Mr. Dunlop said that the Chinese crew and vessel were in the custody of South Korean authorities and that Seoul and Peking were negotiating.
He said a Chinese Government official in Hong Kong notified the South Korean Consul General there Friday that a Chinese miltiary vessel was in distress off the southwestern coast of South Korea and asked for South Korean assistance.
The South Korean Navy sent out a rescue party Friday, he said. 
Shortly after midnight, it found the Chinese vessel drifting in South Korean waters 40 miles off the port of Kunsan, which is about 120 miles south of Seoul on the Yellow Sea.
Mr. Dunlop said the vessel was ''clearly in distress,'' with its engine out of order. 
It had apparently been helped earlier by a South Korean fishing boat, he said, and the fishing boat may have towed it into South Korean waters.
Near the torpedo boat, the South Korean Navy sighted at first one and then a total of three other Chinese military vessels that apparently entered South Korean waters in pursuit of the torpedo boat, he said.
Mr. Dunlop said that crew members of the Chinese boat had apparently mutinied and that in the fighting six crewmen were killed and three were wounded.
A crewman with a gun at first refused to allow anyone to board the torpedo boat. 
Mr. Dunlop said he was apparently concerned about the other Chinese military vessels. 
''It was dark, there was a lot of confusion,'' Mr. Dunlop said.
''At least one crewman on the boat armed did not want anyone on board,'' Mr. Dunlop said. 
''It was a standoff situation, the boat was dead in the water, there were no people on it, there was an armed crewman.''
He said the other Chinese vessels made no hostile motions during this time.
He said the South Koreans then called the American Embassy in Seoul and asked it to convey a message to the Chinese Government, with which South Korea does not have diplomatic relations.
The message said South Korea intended to deal with the incident in accordance with international law and requested the Chinese Government to order the withdrawal of the three other Chinese vessels from South Korean waters.
Late this morning, the Chinese responded that they would withdraw the three military vessels and asked for the return of the torpedo boat, Mr. Dunlop said. 
They also asked to deal directly with the South Korean Government.
The South Korean Navy then boarded the torpedo boat, and a helicopter carried the remaining crew members ashore.
''There is not much of a precedent for this,'' Mr. Dunlap said. 
''There are not too many times this has happened - murder and mutiny aboard a vessel in international waters.''
