
Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone, yielding to sharp Chinese criticism, apparently intends to cancel a planned visit next week to a Shinto shrine dedicated to Japan's war dead.
Mr. Nakasone touched off unexpectedly harsh denunciations in Peking when he made an official visit to the Yasukuni Shrine on Aug. 
15, the anniversary of Japan's surrender in World War II.
China's official press agency said a week later that the Prime Minister's action had ''pandered'' to Japanese who wanted to deny their country's guilt for World War II. 
Last month, students marched through Tian An Men Sqare in Peking, chanting ''Down with Nakasone'' and other anti-Japanese slogans in one of the biggest protest demonstrations there in years.
Japanese newspapers reported today that Mr. Nakasone hoped to avoid prolonging the controversy by calling off another visit to Yasukuni scheduled during a fall festival at the shrine next week. 
His intention was said to have been relayed Tuesday night to members of the ruling Liberal Democratic Party by Takao Fujinami, the chief Cabinet secretary and main Government spokesman.
 
Shadow of the War
The controversy, although rooted wholly in symbolism, demonstrates the extent to which Japan's wartime aggression shadows its latter-day foreign relations. 
Other Asian countries continue to look warily for possible signs of revived Japanese militarism, and Tokyo reacts with open edginess every time the issue arises.
Officials here are especially uneasy when the complaints come from China, to which Japan owes much of its cultural heritage.
The Yasukuni Shrine, near the Imperial Palace grounds, honors the spirits of nearly 2.5 million Japanese soldiers who gave their lives for their country in the last century. 
Among those whose souls rest there, however, are convicted war criminals like Japan's Prime Minister in the early 1940's, Hideki Tojo.
In current political debate, officials who go to Yasukuni tend to find themselves accused as militarists by anti-Government critics.
For years, governing-party politicians sought to deflect such charges by insisting that their visits were made as private citizens. 
But Mr. Nakasone, an ardent nationalist, added considerable fuel to the dispute on the Aug. 
15 anniversary by becoming the first postwar Prime Minister to state that he had gone in his official capacity.
 
'Thought It Only Natural'
''I thought it only natural to pay homage to those who fought for their country and fell in the war,'' he said early this week in an appearance before Tokyo-based foreign journalists.
Mr. Nakasone, 67 years old, was in the Japanese Navy in World War II. 
He saw little combat, serving mostly as a payroll officer, but his experiences and Japan's crushing defeat helped shape many of his nationalistic views.
On the visit to the shrine, however, he apparently underestimated the depth of feeling in China, which puts its war dead at more than 20 million. 
The sensitivity resembled that shown three years ago when China denounced what it said were distortions in Japanese textbook accounts of Japan's wartime occupation of Manchuria.
For Mr. Nakasone, the criticism may have been especially troubling because he prides himself on having presided during a period of uncommonly cordial relations between the two countries.
This warmth has recently been undermined, however, by a growing trade imbalance heavily in Japan's favor. 
China's trade deficit with Japan was $1.2 billion in 1984, a figure that soared to $4 billion in just the first eight months of this year.
The students who demonstrated in Peking last month attacked not only Mr. Nakasone but also Japan's growing commercial presence, shouting, ''Down with the second occupation!''
The twin issues of trade and charges of a revival of militarism are likely to arise in talks that Japan's Foreign Minister, Shintaro Abe, will hold with China's leaders starting Thursday.
