
A New York City delegation signed a memorandum of understanding with Peking officials Sunday designed to promote greater commercial, educational and cultural ties between the two cities.
''They have a sense of the city and its vibrancy and strength and - as they said - its prosperity,'' said New York Deputy Mayor Kenneth Lipper, who headed the 19-member delegation. 
''They recognize there are good feelings among New Yorkers toward Chinese, and they reciprocated on the same basis while we were here.''
The visit followed a trip to New York by Mayor Chen Xitong of Peking last November.
New York City delegation led by Deputy Mayor Kenneth Lipper signs memo of understanding with Peking officials on promoting commercial, educational and cultural cooperation; some major planned ventures, involving several American banks and companies, listed (M)
The New York delegation also met with the Foreign Minister, Wu Xueqian; the Minister of Communications, Qian Yongchang, and senior officials of the Bank of China, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Relations, and the State Planning Commission.
 
Concrete Actions Planned
The six days of talks produced these developments:
- A joint executive liaison committee will be formed to promote business cooperation.
- Mayor Chen Xitong asked Robert Rosenberg, president of Grenadier Realty, and Carolina Woo, a partner in the architectural firm of Skidmore, Owings & Merrill, to prepare a study by October on building an expanded version of Brooklyn's Starrett City housing complex in Zuojiazhuang, in Peking's outskirts. 
The Chinese project would have 30,000 apartments. 
Mr. Rosenberg, general manager of Starrett City, said the Chinese were willing to pay for technical help from the two companies if the project was accepted.
- Chemical Bank of New York proposed sponsoring seminars to introduce companies in the New York area to business and investment opportunities in China. 
Chemical Bank's president, Robert Lipp, also offered to take some Chinese bank employees for a year to teach them modern banking procedures.
- Officials of the Bank of China expressed interest in opening a branch in Manhattan's Chinatown to augment its office in the midtown area. 
Mr. Lipper proposed that the bank open an additional office in Queens.
- Ties will be developed between the Manhattan Center of Science and Mathematics at Benjamin Franklin High School in Manhattan and Peking's No. 8 Middle School. 
Mr. Lipper said he expected an exchange of up to 10 teachers and students, and he added that he was trying to arrange corporate sponsorship. 
Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang toured Benjamin Franklin last January; the Lipper delegation was welcomed at the No. 8 Middle School.
- The Chinese Overseas Shipping company, which runs China's international maritime shipping, told Mr. Lipper that it would open an East Coast branch office in New York. 
The China National Offshore Oil Corporation, which leases drilling rights to foreign oil companies, will also send representatives to New York in the fall to discuss opening an office there.
- The New York-Beijing Friendship City Committee plans to sponsor a three-week exhibit of Chinese photography and crafts in October at the City Gallery in Columbus Circle.
 
U.S. Approval Not Needed
Larry Simonberg, a spokesman for Mayor Koch, said there was no need for any Federal Government sanction for the agreement, which was signed under the aegis of the New YorkPeking sister city program. 
He said it was comparable to a commercial arrangement between private corporations or individuals in two countries with ''trade ties and good relations.''
Richard Weeks, a spokesman for the State Department's division of consular affairs, agreed.
Since China opened trade with the West, its provinces and cities have formed ties with 12 American states and 12 cities. 
Peking established a sister relationship with New York in 1980 and formed the same ties in May with Washington, D.C.
But Jerome Cohen, a specialist in Chinese law who is chairman of the New York-Beijing Friendship City Committee, said the current delegation had penetrated the veneer of polite friendships.
The New Yorkers spent today in the industrial city of Tianjin, southeast of Peking. 
They leave Peking for Shanghai on Tuesday. 
All three cities operate as independent municipalities on a equal footing with China's 26 other provinces and regions.
The visitors paid their air fare from New York, but their expenses in China are being met by their hosts.
