
WHEN a baseball game is rained out, there is always a chance that it will be made up as a double-header, thus giving fans double their money's worth. 
Not so with an air show. 
Officers at McGuire Air Force Base in Wrightstown say they would rather break tradition than have aviation devotees disappointed again. 
The base's traditional air show and open-house program on Memorial Day have been rained out a number of times, and so in the hopes of guaranteeing sunny skies, this year's events have been scheduled for Sunday, Aug. 
18.
''It was a big choice to make, but one that had to be made,'' said Lieut. 
Col. Suzanne Phillips, the base's public-affairs director. 
''Overall, we think it's best for everybody concerned. 
Rain on Memorial Day just tends to dampen everybody's spirits - no pun intended, of course - and we don't want to press our luck with it happening again.''
Last year, base officials were expecting 500,000 people for what the Air Force calls its largest show in the Northeast. 
An early morning overcast developed into a downpour by early afternoon, canceling a majority of the day's activities for the 100,000 visitors who ignored the weather.
Officers at McGuire Air Force Base, Wrightstown, NJ, reschedule traditional air show and open house to August 18, instead of Memorial Day, in order to try to avoid rain out as has happened number of time on Memorial Day (S)
''As much as it is an annoyance for our guests, it can also be a bit dangerous to fly in that kind of weather,'' said Colonel Phillips, referring to the stunt flying traditionally performed by either the Thunderbirds or the Blue Angels, the Air Force and Navy precision-flying teams, respectively, and an exhibition by the Golden Knights, the Army's precision parachutists from Fort Bragg, N.C.
Also because of the weather last year, the Confederate Air Force, an association of Air Force veterans based in Holligen, Tex., that restores and flies vintage military aircraft, was unable to appear.
''The rescheduling gives us a chance to take part in Memorial Day services presented by our neighboring communities,'' Colonel Phillips said. 
''Our honor guard and marching band are going to get a good tour of the countryside this year.''
Flying got the Newark Boys Chorus there, song and good will are keeping them there and when they return to New Jersey from China on Friday, their experiences abroad are sure to be remembered for a long time.
However. a burglary in late March almost prevented the chorus from making the trip. 
Thieves broke into its school - it is next to Symphony Hall on Broad Street - and made off with nearly $12,000 worth of typewriters, computers and cameras, equipment that needed to be replaced for the school to continue operating. 
School administrators feared that the replacement money would have to be diverted from funds donated for the trip.
But, reports Joy Pierce, the school's director of development, and Larry R. Emery, its principal, the community came to the rescue.
''People were enraged when they heard of the burglary,'' said Miss Pierce. 
''Everyone had worked so hard for this goal, and then the unexpected happened. 
A couple of people donated typewriters, and A.T.& T. has promised to donate a number of computers. 
Everyone is pitching in to help.''
School administrators expect to have everything back to normal by July. 
Meantime, two juveniles from the area have confessed to the break-in.
The 19-year-old school - it has 55 students from Newark, East Orange and Irvington in grades 5 through 8 - sent 32 students, accopanied by parents and teachers, to China. 
(The trip was financed primarily through a $55,000 state grant.) ''Their Chinese lessons have helped a great deal,'' said Miss Pierce, referring not only to a crash language course but also a special screening of the 1937 film, ''The Good Earth,'' which was adapted from the Pearl Buck novel. 
''A few of the students sounded a bit tired on the phone the other day, but they're pleased and excited at the places they're visiting and the new friends that they're making. 
What they're seeing today is a far cry from the inner-city scenes that they're used to.''
In addition to giving tours in various cities in China, the chorus is scheduled to appear Thursday in Tokyo.
When the plight of hundreds of thousands of starving Africans became clear to New Jersey residents in recent weeks, many communities in the state's 21 counties began fund drives. 
The fund-raising has taken on many forms, and the goals are all the same: Cash buys sacks of wheat that can keep the inhabitaants of a drought-devastated village alive for a few more days.
Rock stars have recorded a song to raise such funds, and in the Passaic County community of Wayne, concerned residents are roller-skating to the music.
''The talk around here for weeks has been of Ethiopians who look more like skeletons than people,'' said Michael Picciallo of Hackensack, assistant manager of Skaters World on the Hamburg Turnpike. 
''You see pictures day after day of people with hopelessness in their eyes and hands begging for food, hands that seem to reach out of the TV set at you. 
We decided to stop talking about it and do something about it.''
And so from 7 to 10 P.M. on May 20, the $3 admission fee will be donated to the U.S.A. for Africa campaign. 
Funds raised through T-shirt sales also will be donated, Mr. Picciallo said, adding:
''All of us want to do our part, but with all of the problems going on over there, pople start thinking that what they can do is just a drop in the bucket. 
But if enough people put drops in that bucket, it gets full after a while, and you can feel proud to have been a part of it.''
Part of any reporter's job is to disseminate information through experience, a kind of learning process that increases with each new story. 
Craig Wirth of WOR-TV says that he recently learned a lesson at the Brendan Byrne Arena in East Rutherford - the hard way, that is.
The 32-year-old Mr. Wirth, an Emmy Award-winning reporter who lives in Ridgewood, was injured at the arena recently while filming a series on wrestling.
''I've wrestled with some stories in the past, but this one kind of got knocked out from under me,'' he said.
While interviewing members of the Fabulous Freebirds, a wrestling tag-team comprised of Michael Hayes, Terry Gordy and Buddy Roberts, Mr. Wirth said, Roberts offered to demonstrate a particular hold.
''I thought to myself, 'What the heck, it can't hurt,' '' recalled Mr. Wirth, who was then asked to lie down on a concrete floor. 
''Before I knew it, he [Roberts] had hooked his legs around mine and flopped me over onto my belly.''
.
Not only was his left leg ''wrenched in a direction that was never intended by nature,'' Mr. Wirth said, but he also left the arena in a wheelchair. 
Also, although he had not realized it, he had gone into shock.
The incident was taped by Mr. Wirth's camera crew, and a spokesman for WOR-TV said that the wrestling series would be shown this week, beginning tomorrow, during the 8 P.M. news broadcast.
Meantime, Mr. Wirth's physician maintains that he suffered torn cartilage around the kneecap, and has advised the reporter to use crutches.
Has the experience soured Mr. Wirth's concept of professional wrestling?
''I'm still a fan,'' he said. 
''But I'll tell you one thing: my wrestling days are over.''
