
Growing numbers of Vietnamese have been arriving in Hong Kong by boat in the past few months, crowding into refugee camps with thousands of other Vietnamese, most of whom have only a slim chance of finding new homes outside the chain-link fences of the bleak compounds.
So far this year, more than 1,500 Vietnamese refugees, most of them poor farmers and fishermen from north Vietnam, have landed in Hong Kong, four times the number of arrivals during the same period last year, according to Govennment figures.
Waves of refugees have been arriving in Thailand and Malaysia as well, and the Thai authorities have pushed some boats back out to sea.
Hong Kong has so far resisted such an extreme measure, but a recent newspaper survey revealed that 65 percent of those polled here want any new refugee boats turned away. 
And the Governor of this British colony, Sir David Wilson, said last week that Hong Kong is reconsidering its policy of allowing all boat people to land.
'Compassion Fatigue'
The Governor said resettlement countries are experiencing ''compassion fatigue,'' and are simply not prepared to accept all the boat people Hong Kong is sheltering.
Relief officials said people have been fleeing Vietnam in greater numbers this year because the country's economy is near collapse, and crop failures threaten famine in some areas.
The new swell of immigrants has left Hong Kong with a total of 10,400 Vietnamese refugees - a Vietnamese refugee population second only to that of Thailand, according to Nigel J. French, the Hong Kong Government official in charge of refugee policy.
Refugees sail north to Hong Kong from the northern Vietnamese port of Haiphong, a 500-mile journey through the South China Sea that takes about 15 days with good luck and fair weather. 
Refugees from the north, Mr. French said, are poor people with few skills, no foreign languages and no ties to countries outside Vietnam.
''More and more we have the men, women and children nobody else wants,'' Mr. French said.
 
Barracks-Like Buildings
A teacher at a closed camp on Hei Ling Chau, a tiny rocky island that was once the site of a leper colony, said there are children there who had never seen a dog or walked on grass.
Hei Ling Chau is about an hour's boat ride from central Hong Kong, and a recent visitor was asked to send picture postcards of the city because most of the refugees had only caught a glimpse of it as they landed.
The camp's barracks-like cinder-block buildings house 2,900 people in spaces meant for 2,400. 
Two meals a day and a snack are served and there is one toilet for every 90 people.
''We try to take the children on field trips, to see what real life looks like,'' said Nilda Bernardo, a teacher with World Relief, which runs programs in Hei Ling Chau.
''Sometimes we take them into a flat there so they can see what a kitchen and a living room and a bedroom look like,'' she said.
Christopher Bale, the director of the Oxfam relief agency in Hong Kong, said the three closed camps, surrounded by high steel fences and supervised by prison guards, are ''just barely adequate for short-term stays, but there are almost 5,000 people who have been living in these places for three years, and 3,000 who have been in them for more than five years.''
 
'No One Has Asked to See Us'
Bao Ntuyen, a 12-year-old from Haiphong, said he had been living in Hei Ling Chau for four years and no resettlement official had ever interviewed him or his uncle, a farmer who has no ties to anyone outside Vietnam.
''No one has asked to see us,'' the boy said, ''so we are learning English. 
We want to go to a free country, somewhere where they play football.''
Hong Kong has had a continuous flow of refugees since 1975, but the numbers had begun to drop, from a high of about 8,500 arrivals in 1981 to only 1,200 in 1985. 
But by 1986 the flow of refugees began to increase once more.
Hong Kong now plans to build a fourth closed camp to handle the increasing numbers of Vietnamese. 
In addition to the closed camps, Hong Kong has one ''open'' camp, where about 3,000 refugees who arrived before mid-1982 may come and go freely and hold jobs in the community.
 
Ethnic Chinese Resentment
Many Hong Kong residents, 98 percent of whom are ethnic Chinese, resent the fact that the Vietnamese are allowed to stay when immigrants from mainland China, even those with close relatives here, are treated as illegal aliens. 
An average of 40 a day are shipped back.
Only the United States, Britain, Canada, Australia and Hong Kong itself have active resettlement programs here, and all require that refugees have some link to their countries. 
The United States, which last year accepted only 340 refugees from Hong Kong, also requires refugees to prove they have a ''well-founded fear of persecution.''
Malaysia Sees Sharp Rise
   BANGKOK, Thailand, April 28 (Special To The New York Times - The number of Vietnamese arriving on Malaysian shores has risen sharply since Thailand began turning back refugee boats in January. 
The increase is prompting a review of Kuala Lumpur's asylum policies, officials said.
The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees office in the Malaysian capital list 2,921 Vietnamese arriving in Malaysia in the first three months of this year, more than half of them, 1,726, in March. 
April's totals are expected to be equally high or higher.
In 1987, 8,030 Vietnamese arrived in Malaysia, up from 7,400 in 1986.
