
OPERA STAR IN ENGLEWOOD
Montserrat Caballe, soprano and international opera superstar, will perform at the John Harms Center for the Arts in Englewood next Sunday afternoon.
The concert, which begins at 3, will include Rossini arias and works by the Spanish composers Obradors and Chapi. 
''Trois melodies hebraiques'' will honor the 50th anniversary of the death of Maurice Ravel.
Ms. Caballe, born in Barcelona, performed at Carnegie Hall for the first time on April 20, 1965, in a concert version of Donizetti's ''Lucrezia Borgia.''
She later made her debut at the Metropolitan Opera as Marguerite in Gounod's ''Faust.''
Tickets for the John Harms concert are $16.50, $19.50 and $22.50.
The center is at 30 North Van Brunt Street in downtown Englewood.
Information: (201) 567-5797.
 
ANYONE FOR CORN?
It's corn-harvest time at Fosterfields, the Morris County Park Commission's living historical farm. 
And next Saturday, visitors not only will be able to pick and husk corn themselves, but also will be able to watch a master corn sheller in action.
In addiiton, the fodder cutter will be busy chopping the stalks for animal feed, and one can try a hand at corn cracking, as in ''Jimmy Crack Corn and I Don't Care.''
The free three-hour event starts at 1 P.M.
Fosterfields is on Kahdena Road in Morris Township, just a little over a mile west of the Morristown Green.
Information: (201) 644-0342.
 
THE CHINESE CONNECTION
The Garden State Orchestra opens its chamber-orchesta series today with a concert at Kean College in Union commemorating a friendship agreement between New Jersey and its sister province of Zhejiang in China.
Tang Xingbo, Counsel General of China, is scheduled to attend the concert, which will begin at 3 P.M. in Wilkins Theater on the campus.
Four Chinese scrolls of contemporary artists working in the traditional style will be presented. 
The scrolls will be displayed later in the new Chinese Wing at the Newark Museum.
The music program will include ''Pieta for English Horn and String Orchestra'' by Ulysses Kay of Teaneck, and the premiere of ''To a Wayfarer,'' by Chou Wen-chung, an American of Chinese descent.
Tickets are $12, with a 10 percent discount for students and the elderly.
The same program will be repeated at the Fort Lee Historic Museum on Nov. 
6 at 8 P.M. and at the Morris Museum in Morristown on Nov. 
7, also at 8 P.M.
Information: (201) 488-2168.
 
ALL ABOUT THE LENAPES
Dr. Herbert C. Kraft intends to dispel some common misconceptions about the Lenape Indians when he speaks at the Second Reformed Church in Hackensack Thursday at 8 P.M.
Dr. Kraft, professor of anthropology and director of the Archeological Research Center and Museum at Seton Hall University, will present a slide lecture and display artifacts.
The church is at Anderson and Union Streets, and the program is being sponsored by the Bergen County Historical Society, which urges teachers, students and anyone with an interest in Indians to attend.
Information: (201) 343-9492.
 
WINE FESTIVAL IN ASBURY
The King's Road Vineyard in Asbury - that's Asbury in Warren County, not Asbury Park - is having its first harvest festival next weekend, but hopes to make the event an annual one.
From noon to 5 P.M. on Saturday and Sunday, visitors not only will be able to taste wine, but also can go on hayrides and tour the winery.
Among the foods to be offered will be an onion tart made especially to go with fermenting new wine. 
Apple cider will be available for children.
Admission is $1.50 for adults (no charge for children).
The vineyard is three miles south of I-78. 
Take Exit 11 to Route 614 and follow the signs to Pattenburg. 
After three miles on Route 614, turn right onto Route 579. 
The vineyard is a quarter-mile on the left.
Information: (201) 479-6611.
 
CRANBERRY FESTIVAL
Chatsworth, in the heart of the Pine Barrens, will hold a Cranberry Festival Saturday and Sunday to celebrate its crimson harvest.
There will be tours both days to see the more than 20 varieties of cranberries and a program of musical entertainment provided by the Pinelands Dulcimers and the Pineconers, among other groups.
Other cranberry-related exhibits include flower and cranberry arrangements, arts and crafts and a collection of antique tools. 
The Cranberry Cafe will sell barbecue and turkey sandwiches with cranberry sauce.
Hours both days are 7 A.M. to 6:30 P.M.
To reach Chatsworth, which is in Burlington County, take the New Jersey Turnpike to Exit 7, then Route 206 South and left on Route 532.
Admission is free. 
Parking is available at the Chatsworth School for $2.
Information: (609) 859-9701 or (609) 894-9232.
 
'THE AGE OF FAITH'
Dr. David Shapiro, a poet-artist, will discuss ''The Age of Faith: The Spiritual in Art,'' exploring the influence of religion on both medieval and contemporary art, at 11:30 A.M. Thursday at William Paterson College in Wayne.
His talk will note the research conducted by Meyer Shapiro, the Columbia University medievalist, and explore how spiritual influences affect the works of Leger and Matta, contemporary artists.
The lecture is one of the college's Art at Lunch series. 
(Lunch is not provided, but coffee and tea are.) Dr. Shapiro, a member of the college faculty since 1981 and the author of 15 books of poetry and art criticism, is the co-author, with John Heyduk, an architect, of the recently published ''The Collapse of Time.''
The lecture will be held in the Ben Shahn Center for the Visual Arts.
Information: (201) 595-2654.
 
SEVAREID TO SPEAK
Eric Sevareid, the former television commentator and reporter, will speak on ''America at Middle Age,'' a retrospective look at major historic decisions, at 8 P.M. Tuesday at Brookdale Community College in Lincroft.
Mr. Sevareid's news-breaking broadcast in 1940 that France was about to capitulate to the Germans established his reputation as a war correspondent.
After World War II, he continued to cover important events, including the founding of the United Nations and six Presidential campaigns and conventions. 
The lecture is free. 
Information: (201) 842-1900, Ext. 
285.
