
Anna Chennault, a Chinese-American who is a longtime supporter of the Nationalist Government on Taiwan, met for two hours today with Deng Xiaoping, China's top leader, and indicated afterward that she had changed some of her views about China.
Mrs. Chennault, the widow of Gen. Claire L. Chennault, who commanded the World War II Flying Tigers, an American volunteer air group in China and Burma, said that people must be ''humble enough to learn, courageous enough sometimes to change their positions.''
But neither Mrs. Chennault nor Senator Ted Stevens, Republican of Alaska, the new deputy majority leader of the Senate, who is traveling with her, would say what Mr. Deng had told them in their talks this morning in the Great Hall of the People.
Mrs. Chennault said that when she left tomorrow she would fly, by way of Tokyo, to Taipei, where she will brief Chinese Nationalist leaders on her talks here with Mr. Deng, Foreign Minister Huang Hua and several other senior officials. 
Mrs. Chennault, who is a former member of the Republican National Committee, had stopped in Taiwan also before coming to Peking three days ago.
Anna Chennault, longstanding supporter of Nationalist China, indicates shift in her views about People's Republic during tour of ChinaIn China 'to Listen,' Stevens Says
At a news conference tonight, Senator Stevens stressed that he was in China ''to listen'' and was not carrying any messages either from President-elect Ronald Reagan or from the Chinese back to Washington.
The reticence of both Senator Stevens and Mrs. Chennault to discuss the details of their talks with the Chinese or the probable foreign policy of the Reagan administration contrasted sharply with what happened during a visit to Taiwan and Southeast Asia last month by Ray S. Cline, an adviser to Mr. Reagan on China. 
Mr. Cline embarrassed the Reagan transition team by declaring that President Carter's normalization of relations with Peking in December 1978 was a mistake.
The warm and high-level reception given to Senator Stevens and Mrs. Chennault in Peking suggested that China's leaders would like to put aside their suspicions of Mr. Reagan and try to work with him on further improving Chinese-American relations. 
Mr. Deng has extended an informal invitation to Mr. Reagan to visit China, and at the talks this morning he inquired about how Mr. Reagan was getting along.
Mr. Stevens, who is making the trip as a honeymoon journey with his new wife, Catherine, served as a pilot under General Chennault during World War II.
 
Reagan Called 'Very Realistic'
Asked whether he had sought to give the Chinese assurances that Mr. Reagan would not move to improve United States relations with Taiwan, as Peking fears, the Senator replied: ''I've not given any assurances, nor was I asked for any.''
But he added that he had told the Chinese he felt the new President would be ''very realistic in foreign affairs'' and ''will listen to advice.''
Then, in a slip of the tongue, Senator Stevens said: ''I think we have a very firm basis for our relationship with mainland China.''
The Alaska Republican acknowledged later that he had used the old term for the Peking regime, which is still in currency in Taiwan, out of the force of 30 years of habit.
Although he declined to disclose any details of the talks today with Mr. Deng, Senator Stevens said that he would ''certainly not rule out the possibility'' that Chinese-American relations might improve to the point where Washington would begin selling arms to Peking. 
This depends on future Soviet behavior, he said.
Mr. Stevens pointed out that he would be chairman of the Senate's Defense Appropriations Subcommittee and said he had had one meeting with a ranking official of the Ministry of Defense. 
He would not reveal the contents of the talk. 
The Carter Administration has agreed to sell China military support equipment and technology but not lethal weapons such as fighter planes or rockets, which the Chinese have hinted they might like.
Senator Stevens and his wife and Mrs. Chennault are staying in one of the villas in the large state guest house compound next door to a house in which Jiang Qing, Mao Zedong's widow, is accused of having plotted many of the political persecutions during the Cultural Revolution. 
The villa has been the focus of attention in the current trial of Miss Jiang and nine other once-prominent Chinese leaders.
 
Former Member of 'China Lobby'
During the 1950's and 1960's Mrs. Chennault was an active participant in what was termed the China lobby, an influential group of right-wing American politicians and businessmen who urged backing for Taiwan and opposed recognition of Peking.
In her autobiography, published a year ago, Mrs. Chennault relates that she urged President Richard M. Nixon to move ''cautiously'' in approaching Peking. 
After the United States took the first steps toward normalizing relations with China in 1972, she concluded that Mr. Nixon had acted with ''high-handed secrecy and unnecessary haste.''
Recognizing the Peking Government, she wrote, was worse than ''the betrayal of a loyal ally'' - Taiwan; it was ''wrong-headed,'' she said.
Mrs. Chennault, a short woman dressed in an elegant pink tweed suit, indicated that she might now like to play an intermediary role in bringing Taiwan and China together. 
Asked whether her visits back and forth between Peking and Taipei could make her a bridge between the two quarreling Chinese states, she said: ''I'm not at this time privileged to say.''
But other sources with knowledge about her talks here said that she had not been given any new negotiating policy by Peking. 
Yesterday Mrs. Chennault, whose heavy makeup and elaborate jewelry contrasted with the plain attire of several Chinese women who served as hosts, visited her old elementary school in Peking.
