
THE Chinese film ''Wild Mountains'' takes place in a rustic paradise fraught with problems that might be found anywhere: troubles about money, ambition, get-rich-quick schemes, idle gossip and marital discord. 
It concerns two married couples, the younger of them separated. 
Hehe (Du Yuan) has come to live with his brother Huihui (Xin Ming) and sister-in-law in a hut that is within clear view of the place where his beautiful wife Quirong (Xu Shouli) lives with their baby. 
Hehe and Quirong have quarreled about his dissatisfaction with simple peasant life and his eagerness to see the wider world.
For all its emphasis on crude simplicity, ''Wild Mountains'' seems conceived as a commercial entertainment, and an enjoyable one at that. 
The hard, chore-filled life of these peasants is presented with a glowing romanticism. 
And even at the end of each exhausting day, the characters retain their cheerfulness and good humor. 
The film's homespun humor (''Filthy!
We could grow crops on you!'') is delivered with a certain urbanity, by actors who seem markedly more sophisticated than the characters they play. 
None of this diminishes the film's rueful intelligence or its picturesque charm.
In ''Wild Mountains,'' which was directed by Yan Xueshu, the scenery is the real star. 
The camera often takes time out to roam the landscape, which is quite spectacular. 
And the beauties of nature are celebrated at every turn, as is the work ethic. 
Quirong labors long and hard with her little son strapped onto her back, an arrangement that must be made doubly taxing by the baby's diaperless apparel. 
Guilan, Huihui's childless wife, cares for barnyard animals and teases her husband about the pigpen, which is the closest thing to an outhouse that the family has. 
Hehe argues with his brother about the peasant's lot and helps to dream up moneymaking ideas, the loveliest of which involves silkworms. 
Perhaps the worst plan, which is Hehe's alone, is to raise a passel of flying squirrels, on the theory that their droppings have medicinal value.
''Wild Mountains'' eventually takes Hehe and Guilan on a trip to a small city, where they marvel at the souvenirs, the television and the other signs of modern civilization. 
This way of life impinges only indirectly on their mountain existence, but it signals a dissatisfaction that has far-reaching effects for all four principals. 
''Wild Mountains,'' acted in a hearty, life-affirming spirit that suits the direction, demonstrates considerable wisdom in presenting a discontent that could turn up anywhere, and the forces that may set it in motion.
''Wild Mountains'' will be shown tonight at 6 P.M. and Saturday at 8:30 P.M. as part of the New Directors/ New Films series.
 
Pie in the Sky
 
WILD MOUNTAINS, directed by Yan Xueshu; screenplay (Chinese with English subtitles) by Mr. Xueshu and Zhu Zi, from the novella ''Jiwowade Renjia'' (''The People of Jiwowa'') by Jia Ping'ao; photography, Mi Jiaqing; music by Xu Youfu; production companay, Xi'an Film Studio. 
At Roy and Niuta Titus Theater 1, The Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street, as part of the 1987 New Directors/New Films series.
Running time: 100 minutes. 
This film has no rating.
Guilan...Yue Hong; Huihui...Xin Ming; Hehe...Du Yuan; Qiurong...Xu Shouli; Ershui...Tan Xihe; Ershen...Qiu Yuzhen.
