
Over the next week and a half, the delegates at the 12th Congress of the Chinese Communist Party are expected to approve some significant structural changes in the world's largest Communist party, now numbering more than 39.6 million members.
The agenda for the congress, which opened today, includes the discussion and adoption of a new party constitution and the election of new members to the Central Committee, to a new central advisory commission and to the discipline inspection commission, which investigates abuses of authority in the party.
The central advisory commission is being created to let Deng Xiaoping lead his aging and ill contemporaries into a se@miretirement that will give them the dignity of remaining as advisers to the party while making way for younger men.
A tacit aim in the other bodies is to get rid of leftist holdovers and bring in more vigorous supporters of the pragmatic policies of Mr. Deng, the Chinese leader.
PEKING, Sept. 
1 - Over the next week and a half, the delegates at the 12th Congress of the Chinese Communist Party are expected to approve some significant structural changes in the world's largest Communist party, now numbering more than 39.6 million members.Key Posts May Be Abolished
Deputy Prime Minister Wan Li told some Japanese visitors last month that the existing positions of party chairman and six deputy chairmen would be abolished in favor of a stronger party secretariat. 
There had also been rumors that the ruling Politboro might be abolished, but it now appears that its powers will merely be circumscribed.
A Chinese source thought that the congress might be followed by a ''rectification'' campaign in which the party ranks would be thinned out by having members resubmit their applications, with some then not being accepted. 
This could produce a party rank and file more loyal to Mr. Deng's faction, since a substantial number of members were taken in during the period of radical dominance in the Cultural Revolution.
Such changes, if they take place as expected, will amount to the most extensive transformation that any ruling Communist party has undergone without violent upheaval. 
They would not necessarily erode the influence of the 78-year-old Mr. Deng, who has been trying to invest more authority in his two proteges, Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang, 63, and the current party chairman, Hu Yaobang, 67.
On Tuesday, Mr. Hu told a visiting delegation of French journalists that under a new arrangement to be approved at the congress, Mr. Zhao would concentrate on economic questions while he himself handled party and political affairs.
 
Deng Gives Opening Speech
The party congress began today with an opening speech by Mr. Deng. The 1,545 delegates and 145 alternates then listened for the rest of the morning and afternoon to a long political report delivered by Mr. Hu.
Mr. Hu, who replaced Hua Guofeng as party chairman at a meeting of the Central Committee 14 months ago, implicitly blamed his predecessor today for the difficulties the party has experienced in shaking off the radical image that it earned during the Cultural Revolution.
Mr. Hua was bequeathed the leadership of the party by Mao Zedong before he died in 1976, but had turned against the Maoist faction called the Gang of Four before he delivered the political report to the last party congress in 1977.
''However,'' Mr. Hu was quoted today as having said, ''the political report to the 11th party congress still approved of the erroneous theories, policies and slogans of the Cultural Revolution, thus exerting a negative influence by seriously obstructing the effort of the party to set things right.'
 
Hua's Future in Doubt
If the overhaul of the party structure goes as expected, Mr. Hua will lose his post as one of the six deputy chairmen. 
It is unclear whether he will remain in the Politboro and the Central Committee.
No foreign Communists have been invited to the party congress, which is also closed to foreign journalists here. 
Reporters were given a sketchy briefing on Monday by the Minister of Culture, Zhu Muzhi, who confirmed that the Politboro would not be eliminated.
In its reports on the congress today, the official New China News Agency quoted Mr. Deng as reiterating the three basic tasks that have been set out for China. 
These are to strive for national reunification, including the return of Taiwan, to combat foreign hegemony, or expansionism, and safeguard world peace, and to intensify the ''four modernizations'' of the nation's industry, agriculture, defense and science and technology.
''Economic construction is at the core of these tasks as it is the basis for the solution of China's external and domestic problems,'' Mr. Deng told the delegates.
 
U.S. to Curb Arms Sales to Taiwan
Issuance of a new Chinese-United States communique last month in which Washington declared its intention gradually to reduce military sales to the Nationalist Government on Taiwan is thought to have made Mr. Deng less vulnerable to hard-line criticism within the party about his contacts with the United States.
But Mr. Deng hinted today at continuing unhappiness over the Taiwan arms issue when he declared that ''no foreign country can expect China to be its vassal, nor can it expect China to swallow any bitter fruit detrimental to China's interests.''
