
Critics are seeking to delay a regulation that the Reagan Administration says would improve its ability to monitor imports of textiles and apparel.
The critics claim that the regulation - which the Government issued Aug. 
3 and is to take effect Sept. 
7 - would strand $500 million worth of foreign-made textiles and apparel that American companies have already ordered.
They say that would cause substantial financial difficulties for retailers and other businesses, as well as apparel shortages and price increases of up to 20 percent for consumers. 
It also could cause China to take retaliatory trade measures, they say.
US textile and apparel importers seek delay in Federal regulation--announced on Aug 3 to take effect Sept 7--changing Customs Service's country-of-origin rule as it applies to textile import quotas established through bilateral agreements; say it would strand $500 million worth of foreign-made textiles and apparel that American companies have already ordered and cause substantial financial difficulties for retailers and other businesses, as well as apparel shortage and price increases of up to 20 percent; say China might also retaliate (M)
The proposed measure would change the Customs Service's country-of-origin rule. 
It applies to textile import quotas established through bilateral agreements.
Under current regulations, if parts of a garment are made in one country and shipped to another for assembling and then shipped to the United States, they are counted against the import quotas of the second country.
For example, if sleeves or other parts of sweaters are made in China, but sewn together in Hong Kong, they have been counted against the textile import quotas of Hong Kong rather than China.
The Administration proposal would apply the country-of-origin designation to the country where the fabric originated - in the example above, China rather than Hong Kong. 
That could reduce the amount of Chinese textiles that ultimately find their way into this country, since China has a smaller quota than Hong Kong, which has been trading longer with the United States.
 
Varied Group of Opponents
The measure's opponents include retail industry groups, textile importers, agricultural interests and members of Congress who contend that the proposal is ill-conceived and motivated largely by the re-election concerns of the President and two of his Senate allies, Senator Jesse Helms, Republican of North Carolina, and Senator Strom Thurmond, Republican of South Carolina.
But Federal officials, along with some members of Congress and domestic textile manufacturers, offer two reasons for the regulation. 
One is to prevent fraud and evasion of textile quotas established by bilateral trade agreements. 
The other is to protect American textile manufacturers and workers against a burgeoning volume of less-expensive imports.
Although the proposed change would apply to each of the 36 nations with which the United States has bilateral textile trade agreements. it would most sharply affect those in the Far East.
According to Government and industry figures, four countries - Taiwan, Korea, Japan and China - and the colony of Hong Kong together supply nearly 60 percent of the textiles and apparel imported by the United States. 
The proposed regulation would also require inspection of shipments of textile imports at their United States port of entry rather than at their destination.
Rules now allow textile shipments that enter the country through one port but are bound for another location to be sealed, bonded and shipped to their destination before the Customs Service makes its inspection.
Walter C. Lenahan, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Commerce, who directed the Government group that drafted the rule, said Government statistics show that in 1983 the Customs Service seized about $5 million worth of textiles that were imported fraudulently.
By contrast, the estimated value of illegal goods seized so far this year is close to $28 million. 
This year, special textile squads were assigned to the ports of New York and Los Angeles, where 75 percent of the imported textiles enter the country.
The proposed rule was praised by James H. Martin Jr., president of the American Textile Manufacturers Institute. 
Mr. Martin is also vice chairman of Ti-Caro Inc., a Gastonia, N.C., company that manufactures yarn and industrial sewing thread.
''It clarifies the fact that the intent of the bilaterals have been stretched, even to the point of fraud in some instances,'' he said. 
''We're not against imports, but we feel that trade should be orderly, above-board, and fair.''
 
Called 'Administrative Overkill'
However, critics such as Sim Gluckson, chairman of the textile and apparel group of the American Association of Exporters and Importers, contend that as a fraud-fighting device, the new policy ''amounts to administrative overkill.''
He said: ''It's a very bad regulation that will be extremely disruptive to the fall and winter retail season.''
Mr. Gluckson, president of a New York-based knitwear company, said that because textiles and apparel are bought six to nine months in advance, the proposed rule would likely mean that shipments already ordered by companies would not arrive in time. 
''Contracts have been signed. 
Letters of credit have gone out, dates of shipment have been arranged,'' he said. 
''And now this. 
It's thrown the whole industry into confusion.''
At least a score of senators and representatives have complained in letters to President Reagan that the regulation ''would suddenly make illegal widespread methods of textile and apparel production which are absolutely legal under present U.S. law and which have been legal for many decades.''
 
Concern About China
Others, including Senator Bob Dole, Republican of Kansas, expressed concern that the measure would sour the United States-China trade relationship. 
About 11 percent of the textiles imported by the United States last year came from China.
The official New China News Agency has said that the proposed regulation would ''adversely affect the textile exports of the Chinese mainland for Hong Kong.''
The comments by the news agency have raised concern among agricultural interests that China might limit or ban imports of American grain or other commodities in retaliation.
Last year, China banned purchases of several United States exports, including wheat and cotton, when the two countries could not agree on ceilings for textile and apparel imports.
Finally, several critics assert that the rule change was pushed primarily to help the re-election chances of the Carolinas' Senators and the President's own re-election campaign.
The charges of political motivation were denied by Mr. Lenahan and by Senators Helms and Thurmond.
The textile industry nationwide employs about 2.4 million people, according to the industry, with North Carolina, New York and South Carolina, respectively, the top three states in textile-related employment.
