
A senior Nicaraguan leader has returned from Moscow with promises of aid that the Sandinista Government said would be ''of great importance.''
No figures were made public, but diplomats said Soviet economic aid to Nicaragua will probably total hundreds of millions of dollars next year, as it did this year.
An official communique published today said that the Minister of Foreign Cooperation, Henry Ruiz Hernandez, returned to Managua this week after a series of meetings with Soviet officials. 
Mr. Ruiz is a member of the nine-man Sandinista National Directorate and is considered the principal Sandinista link to the Soviet Union.
The scant official statements on Mr. Ruiz's talks in Moscow indicate that again next year, the Soviet Union is to be Managua's main donor of economic aid. 
Moscow also supplies most of Nicaragua's military needs, but there was no indication Mr. Ruiz discussed military matters in his trip.
 
Countries Sign Agreements
The communique today said that while Mr. Ruiz had been in Moscow, ''the two countries signed economic and technical agreements of great importance to both nations.''
The Sandinista Government customarily treats economic aid data as secret, and efforts to obtain details of the new accords today were unsuccessful.
Reports in the Nicaraguan press said the Soviet Union and its European allies provided Nicaragua with a wide variety of nonmilitary products this year, from tractors, chemicals and newsprint to grains and medicine.
In addition, the Russians have provided principal financing for the construction of a textile factory, an asphalt factory and a large irrigation project near the town of Tipitapa. 
They maintain a hospital in the western province of Chinandega.
''The aid may not be increasing that much, but the Sandinistas are playing it up more,'' said one diplomat who follows relations between Managua and Moscow. 
''Their press has been using the theme that the socialist countries understand us, that they are helping us in our time of need.''
 
Western Countries Keep Ties
Several Western countries also maintain significant aid programs in Nicaragua. 
Prominent among those that provided credit lines or other aid totaling millions or tens of millions of dollars this year were Spain, the Netherlands and Sweden.
In addition, the Sandinista Government this year established diplomatic and commercial ties with China. 
After President Daniel Ortega Saavedra's visit to Beijing in March, Chinese authorities gave Nicaragua a $20 million interest-free line of credit, which was used to buy food, tools and consumer goods. 
Diplomats familiar with Chinese thinking, however, said they did not expect any quick increase in Chinese trade with Nicaragua or Chinese assistance to the Sandinista Government.
In Mr. Ruiz's visit to Moscow, he met with Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze. The meeting was considered a signal of continuing Soviet solidarity with the Sandinistas.
Diplomats here and elsewhere in Latin America said Soviet officials had been discussing the possibility that the Soviet leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, might visit this region next year. 
No itinerary has been announced, but diplomats said this week that they presumed Mr. Ruiz had extended an invitation and urged that Mr. Gorbachev stop in Managua if he visits the region.
