
The chief Chinese delegate at the Soviet-Chinese talks on improving relations met today with Foreign Minister Andrei A. Gromyko amid indications that the discussions had produced no breakthroughs on the issues separating the two nations.
A report by the official press agency Tass said that Mr. Gromyko and Qian Qichen, a Chinese Deputy Foreign Minister, had agreed on ''the positive importance of the fact'' that the two Governments were having ''a political dialogue.''
The Tass item was one of a very few reporting on the talks since they resumed here March 1, following initial discussions held in Peking last fall. 
The reluctance of the two sides to disclose much of substance has led some Western diplomats to believe that they may be moving cautiously toward a limited accommodation on the one issue that seems susceptible to compromise, the tensions between military forces arrayed along their common frontier.
MOSCOW, March 21 - The chief Chinese delegate at the Soviet-Chinese talks on improving relations met today with Foreign Minister Andrei A. Gromyko amid indications that the discussions had produced no breakthroughs on the issues separating the two nations.
On the questions of Cambodia and Afghanistan, the two other issues China has set as priorities, the positions seem far apart. 
However, the diplomats stressed that this interpretation was based more on surmise than on anything firm.
Both sides have large troop concentrations along the 4,500-mile frontier; the Soviet Union is believed to have deployed 48 divisions totaling at least 600,000 men, the Chinese perhaps double that number, but in greater depth. 
The common view among diplomats is that a mutual pullback of the kind that was mooted by Soviet officials late last year is probably still some time away.
More likely, in this view, is agreement on the sort of confidencebuilding measures that the Russians have agreed on with the Western alliance, including notification of major troop movements and exchanges of observers.
When the Chinese delegation left for Peking after today's meeting, there was no hint of any agreements. 
The Tass report of the Qian-Gromyko meeting hinted, however, that the Russians had been more forthcoming in the encounter than the Chinese.
If so, it would be part of a pattern that began last year, with Soviet leaders insistently pressing for a resumption of talks and the Chinese eventually agreeing.
Tass said somewhat brusquely that Mr. Qian ''set out'' Chinese positions on bilateral and international issues, and did not elaborate. 
Mr. Gromyko, it said, emphasized ''the U.S.S.R.'s readiness to look for ways toward the normalization of relations'' as well as ''the existing possibilities for gradual broadening of bilateral ties and contacts, which would promote a general improvement of relations.''
Diplomats said that an easing of tensions along the frontier could fall within Mr. Gromyko's prescription. 
So too would moves already taken, and others that may follow, to increase trade and academic and sports contacts.
While the talks here were in progress, a Soviet-Chinese trade agreement for this year was signed that will substantially increase two-way exchanges, to about $1 billion.
