
The first thing to strike a visitor's eye as he alights from the military plane are two huge signs that proclaim in bold white Chinese characters on a flaming red background, ''Recover the Chinese Mainland'' and ''Destroy the Communists.''
Military transport remains the only way of reaching Quemoy and its sister island, Matsu, because the offshore islands, just a few miles from the mainland, remain fully military areas and are customarily referred to by Nationalist officers as ''the battlefront.''
The last exchanges of gunfire took place 23 years ago, and the Communist gunners stopped their every-other-day barrages of shells loaded with propaganda leaflets in December 1978, a few days before the United States broke diplomatic relations with Taiwan.
Nationalist islands of Quemoy and Matsu continue propaganda warfare with mainland China
The Nationalist side, however, maintains its propaganda shelling of the coast of Fukien Province. 
The two sides continue to send each other balloons carrying either propaganda wrapped around cookies, soap or items of clothing, or propaganda stuffed into inflated plastic toys.
 
Slogans, Music and News
Moreover, both sides still fill the airwaves with propaganda slogans, propaganda music and propaganda news for as much as 20 hours a day.
''We are soldiers and we obey our commanders,'' replied a psychological-warfare officer when asked whether after more than three decades of unceasing propaganda bellowed at the limited audiences on both sides of the Formosa Strait the words and music had not suffered from repetition.
Quemoy, whose 52,000 inhabitants live in 5 towns and 35 villages, remains on a full war footing. 
The number of Nationalist troops stationed here is a secret, but they are everywhere. 
They guard every crossroads, they are huddled into camouflaged pillboxes, they swarm through the extensive network of tunnels and trenches.
Sometimes they are seen patrolling in a field exercise; often they can be observed in such make-work projects as sweeping dried pine needles off the roadways with fresh branches cut from the same trees. 
Always they seem alert, their arms are at the ready, and discipline and combat enthusiasm appear high, although none of the young soldiers have had to test their fighting mettle.
The language of the military and the signs that are everywhere are studded with the phraseology of the period when the United States appeared ready to go to war over Quemoy and Matsu if the Communists attacked.
 
Defense Pact Abrogated in 1979
However, when a mutual defense treaty was signed in 1954, Washington excluded the islands from the treaty's applicability. 
The pact was unilaterally abrogated by the United States in 1979.
''We are the sentry and the safeguard of Taiwan and the Pescadores,'' said a trim young women of the ''Self-Defense Corps'' who, armed with a pointer and standing at attention, briefed a visitor.
She wore a tailored and tightly fitted camouflage jumpsuit, the trouser legs neatly bloused over high-heeled black boots, and emphasized her slim waist with a broad but empty cartridge belt.
''So that we never forget that we are not at peace but at war,'' replied Col. Mao Dien-ping of the military spokesman's office when asked about the officially fostered belligerent air. 
''The enemy can destroy our lives at any moment. 
We should work hard to fight against our enemies.''
