
The United States' two members of the International Olympic Committee and a senior State Department official said yesterday that the presence of many allies of North Korea, including the Soviet Union, would serve as a deterrent to the possibility of disruptive actions by North Korea during the Seoul Olympic Games.
North Korea announced yesterday that it would not attend the Games unless it could be co-host of them. 
The deadline for accepting the invitation to the Games is Sunday, and of the 167 countries invited, 153 have accepted, including the Soviet Union.
''The world will be there,'' said one of the members, Anita DeFrantz, an attorney in Los Angeles and a former United States Olympic rower. 
''Over 150 nations have accepted the invitation to the Games. 
With North Korea not there, if anything untoward happens, my sense is people will know where to look. 
I am also confident that the security will work.''
Robert Helmick, the other I.O.C. member and the president of the United States Olympic Committee, said the South Koreans have ''one of the best security systems in the world.''
He also said that United States Government officials monitoring the situation in South Korea have assured him that athletes competing in the Games have no reason to fear.
 
'Total International Outcast'
Those views were underscored by Edward J. Derwinski, an Under Secretary of State, who said North Korea would become a ''total international outcast'' by attempting to sabotage the Games or destabilize the region before they start, Sept. 
17.
''Any act of sabotage could accidentally inflict losses on many of their cohorts,'' Derwinski said from Washington, referring to North Korea's allies. 
''Their mere presence almost guarantees safety for everybody.''
Derwinski allowed for the possibility that South Koreans might sense a lingering concern because of questions surrounding the midair explosion of a Korean Airlines jet in late November near the Burma-Thailand border. 
South Korean authorities suspect North Korean involvement.
But because of the record number of countries planning to attend and their expectation of successful Games, he doubted North Korea would attempt any disruptive action either during the Games or in the eight months preceeding them.
 
Appeal to North Korea
Meanwhile, yesterday in Seoul, members of the organizing committee appealed to North Korea to reconsider its decision not to attend.
Park Seh Jik, the president of the organizing committee, said at a news conference, ''We will keep the door open until the last moment for North Korea to change its mind and enter the Games.''
North Korea's decision followed years of negotiations, during which the Seoul organizers and the I.O.C. tried to satisfy North Korea's demand to be recognized as a co-host of the Games. 
Much of the negotiations dealt with the number of events that would be staged in North Korea. 
Initially, North Korea asked for eight. 
In its last proposal, the I.O.C. offered five.
But the North Koreans were also seeking greater recognition as a host country.
In any case, negotiations ended several weeks before the Dec. 
16 presidential elections in South Korea and never resumed.
North Korea intends to participate in next month's winter Games in Calgary, with theee male speed skaters.
 
Cuba Is Exception
With the Soviet Union's acceptance and a report that China has accepted, nearly all of North Korea's allies have indicated they will attend the Games. 
The biggest exception is Cuba, which has steadfastly supported North Korea's demand for a larger role as a host.
A spokesman for the Cuban Sports Institute was quoted by a Mexican news agency as saying that Cuba intends to announce its decision Sunday.
The agency, Notimex, in a dispatch from Havana, said that Cuba ''is confused'' because the Soviet Union had accepted the invitation but North Korea has not.
Cuba, currently a power in boxing and women's volleyball, was among 14 Soviet-bloc nations that boycotted the 1984 Los Angeles Olympics. 
The I.O.C. intends to consider a recommedation at a meeting next month in Calgary to sanction any boycotting nation by not inviting it to the subsequent Games. 
That would mean Cuba would not be invited to participate in Summer Olympics again until 1996.
 
CHINA REPORTED TO BE IN
HONG KONG, Wednesday, Jan. 
13 (AP) - China has accepted the invitation to participate in the Summer Olympics, a pro-Beijing newspaper reported today. 
The Chinese-language Ta Kung Pao, quoting unnamed sources in Beijing, as saying the Chinese Olympic Committee sent a letter Tuesday to the International Olympic Committee informing it of the decision. 
The two-sentence dispatch said the decision would be announced officially within the next few days.
