
North Korea reported today that its leader, Kim Il Sung, greeted a foreign group this morning. 
The report, also carried by the Chinese press agency, was apparently intended to dispel rumors that Mr. Kim had been killed.
But confusion over the fate of the North Korean leader persisted amid reports in South Korea that his Defense Minister had seized power.
The North Korean press agency said Mr. Kim had ''warmly met'' a visiting Mongolian delegation at the airport in Pyongyang and then joined his guests in reviewing a military honor guard. 
Thousands of people were on hand, the report said.
Austrian Says He Saw Kim
United Press International reported that an Austrian trade representative who attended the airport ceremony said that he had seen Mr. Kim and that the North Korean appeared healthy.
U.P.I. also said the North Korean press agency had released a photograph of Mr. Kim shaking hands with the Mongolian leader, Jambyn Batmunh, that was shown on television in Japan.
A spokesman for South Korea's Defense Ministry, Lee Heung Sik, issued a statement this afternoon that acknowledged the reports that Mr. Kim was alive but did not confirm them.
''We are closely watching such North Korean moves,'' Mr. Lee said, ''to determine whether they are a result of serious power struggles that are going on inside the North or represent a sophisticated form of psychological warfare to hide a scheme for military provocation.''
In either case, he said, South Korean armed forces were maintaining ''intensive vigilance against the North.''
Earlier in Seoul, the Government-run Korea Broadcasting Service, quoting South Korean Defense Ministry sources, said North Korean loudspeakers at the border had announced that ''full power'' had been assumed in the North by Defense Minister Oh Jin U. The account was especially confusing because it followed recent reports that Mr. Oh was in a coma after a car accident.
The South Korean service carried the reports of Mr. Kim's presence at the airport as the main item on its noon broadcast, followed by the accounts of the loudspeaker announcements. 
That suggested that greater weight was being placed on the report that Mr. Kim, 74 years old, was still alive.
U.P.I. quoted the Austrian trade representative in North Korea, Wolfgang Entmayer, as saying of Mr. Kim: ''I saw him with my own eyes, and he seemed to be in good health and smiling. 
He was walking on his own, and there was nothing unusual about it.''
U.P.I. said the interview was conducted by telephone from Peking.
Mr. Entmayer said that a military band and honor guard had been present for the arrival of the Mongolian delegation, and that roads leading from the airport to downtown Pyongyang had been lined with ''the usual crowds'' waving flags and cheering. 
''Nothing extraordinary has occurred here that I know of,'' he said. 
''There has been nothing unusual on television or radio.''
On Monday, unconfirmed reports circulated that Mr. Kim had been assassinated or that a power struggle was under way in that Communist nation.
South Korean Government officials and news agencies continued to report Monday night that Mr. Kim may have been shot. 
And the Defense Minister, Lee Ki Baek, told a National Assembly committee that ''serious signs of an emergency in North Korea'' suggested that Mr. Kim had died or that a power struggle was in progress.
But other Government officials and foreign diplomats expressed uncertainty about the reports and said it was premature to draw firm conclusions.
''There are factors pointing to his being dead,'' a Western diplomat said. 
''But the factors pointing to the contrary are more solid.''
 
No Word on Kim's Son
Nothing was said about the whereabouts of Mr. Kim's son, Kim Jong Il, 43 years old, whom Mr. Kim has designated as his successor in the last few years. 
The designation of the younger Kim, referred to in the North as the ''Dear Leader,'' created the merchanism for the first dynastic transition in a Communist country.
Mr. Lee, who has been the most outspoken South Korean Government official in discussing the Kim matter, told members of the National Assembly that on Saturday morning the Government received intelligence reports from Japan saying Mr. Kim had been killed by soldiers a day or two earlier. 
These military men defected to China, which has thus far rejected North Korea's demand for their repatriation, he quoted the reports as saying.
In its editions today, The Korea Herald, a Government-controlled English-language daily, reported without elaboration that a story was circulating that Mr. Kim had been shot on a train. 
Other accounts said he had died in a car accident.
 
'A Severe Power Struggle'
''Judging from information gathered from various sources, North Korea is suffering from a severe internal power struggle,'' Mr. Lee said.
Mr. Kim has ruled North Korea since it was formed in 1948 after the postwar division of the Korean Peninsula.
To North Koreans, he is known as the ''Great Leader,'' and his image is ubiquitous, on everything from statues to lapel pins.
Mr. Lee repeated earlier assertions that North Korean loudspeakers along ''front-line areas'' of the Korean demilitarized zone announced Mr. Kim's assassination on Sunday. 
He said some loudspeakers had announced, ''Let's embrace the Dear Leader Kim Jong Il as leader of the nation.''
At some points along the DMZ, North Korean flags were flown at half-staff and funeral music was played, he asserted, and a portrait of Mr. Kim decorated with white flowers was seen.
 
Says It May Be a Ploy
The Defense Minister also said he could not rule out the possibility that the ''loudspeaker blasting may be part of North Korean psychological warfare against the South.''
In Tokyo, the Japanese news agency Kyodo reported that a senior official in Hanoi had said Vietnamese representatives in Pyongyang were saying that Mr. Kim had died.
There was countervailing evidence, however, culminating in the reports that Mr. Kim had met the delegation from Mongolia.
United States military officials said American soldiers at the truce village of Panmunjom in the DMZ had reported no unusual activity on the northern side of the border. 
North Korean flags were flying at full staff today, and North Korean guards at Panmunjom behaved normally, they said. 
According to Bill Fullerton, a civilian spokesman for the United States Eighth Army in Seoul, regular busloads of tourists visited the DMZ today.
''As far as our soldiers can tell, everything was the way it was before,'' Mr. Fullerton said. 
He and other officials acknowledged, however, that American troops patrol an area that is only about a mile long -a fraction of the 151-mile-long border. 
It was possible, they said, that the loudspeaker broadcasts had occurred out of earshot of the Americans.
 
'Honestly, Truly Don't Know'
One foreign diplomat said an American intelligence officer monitoring the Pyongyang radio from Seoul on Sunday morning heard an announcement that Kim Il Sung was dead. 
This was followed by funereal music, he said. 
But this report was not repeated, the diplomat added, and since then broadcasts have been routine.
''We honestly, truly don't know what has happened,'' he said.
North Korean diplomats in Peking and New Delhi strongly denied the death reports and accused South Korea of inventing them. 
''The South Korean side always spreads such fabrications,'' the North Korean Embassy in Peking said.
There were few signs on Seoul streets that anything unusual had occurred, let alone something that could have huge importance for South Korea as well as the North.
The national police were put on special alert, and busloads of officers filled some downtown streets. 
But the police presence is normally thick and has been especially so in recent weeks after large anti-Government demonstrations.
South Korea's armed forces were said to be kept to a normal state of readiness, as were the 40,000 United States soldiers stationed here.
 
North's Borders Tightly Sealed
Determining political developments in North Korea is extremely difficult because that country has tightly sealed its borders, revealing little of itself to outsiders, even Communist countries.
There have been periodic reports in recent months of unhappiness among North Korean military officers with the Kims' plans to transfer power from father to son, and several political analysts in Seoul said today that the displeasure might have spilled over. 
Close allies of Pyongyang, notably the Soviet Union and China, have also hinted at dissatisfaction with the transition plan.
Another possibility, the political analysts said, was that certain officers had disapproved of Kim Il Sung's recent tilting toward Moscow in the balance that his country traditionally has sought to achieve between the Soviet Union and China. 
The North Korean leader made a visit to Moscow late last month, an unusual trip in that he made the journey by plane. 
Mr. Kim is known to have a strong aversion to flying and in the past had traveled the nearly 4,000 miles from Pyongyang to Moscow by train.
The two Koreas share one of the world's most heavily fortified borders, and, unlike the two Germanys, they are implacable enemies. 
In the South, Kim Il Sung and Kim Jong Il are depicted as almost demonic personalities, and their pictures are rarely seen.
Several political analysts said the developments in the North could also affect South Korean politics. 
The Government of President Chun Doo Hwan has begun a crackdown on dissidents, and the possibility of unrest north of the DMZ may make the political opposition think twice before further challenging the Government's authority.
 
North Korea At A Glance
 
Government
  In the four decades since he was installed by the Soviet forces that took over from occupying Japanese, Kim Il Sung has been the absolute ruler of North Korea, running the country almost like a personal fiefdom. 
The national ideology, while officially Communist, is primarily based on the glorification of Mr. Kim's thinking. 
In recent years Mr. Kim has elevated his son, Kim Jong Il, to a position of almost equal influence and has named the son to be his successor.
 
History
  Japan annexed Korea in 1910 and retined control until the end of World War II. 
Korean customs and nationalism were brutally suppressed. 
The Cairo Declaration of 1943 called for a free and independent Korea after the war, but Stalin accepted a 1945 American plan for two military zones to be established after the Japanese surrender, divided along the 38th Parallel. 
Free elections were to be held.
After the Japanese surrender, political exiles came home. 
In the South, Syngman Rhee returned from the United States; in the North, the anti-Japanese resistance leader, Kim Il Sung, returned from the Soviet Union.
With Soviet backing, Mr. Kim was named head of the new Government of the North, which was proclaimed the Democratic People's Republic of Korea in September 1948. 
Mr. Rhee became the first leader in the South, which had been founded a month earlier. 
American forces were pulled out of the South in June 1949.
 
The Korean War
  The Korean War began on June 25, 1950, when North Korean forces invaded the South. 
Seoul, the South Korean capital, was captured after four days. 
United States troops returned, at the request of Seoul, at the end of June. 
Responding to a United Nations call, 16 other nations sent military contingents to the defense of the South.
In October 1950, the North Korean capital was captured, and in November, the allies reached the Yalu River on the Chinese border. 
Peking had committed troops to the fighting in October, and they were able to push the South Korean and United Nations forces back to approximately the 38th parallel.
Fighting continued back and forth until an armistice was signed at Panmunjom in July 1953.
 
Military Strength
  Counting all branches, North Korea has approximately 785,000 troops, according to the International Institute for Strategic Studies. 
By comparison, South Korea has 622,000 troops. 
United States forces in South Korea number approximately 40,000.
 
Geography and People
  North Korea has a population of about 20 million, about half that of South Korea. 
Its area is 46,540 square miles, somewhat larger than the South and about the size of New York State.
 
Resources
  Seventy percent of the mountainous Korean Peninsula is forested, and most of the best timber is in the North. 
Iron ore and coal deposits are concentrated in the North. 
Rice and corn are the major crops, and extensive efforts have been made to reclaim land for agriculture.
