
FROM REMOVING FIG LEAVES on Italian masterpieces to censoring films in Hong Kong to protecting antiquities in Israel, culture the world over provokes heated debate.
Following is a roundup of reports from 12 Times foreign correspondents about cultural issues that have sparked controversy and discussion in their countries. 
In addition to reflecting the inextricable connections among art, money and politics, their reports show that countries throughout the world are struggling to maintain their cultural heritage and that television - its control, programming and funding - is an increasingly important concern.
The Government here is facing sharp criticism after its admission that it has been censoring films for the last 34 years without legal authority to do so. 
The Government, which is headed by British officials appointed by London, apparently censored films that it believed would offend China, Hong Kong's vast northern neighbor.
The admission, which came only after a report in The Asian Wall Street Journal, has provoked bitter accusations that Britain is more interested in placating China than in protecting the interests of the 5.5 million residents of this territory, which reverts to China in 1997. 
Supporters of direct elections here are concerned that if Britain is unwilling to stand up to China on artistic matters, it is unlikely to introduce democracy in the territory in the face of apparent opposition from Beijing.
The fact that censorship took place was not new, although many residents apparently were unaware of it until the recent publicity storm. 
What was new was the realization that the Government knowingly censored films without any legal right to do so.
''Such an abuse of power for so long is a shocking state of affairs, and is contradictory to the spirit of rule by law,'' said the Chinese-language Hong Kong Daily News. 
The English-language South China Morning Post lamented that the incident undermined ''the confidence-building process so vital to Hong Kong.''
At least 21 films were banned outright by the Government, but certain scenes were apparently cut from many others. 
Some films reportedly were even sent to the Xinhua News Agency office in Hong Kong, China's unofficial representative in the territory, for editing. 
The banned films included an array of little-known titles, mostly from Taiwan and Vietnam, both of which are strongly critical of the Beijing Government. 
One 1974 Hong Kong film that was banned portrayed a group of young people who escape from China to the territory.
Hong Kong, clearly embarrassed by the reports, issued a statement confirming that films had been censored ''on the grounds that they might damage good relations with other territories.''
It also noted that the censorship had never been challenged in court. 
In any case, the row seems likely to be settled through new legislation that will grant the Government clear authority to ban films.
