
The vivid frescoes seem startling in a 1,500-year-old Buddhist temple. 
On one wall, monks fight with feet and clenched fists in a cloistered garden. 
On the opposite wall, more monks spar with swords, staves, cudgels and other ancient weapons. 
The stones of an adjacent hall have been stamped down into 48 indentations, a legacy of centuries of practice in the martial arts that have left the floor pitted up to seven inches deep. 
Shaolin Monastery, nestled on the barren slopes of Song Mountain in central China's Henan Province, was the home of Chan Buddhism, a Chinese sect that gave rise of Zen Buddhism in Japan. 
But it is even better known as the cradle of wushu, an ancient fighting skill that has evolved into Chinese kung fu and influenced Japanese karate and Korean taekwondo.
Christopher Wren article on visiting Shoalin Monastery in central China's Henan Province; photos (M)
During the Tang Dynasty 13 centuries ago, the monastery had 500 fighting monks along with 1,000 more prosaic monks who tilled several thousand acres of communal farmland. 
The monastery then fell on hard times. 
It was burned three times, most recently in 1928 during a struggle between rival warlords. 
It was vandalized during the Cultural Revolution, and its remaining monks dispersed to secular labor. 
Several years ago, Shaolin Monastery reopened and now has 20 monks ranging in age from 16 to 76 years. 
The revival of historical interest in Shaolin Monastery is ironically the result of the popularity of China's first kung fu movie, ''Shaolin Temple.''
(Buddhist monasteries in China are usually called temples.) The film followed the formula of revenge and mayhem that has been a staple of the Hong Kong film industry and was shot on location.
The monastery's reputation derives from an incident in 618 A.D., when the Tang Dynasty Emperor Li Shimin, hearing of the martial arts developed at Shaolin Monastery, appealed for help in defeating Prince Zheng in a battle at nearby Luoyang, then the imperial capital. 
Thirteen warrior monks who responded to the Emperor's call helped win the victory, opening the way for the unification of China. 
(With a license that Hollywood might envy, the movie had the monks winning the campaign by themselves.)
The introduction of fighting skills at Shaolin Monastery has been attributed in legend to the Indian monk Bodhidharma, who went to the monastery in 527, three decades after it was founded by Batuo, another Indian monk. 
Bodhidharma allegedly spent nine years in contemplation, facing the wall of a cave on Song Mountain above the monastery. 
For exercise and protection from wild animals, he taught himself self-defense and later passed the skills along to his disciples.
Actually, the ancient martial arts probably originated even earlier as Buddhist monks learned to fend off brigands and other predators. 
Variations of their refined techniques subsequently reached Japan, Okinawa, Korea and other Asian countries that developed their own distinct fighting styles.
Chinese wushu goes well beyond the ''empty-hand'' fighting of the more familiar karate of Japan or taekwondo of Korea because it incorporates 18 ancient weapons, such as nine-sectioned chains, hinged sticks, staves and swords. 
Chinese wushu, like the more contemporary kung fu, has no belt gradings but can take up to 10 years to master. 
It is taught in China for physical exercise and health rather than self-defense. 
The best known of its styles is taijiquan, called tai chi in the West, which has been vastly slowed down to emphasize flexibility and serenity.
Shaolin Monastery has become a tourist attraction, with the government allocating more than $1.6 million for its restoration. 
The monastery, a few miles from the county seat of Dengfeng, is about four hours by car or tour bus from Henan's provincial capital of Zhengzhou, itself an overnight train ride from Peking, 400 miles to the north. 
The monastery can also be reached from Luoyang.
The monastery is entered through its elevated ''mountain gate,'' reached by a flight of 16 broad stone stairs. 
Under the curved tile roof hangs an elegant gold leaf inscription with the three Chinese characters for Shaolin Temple, written in the 18th century by the Qing Dynasty's Kangxi emperor. 
Stately cy press and ginkgo trees planted by the monks centuries ago rise above the reddish walls. 
More than a dozen buildings, including the Heavenly King (Tianhuang) Hall and a library of Buddhist scriptures, were burned down by the warlord Shi Yousan during the civil fighting in 1928. 
It was said that the monastery burned for 45 days.
Fortunately, the last row of buildings inside the monastery was not destroyed. 
The largest is the Hall of a Thousand Buddhas, in traditional red brick with a curved blue-gray tile roof. 
It contains what are regarded as the finest surviving frescoes in China, painted during the Ming Dynasty, covering more than 3,000 feet of wall. 
They show in intricate detail 500 ''arhats,'' or Buddhist saints, worshipping Buddha amid clusters of billowing clouds. 
No two faces or figures look alike.
A martial arts enthusiast may be more intrigued by the green brick floor, with its 48 indentations in four symmetrical rows about one yard apart. 
The depressions were formed over the centuries, when the monks learned to strengthen their fighting stance by pressing their feet down on the bricks. 
Nearby, a rack of weapons displays a vicious-looking collection of spears, halberds and tridents.
To the east is the White Robe (Baiyi) Hall with its equally famous frescoes of the martial arts, only slightly damaged by graffiti and wear. 
Along the southern wall, 34 monks in colorful open jackets, sleeves rolled up, spar in bare-fisted pairs before a small but intense audience of scholars and spectators. 
On the northern wall, other monks show off their skills with the 18 ancient weapons.
Another wall fresco depicts the 13 warrior monks coming to the aid of the Tang emperor. 
There are additional frescoes of a barehanded monk subduing a dragon and a tiger. 
The origin of the art is obscure. 
The robes and pigtails of the onlookers suggest that the frescoes were painted early in the Qing Dynasty, which overthrew the Ming emperor in 1644 and was itself finally toppled in 1911.
Shaolin's monks today go about their duties with shaved heads and coarse gray robes, oblivious to the stream of tourists. 
But they also have tales to tell. 
Fu Yun, now in his 60's, recalled how the monastery had 300 monks when he joined as a child novice in 1930. 
In those days, he said, the monks practiced wushu six hours a day as a respite from meditation. 
''The basic lessons in wushu were to keep us fit,'' said Fu Yun. 
He was forced to go home to work as a farmer in 1949 but returned after the Communist authorities adopted a greater tolerance for religious belief after the repressive Cultural Revolution.
To the disappointment of many visitors, the monks no longer perform wushu. 
''I can still play but not very well,'' Fu Yun confessed. 
''To be good at wushu, you must be obedient and willing to bear suffering and hardship.''
Chuan Qing, a 24-year-old monk from eastern China, said he was not interested in wushu because ''it is very hard to do.''
For the monks, who rise at 3 or 4 A.M. and subsist on vegetables and rice, life is not much more glamorous than that in other Buddhist monasteries in Asia.
Shaolin's traditional martial arts are being preserved at the nearby town of Dengfeng, where a sports school specializing in wushu opened two years ago. 
Its 140 or so pupils practice wushu every afternoon following their academic classes. 
The pupils, some of whom are only 10 or 11 years old, frequently stage fighting displays for foreign tourists on the packed dirt of their outdoor practice field.
Visitors to China do not have to travel all the way to Shaolin Monastery to see wushu. 
In any major Chinese city, simply rise at dawn and head for the local park, where some young people practice before going off to jobs or classes. 
In Shanghai, for example, there is early morning wushu practice along the Bund, or waterfront promenade. 
Just head for the clatter of swords and staves.
