
Under the Great Hall on Ellis Island, the door through which millions of immigrants entered America, archeologists last year discovered the skeletons of two American Indians.
They are believed to be Munsees, a local branch of the Delawares, who gathered oysters around the island before the arrival of Europeans.
''Somehow it is very appropriate that the only remains we find on Ellis Island represent the one group that was here before the waves of immigrants that came to make America,'' said John Belle, the main contracting architect for the Ellis Island restoration project for the National Parks Service.
The Indian remains are to be interred on the island before the Great Hall opens to the public as a national museum of immigration in 1992.
Preserving Historic Graffiti
Mr. Belle said the discovery of the skeletons was one of a series of finds that offered new insights into Ellis Island and the 12 million immigrants who passed through the red brick building.
Historians have spoken of the Babel of tongues that rose and fell when thousands of immigrants crowded the cavernous Great Hall in the early part of this century.
Today, conservators are working to preserve the surviving traces of that hubbub - snatches of graffiti scribbled on plaster walls or carved in wooden windowsills.
''They used pencils, penknives and the same blue chalk that doctors used to mark comments on people's coats,'' said Christy Cunningham, a paintings conservator contracted by the Parks Service. 
''Some are just names, dates and villages of origin. 
But there are also sketches of the boats they came over on, with flags flying and steam billowing out of the funnels.''
The 25 areas of graffiti selected for preservation speak of America's multinational roots. 
There are scrawls in Arabic, Armenian, Chinese, French, German, Hebrew, Hungarian, Polish, Greek, Italian, Russian and Serbo-Croatian. 
Some are prosaic. 
''If there were no mosquitoes, one would probably be healthier,'' reads a scrawl in Hungarian. 
Others are more discursive. 
''Thinking of home brings tears,'' one writer scribbled in Chinese on the marble wall in a men's room. 
''Lucky just to arrive in Flowery Flag country. 
I expected peace with no worries. 
Who knew the immigration guards would detain us?
Left locked up without any reason. 
How can we change these harsh laws?''
''Let's devote ourselves to return to China and kill our enemies,'' the man concluded. 
''When I have the opportunity to see my father, brothers, wife and children, I will be overjoyed and tell about my Western journey.''
An Italian immigrant wrote in the men's room: ''Women make men suffer because they are venomous and loose and don't look after their husbands.''
Two graffiti in obscure Armenian dialects continue to puzzle translators.
 
Impression Owed to Acoustics
Mr. Belle, an immigrant from Wales, believes he has solved the mystery of why the Babel of tongues had so impressed visitors to the Great Hall.
''The wall plaster is reinforced with horse hair to give it body,'' he said.
This 19th-century construction technique - mixing wet plaster with horse hair purchased from slaughterhouses - was also used in the construction of Carnegie Hall and several Broadway theaters.
''Sounds were clear as a bell in the Registry Room,'' Mr. Belle said, using the formal name for the Great Hall.
The acoustics are also good because of the fine workmanship of the vaulted ceiling of the main hall. 
Constructed around 1917 by the Guastavino Brothers, the same tile contractors who built the ceiling of Grand Central Terminal, the ceiling is almost perfectly intact today.
''We inspected every tile with a rubber hammer,'' said Mr. Belle, who is managing partner of Beyer Blinder Belle Architects and Planners of New York. 
''Less than 40 tiles out of the thousands had to be repaired or replaced.''
 
Finding Old Manhattan
On the outside of the main building, contractors digging trenches for power lines have uncovered evidence that supports a theory that much of today's Ellis Island was created by landfill produced when the New York subways were dug at the turn of the century.
''Two feet under the front lawn, we found pottery, silverware, plates and lanterns from the 1820's and 1830's,'' said Michael Alderstein, Parks Service project manager for Ellis Island. 
''As we dig through Ellis Island, we find old Manhattan.''
From the late 1700's to the early 1830's, Ellis Island was also used as an execution ground, largely for sailors convicted and hanged for piracy or mutiny.
When the human bones were unearthed below the building foundations, some restoration workers speculated that they might be the remains of executed convicts.
However, John Pousson, staff archeologist for the Parks Service, said that during the time the northern end of Ellis Island was used for executions, the remains of executed convicts were usually sold or donated to medical schools.
Furthermore, he said, examinations of the teeth show they have a wear pattern characteristic of American Indians.
''There are no cavities, which indicate that these are not Europeans,'' he said.
