
Before the Olympic Games began, many gold medals were predicted for China in men's gymnastics. 
The Chinese were favored to win the team gold medal; their star, Li Ning, was favored to win the individual all-around gold medal; and Li, Tong Fei and Lou Yun all were expected to win medals in various of the individual apparatus finals.
Once the competition began, the raves for China were tempered by the entirely unexpected performance of the men of the United States team. 
They not only won the team gold medal, but their Peter Vidmar took the lead, just ahead of China's Li, in the preliminary standings for the individual all-around medals.
Profile of Japanese gymnast Koji Gushiken, who has won gold medal in all-around individual competition despite fact that he placed fifth before start of event; Gushiken's career and background traced (M)
With all the hubbub about Vidmar and Li, not much notice was paid to the little man with the ancient-looking face who stood in fifth place as the all-around competition began Thursday night. 
Koji Gushiken of Japan was known as one of the world's best gymnasts, but there were four other world-class performers ahead of him - not only Vidmar and Li, but Tong and Bart Conner of the United States.
And in this sport where thousandths of a point can make a difference, there is very little margin for error for someone in fifth place trying to move up. 
So Gushiken gave six very nearly error-free performances, scoring a 10 on his vault, 9.95 on his horizontal bar and rings routines, and 9.90 on the other three events, and overtook Conner, Tong, Li and Vidmar to win the gold medal.
 
Vidmar Not Surprised
Most observers were astonished. 
They thought that if anyone was going to overtake Vidmar in the finals, it would be Li. 
But Vidmar wasn't surprised.
''No, no,'' said Vidmar, whose silver medal was the first medal for an American in Olympic all-around competiton. 
''I remember at the '81 world championships, everyone was talking on and on about the Russians and the Chinese, and Koji got third in the all-around. 
At the '83 world championships, everyone was talking about the Russians and the Chinese, and Koji got second in the all-around.
''He just moved up to the right spot today,'' Vidmar said. 
''He has good timing.''
Gushiken might dispute that. 
He is 27 years old, aged by the standards of his grueling sport. 
And good timing hasn't been a highlight of his 16-year career, judging by what he said, through a translator, in the interview session after his victory.
Gushiken, who is from Osaka and now lives in Tokyo, where he teaches at the Nippon Physical Education College, would have been at a prime age for Olympic competition during the Montreal Games, in 1976. 
But in each of the two years before those Olympics, he suffered a serious injury - first a ruptured Achilles' tendon, then a broken ankle. 
Each time, he said, it took him six months to recover, and another six months to reach top competitive form.
''I was only ranked 13th in Japan when the Montreal Olympics came,'' he said. 
''So I could not go.''
 
Disappointment in 1980
When it was time for the Moscow Games, he was back at the top, but his country joined the boycott led by the United States.
''I was very disappointed in Japan's boycott of the 1980 Olympic Games because I was a member of that team, and I had trained so hard and perservered through so much for that,'' he said.
''I left Japan this time with determination to win sort of double gold, making up for the one I missed in Moscow.''
He also made up a bit for the lost glory that once belonged to Japan in men's gymnastics. 
After winning their first team medal, a silver, in 1956, the Japanese went on to dominate Olympic gymnastics from the 1960 Games, in Rome, through the 1976 Games in Montreal. 
Japan won each of those five team gold medals, and Japanese men won 10 of the 15 individual all-around medals - three golds, four silvers and three bronzes.
Since then the Soviet Union, which had been Japan's closest competitor ever since 1956, has dominated men's gymnastics. 
The Russians won the team gold in Moscow and were heavily favored to win the world championships last October, although the Chinese slipped past them by a fraction of a point.
In those world championships, Gushiken took the silver all-around medal behind the Soviet Union's celebrated 17-year-old, Dmitri Bilozerchev. 
But the relative youth of the Chinese men, and the relative old age of Gushiken, were considered strikes against him here.
And fifth place after the preliminary scores (computed from each individual's scores in the team competition) was not the best place from which to launch a medal run. 
''I knew I was in fifth place but the difference was only 17-hundredths of a point,'' he said. 
''So if I take each exercise very carefully and do it my best, I knew I could win.''
Gushiken did not edge into first place until the fifth rotation, when he earned a 9.95 on the horizontal bar while Vidmar earned a 9.90 for his vault, putting Gushiken .025 of a point into the lead.
Either man could have won on the sixth and final rotation. 
Up first on the floor exercise, Gushiken scored a 9.90, which meant that Vidmar needed a 9.95 or 10 on the parallel bars to beat him. 
Bit Vidmar bobbled his dismount slightly and got a 9.90.
As soon as he saw that score, Gushiken burst into tears, knowing he had won.
