
The State Department has assured the Los Angeles Olympic Organizing Committee that foreign athletes and officials traveling to the 1984 Summer Olympic Games will be allowed into the country without visa problems.
Peter V. Ueberroth, the president of the L.A.O.O.C., said Friday that he had received ''reassurance'' on the sensitive question from Secretary of State George P. Shultz at a meeting in Washington Thursday. 
During the course of his visit, Mr. Ueberroth said he had also had met briefly with President Reagan (''It was a social thankyou visit''), whom he described as being ''very helpful'' with plans for staging the first Summer Olympics in the United States since the 1932 Los Angeles Games.
No Federal funds are being used to assist Los Angeles's $500-million effort, but Mr. Ueberroth said the Reagan Administration had assigned Michael K. Deaver, deputy chief of staff in the White House, to work with the organizers on law enforcement.
The State Department has assured the Los Angeles Olympic Organizing Committee that foreign athletes and officials traveling to the 1984 Summer Olympic Games will be allowed into the country without visa problems.
The biggest expense problem to be resolved between now and the opening ceremonies on July 28, 1984, remains negotiating contracts with 54 independent police departments and protecting thousands of athletes, officials, members of the media and visitors, Mr. Ueberroth added.
 
Several Topics Addressed
During a luncheon meeting with editors and reporters of The New York Times, Mr. Ueberroth answered questions on a variety of sports and political issues related to the Los Angeles Olympics. 
Some of the more significant were these:
- China's decision to cut off all cultural and sports exchanges with the United States for the remainder of this year in response to the United States having granted political asylum to the Chinese tennis player, Hu Na, had left the Los Angeles organizers ''vulnerable'' to a possible Chinese boycott in 1984. 
''The Olympics are a political event,'' Mr. Ueberroth said, describing the Chinese situation as ''very sensitive.''
He said he is hopeful that the People's Republic of China and Taiwan, which is to send athletes and officials to the Games under name Chinese Taipei Olympic Committee, would both compete. 
From an original plan to send only 30 athletes, mainland China's most recent estimate for 1984 is now at 385, Mr. Ueberroth said.
- The international governing body for soccer, the Federation Internationale de Football Association (FIFA), last week approved the sites proposed for the Olympic soccer tournament (including stadiums at Harvard University, Annapolis, Md., Stanford University and the Rose Bowl in Pasadena). 
But because of an eligibility dispute with the International Olympic Committee over the definition of amateur players in soccer, Mr. Ueberroth indicated there was still a possibility that FIFA could withdraw its sanction for soccer in the 1984 Olympics, and perhaps even stage a substitute tournament.
- A site for the shooting events still has not been found, since the I.O.C. rejected Las Vegas, Nev., as an alternative. 
''We're trying to find a solution,'' Mr. Ueberroth said. 
The possibility of the Olympic shooting events being staged outside the host country has precedence. 
''If worse comes to worse, they won't hold it anywhere,'' he said.
- The Los Angeles Raiders of the National Football League have until April 28 to decide whether they will build luxury boxes in the Coliseum, for which the Los Angeles Olympic Organizing Committee will pay the Raiders $3 million.''My guess is he won't build them,'' Mr. Ueberroth said, referring to Al Davis, the Raiders' managing partner.
- The United States is ''dead last'' in understanding that sports can influence young people in a positive way. 
''It hasn't dawned on us,'' Mr. Ueberroth said, citing the 1980 boycott of the Moscow Olympics and the reluctance to ''share our athletes'' with less developed countries as examples of recent United States negativism at the international level.
- Even without government assistance, the L.A.O.O.C. still envisions finishing in the black, with income from television ($210 million), cash ($140 million), tickets ($90 million), interest and a coin program covering its commitment. 
Mr. Ueberroth, however, has cut his original estimate of a $21 million profit to $8 million.
Mr. Ueberroth said a nationwide ticket policy that would give individuals 60 days in which to file their requests would be announced soon. 
Historically, many Olympic events are not sold out; but in the event of any sellout, a computer will select winners randomly from requests.
Appointed in March 1979, after being recruited at the last minute by the search firm of Korn-Ferry, Mr. Ueberroth left the financial comforts of the second-largest travel corporation in North America, First Travel, which he founded 20 years ago, to head the 360-member organizing committee. 
Committed to financing the games privately for the first time made Mr. Ueberroth an early target in I.O.C. circles, particularly after the administrative and financial foulups at the 1980 Winter Olympics in Lake Placid and Denver's aborted plans to stage the 1976 Winter Games.
 
Lake Placid Is Recalled
Foreign delegations are most seriously concerned about such matters as security, transportation and their treatment upon their arrival here. 
Some delegations had criticized the housing, transportation and services provided by the organizers in Lake Placid.
Mr. Ueberroth said his trip to Washington was designed to explain to Administration officials ''the Olympic Games and what they're about.''
''I just want to be sure as we move along we're not passing up chances for international friendship,'' he said. 
John Caulfield, of the visa affairs department, said making entry to the United States easier for foreign Olympic athletes had been discussed. 
''In general, it is quite reasonable that we would take steps to facilitate the entry of members of foreign delegations,'' Mr. Caulfield said. 
''The Olympics is different from an occasional golfer or player from the North American Soccer League.''
The success or failure of the Los Angeles Olympics, Mr. Ueberroth said, would be measured not in dollars and cents, but in how well the city embraced the games. 
''Things go better when people like it,'' he said.
''I think the best sporting event in this country is the New York City Marathon, because the people embrace that event,'' said Mr. Ueberroth, a San Jose State University graduate, who tried out for and failed to make the United States Olympic water polo team in 1956.
