
China's best prospect for the Olympic gold in track and field hardly looks like a world- class athlete. 
With his Nike shirt worn inside out, wire-rimmed spectacles and hunched back, 21-year-old Zhu Jianhua is plugged into his Sony Walkman, nonchalantly watching a pre-Olympic competition from the bleachers, as he waits for his event.
Nicknamed ''Bean Pole'' in his native Shanghai, Zhu's frail, long- legged 6-foot-4-inch, 152-pound frame marks him as a high jumper. 
In a backward flop style that combines the agility of a gymnast with the speed of a runner, his featherweight body sails across the 7-7 1/4 (2.33- meter) bar with the ease of an airplane at takeoff.
Profile of Zhu Jianhua, China's master technician of art of high jump, who is competing in Olympic games; photo (M)
Though he has set the world record three times - at 7-9 1/4 (2.37 meters) and 7-9 3/4 (2.38) in China's preliminaries and national championship last year, and 7-10 (2.39) at a West German track meet in Eberstadt in June - the ultimate test of Zhu's athletic prowess will be the men's finals in the high jump on Aug. 
11.
Can he handle the pressure of international competition, particularly against the two-time United States Olympic bronze medalist, Dwight Stones?
As the leading athlete of the first full Chinese team to join the Olympic Games, Zhu bears the additional pressure of ''winning for the motherland.''
For a nation with a weak sports tradition, once dismissed as the ''sick man of Asia,'' Olympic medals carry the symbolic weight of China's struggle for recognition as a world economic power.
''We have three objectives,'' Hu Hongfei, Zhu's 59-year-old coach, said in his native Shanghai dialect. 
''First, to bring in at least the bronze, second, to bring in the gold, third, for Zhu to break his own world record.''
 
Has Stones's Respect
According to Stones, now 30, Zhu is ''technically the best high jumper around; he'll probably be the first to clear 8 feet.''
But, Stones added, world-record high jumpers don't necessarily perform well in the Olympics.
''The Olympic record was significantly below the world record in 1972 and 1976,'' Stones explained. 
''Every time Zhu broke the world record, the competition was held under ideal conditions. 
Eberstadt was a synthetic environment with only 4,000 spectators; a fantastic facility, where high jumping was the only event. 
The Olympics is a one-time competition with special pressures. 
There will be distractions - the 1,500 final, 400 relay final and other premier track events that same day, the crowds; it will be a long competition that could last five hours.''
Stones emphasized the importance of mental preparation in managing the lengthy hours between jumps.
''Zhu is 21 years old; this will be his first Olympics,'' Stones said. 
''This is my third Olympics on the facility where I made my best mark - 7-7 3/4.''
 
Zhu's 'Bad Luck'
Once before, Zhu buckled under pressure. 
At the first international track and field championship in Helsinki last year he finished third, clearing 7-6. 
Only two months before he had set his first world record on his home turf in Shanghai.
''It was bad luck,'' Zhu said of the world championships. 
''I was nervous and did not know how to handle the psychological pressure of international competition.''
 
Is he nervous about the Olympics?
''No. I've paid my dues,'' he said in a conversation conducted in his Shanghainese dialect.
''Comparing oneself to others increases anxiety,'' Hu said. 
''When Zhu was a child, I told him that the goal was to raise his own personal record among the best high jumpers in his age group; I never pushed him to be first in competition. 
I tell Zhu that he must aim high, keeping in mind his own record and the world record. 
The opponent is the bar, not the competitor.''
 
'Long Lower Limbs'
Hu, a former middle-distance runner who describes himself as a ''so-so athlete determined to succeed as a coach,'' first spotted the 10-year-old boy's ''long lower limbs, the stuff of a high jumper,'' at a school playground, and has been training Zhu since.
''The unity of their coach-athlete relationship is remarkable,'' said Harry Sneider, Stones's coach, who also has plaudits for Zhu's technique. 
''Zhu's speed conversion, the ability to convert horizontal speed into vertical lift, and his use of the swing leg are marvelous. 
He's also got the best flexibility of any jumper. 
Zhu has maximized the use of his physique to achieve extraordinary results.''
''Zhu needs to develop endurance, though, through weight lifting,'' said Stones.
''Stones has his technique and I have mine,'' said Zhu, who only takes 10 rapid-fire steps to the bar, before his speedy flight up and over.
The competitive styles of both Zhu and Stones are as dissimilar as their personalities, perhaps a reflection of the dichotomy between East and West. 
Stones is outgoing and talkative, with a reputation for ''psyching out'' his competitors, whereas Zhu appears introspective and mellow as he competes against his own standard.
Mobbed by reporters after he had won the pre-Olympic competition, Zhu handled the press with aplomb, and simply walked away when he'd had enough.
''For every half-hour I speak, Zhu only says two words,'' said Hu.
Fans come up to Zhu and say ''Youre No. 1,'' or ''Good luck,'' and Zhu understands and looking genuinely pleased, murmuring a humble ''thank you,'' the only two words he knows in English.
Zhu's public reserve masks the determination of a professional athlete, which was evident at a young age. 
At one time suring his childhood, Zhu continued to high jump, despite a painful wound from a splinter on the sole of his foot. 
Zhu was a sickly youngster who suffered from frequent fevers and respiratory problems, and as the pampered youngest son of five children, he was discouraged from sports by his parents.
He also suffered from ''fear of height,'' ducking the bar instead of going over it, whenever the height was raised, not an uncommon phobia among high jumpers, said Hu. 
How Zhu performs on that one day of the Olympic competition, however, will depend on his ability to handle the distractions and his detractors; how he manages his energy level; whether he can endure the August heat, all while carrying the weight of Chinese and world expectations.
Can he put it all together?
''Only Zhu himself knows,'' said Hu.
