
This bustling Central Asian city is barely 100 miles from China, yet for 20 years it has had virtually no contact with the other side of the frontier.
Centuries of trading, intrigue and war have given way to silence, broken only by the propaganda broadcasts that each side beams at the other across the towering Tien Shan range. 
On July 1, however, a small beginning was made on restoring some of those ancient ties when the two countries reopened two border points that have been sealed since the ideological and territorial rift between them broke into the open in the 1960's.
The opening of the barriers for local trading, at a mountain pass at Turugart, 130 miles east of here, and another at Korgas, 470 miles to the northeast, will not extend to passenger traffic, and thus will not relieve the forced separation of tens of thousands of families that straddle the border. 
Nor will it mean any major increase in trade, since the major country-to-country traffic, which will more than double this year, passes through rail points thousands of miles farther east.
OSH, U.S.S.R. 
- This bustling Central Asian city is barely 100 miles from China, yet for 20 years it has had virtually no contact with the other side of the frontier.
Nonetheless, it is a symbolic step in the overall effort by Moscow and Peking to improve relations. 
Two rounds of talks since last October, the first in Peking and the second in Moscow in March, have failed to produce any major steps toward resolving their differences, and manifestations of good will have been limited to such things as reopening minor border points, stepping up trade and reviving sports and scientific exchanges.
 
Soviet Officials Wary
Local officials here and in Frunze, capital of Soviet Kirghizia, adopt a wary tone when discussing the border reopenings, reflecting the ambivalence that has characterized Government pronouncements in Moscow since the unproductive round of talks in March. 
Sopubek B. Begaliyev, chairman of the Kirghizian state planning committee, mentioned the border points only in passing while reviewing the state of affairs in the republic for visiting reporters, and added cryptically, ''You can say this is some evidence of improved relations.''
A similarly noncommittal view was expressed by Karybek M. Moldobayev, first secretary of the Frunze party committee, who dismissed suggestions that the gradual improvement in ties was of particular importance to Kirghizia, given its proximity to China and the memories of border clashes that have occurred during the years of enmity. 
The clashes, mainly in 1969, never reached the intensity of the fighting on the Amur and Ussuri rivers in the Far East, where the death toll was considerable.
''As part of the Soviet state, Kirghizia will benefit along with other parts of the republic,'' he said. 
Hardly a year ago, when Leonid I. Brezhnev was making little headway with his appeals to China for a turn toward improved ties, visitors here found a more emphatic attitude. 
Then local officials spoke openly of the ''threat'' that they said China's military presence posed to Kirghizia, and they recounted how conditions on the other side of the border caused tens of thousands of refugees to pour across the frontier into Kirghizia at the height of China's Cultural Revolution in the late 1960's.
Today, such matters are approached more discreetly. 
Asanbek Tokombayev, head of the republic's radio and television service, recalled the border skirmishes as ''small-scale matters'' that had long since been forgotten, and described border tensions in general as ''a thing of the past.''
Other officials questioned on the matter said they attached little importance to China's historical claim to Soviet territory on the north side of the Pamir Mountains, part of a much wider Chinese position that places about 580,000 square miles of Soviet territory in the category of land seized from imperial China under ''unequal'' treaties with the Russian czars.
 
Slight Interest in China
Mr. Tokombayev said that the border reopenings were not sufficiently interesting to audiences here to warrant sending film crews to monitor the event. 
Indeed, he said, there was little general interest here in what was going on in China, apart perhaps from the people of Uighur, Kazakh or Kirghiz origin who had been residents of China until the 1960's but had taken up residence here and become Soviet citizens.
He said he was ''unsure'' whether China was still broadcasting radio propaganda in the local languages, ''but we do not listen, anyway.''
He denied knowledge of Soviet propaganda transmissions, but Western monitoring services have confirmed that Soviet stations in Alma-Ata, Tashkent and elsewhere in Central Asia continue to vaunt the higher Soviet standard of living in shortwave programs transmitted across the mountains in Uighur and Kazakh.
Almost everywhere, officials questioned on the matter said that the greatest threat these days came not from Peking but from Washington, and President Reagan's program of modernizing United States nuclear arms. 
This is the standard line in Moscow. 
But on the streets of Osh, an industrial city of half a million that sits amid one of the most fertile agricultural areas in Central Asia, ordinary people tended to reverse the view.
''United States?'' a gold-toothed fruit vendor in the Osh bazaar said, as an American reporter sampled one of his melons. 
''Excellent,'' he said, giving a thumbs-up sign.
