
INTELLECTUALS AND THE STATE IN MODERN CHINA A Narrative H istory. 
By Jerome B. Grieder. 395 pp. 
New Y ork: The Free Pres s. 
$22.50.
CHINA'S INTELLECTUALS Advise and Dissent. 
By Merle Goldman. 
276 pp. 
Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press. 
$22.
FOR ordinary mortals who have not acquired through study or practice the art of deciphering Chinese thought and politics, such matters can seem forbiddingly unfamiliar or quite simply impenetrable. 
The Confucian heritage sounds impossibly archaic and the Marxist-Leninist present is hardly inviting. 
In the past 30 years, debates about philosophy and politics have usually been conducted in code: Today's leaders and issues wear the disguise of figures and events from the past, from a literary and historical culture unknown to most people in the West. 
Those brief moments during which the Chinese have spoken en clair, such as the Hundred Flowers campaign of 1957 and the Democracy Movement of 1978-79, have riveted our attention but ended almost as suddenly as they began.
Roger Garside reviews Jerome B Grieder's "Intellectuals and the State in Modern China," and Merle Goldman's "China's Intellectuals"
So we still need interpreters - though many books by China specialists thicken the mystery instead of dispelling it. 
Not so Jerome Grieder's ''Intellectuals and the State in Modern China.''
Convinced that China's modern history is not an item of intellectual exotica but ''something that belongs to all o f us,'' Grieder set out to write about China's intellectuals from the middle of the 19th century until the Communist victory in 1949, in a manner that would be intelligible to the general reader.
The result is no facile work of popularization. 
It will make demands upon the stamina of any reader. 
At times the author overestimates the layman's capacity to absorb detail, and Grieder's style can be wordy, even portentous. 
But his broad learning and vitality of spirit make him an excellent narrator and companion for this eventful journey. 
This is intellectual history in the sense defined by Joseph Levenson: ''The history not of thought, but of men thinking.''
Grieder engages the reader emotionally as well as intellectually as he recounts the fate not only of ''men thinking'' but of ideas living, and dying, in modern China. 
It is worth noting in this regard that neither America nor Europe has in modern times been through an identity crisis of the intensity the Chinese have endured since the middle of the 19th century.
Grieder makes a major contribution to our understanding of the intellectual adjustment China has had to undergo in the face of overwhelming pressures from outside and massive economic imbalance within. 
He shows us that many of the most difficult and sensitive issues that confront China today faced Chinese intellectuals 50 or 100 years ago. 
Pragmatism in conflict with dogma, pluralism versus an ideological monopoly, how to absorb the best of foreign culture without destroying China's own sense of identity, how to devise political and legal institutions that will balance freedom and order, how to modernize the economy - all these are themes of the book as well as issues in Peking today.
''Intellectuals and the State in Modern China'' provides sketches of the lives of the protagonists, and with deft economy Grieder evokes the conditions of the China they have inhabited. 
But he concentrates on their sense of themselves, their values, philosophies and proposals for reform or revolution. 
He conveys the agonizing of those who wanted to save the imperial system but realized it could not be done by drawing on the resources of traditional philosophy. 
Men like the early Communist leader Chen Duxiu icons of inherited culture with verbal violence. 
We hear the quieter voice of the liberal pragmatist Hu Shi calling on China to adopt a different strategy, to choose pluralism instead of totalitarianism.
Since the death of Mao Zedong, China has been engaged in a sober reassessment of its socialist revolution, and it is enlightening to look back now with Grieder at what Hu Shi wrote. 
''Civilization is not created wholesale,'' he cautioned in 1919. 
''It is created bit by bit and drop by drop. 
Progress cannot be achieved all at one go, of an evening.''
After the traumas of the Great Leap Forward and the Cultural Revolution, such words must sound more persuasive to Chinese ears now than they did in the 1920's. 
But in those days, as Grieder points out, in a nation with no tradition of tolerance for a party of loyal opposition, and at a time of growing anarchy, it was not surprising th at China's leaders should have been drawn to authoritarian political forces, Chiang Kai-shek at one pole and the Communist Party at the other. 
Events in the 1920's and 1930's were pressing, and people were too impatient for Hu Shi's ''drop by drop''philosophy.
Nevertheless, from Grieder's account, Hu Shi emerges as a thinker no less radical than his Communist contemporaries: China must ''accept without prejudice the scientific-industrial world culture and the spiritual civilization that underlies it,'' he said, and declared that ''the only way to have democracy is to have democracy.''
In one of those connections that make his book so stimulating, Grieder moves from Hu Shi in the 1920's to Wei Jingsheng, the most radical activist of the Democracy Movement of 1978-79, and places them both in the line of those who have struggled for a pluralist China.
But Grieder does not deal with the period after 1949 in any detail. 
Our understanding of the continuities between the old China and the new is thereby impoverished. 
So few of those who study the new China possess his combination of boldness, historical perspective and ability to relate Chinese thought to the world outside. 
Intellectual history of the post-l949 period has been largely in the hands of craftsmen, not artists.
Merle Goldman is a fine artisan. 
In the serried ranks of Sinologists, there is no more skillful code breaker than she. 
Her earlier book, ''Literary Dissent in Communist China,'' chronicled literary developments up to the Great Leap Forward at the end of the 1950's. 
In her new book, ' 'China's Intellectu als: Advise and Dissent,'' she has broadened her focus to inc lude not only literary writers but philosophers, historians, journal ists and scientists.
The most valuable part of this book is the chapter in which she interprets the veiled debates that took place in the early 1960's, in the aftermath of the disastrous Great Leap Forward. 
With scholarly precision Goldman indicates how intellectuals, enjoying the patronage of powerful Communist Party leaders opposed to Mao, expressed an amazing array of heterodox ideas, reopening questions that seemed to have been settled by the Communist victory in 1949.
She presents the playwright Wu Han calling for the breakup of collective farms, eminent historians speaking of the need to unite the country around common goals, and philosophers like Liu Jie arguing that the Confucian ideal of human kindness produced in China an evolutionary rather than a revolutionary process. 
No one to my knowledge has researched and written so comprehensively on this aspect of the period. 
But the rest of the book is disappointing. 
Its title leads one to expect an intellectual history; one finds instead a history of the bureaucratic politics of the intellectual culture.
Merle Goldman is so preoccupied with Lenin's question ''Who: Whom?'' that she presents intellectual ideas and values as functions of these bureaucratic politics, whereas we have abundant evidence that there is an autonomous life of the mind and spirit in China.
This has been plain to see each time the lid has been lifted on post-1949 China: during the Hundred Flowers campaign and the Cultural Revolution, and in the years since Zhou Enlai's death in 1976. 
A volcanic eruption of poetry has provided evidence that traditional patterns of expression are being married to contemporary thought and feeling. 
For an intellectual history to be published today without a proper examination of that evidence - let alone of the earlier evidence - is just not good enough.
That is not all. 
Goldman has not developed the vital connections between what has happened in this later period and the point at which Grieder stopped. 
The social context in which Chinese intellectuals operate is all but invisible. 
Finally, Goldman's acknowledgments and notes on sources confirm what the text itself makes clear: Discussions with Chinese played no significant part in her study.
Such detached and dispassionate writing is sometimes regarded as ''scientific.''
Certainly it is justifiable if one is writing about molecules or plants, neither of which have been known to die for their ideas. 
But when transposed to the realm of people, this approach becomes unscientific; it filters out too much of the essence of our untidy lives.
Oh, ye watchers of latter-day China, open your doors and bring into your studies other men's emotions, suffering and dreams!
Nations and their politics are not made by power play alone.
