
To trim, as usual.
PEKING, March 6 - The passengers aboard C.A.A.C. 
Flight 1506 from the southeastern city of Fuzhou arrived in Peking on schedule, but their luggage did not. 
The passengers waited for nearly an hour before an airline employee explained that heavy air cargo had been piled on top of the luggage.
When the luggage finally appeared, the employee murmured a rare apology to an American traveler. 
''I know that C.A.A.C. is bad,'' she said.
Her admission would not be challenged even in China. 
The official Chinese press has taken up the incessant complaints about the surliness, incompetence and sloth of the Civil Aviation Administration of China, as the state airline is officially called. 
Now it is promising to undo its reputation as arguably the world's worst major airline.
A new directive issued recently by the airline's officials announced it had embarked upon a shake-up under the slogan, ''A people's airline for the people.''
According to People's Daily, incompetent managers and employees who do not shape up will be dismissed.
 
Delays to Be Announced
From now on, the party newspaper said, there should be no more rude and uncivilized behavior, bad meals, rough baggage handling and soliciting of gifts. 
It said the airline planned such startling changes as announcing flight delays honestly and feeding stranded passengers.
The campaign has been remarkable so far for the skepticism that it has evoked. 
''We'll see,'' a Government official in Peking said. 
''Deeds are more eloquent than words.''
Other veteran travelers recalled earlier pledges. 
In August 1980, the airline promised to improve after newspapers exposed cases of mismanagement, surly service and disrespect for passengers, including an argument in which one employee spat in the face of an African Ambassador's wife.
A year ago, Shen Tu, the airline's director general, admitted at an international conference of travel agents in Peking that his airline had ''many aspects which are far from satisfactory, such as deficient management, low efficiency and poor services, which caused difficulties and unpleasantness to our passengers.''
Mr. Shen added, ''We have the confidence to overcome them.''
 
Airline Earned $100 Million
Any Western airline that arbitrarily canceled flights, refused to make connecting or return reservations and was generally slovenly would most likely go bankrupt. 
But the Chinese airline earned $100 million in profits last year, thanks to a monopoly on air travel inside the world's most populous country and such practices as charging foreigners two-and-a-half-times the fare for Chinese.
The airline also restricts competition on regional flights. 
It has only five direct flights a week between Peking and Hong Kong, and applicants for a seat have to wait up to two weeks. 
C.A.A.C., which manages every aspect of civil aviation in China, refuses to let other airlines share the lucrative route. 
British Airways was finally granted the right to carry Hong Kong passengers once a week on its London-to-Peking run.
Flights on the Chinese airline are seldom full because a few seats are saved in case an important party or Government official shows up at the last minute. 
Overbooking, however, was resolved on at least one flight by setting up canvas stools in the aisle.
 
Many Need an Explanation
The airline treats flying as a privilege, and ordinary Chinese need a letter of explanation from their work unit to get a ticket. 
Sales offices tend to ignore telephone reservation requests, but appearing in person is not much better. 
A Chinese traveler reported lining up at the airline's Canton's office only to have the ticket window slam down for lunch. 
It was 10:55 A.M.
The airline has made some improvements in the last few years. 
It has upgraded its fleet of 160 or so aircraft by buying some Boeing and Douglas jetliners, although aging Soviet-made Ilyushins, Tupelovs and Antonovs still fly the provincial routes. 
The airline's pilots, trained in the Chinese Air Force, are competent, though a Western airline official said ''they do come in a little fast.''
A European military attache compared his landing in Canton to ''a strafing run.''
The Chinese, like the Russians, do not disclose air crashes unless foreigners are involved. 
In the worst incident reported, an airliner slammed into a mountain near Guilin in April 1982, killing all 112 people aboard. 
According to Hong Kong reports, an air controller gave the wrong altitude to the plane's pilot.
 
Combs for Souvenirs
Safety briefings are nonexistent on the airline's flights, and flight attendants approach their responsibilities with sometimes engaging innocence. 
A first-class traveler on a flight to Urumqi recalled how the flight attendants lounged in the spare seats eating tangerines and never offered her one.
One duty of the flight attendants involves distributing key rings, plastic combs and other inexpensive souvenirs. 
Small nail clippers were doled out on one trip, and the bored passengers set to work.
The airline tolerates an almost unlimited amount of hand baggage stuffed into overhead compartments and piled along the aisles. 
On one Shanghai-to-Hong Kong flight, a shipment of live crabs broke loose, and they scuttled under the seats.
Occasional defects in maintenance are more serious. 
A Western airline representative found a Chinese ground crew washing out and reusing disposable filters. 
When a Chinese pilot discovered problems with an engine last December, he took off from Hong Kong with his passengers aboard and flew over to Canton, where the repairs could be done more cheaply, before arriving in Peking eight hours late.
An Ilyushin-18 caught fire on its approach to Canton in December 1982 because a passenger was smoking in the lavatory. 
Some airport fire trucks had not filled their water tanks, and 23 people died in the blaze.
 
Hijackers to Be Resisted
One policy unlikely to change became apparent after an internal flight was hijacked to South Korea last May. 
Mr. Shen, the director general, said at a subsequent news conference that crews had been ordered to resist hijackers ''if the safety of the passengers is assured.''
Until now, the airline's attitude has been that disgruntled passengers could take a train, or walk. 
After the hijacking last spring it banned air travel for everyone except ranking officials, military officers and foreigners until X-ray security devices could be installed at airports.
Its wholesale cancellation of flights left stunned travelers crowding aboard trains. 
The situation has since returned to normal, which People's Daily said at the Peking airport meant ''filth, chaos and rudeness.''
peasants urging donkey carts across desert airstrip in China
