
When Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger arrives in China on Sunday for a five-day official visit, he will be introduced to an army that was at one time considered the world's best light infantry but has been overtaken by progress.
China's People's Liberation Army, with over 4.2 million men and women under arms, is largely obsolete, lacking sophisticated antitank and antiair craft missiles and electronic communications gear, among other modern necessities.
The army, which was born as a guerrilla band 56 years ago, remains mired in its traditional dual role of defending the country and ''serving the people,'' as the old Maoist slogan put it.
 
Soldiers Still Harvest Rice
Its soldiers still routinely fix roads, plant trees, raise pigs and harvest rice. 
Yu Qiuli, the army's political commissar, declared recently that the armed forces had contributed 100 million work days of public service over the last four years.
Yet an effort has now begun to transform the army into a more modern fighting machine. 
''The P.L.A. is no longer in the era of millet plus rifles,'' a commentary in the official newspaper People's Daily said last May. 
Mr. Weinberger, who is making his first visit to China, according to a Pentagon spokesman, is scheduled to review an armed forces honor guard on Sunday in Peking. 
On Tuesday he is to visit the elite Third Division of the Peking Garrison, and two days later he is to visit an aircraft factory in Xian and inspect a naval vessel in Shanghai.
The Chinese leaders are expected to ask Mr. Weinberger about the Reagan Administration's decision to liberalize its export to China of dual-use technology - primarily civilian computers and other hardware that can be adapted for military purposes.
 
U.S. Offer Remains Open
Washington's offer, made two years ago, to consider Chinese requests for United States weapons remains open, though some Western military observers here doubt that the Chinese will present Mr. Weinberger with a specific shopping list, for two reasons.
The Chinese leadership is thought to be concerned that its purchase of American arms might give the Reagan Administration a pretext to sell more weapons to the rival Nationalist regime on Taiwan. 
This issue remains a key sticking point in Chinese-American relations, since Peking interprets the joint communique of August 1982 as committing Washington to phase out its military deliveries to the Nationalists.
But China is also too poor to re-equip the world's largest army with foreign weapons. 
Mr. Yu was quoted by The Beijing Review in August as saying:
''We have never pinned our hopes for modernizing our military equipment on imports. 
China is a big country with a big army. 
We cannot afford to buy all the weapons we need. 
Even if we could afford it, it is hard to acquire really advanced weapons of important military value.'
 
Foreign Arms Used as Prototypes
The Chinese seem interested in acquiring small quantities of foreign arms that could become prototypes for eventual weapons of Chinese manufacture. 
Some Western diplomats expect the Defense Minister, Zhang Aiping, to raise this issue with Mr. Weinberger, if only in an inconclusive way, though they point out that it would be faster for China to buy the arms than the production technology.
But the indications are that China, which canceled a multimillion-dollar deal with British Aerospace earlier this year, wants to do things cheaply. 
The Chief of Staff, Yang Dezhi, assured army delegates to the National People's Congress in June that ''we will mainly rely on our own efforts to improve our weapons and equipment while introducing advanced techniques from other countries.''
Statements by Chinese military leaders, articles in the official press and analysis by Peking-based diplomats and military attaches indicate that the problem of modernization of the army extends beyond arms alone to basic tactics and leadership competence.
The army's arsenal consists of copies of Soviet weapons mostly predating 1960, when the Soviet Union stopped its military and economic assistance to China. 
Light weapons like the Chinese version of the Kalashnikov assault rifle are highly enough regarded to make China a major arms seller to developing countries.
 
Military Aircraft Outdated
But heavier equipment is badly out of date. 
The Chinese Air Force uses copies of Soviet combat aircraft that go back to the MIG-15 of Korean War days. 
Its more modern Shenyang jet fighters, painstakingly updated from the MIG-19 and MIG-21, were described by one United States analyst as ''the world's most advanced obsolete aircraft.''
China has obtained some MIG-23's from Egypt to copy and its version is now believed to be in production, but even this new plane is no match for supersonic fighters like the Soviet MIG-25 or the American F-16.
The Chinese T-59 tank is likewise copied from the old Soviet T-55. 
A newer Chinese model, the T-69, has a gun stabilizer for high-speed firing, infrared searchlights and a laser range-finder, but it remains inferior to the T-72 that spearheads Soviet armored units.
Lacking self-propelled artillery, China has tried to mount heavy 122-millimeter guns on some of its armored personnel carriers, straining their suspension systems. 
Its antitank weapons resemble first-generation Soviet models dating back at least two decades.
 
Troops Still Move on Foot
The Chinese Army still basically moves on foot. 
Of the 200 or more divisions it is estimated to have, only 11 are armored and three are airborne. 
The Chinese have mechanized three to five infantry divisions, though it is unclear whether all their battalions are included. 
By comparison, the 45 or so Soviet divisions positioned along China's northern borders are all motorized.
The Chinese Navy has at least one nuclear-powered submarine capable of firing ballistic missiles from underwater. 
Presaging a move away from the traditional role of coastal defense, two Chinese naval vessels made a nonstop 6,000-mile voyage into the South China Sea and Western Pacific earlier this year. 
But the navy remains old-fashioned.
A military attache from a North Atlantic Treaty Organization country who has watched Chinese ground military tactics said, ''It is just like World War I with trenches.''
The Chinese Army is now trying to transform its old strategy of static defense, which is vulnerable to armored and airborne assault, into what the Liberation Army's daily newspaper has called an ''active defense.''
As some Chinese officers describe it, this means combining fixed defensive positions with mobile forces for counterstrikes and guerrillas for harassment behind enemy lines. 
Wu Xiuquan, head of Peking's Institute of International Strategic Studies, told visiting American members of Congress in August that China was also prepared to use nuclear weapons against an invader.
 
'Combined Operation' Maneuvers
Last year, the Deputy Chief of Staff, Zhang Zhen, said that tank battles would be emphasized over set-piece infantry warfare and that officers would be trained to use more sophisticated weapons. 
The press has disclosed ''combined operation'' maneuvers that coordinate infantry, artillery and armor with supporting signal and engineer units.
There has also been talk of slimming down the swollen forces by 10 percent or more and relieving them of nonmilitary duties. 
More than 20 divisions, by one estimate, are being transferreed from the army to a newly formed paramilitary People's Armed Police whose duties range from guarding public buildings and embassies to manning frontier posts. 
It was reported last month that a 30,000-man army construction unit was being demobilized and reformed as a construction engineering corporation in Peking.
One of the toughest challenges is to rejuvenate the upper echelons of the army, which have been dominated by aging guerrilla veterans too conservative to accept change. 
A plan to restore military ranks, which were abolished in 1965, has yet to be put into effect, partly because there would be so many elderly generals.
 
Higher Education Required
Other steps have been taken to create a younger and more professional officer corps. 
Mr. Yang, the Chief of Staff, reported in June that officers would no longer be chosen from the enlisted ranks but must graduate instead from military academies. 
The Political Commissar, Mr. Yu, told The Beijing Review that ''we have made it a rule that officers above the platoon level must have received a college education.''
The military has ranked last in China's ''four modernizations'' campaign, behind industry, agriculture and science and technology. 
The army's military budget this year has been put at 17.87 billion yuan - less than $9 billion - which is about the same as those of the last two years, though some programs like nuclear weapons and missile development have been tucked away in the budgets of ostensibly civilian ministries.
China's leader, Deng Xiaoping, has reportedly persuaded the army leadership to accept this low priority, arguing that industrialization will create a base for the domestic production of sophisticated weapons.
 
Technical Renovations Cited
''We have devised and produced our own atomic and hydrogen bombs, long-range guided missiles and other sophisticated strategic weapons for self-defense,'' the Communist Party journal Red Flag said last year in encouraging the army to stretch out the equipment that it already has. 
A few days ago, Mr. Yang, the Chief of Staff, said at an army meeting on arms production that over 12,000 technical renovations had been made on Chinese wapons in recent years.
But Mr. Deng has also maintained his grip over the armed forces by retaining the chairmanship of the party and state military commissions, while giving up other Government and party posts. 
He has installed in key slots senior officers who, if not enthusiastic about his policies, are at least unwilling to oppose them. 
Five of the commanders of China's 11 military regions have been replaced in the last year.
