
A diner in a Chinatown restaurant was shot yesterday by a man who was then shot to death by a man identified as a part-owner of the restaurant, after a pursuit in streets crowded with lunchtime strollers.
A passer-by was also wounded, possibly by a bullet that passed through the body of the man who was slain. 
Both the man shot in the restaurant and the man wounded on the street were reported in stable condition.
Gunman is shot to death by Kam Lun Association chairman Herbert Liu, who pursued him from China Royal Restaurant, Chinatown, NYC, after gunman shot companion Sho Yo Laio; passer-by is wounded; police say incident is apparently not related to recent shootings in Chinatown (M)
The first shooting occurred at 12:45 P.M. at the China Royal Restaurant, at 17 Division Street, sending diners scurrying into the busy street.
The police said the man who had shot the suspected gunman was Herbert Liu, 42 years old. 
He is chairman of the Kam Lun Association, affiliated with a Chinese fraternal organization known as the American Freemason Association. 
The police said that he was licensed to carry a gun and that no charges had been brought against him.
Detectives said that employees had told them Mr. Liu was a part-owner of the restaurant, but that Mr. Liu had later denied this.
Inspector Joseph G. DeMartino of the Manhattan Detective Area said that the shooting in the restaurant followed an argument, apparently over money, that had broken out at the table, but that the nature of the dispute was still unclear.
''There is nothing at this time to connect this shooting with any of the other recent shootings in Chinatown,'' he said.
On March 13, Michael Chen, the 33- year-old leader of the Flying Dragons, was found shot to death, with five bullet holes in the head, in the Hip Sing Credit Union office at Pell Street.
Yesterday's shooting at the China Royal occurred in the second-floor dining room of the resturant.
A short time before, leaders of the Chinatown community and others took part in the dedication of a new marble base for the statue of Confucius that overlooks the maze of cross streets that intersect Chatham Square.
Some of those who were at the ceremony, the police said, then had lunch at the China Royal, including Herbert P. Rickman, a special assistant to Mayor Koch, and Police Inspector Edward Walsh. 
They left shortly before the shootings.
Seated at another table were four men, Inspector DeMartino said. 
Two of them left. 
Then one suddenly drew a .38-caliber revolver and fired into the face of a 49-year-old man identified as Sho Yo Laio, 49, of 75 Montgomery Street.
Mr. Liu chased the gunman and fired three shots, the police said. 
The man he was chasing fell face down in front of the Great Shanghai Restaurant, at 27-29 Division Street. 
He was not identified nor was the passerby, who was struck in the buttocks.
