
Bo Yang is a mild-mannered, bespectacled scholar who scribbles Chinese characters on notebooks in his small study, and infuriates people throughout the Chinese-speaking world.
Taiwan once labeled Mr. Bo a Communist agent, and imprisoned him for nine years. 
On the Chinese mainland, the authorities this year banned his books and condemned him for insulting the Chinese people. 
And in Chinatowns in the United States, as well as Hong Kong and Southeast Asia, Mr. Bo's acid pen has earned him bitter criticism as well as adulation.
Mr. Bo is a Chinese Voltaire, a social critic who is prolific, biting, and read. 
A stocky 68-year-old man with thick glasses and a bump below his knee where Taiwanese interrogators broke his leg to elicit a confession, Mr. Bo is best known for his scathing criticisms of his own people and culture.
''The Chinese people continue to grow increasingly base and despicable,'' Mr. Bo writes in a notable essay, ''The Ugly Chinaman,'' that was first published nearly three years ago. 
He complains that Chinese people are too conformist, too loud, too cruel, too crass, and, above all, too willing to tolerate injustice.
 
'A State of Ugliness'
''How is it possible for such a great people and great nation to have degenerated to such a state of ugliness?''
Mr. Bo writes elsewhere in the essay. 
''Not only have we been bullied around by foreigners; even worse, for centuries we've been bullied around by our own kind - from tyrannical emperors to despotic officials and ruthless mobs.''
Such vitriol is finding a larger audience. 
Mr. Bo says that some 120,000 copies of ''The Ugly Chinaman'' have been sold in Taiwan, and at least five editions were published in China in 1986 before Beijing banned the essay this year during the nationwide crackdown on intellectuals. 
There have been two translations into English, and the Chinese version has been published in periodicals in Hong Kong, Los Angeles, New York and other cities.
''Bo Yang's name is well known on both sides of the Taiwan Strait, in America and in Southeast Asia,'' said T. K. Tong, chairman of the Department of Asian Studies at the City College of New York. 
''I'd say he is the leading writer in Chinese literature today.''
Dai Tien, a literary editor and newspaper columnist in Hong Kong, said that what sets Mr. Bo apart is his criticism of Chinese culture. 
''Traditionally, Chinese writers have always written nice things about their own people,'' Mr. Dai said. 
New Book Completed Now Bo Yang has just completed a new book, to be published in October, that expands on the theme of ''The Ugly Chinaman.''
The main essay in the book was published in September in Hong Kong and Los Angeles, and is attracting considerable attention. 
The essay focuses on the reason why Mr. Bo continues to drum away at what he regards as the shortcomings of the Chinese people. 
Only when the Chinese acknowledge the flaws, he believes, will they be liberated of them.
The latest essay, a blend of history and fiction, is nominally about the brutal destruction of a town by a Chinese warlord 1,200 years ago. 
As the warlord and his soldiers slaughter the townspeople, the local queen utters a terrible curse on the Chinese people: they will be weak and disunited and suffer constant tragedy. 
When the warlord asks when the curse will end, the queen answers, ''The curse will never be lifted, unless the Chinese people wake up to the fact that they have been cursed.''
Bo Yang, sipping tea in the living room of his spacious apartment in a Taipei suburb, explained: ''I want to make people think about why we are so weak. 
We have to wake up to it.''
If his writing style is bold and contentious, Mr. Bo seems quiet, almost diffident, in conversation. 
He works in a study overlooking the green hills outside of Taipei, his desk crammed with books and papers and unfinished articles. 
Surrounding the desk are shelves groaning with books, including about 55 volumes of fiction, essays and history that he has written himself. 
The shelves also accommodate the poetry published by his wife, Jeanette Chang Shiang-hua.
 
Novels Attack Communism
Born in Kaifeng, China, as Guo Yidong, the author is today known mostly by the pseudonym Bo Yang. 
He came to Taiwan after the Communist victory on the mainland in 1949, and in the 1950's he wrote many novels attacking Communism.
In the 1960's he began attacking the Nationalist Government on Taiwan, and in 1968 he was arrested and accused of being a Communist agent. 
The prosecutor demanded the death penalty, but he was released after serving nine years and 26 days in prison.
''In prison a day is like a thousand years,'' Mr. Bo wrote in one of the many poems drafted during his imprisonment. 
He also wrote several history books while incarcerated, and he says that it was during this time that he concluded that there was no moral difference between the Communists on the mainland and the Nationalists on Taiwan.
A common Chinese culture, based on Confucianism and spiced with cruelty and intolerance, afflicts both Taiwan and the mainland, he says. 
It is changing, he concedes, but too slowly.
''I have discovered that God has predestined people like me to go to jail, whether the jail be in Taiwan or on the Chinese mainland,'' he writes in ''The Ugly Chinaman.''
''Why does speaking the truth lead to such unfortunate consequences?
My answer is that this is not a problem of any particular individual, but of Chinese culture as a whole.''
