
THERE is the shock of ''deja vu'' about the the Guangdong Yue Opera Troupe of China, which gave its first performance in the Beacon Theater on Saturday night. 
The opera troupe, which is performing 10 operas in Chinese until July 18, is presenting a style of musical theater that developed only recently in Chinese history - a mere 200 years or so ago, which makes it a bit younger than European opera and a bit older than grand opera.
As in a deja vu, the opera ''Searching the School,'' seemed intimately familiar. 
There was the young woman, unjustly condemned; the sensitive man, unwittingly causing her harm; vaudeville pieces of comedic dialogue between a folksy man and a mannered scholar; mime out of a silent movie; a woman disguised as a man.
THERE is the shock of ''deja vu'' about the the Guangdong Yue Opera Troupe of China, which gave its first performance in the Beacon Theater on Saturday night.
The shock was that, as in a deja vu, there was something strange, as if the scene were watched from the outside: and so it was. 
It derived from folk traditions in the south of China, and used folk instruments - including the erxian, a two-string guitar - and an elegant microtonal folk-song style, a heightened speech, in which pitch and duration extend the expressive sounds of words. 
It was also created with formalized gestures: the placing of fingers in the air, the motion of hand against face and the explicit darting of eyes were used, along with the stock situations, to express an inner life.
Then, too, there were the costumes, peach, lime and violet robes and headgear; the women's hairpieces, long black locks divided into parts and adorned with shells and beads; and the sets, gauzy drapes, ocean backdrops and eloquently simple light effects.
And if the plot unfolded familiarly, it was also always surprising, taking place in a different realm: A woman is flying her kite; the string breaks. 
A man finds it and writes a poem upon it; when the kite is returned, the poem seems incriminating; she is beaten and imprisoned. 
In 19th-century opera she would have to have an illegitimate son to be so condemned; instead a gust of wind and a poem carries her to her fate.
The opera, then, fascinated, even while long stretches of dialogue could be understood only by the largely Chinese audience, which could also read the Chinese script flashed on a small screen near the stage.
Hong Xiannu, as the woman, Chilian, created a minutely detailed performance that at times made her transformation into a man and her shifting emotions seem uncanny. 
Now in her 50's, she is reportedly a classic actress in this form. 
She was abused by the Cultural Revolution, rehabilitated, abused because of her connection with the Gang of Four and rehabilitated again. 
With such experience must have come some knowledge of incriminating poems and wind gusts.
Her daughter, Hong Hong, played the same role in some scenes, giving the uncanny another twist. 
Huang Zhiming, as the schoolmaster Xie Bao, was also a theatrical master, mixing seriousness with exaggeration. 
Chen Xiaofeng was the stolid yet sensitive scholar Zhang Yimin. 
Ye Weixiong was Qiong Tai.
The operas scheduled vary from the fantastical to the military and, judging from the first, the Guangdong Yue Opera might well provide a fascinating experience - at least once.
