
A former foreign leader and frequent visitor here once asked Deng Xiaoping about the best strategy for regaining office. 
''Be patient,'' Mr. Deng said, laughing. 
It was advice born of experience. 
Few leaders have been as far down as Mr. Deng was between 1966 and 1973 and again between 1976 and 1977, when Mao Zedong and his cronies reduced the disputatious little man from Szechuan to the status of an ordinary worker. 
The Red Guards called him a ''Napoleon'' for his imperious ways, but the nickname proved more apt than they imagined.
Like the French Emperor returning from exile on Elba, Mr. Deng came back, in his case to a new hold on power beyond any he had known.
Last week, seven years after he gained control of the Communist Party, China's pre-eminent leader made his boldest move yet to outmaneuver those who oppose his ''open door'' reforms.
At a special conference, more than 130 high-ranking veterans of the party's days as a peasant guerrilla force were gently shunted aside in favor of middle-aged officials selected for their loyalty to Mr. Deng's vision of a modernized, competitive future.
The resignations were the culmination of a campaign that has already resulted in the forced retirement of more than a million civil servants and tens of thousands of military officers.
Almost all the retirees were in their 70's or 80's and had marched with Mao. 
Among the more prominent were Marshal Ye Jianying, 88 years old, one of the five men who sat with Mr. Deng on the Politburo's Standing Committee, China's inner circle; Deng Yingchao, 81, the widow of Zhou Enlai and the country's highest-ranking woman, and Wang Dongxing, 72, the former head of Mao's bodyguard. 
Surprisingly, two Cabinet members, Defense Minister Zhang Aiping, 75, and Culture Minister Zhu Muzhi, 69, were also removed.
In part, the retirements - 64 from the Central Committee, 10 from the Politburo - were designed to bring new vitality into the overaged hierarchy. 
But by pressing for the departure of dozens of leaders with ties to the party's inward-looking obscurantist past, Mr. Deng was also attempting to slay the Maoist dragon once and for all.
It seemed an appropriate time. 
After six weeks at a seaside retreat, Mr. Deng returned to the capital for his 81st birthday on Aug. 
24 with a walnut tan. 
But his age is beginning to show. 
He has developed a minor speech impediment and a miniaturized aid in his left ear has only slighly improved his hearing. 
He banters about going to see Hong Kong after China gets the colony back in 1997, but virtually everyone assumes that the post-Deng transition cannot be far away.
Because he trod carefully in securing his power after 1978, Mr. Deng is in a hurry now. 
At the Party Congress in 1982, the first under his control, he pulled nine of his allies onto the Politburo, but was left with a rump of holdovers from the Mao era who continued to snipe at his reforms. 
In 1983, the policies came under heavy pressure during a ''spiritual pollution'' campaign that was blatantly anti-Western, and it was several months before Mr. Deng mustered the political muscle to suppress it.
At that time, he and his allies devised an expedient for consolidating their position: the special conference now in session. 
Only two such meetings have been held since the party's founding in 1921, one in 1937 to approve the policy of a ''united front'' with Chiang Kai-Shek's nationalists against Japan, and another in 1955, when Mao needed the party stamp on his ouster of a major rival, Gao Gang, and Gao's associate, Rao Shushi. 
One of the keynote speakers on that occasion was Mr. Deng.
The 1982 party Constitution envisaged special conferences for the discussion of ''major problems that require timely solution.''
Although they have never been used for wholesale political housecleaning, the Dengists used their Central Committee majority to deem that the phrase covered the need to ''rejuvenate'' the committee, a task that would normally be handled by the next Party Congress in 1987.
That they were sensitive to mumblings about irregular proceedings was implied by a constitutional exposition that Hu Yaobang, the General Secretary, offered the conference's opening session.
This week, Mr. Deng will unveil the list of those he has recruited to the Politburo. 
At the top will be two men who have emerged under his stewardship as heirs-apparent - Hu Qili, 56, favored to succeed the unrelated Hu Yaobang as General Secretary, and Li Peng, 57, the insiders' choice to take over from Zhao Ziyang as Prime Minister.
 
Economic Growth
Both are university-educated, tough and economically literate, particularly the Soviet-educated Mr. Li, who impressed his hosts on a tour of the United States this summer.
Beyond their talents, the new elite inculcated by Mr. Deng will have the advantage of the vaulting popularity of his reforms. 
Statistics released at the conference showed that since they took hold in 1980 there has been an average annual growth rate of 10 percent, against a best rate of 2 or 3 percent under Mao.
There have also been huge leaps in basic living indices - a 600 percent increase in retail shops and services, a 120 percent rise in retail food sales, an 85 percent increase in the income of peasants and a gigantic leap, to 15 million, in the number engaged in private business.
But to describe the strengthening of Mr. Deng's hand on the Central Committee as ''a guarantee'' of the reform policies, as the People's Daily did in its editorial, is to discount party history.
The contest between the Maoist levelers and those such as Mr. Deng, who see Communism as a means of making China rich and strong, has deep and bitter roots, and there is the example of the immediate post-Mao period to show that majorities evaporate rapidly when sentiment shifts in the innermost councils of power. 
The Dengists are stronger, but the opposition is still there.
