
ABC-TV's final Mutual of Omaha Spirit of Adventure Series for the season, ''Uncovering China's Hidden Wildlife,'' is a splendid production that serves to remind us that man, this planet's ultimate predator, now holds the fate of so many less fierce and less adaptable creatures in his hands.
The show, which will be broadcast July 19 at 5 P.M. Eastern time, abounds in brilliant footage of many of China's rare or endangered species whose habitat ranges from rain forests to the snow-capped Himalayas. 
One sees a Manchurian tiger stalking and killing a deer, and another tiger giving birth. 
One watches researchers working with the rare and wondrous white flag dolphin, a fresh-water mammal once common in the Yangtze River, whose ranks have been reduced to about 100 animals living in captivity. 
And one also observes a brief glimpse of the courtship ritual of the red-crowned crane, a huge bird - total population about 1,000 - that summers in Siberia and winters on the coast of the Yellow Sea in China. 
It is comforting to learn that their population has doubled since 1949.
There is also a fascinating sequence showing Chinese alligators bursting free of eggs and scuttling toward the water while their mother looks on. 
These alligators, now listed as critically endangered, have a chance of maintaining a toehold on Earth if a breeding program being conducted at a research station in Anhui Province is successful.
Other rare creatures in the show include the caribou and yak, the Asian elephant, the Himalayan black bear and the Mongolian moose.
A short but telling segment is devoted to villagers busy burning and clearing land for agriculture, part of the enormous effort to feed the country's more than 1.2 billion inhabitants, an endeavor taking place all over the world that is, along with highways, factories and homes, gobbling up the habitat that the creatures man would protect must have in order to survive and flourish.
Devotees of the Mutual of Omaha series will be pleased with its return to the Panda Reserve at Woolong, where, one learns, a giant panda cub born in captivity last October is doing well. 
The endangered giant panda's habitat has been reduced to a few hundred square miles of high-altitude bamboo forest and there are less than 1,000 of the animals living in the wild. 
(The current Eastman Kodak Colorama display in Grand Central Terminal celebrates the arrival of two giant pandas at the Bronx Zoo. 
These animals, on loan from China, will remain in New York City until the end of October.) The show is a brilliantly photographed but grim account of the destruction or corruption of wild places, as well as a celebration of man's efforts, however belated, to correct the wrongs and lessen future occurrences of them. 
One truly happy note is sounded in the story of China's Pere David's deer. 
There are records of these animals in China's history as far back as 6,000 years. 
Early in this century, when they were nearly extinct, a few of them were brought to an estate in England where they prospered. 
Some of the descendants of those animals have been successfully reintroduced into China. 
Pere David was a Jesuit missionary and naturalist who ''discovered'' the deer in 1865 within the Imperial Park near Peking.
Having been a judge for one of these affairs a few years ago, I can vouch for the enthusiasm and angling skills of those who participate in what is called the American Bluefish Classic.
Labeled the world's largest tournament for the species - a claim I have no reason to doubt - this year's event, the 12th, will bring together 175 to 200 boats and as many as 800 fishermen, who early on the morning of July 18 will cross the checkpoint at Captain Andy's Marina in Margate, N.J., and head for the open ocean. 
The boat that catches the eight heaviest fish will win a winter vacation for four at the Bimini Big Game Fishing Club in the Bahamas. 
Second place in this category is $1,250.
The grand prize may not be awarded, but it is not out of reach. 
If he who weighs in the heaviest fish also tops the existing tournament record of 15 pounds 15 ounces, he will receive United StatesTreasury Bonds with a maturity value of $75,000. 
Even if the heaviest fish does not break the tournament record, it will fetch $6,000 in cash.
The affair is once again being sponsored by the Historic Smithville Inn. 
Ralph Stork of the marina is one of the organizers and keeps a sharp eye on the activities. 
Almost every fishing tournament offering substantial prizes has its occasional difficulties with would-be cheaters. 
The year I was last at Margate, my fellow judges and I had grown somewhat weary of gazing at hundreds of blues as they were placed on the scales before us and weighed. 
I probably wouldn't have noticed if a concrete building block had been substituted for a fish.
Not so Ralph Stork. 
Late in the day when a sodden, glassy-eyed batch of blues was being run past us, Stork observed their flaccid condition and opined that they had been caught somewhere else the day before. 
All but one of the anglers aboard the boat that brought those fish in had faded away; he denied any wrongdoing, but after conferring, presumably by telephone, with his crew mates, told us to withdraw his boat's entry. 
Since that time - should anyone contemplate chicanery - all the tournament fish have been tested with an electronic device that reveals how long they have been out of water.
The entry fee is $250 per boat. 
For more information, call Gwen Hagaman at Historic Smithville Inn (609) 652-7775.
