
Pakistan has test-fired a missile capable of carrying a nuclear weapon, according to an Administration official.
The American official, who asked not to be identified, confirmed a report from Pakistan, but provided no independent details on the test.
A Pakistani with close ties to the Government of President Mohammad Zia ul-Haq said in Islamabad that the missile was launched at a test range in the Thar Desert of southern Pakistan on April 25. 
He said the missile was capable of reaching Bombay and New Delhi and was of ''home design,'' but produced with Chinese help.
Support for China Connection
Another Administration official asserted that China was helping Pakistan with its missile project. 
A Pakistani Government spokesman here said he had no information on any missile program or the reported test.
Development of such a weapon would not violate any international agreement on nuclear arms.
Before the confirmation of the test firing, Defense and State Department officials had discounted the report from Pakistan and said the report might have been propaganda to warn India that Pakistan could produce surface-to-surface missiles capable of carrying nuclear warheads.
According to an annual survey by the International Institute for Strategic Studies in London, Pakistan has had few missiles until now. 
The army has multiple rocket launchers, which are used like artillery, its air force is armed with air-to-air and air-to-surface missiles, and the navy has surface-to-air missiles.
 
India Announces New Missile
In February, Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi announced that India had successfully fired a surface-to-surface missile 150 miles into the Bay of Bengal. 
The Indian missile is capable of carrying a nuclear warhead, but India denies it possesses any nuclear weapons, even though it exploded a nuclear device 14 years ago, American officials believe that Pakistan can also build nuclear weapons at its test site at Kahuta, southeast of Islamabad. 
But President Zia has repeatedly assured the United States that it has no nuclear weapons program.
Concern over the Pakistani nuclear program led Congress last year to threaten a cutoff of $4.2 billion in American assistance to Pakistan over six years until the President certified in December that Pakistan ''does not possess a nuclear explosive device.''
The Indians, who have been at war with Pakistan three times since both countries gained independence from Britain in 1947, have long suspected that neighboring Pakistan was secretly building nuclear weapons. 
In 1984, American officials revealed that Indira Gandhi, the Indian Prime Minister at the time, rejected a recommendation from her senior advisers that she order an Indian air strike against Pakistan's nuclear development site at Kahuta.
 
A Reference to '2 Stages'
The Pakistani report of the missile firing said Pakistan had components for 42 missiles and made reference to ''two stages'' to the missile, but from an analysis of the details provided, it appears that the two stages are actually two separate missile systems: one, 20 feet in length with a range of 50 miles; the other, a 32-foot missile with a 186-mile range.
If these are accurate specifications, neither missile could reach Bombay or New Delhi from Pakistan.
On the basis of other characteristics provided in the report from Pakistan, the missiles closely resemble two Soviet-made short-range missiles known in the West as Scud and Frog. 
The more powerful Scud has been exported to several foreign countries by the Soviet Union, and it is possible that Pakistan has been able to procure some of them.
Most missiles today, because of the reduction in size of nuclear weapons, can be used with either conventional or nuclear warheads. 
However, both the Scud and the Frog were specifically designed by Soviet specialists to carry nuclear warheads.
Of the two missiles, only the larger and more powerful Scud has the range and accuracy to reach major Indian installations. 
If one of the missiles described in the report is a Scud, it can be modified to extend its range at the expense of accuracy and warhead size.
Iraq has a large supply of Scuds and has already twice modified them to increase their range to hit targets deep in Iran with conventional warheads.
