
China protested today against the resumption of flights to Taiwan by Pan American World Airways and demanded that the United States Government designate another airline to fly Pan Am's route into China.
But the Chinese stopped short of canceling Pan Am's landing rights, as some Westerners here had expected, and called instead for the earliest possible consultations on the matter with Washington under an existing air transportation agreement.
This evening, a Pan Am flight arrived in Peking from Tokyo without incident. 
China was responding to Pan Am's decision to reopen its routes to Taiwan, which it had closed in 1978. 
The first flight arrived in Taipei yesterday.
PEKING, June 16 - China protested today against the resumption of flights to Taiwan by Pan American World Airways and demanded that the United States Government designate another airline to fly Pan Am's route into China.
Today the Chinese Government struck back on two fronts. 
The Foreign Ministry called in Charles W. Freeman Jr., charge d'affaires. 
He was handed an official note of protest by Zhu Qizhen, Assistant Foreign Minister.
 
A Second Letter to Embassy
This afternoon, Li Shufan, chief of the International Department of the Civil Aviation Administration of China, delivered a letter to David G. Brown, the embassy's Economic Counselor. 
It demanded that the United States Government select another airline, with no Taiwan link, to take over Pan Am's routes. 
The administration also asked for consultations at the earliest possible date.
The letter said further that the administration, which operates China's state airline, was terminating as of today Pan Am's right to use an air route from the Chinese-Burmese border to Hong Kong near the southern Chinese cities of Kunming and Canton, as well as its right to use Canton as an emergency alternative to Hong Kong.
Pan Am has not taken advantage of these routes. 
Neither the protest note nor the letter threatened to cancel Pan Am's flights to Shanhai and Peking, suggesting that they may be allowed to continue for the time being.
 
China Route Said to Lose Money
Pan Am has been reported to be losing money on its two scheduled flights a week from Tokyo to Peking, which it began early in 1981, although an intermediate stop was added in Shanghai. 
The airline's officials here said that the resumption of the more profitable route to Taiwan was based purely on economic considerations.
The protest note said that the opening of international airline routes ''is subject to authorization by the governments concerned and is by no means an ordinary commercial action.''
The note asserted that it was ''futile for the U.S. 
Government to belittle the political implication of such authorization'' and shed the responsibility.
It accused the United States of ''ignoring China's sovereignty, hurting the national feelings of the Chinese people and harming the aviation relations between the two countries.''
The basis of Peking's objection to American political, military or business ties with Taiwan is that the island is an unrecovered province of the mainland and any dealings amount to interference in China's internal affairs.
 
Hint of Approval Earlier
China was reported earlier to have indicated it might agree to the resumption of flights to Taiwan if Pan Am requested permission from Peking.
The letter from Civil Aviation Administration of China, which was distributed by the New China News Agency, charged that Pan Am, having agreed to terminate its service to Taiwan, ''has gone back on its commitment and resumed its service to Taiwan without the consent of the Chinese side.''
The Chinese Government has already given approval for a second United States airline, Northwest Orient, to begin service to China. 
Cargo flights are expected to start later this year and passenger flights next year.
The airline also flies to Taiwan so it is thought unlikely that Northwest Orient will absorb Pan Am's routes.
 
----
 
U.S. Hints at Retaliation
WASHINGTON, June 16 (AP) - The Reagan Administration served notice today that it had no intention of complying with Peking's demand that Pan American World Airways be replaced by another carrier for flights to China. 
It hinted at retaliation if Pan Am is barred.
Dan McKinnon, chairman of the Civil Aeronautics Board, said Pan Am was selected more than two years ago for flights to China and ''we intend to stick by Pan Am.''
He said that if China banned Pan Am, the agency might retaliate against China's airline, which serves three United States cities.
The State Department declined to comment on China's demand, but a spokesman, John Hughes, repeated the Administration's support for Pan Am's decision to serve Taiwan.
