
Each time I have been entertained in a Vietnamese home it has been a typical summer night in Washington - hot and humid. 
The hostess's choice of food has always seemed especially felicitous. 
The marvelous variety of unusual dishes and the lightness of the cuisine, with its finely tuned use of gentle seasonings, have been particularly appropriate for hot weather. 
So it is no wonder that such fare is especially appropriate for, and becoming increasingly popular at, stylish pool parties across the country.
As I was to find out later, the food is not at all difficult to prepare. 
That is, once you have mastered the use of a few ingredients that are unfamiliar to most Westerners, such as rice paper and lemon grass. 
Rice paper is the edible translucent paper used for making Vietnamese spring rolls, a specialty far more delicate than Chinese egg rolls, to which they are often compared. 
Lemon grass, sometimes called citronella root, imparts a distinctive lemony taste and fragrance to the food.
Salads, vegetables, fish, sprightly sauces -all conspire to tempt the palate of the diner who, given a choice on a summer's eve, might ordinarily opt for cold roast chicken and jellied consomme. 
But not if shrimp salad with mint or brochettes of beef scented and spiced with galangal, an unusually piquant form of ginger, are offered as alternatives.
With the first exposure to the subtle refinements of the Vietnamese kitchen, the uninitiated American quickly puts aside any preconceptions of the food as being the same as Chinese. 
These cuisines do have many ingredients in common and both are properly eaten with chopsticks, but the similarity ends there. 
Despite 1,000 years of Chinese rule, ending in the 10th century, the Vietnamese maintained their identity not only in their own language and customs but in their own culinary sophistication.
Other cultures have had more of an influence. 
There is an easily definable French presence in the Vietnamese kitchen, and traces of Indian cooking also can be found. 
The resulting cuisine is a rather sophisticated one that reflects the richly varied history and geography of the country.
The food is almost always light. 
Uncooked vegetables and salads are an integral part of Vietnamese meals, which makes them especially appropriate for warm-weather entertaining. 
Shallots, Maggi seasoning, white potatoes and asparagus commonly are used. 
There is much less emphasis on stir-frying and thick sauces than is found in the Chinese kitchen, and lemon grass, unknown in China, is a hallmark of Vietnamese cooking. lthough Vietnam is quite small, about the size of New Mexico, its cooking is divided into regions. 
In the south, with its hot, humid climate, the French influence is the most pronounced. 
Indian curries are particularly strong there. 
Because sugar cane is grown in the region, dishes in the south tend to be sweeter than those elsewhere.
In the central region, where Hue, the ancient capital, is located, the food is rather decorative and very spicy. 
Hot chilies and shrimp sauce frequently are used.
To the north, with its colder weather, there are fewer ingredients and the food tends to be lighter and less heavily spiced. 
Black pepper is widely used, and stir-fried dishes are common.
It is not only the ingredients but the names given to some Vietnamese dishes that reflect the French influence, although the name is often as far as the Western influence goes. 
From the French the Vietnamese learned to make exquisite pates, but they often are seasoned with their famous sauce, nuoc mam, an anchovy-based mixture that is as popular as soy sauce is in China. 
The Vietnamese also have a chicken pate that is deep-fried.
Asparagus, which the Vietnamese call ''Western bamboo,'' is an essential ingredient in crab soup, a dish enjoyed all over the country and equally popular among Americans. 
Typical of the food of the country, it is both light and extremely savory. he recipes for this summer repast are creations of Bach-Yen Boun, chef at Indochine in New York City. 
Part Cambodian and part Vietnamese, she learned to cook at home in Cambodia. 
Her sister runs a Vietnamese restaurant they own in Paris called Au Coin des Gourmets. 
Despite its simplicity, Boun's food is not picnic fare. 
It is, however, especially appropriate for summer because it satisfies without leaving you stuffed.
These dishes - such as the Vietnamese spring rolls (called pates imperiaux in France); shrimp with mint rolled in rice paper (or rouleau de printemps); beef brochettes marinated in lemon grass paste, skewered with red peppers and onions; even the small, greaseless spareribs - will provide a dinner your guests are likely to remember for a long time. 
The cook will be happy because most of the dishes can be prepared and cooked in advance. 
And even those that require last-minute cooking can be prepared ahead almost completely.
Serve this food lukewarm or at room temperature, not steaming hot.
Shrimp Salad Lemon Grass Paste Shrimps With Mint Rolled in Rice Paper Dipping Sauce Beef Brochettes Spare Ribs Sweet and Sour Chicken Steamed Sea Bass Vietnamese Spring Rolls SHRIMP WITH MINT ROLLED IN RICE PAPER #14 medium-sized shrimps, shelled and deveined, about 1/2 pound 1/4 pound rice sticks #7 large, round rice-paper wrappers #1 small head iceberg lettuce #1 pound bean sprouts #35 mint leaves, cut into small strips Dipping sauce (see recipe). 
1.In a small saucepan, bring three cups of water to a boil. 
Add the shrimps and cook for two minutes, or until they become pink. 
Drain and let cool. 
Halve the shrimps lengthwise and set aside. 
#2.In a large pot, bring four cups of water to a boil. 
Remove the pot from the heat. 
Add the rice sticks and let stand for five minutes, or until they are soft. 
Drain them, run under cold water and drain again. 
Cut into three-inch strips. 
Set aside. 
#3.Dip the rice-paper wrappers in cold water and lay them on a clean towel or between paper towels for about five minutes to soften. 
Rice-paper wrappers should be handled carefully; they break easily. 
#4.Separate the leaves of the lettuce, discarding the tough ones. 
#5.Place a rice-paper wrapper on a work surface. 
On the lower half of the rice paper, layer a lettuce leaf, some bean sprouts, rice sticks and four to five mint leaves. 
Fold the sides of the rice paper to cover the filling. 
#6.About four inches from the top of the rice paper, arrange a row of four shrimp halves, placed vertically. 
Starting from the bottom, roll tightly to enclose the filling and the shrimps. 
Repeat with the remaining ingredients. 
#7.Cover the rolls with a damp cloth until ready to serve. 
To serve, slice them into four pieces, making sure each contains a shrimp. 
Serve with the dipping sauce. 
Yield:Six to eight servings. 
DIPPING SAUCE 1/2 cup nuoc mam (see note) #1 cup rice vinegar 1/2 cup sugar 1/4 cup shredded carrots 1/4 cup chopped peanuts.
Combine the nuoc mam, rice vinegar, sugar and one cup of water. 
Stir and let stand until the sugar is dissolved. 
This sauce can be kept for several days in the refrigerator. 
When ready to serve, add the carrots and peanuts.
Yield:Two and three-quarter cups.
Note:Nuoc mam is a fish sauce available in most Oriental specialty stores. 
BEEF BROCHETTES Y cup lemon grass paste (see recipe) #1 tablespoon nuoc mam (see note) #2 teaspoons sugar Salt to taste #1 tablespoon vegetable oil #3 medium onions, about 1 pound #2 pounds sirloin steak, cut into thin strips (about 72 pieces) #3 red peppers, seeded and cut into 1-inch cubes Lettuce, cucumber, bean sprouts and mint for garnish. 
1.In a small bowl, combine the lemon grass paste, nuoc mam, sugar, salt and oil. 
Mix well. 
#2.Cut one onion into julienne strips. 
Cut the remaining onions into one-inch cubes. 
#3.Place the strips of beef on a work surface and rub the marinade over them. 
Place a strip of onion across each strip of beef and roll it to enclose the onion. 
#4.Prepare 12 skewers, alternating each meat roll with a cube of onion and red pepper; there should be six rolls per skewer. 
Let stand at room temperature for two hours. 
#5.Preheat the broiler or barbecue grill. 
#6.Grill the brochettes for about one minute on each side. 
Serve with a garnish of lettuce, cucumber, bean sprouts and mint. 
Yield:Six to eight servings. 
Note:Nuoc mam is a fish sauce available in most Oriental specialty stores. 
LEMON GRASS PASTE #6 stalks fresh lemon grass, peeled (see note) #1 2-inch piece galangal, peeled (see note) #6 shallots #6 cloves garlic 3/4 teaspoon saffron.
Place all the ingredients in the container of a food processor or blender. 
Blend to a paste. 
This will keep for several days in the refrigerator. 
Yield:One cup. 
Note:Lemon grass is available in Oriental specialty stores. 
Galangal is a root from the ginger family. 
It can be purchased frozen in some Oriental specialty stores. 
STEAMED SEA BASS #1 whole sea bass, about 2 1/2 pounds, cleaned and with the gills removed but head and tail intact Y cup ginger root, cut into julienne strips 1/2 cup chopped chives #6 tablespoons oyster sauce #2 tablespoons vegetable oil #1 tablespoon sugar. 
1.Place the fish on a heat-proof plate on the rack of a steamer over simmering water and cook, covered, for 30 to 40 minutes, or until the fish is no longer pink at the bone. 
Five minutes before the fish is done, sprinkle with the ginger root and chives. 
#2.In a small saucepan, combine the oyster sauce, oil, sugar and two tablespoons of water. 
Bring to a boil over medium heat and cook for two minutes, or until the sugar dissolves. 
Keep warm. 
#3.To serve, lay the fish on a serving platter with the chives and ginger, and pour the warm oyster sauce over it.
Yield: About six servings. 
VIETNAMESE SPRING ROLLS 3/4 cup bean threads, broken into small pieces #1 pound ground pork #1 medium onion, minced 1/4 carrot, shredded 1/4 pound bean sprouts #2 teaspoons sugar #1 teaspoon salt 1/2 teaspoon freshly ground pepper #2 egg yolks #1 package rice-paper triangles Vegetable oil for frying Lettuce and mint leaves for garnish Dipping sauce (see recipe). 
1.Soak the bean threads in water for a few minutes to soften, and drain. 
#2.In a large bowl, combine the bean threads, pork, onion, carrot, bean sprouts, sugar, salt, pepper and one egg yolk, and mix well. 
#3.For each roll, use two layers of triangles. 
Dip them in cold water and lay them on a clean towel or between paper towels for about five minutes to soften. 
Rice-paper triangles should be handled carefully; they break easily. 
#4.Mix the remaining egg yolk with one teaspoon of water. 
Across the base of the triangle, place one tablespoon of the filling. 
Fold in the side points to cover the filling. 
Roll the rice paper tightly, starting from the bottom. 
Secure the point with beaten egg yolk. 
Repeat with the remaining ingredients. 
#5.In a wok over medium-high heat, add enough oil to fry the spring rolls. 
When the oil is hot but not smoking, about 325 degrees, add the spring rolls and fry them for five to six minutes, turning them, or until they are golden brown. 
Drain on paper towels. 
This can be done a few hours before serving. 
When ready to serve, reheat the oil and fry the spring rolls until they are crispy again. 
Serve with a garnish of lettuce and mint leaves, to be wrapped around the spring rolls, and dipping sauce.
Yield:Fifty rolls.
