
New Cardin Beachhead
The largely untapped Chinese market is the target of a new venture linking Pierre Cardin, the French designer, and Gruppo GFT, an Italian manufacturer and distributor of ready-to-wear. 
The plan is to manufacture and to sell in China Mr. Cardin's clothing and accessories for men, women and children, his home furnishings and his leather goods.
Mr. Cardin's name is already known in China. 
He showed his haute-couture collection there in 1979 and opened Maxim's restaurant in Beijing in 1983. 
He has also manufactured some apparel there, as has Gruppo GFT.
But just how much of a market for high fashion does China represent?
''The Chinese people like to dress,'' Mr. Cardin said by telephone from his Paris office. 
''They have rejected the Mao suits. 
They don't like classique. 
They like high fashion. 
The clothes we will sell there will be the same as what I show in Paris. 
We are expecting to open 40,000 stores in China. 
It's a very big deal.''
 
Spring Hats Sprout
''This is a hat season,'' said Patricia Underwood, a millinery designer. 
''We're making them as fast as we possibly can. 
What we've shipped for spring is selling, and we're already getting reorders.''
With just seven employees, her small business may reach $700,000 in sales this year, she said, up from $150,000 five years ago.
''The hat business started going for me when I got into Bergdorf Goodman about six years ago,'' she said. 
''They took 10 hats. 
This year there were 500 in the initial spring order.
''When we started in business in 1974, the hat industry was very hand to mouth,'' Ms. Underwood added. 
''Only dyed-in-the-wool hat wearers were buying hats. 
But making hats was the only thing I knew how to do, and it was a very easy business to go into on a small scale because you need very little equipment: a sewing machine and hat blocks. 
I had a partner and we each put in $500.''
Millinery is still a business that requires only a modest investment to start: a few thousand dollars, say. 
But the growing market has generated increased competition. 
And it is wide-brimmed straw hats lavished with flowers that are giving the millinery business a boost right now.
Bonnie Pressman, fashion director of Barneys New York, said women are responding to the romance and fantasy of such hats. 
Jane Tuma, vice president and fashion director for accessories at Saks Fifth Avenue, said it may be the femininity of the styles. 
And there is no doubt that many women were captivated by the flower-bedecked hats Christian Lacroix showed with his clothes.
Philippe Model, a French milliner, brought two dozen brimmed straws covered with brilliant silk roses -very much in the Lacroix mood - to Bloomingdale's in January. 
The store has sold more than half, priced from $400 to $525.
 
Enter German Tailoring
Hugo Boss, a West German men's-wear company known for quality fabrics and tailoring, is making a serious pitch for the United States market. 
An American subsidiary, Hugo Boss Fashions, was formed last November with Barry Wishnow, an American, as its president. 
Previously, the line was handled by sales agents here, but that didn't allow the company to compete successfully.
''Hugo Boss was very involved in Europe,'' Mr. Wishnow explained recently. 
''We will begin to expand the position of Hugo Boss in this country, not by selling to every store that exists, but by developing all parts of our business with each store we sell to. 
We want to do as much business in one store as someone else might do in 10 stores. 
We want to sell each store men's clothing and furnishings, sportswear, rain wear, outer wear and our new women's collection.''
The women's clothes (suits average $650), will be sold only in the United States. 
The target market includes stores like Saks Fifth Avenue, Barneys New York, Charivari, Bullock's and I. Magnin.
