
The Peking leadership, showing concern that the country's birth rate is beginning to rise again, has formally warned Chinese to adhere to the strict family planning measures that it has laid down.
A new directive issued jointly by the Central Committee of the Communist Party and the policy-making State Council urged that steps be taken to halt what the New China News Agency today called ''the current tendency of rising population growth rate.''
The family planning directive was given front-page prominence today by People's Daily, which published a supporting editorial entitled, ''Persist in a Scientific, Correct Population Policy.''
The party newspaper said that younger generations should ''grow up with a better cultivated mind and physique.''
The Peking leadership, showing concern that the country's birth rate is beginning to rise again, has formally warned Chinese to adhere to the strict family planning measures that it has laid down.
The directive followed new guidelines laid down last week in which couples living in cities were ordered to have no more than one child. 
The guidelines, which appeared last Thursday in the Guangming Daily, were only part of the new effort to keep the population from getting out of hand.
 
Could Soon Reach 1.3 Billion
The editorial in People's Daily today cautioned that if the present growth went unchecked, China's population could exceed 1.3 billion people by the year 2000, which is 100 million more than the Government's target. 
The population is already thought to have reached one billion people, though the exact number will be determined by a national census scheduled for July.
At a United Nations-sponsored Asian population conference held here last autumn, China reported an annual growth rate of only 1.17 percent, which is well below Asia's overall population growth rate. 
The Asian parliamentarians at the conference endorsed a proposal to reduce Asia's population to a 1 percent growth rate by the year 2000.
Several years ago, the policy was introduced of encouraging couples to have only one child, because the population was continuing to outstrip its agricultural and other resources. 
The policy has combined financial and social incentives and penalties to discourage couples from having more children.
Chen Muhua, who headed the State Family Planning Commission, reported last October that 10 percent of the couples of child-bearing age had pledged to have only one child.
The weekly Beijing Review in January called the one-child limit per family ''not our permanent population policy but an emergency measure, a social paycheck for the unplanned population reproduction from the 50's to the 70's.''
Judging by recent statements and articles, the Chinese leadership has at least two reasons for renewed concern, apart from current statistics.
 
300 Million Near Marriage Age
One is that 300 million Chinese born during the chaos of the Cultural Revolution between 1966 and 1976 will be approaching marriagable age and are likely to contribute to a baby boom.
Another is that the new agricultural policies, which have given China's 800 million peasants more responsibility for what they produce, have made it once again profitable for farmers to have large families, and particularly sons, to help increase their crop yields.
There have been indications in the Chinese press that this has undermined family planning programs in the countryside. 
The rural suspicion of birth control may be one reason why only urban dwellers have been officially limited to a single child. 
The New China News Agency today quoted the new directive as emphasizing that ''family planning must go hand in hand with the practice of the responsibility system in production. 
One-child families should have encouragement.''
Today's editorial in People's Daily alluded to the problems that China already had feeding itself and said that if it kept eating up the available food, ''our country has no hope.''
A population research group of scientists here has estimated that China's most suitable population size in 100 years should be only 650 million to 700 million, which is a third below the current population and could only be achieved by maintaining a one-child family for the next 75 years.
