
China has decided to restore the post of Chief of State, equivalent to the presidency, which Mao Zedong abolished as a threat to his authority during the Cultural Revolution.
The decision, which had been expected by diplomats here, came to light Thursday at the opening of a new session of the standing committee of the National People's Congress, China's nominal parliament. 
The standing committee does all the major legislative work for the congress.
At the top of its agenda is the approval of a new constitution, which will be the fourth since the Communist takeover in 1949. 
A constitutional revision committee announced on Wednesday that it had completed and adopted a new draft, which was originally expected last year.
PEKING, April 23 - China has decided to restore the post of Chief of State, equivalent to the presidency, which Mao Zedong abolished as a threat to his authority during the Cultural Revolution.
''The greatest change the constitution proposes is the reinstatement of a Chairman of the People's Republic and the establishment of the Central Military Council of the People's Republic to lead the armed forces of the country,'' the New China News Agency reported.
 
Army Now Under Party Control
It was unclear whether the new military committee would augment or replace the Communist Party's military commission, which has kept the army under party control. 
China's leader and Deputy Chairman of the Communist Party, Deng Xiaoping, has been chairman of the military commission since the party congress last summer.
The new constitution must theoretically be approved by the standing committee and then submitted for public discussion this year before it becomes official. 
Approval was virtually assured by its appearance on the standing committee's agenda.
The restoration of the presidency and the adoption of a new constitution represent a shift back to a more formal and legalistic structure after the anarchy that prevailed during the Cultural Revolution in the mid-1960's to mid-1970's.
Peng Zhen, the chairman of the standing committee's legal commission, said at the committee session Thursday that the original 1954 Constitution was ''comprehensive in content'' while the subsequent Constitutions of 1975 and 1978, ''restricted by the historical conditions at that time, were undesirable.''
This suggested that the new constitution might revert to the lines of the original one.
Mr. Peng, who helped write the draft submitted to the standing committee, was quoted by the New China News Agency as saying: ''The 1978 Consitution no longer suits the needs of the current situation. 
This calls for the changes in the Constitution.''
The disclosure did not mention who would occupy the restored presidency. 
Mr. Deng is the most obvious candidate in view of his influence, but Chinese and foreign diplomatic sources here have doubted that he would accept the post, since he indicated this year that he was withdrawing from daily ceremonial duties to concentrate on broader issues of policy.
 
Two Possible Candidates
Unofficial reports have mentioned as possible candidates Wan Li, a Deputy Prime Minister in charge of agriculture, and Li Xiannian, a party Deputy Chairman who has been a bridge between factions in the leadership.
Mao was the first president of the People's Republic of China, as well as its party Chairman. 
But he surrendered the Government post in 1959 after the failures of his Great Leap Forward economic program.
The presidency was then assumed by Liu Shaoqi, whom Mao subsequently accused of using the post as a power base to undercut his policies. 
Mr. Liu was denounced as a ''capitalist roader'' for advocating changes similar to those being carried out today. 
He was purged in 1968 and died in solitary confinement in 1969, though he has been posthumously rehabilitated.
With Mr. Liu's downfall, the presidency was in effect abolished and its powers assumed by Mao, who died in 1976. 
The post disappeared altogether in the 1975 Constitution.
The present Constitution, which was approved under the leadership of Hua Guofeng, now demoted, began moving the country away from the excesses of the Cultural Revolution by enumerating some basic rights and restoring several earlier provisions. 
But it left much of the Government's authority in the hands of the party leadership.
 
Full Authority Doubted
The aged Ye Jianying has acted as a de facto head of state in his capacity as Chairman of the National People's Congress. 
Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang and the party Chairman, Hu Yaobang, have also at times acted as the top national official. 
Once the presidency is restored, some diplomats here doubt that it will regain the authority it had under Mao and Mr. Liu.
Mr. Peng was quoted as saying that the draft constitution embodied ''important reforms and new developments in China's state system,'' but the official press agency did not explain what these were in any detail.
Like the 1978 Constitution, the draft contains a preamble and four chapters, but its 140 articles compare with only 60 in the current charter.
The standing committee is also expected to endorse continuing structural changes in the cumbersome bureaucracy. 
Chinese sources have predicted that the number of deputy prime ministers will be cut from 13 to 2. 
The unofficial reports are that the two will be Mr. Wan and Yao Yilin, who are both allies of Mr. Deng.
