
Young employees of the Peking municipality were told recently to avoid ''bizarre dress'' or be turned away from the office.
Men must also cut their hair and shave off sideburns and mustaches, and women may not have hair longer than to their shoulders or wear heavy makeup or earrings or other ''unhealthy ornaments.''
''We must preserve our habits of simplicity and bitter struggle,'' Peking Daily explained in publishing the new regulations, which took effect this month. 
''Hats and clothing must be clean and simple and bizarre dress is forbidden.''
Peking issues new dress code; although Chinese are no longer confined to baggy jackets and trousers, there are still many restrictions on dress and appearance; photos (M)
The dress code is a barometer of today's ideological climate, in which there have been many warnings that decadent bourgeois tastes and values are infiltrating China under the country's open-door economic policy. 
The distrust of long hair and modish attire echoes the generation gap in the West, but here the old guard can invoke Communist Party dogma to apply the brakes.
 
Better Dress Encouraged
Chinese are no longer confined to the baggy jackets and trousers that passed for fashion under Chairman Mao Zedong. 
Last spring, Hao Jianxiu, a member of the party secretariat, said that people should not be afraid to dress better. 
Miss Hao even managed a good word for the ''qipao,'' the traditional tight-fitting women's dress with the slit up the side.
Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang and the party chief, Hu Yaobang, have appeared in Western suit and tie at official functions. 
But most officials, including China's paramount leader, Deng Xiaoping, stick to the familiar high-collared tunic popularized by Sun Yat-sen, father of the Chinese Republic.
Last summer, many young women blossomed in bright print dresses and some young men wore pastel T-shirts like one from Shanghai that proclaimed its owner a ''vigorous, graceful sportsman.''
But fashion is very much seasonal in China. 
As the willow trees shed their leaves and harvested cabbages pile up on the roadsides, the Chinese are reverting to monotonous blue and olive drab work clothes padded out with layers of long underwear.
When it was warmer, some young people took to fashion with a zest that disconcerted their elders. 
Last May, 700,000 visitors jammed a monthlong exhibition here of Western-style clothing made in China and bought nearly a million garments. 
Scalpers sold the restricted tickets at up to 50 times the nominal cost of 5 cents each.
 
Modern Apparel Made for Export
Better clothing has become available because China is making modern apparel for export. 
After the United States imposed a limit on textile imports from China when the two sides failed to agree on a new pact, clothes intended for the United States began spilling out onto the sidewalks of Peking. 
Plaid flannel shirts with an American label and $11 price tag were being sold for the equivalent of $2 apiece. 
The supply has dried up since a new textile agreement was reached.
Bolder Western styles, including blue jeans, are smuggled up from Hong Kong by way of Canton and sold by black-market peddlers. 
A pair of sunglasses with a foreign label still pasted on one lens remains the most prestigious accessory. 
A few youths so flaunt the Hong Kong look that they have been nicknamed ''spare-time overseas Chinese.''
 
New Trends Stir Concern
Conservative Chinese feel that the trend is going too far. 
''Go down to Wangfujing,'' said one older man, speaking of a major shopping street in Peking. 
''You'll see young girls walking around in suggestive clothes trying to catch the attention of the boys. 
And the boys go to the barber shop and have their hair curled so you can't tell them from the girls.''
The scene looked tame by Western standards. 
But the authorities, sensing a distinction between bourgeois unisex and proletarian unisex, are trying to draw the line.
The Xidan Department Store reported a few weeks ago that it had required more than 70 of its young salesmen to shear off ''strange'' hair styles and more than 20 saleswomen to give up their earrings, eyebrow pencil and lipstick.
 
French Fashions Shown
Peking Daily quoted store officials as saying that such ''unhealthy beauty'' not only was distasteful but also ''enticed certain customers with unhealthy thoughts to tease the employees and distract them from working well.''
The debate over fashion has not been limited to Peking. 
In the southern province of Hunan, a television series on ''the beauty of clothing'' considered the propriety of items like bell-bottomed trousers.
Chinese men can get away with wearing floppy white sleeveless undershirts in the summer, but any bare flesh on a woman causes clucks of disapproval.
When the French designer Pierre Cardin recently held a fashion show here to promote his line of apparel being turned out for export by 14 Chinese textile factories, some plunging necklines and backs on the models were demurely hiked up with safety pins.
Afterward, Mr. Cardin thanked the models by presenting them with sets of delicate underwear and shoes, which were thereafter confiscated by the authorities, according to one informant.
The interest in fashion seems largely confined to urban young people who already have a job or are waiting for one. 
University students tend to dress down in the familiar baggy blue, though some women at Peking University have cut their pigtails and treated themselves to home permanents.
The university look is based on conformity, not rebellion. 
With less than 4 percent of Chinese youth able to get a higher education, those who make it hew to the proverb here that ''the gun shoots the bird that sticks its neck out.''
