
When President Reagan arrived in China late last month, a radio station broadcasting in Chinese likened Mr. Reagan's visit to ''the weasel going to pay his respects to the hen,'' an old Chinese proverb for treachery.
Its broadcast the next day, taking note of Mr. Reagan's smile, warned that ''a smiling tiger is the most treacherous.''
A broadcast on the third day lamented that the Chinese leaders failed to understand the danger of receiving an anti-Communist like Mr. Reagan. The radio likened Mr. Reagan to Hitler.
Article on clandestine broadcasts by August First Radio, Peking, China, made during visit of Pres Reagan to China; notes broadcasts, purporting to speak for disgruntled elements of Chinese armed forces, have been traced to Soviet Union and are part of effort to undermine policies of Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping (M)
All the broadcasts came from a station calling itself ''August First Radio,'' after the date the People's Liberation Army was founded in China, and purporting to speak for disgruntled elements of the Chinese armed forces.
In fact, its broadcasts have been traced to the Soviet Union and are part of an effort to undermine the policies of China's leader, Deng Xiaoping.
 
First Heard 5 Years Ago
A monitoring service of the British Broadcasting Corporation discovered in October 1982 that when the August First radio failed to appear one day, its frequency carried Moscow radio's domestic programming, ''Mayak.''
The station, first heard five years ago, is one of many clandestine radio stations around China's borders.
Another station calling itself ''The Voice of Democratic Kampuchea'' has reported the successes of Peking- backed guerrillas fighting the Vietnamese in Cambodia. 
The station is believed to be based in southern China.
Since last year, other clandestine radio stations pretending to represent China's armed forces have gone on the air with criticisms of Peking. 
They use such names as ''Radio Spark,'' ''Radio October Storm,'' ''The Voice of the P.L.A.'' and ''The Contingent of Proletarian Fighters.''
Some references to Nationalist ideology led to speculation that they come from Taiwan, but their signal has prompted theories that they are based in Vietnam.
A Western diplomat said the August First broadcasts were not aimed at ordinary Chinese so much as at soldiers along the northern border. 
He said the soldiers - young, poorly educated and sometimes homesick - were considered ripe targets for such propaganda.
The August First radio and its companion stations try to sound patriotic, staunchly Communist, anti-Western and sympathetic to army gripes. 
They charge that Peking insulted the armed forces by giving the military last priority in the four modernizations, after industry, agriculture and science.
 
Press Anti-Deng Campaign
The broadcasts also articulate the resentments of hard-liners who have had to yield to Mr. Deng's policies. 
They have accused him of creating a personality cult and letting degenerate Western values into China. 
The broadcasts have also attacked the party consolidation drive to weed out leftists and criminals from the rank-and-file. 
The sharpest diatribes have been directed against China's relations with the United States. 
The clandestine broadcasts have played up the size of continuing United States military sales to Taiwan and said the promise of United States technology was meant only to ''bribe and blackmail'' China.
The worst vilification in recent months was voiced by the August First radio against Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger, whose trip to Peking last September opened the way for the subsequent exchange of visits by Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang and President Reagan.
A month later, the August First radio said that Mr. Weinberger and his delegation had said ''these yellow-skinned dogs of China are all odius and impolite.''
The radio also accused the Americans of making obscene remarks about Chinese women.
Not surprisingly, the August First radio also stresses the need for closer relations with the Soviet Union.
The Chinese press has publicly ignored the clandestine broadcasts, which have not incited any visible disquiet. 
But the sensitivity exists. 
When a Western military attache paid a courtesy call on a senior Chinese Army officer, he inquired about the broadcasts. 
The officer, he said, smiled coldly and changed the subject.
