
Lines formed in Peking today as the city's 9.5 million people stocked up on meat, fish and poultry a day before the steepest food price increases here since the Communists took power in 1949 were to take effect.
At every work unit, announcements from the city authorities were read out during the week detailing the increases, which will add an average of 50 percent to the prices of 1,800 ''nonstaple'' food items.
The price increases are up to 70 percent for pork, 130 percent for beef, 18 percent for eggs and 340 percent for yellow croaker, a popular fish.
At the same time, residents were promised a monthly per capita grant of 7.50 yuan - the equivalent of $2.62 - to help meet the higher costs.
Peking's 9.5 million residents stock up on meat, fish and poultry on day before steepest food price increases since Communists took control in 1949 are to take effect; increases, part of Goverment effort to introduce market mechanisms into economy, will add average of 50 percent to such 'non-staple' food items as pork, beef, eggs and some fish; residents are promised small monthly per capita grant to help meet higher costs, but increases are still expected to force shift in diets; photo (M)
With the average annual income among urban Chinese last year falling at 608 yuan ($207), and beef rising to the equivalent of 2 yuan a pound, it seemed plain that the increases would force a shift in diets, at least in the short run. 
Economists here have argued that over the longer term the increased returns to producers from the higher prices will stimulate higher output and lower prices in the marketplace. 
But for those worrying about the immediate future, this was scant consolation.
One young man with a wife and child said he would have to choose between shifting a much higher proportion of his monthly pay into buying food, or cutting down sharply on his family's consumption of meat and chicken. 
''Until now, people have been very happy with Deng Xiaoping,'' the man said, speaking of changes instituted by China's supreme leader. 
''But now we can see there is another side to the changes. 
It is going to be hard.''
 
Following a Set Pattern
The pattern in Peking has been the same as one followed earlier in 22 other cities, including Canton, Shanghai and Wuhan. 
And as in those cities, consumers flooded stores and markets to stock up on the affected items.
By the last days of the week, places like the Chongwenmen Market in central Peking had little left but fatty scraps of pork and low-grade samples of dried fish. 
A rush on canned foods left shelves similarly bare.
The move is part of a drive by the Government to introduce market mechanisms into the economy. 
After years of prices that remained the same or rose hardly at all, millions of people across urban China are encountering steep increases in food costs.
How fraught with difficulties the process will be can be gauged from the care that party leaders have taken to prepare the public. 
For months before the current round of increases officials were putting consumers on notice that strains lay ahead.
Usually, the warnings were accompanied by pledges that the Government would do everything it could to ease the transition, but there have been periodic bouts of ''panic buying'' as shoppers sought to protect themselves.
 
Calculated Political Risks
When Chiang Kai-shek was in power before 1949 few things eroded confidence as fast as the spiraling inflation that gave rise to banknotes denominated in millions of yuan. 
Now, the Communists who supplanted the Chiang Government and virtually abolished inflation are deliberately pushing up prices on a wide range of consumer goods, food in particular.
The increases involve calculated political and economic risks. 
From the outset of the program in 1979, officials putting into effect Mr. Deng's policies have been determined to replace what they refer to as the irrational pricing system established under Mao Zedong with something much closer to the Western model, with the market place replacing the bureaucracy as the chief arbiter of value.
Men like Tian Jiyun, the Deputy Prime Minister who has principal responsibility for price changes, believe that unleashing the power of supply and demand is the key to the entire modernization program set forth by Mr. Deng.
It is an article of faith among those involved in the program that only by allowing prices to rise and fall in response to market conditions can the country free itself from the burdens of scarcity and oversupply, shoddy quality and the other problems that beset the typical Communist economy.
 
Market Principle Referees
No other nation that is formally wedded to the doctrines of Karl Marx, not even Hungary, the most economically adventurous member of the Soviet bloc, has attempted anything so far-reaching.
Although Mr. Deng and his associates insist that the state will be on hand as a referee, they are convinced that prosperity will come only through the fullest possible application of market principles that most Communist countries, China included, have spent decades suppressing.
The problem lies in the transition from an economy in which the Government has manipulated prices to keep some items - not only food, but also rent, electricity, children's toys and tens of thousands of other goods - unrealistically cheap. 
At both ends of the economic chain, producers and consumers must be weaned from a system of large state subsidies that has entrenched inefficiencies and drained at least 20 percent of all revenues - some Western economists say the real figure may be closer to 40 percent - from the Government treasury.
The Government has so far excluded food grains, edible oils and basic vegetables like cabbage from the price changes.
