
Anyone who wants his National Hockey League scores along with news of the Xinjiang cotton harvest, the latest results of basketball tournaments in New York and light industry in Shanghai, tips on bridge-playing and bridge-building need look no further than a newspaper called China Daily.
As China's first English-language newspaper since the Nationalists shut down their presses and fled to Taiwan in 1949, China Daily has become a success six months after it started formal publication, with a circulation up from an initally cautious 20,000 copies to 50,000 today.
It was devised for foreigners, but two-thirds of its readership is Chinese -often ranking bureaucrats - who brush up on their English while enjoying a less restricted view of the world than is normally found in the Chinese press.
''Our newspaper is mainly geared to foreign readers,'' said Guan Zaihan, who serves on the China Daily editorial board. 
''That's why we serve so much foreign news. 
But we also want to tell our foreign friends about China.''
Profile of China Daily, Peking's first English-language newspaper since 1949
China Daily prints overseas news from foreign wire services, domestic news from the New China News Agency and merciful abridgements of the verbose ideological exhortations that fill the Chinese-language papers.
 
Lively Mix of Stories
The resulting mix is lively if sometimes curious. 
Last week, China Daily related at some length the tale of a married medical student in Shanghai who was expelled for adultery after he began spending his nights with an undergraduate notorious for her ''bourgeois ideology.''
The adjacent story was a report, translated from The People's Daily, on an animal husbandry farm, which had increased its profits twentyfold in the last five years by giving the peasants more responsibility.
China Daily is considered a ''sister publication'' of The People's Daily, and occupies the same compound in Peking, the gate of which is guarded by a soldier with a fixed bayonet.
Bicycles are parked in the building hallway. 
Upstairs, one of the English-language signs cautions: ''Do not fall into bad habits. 
The easy way is quite often the incorrect way.''
While China Daily has been subsidized by a loan from The People's Daily and is printed on its new English offset presses, the new newspaper has avoided the self-conscious propaganda image that China's other English-language publications project.
''We have a different readership, very different from The People's Daily,'' said Zheng Defang, a deputy editor who learned her profession at the New China News Agency. 
''If we tried to preach, you know what the reaction would be,'' she said.
 
'Under the Leadership of the Party'
Miss Zheng, a genial, matronly woman who wears her graying hair in a bun, added, ''This paper is run in China, and China is a country where the party leads, so any paper printed in China would be broadly speaking under the leadership of the party.''
Mr. Guan, who was a Professional Journalism Fellow at Stanford University several years ago, explained: ''We are not a party organ and we do try to be as objective as we can. 
In other words, we don't deviate from the party line but we do have our own editorial policy.''
The newspaper's resulting soft sell offers something for almost everyone. 
China-based diplomats and journalists increasingly rely on it to catch developments that they missed in the Chinese-language press.
Tourists get two pages of sports news as well as overseas news, even a daily crossword puzzle. 
Chinese hone their English on some articles that would not be found outside the Reference News, a classified daily summary restricted to reliable officials.
The managing editor, Feng Xiliang, has encouraged the young staff, which is mostly recruited from foreign language institutes, to write feature articles that will enlighten foreigners about all aspects of China. 
There have been recent interviews with Wu Tunan, a lithe 96-year-old master of taijiquan, the meditative shadow boxing, Yu Zhixue, a noted landscape artist, and Wang Shix@iang, who collects Ming Dynasty furniture. 
Other features have explained the arcane theatrics of classical Peking opera and, among other food recipes, have shared hints on how to catch and cook a turtle.
 
Limited Promotion Overseas
Though China Daily has yet to be promoted overseas, 8,000 copies are now printed for readers in Hong Kong. 
The Hong Kong edition costs 18 cents an issue, or three times the price of the Peking edition.
China Daily gets about 100 letters a week from readers, whose comments offer an insight into what concerns the Chinese. 
Chen Yunde, in Shanghai, expressed shock the other day that some young women were having their ears pierced, a practice that he equated with the binding of feet. 
Two other readers complained that the Chinese habit of spitting on the ground was giving foreigners a bad impression.
Miss Zheng and Mr. Guan said they could not give financial details about the newspaper because, Miss Zheng said, ''we don't handle the business part.''
But she did say that ''we get more money from our advertisements than from our circulation.''
The advertisements, which cost about $15.50 per column inch, are used by the Chinese to promote such products as carpets, pumps, pharmaceuticals and sandals and by foreign companies to sell watches, banking services and airline flights.
China Daily's biggest problem, Miss Zheng said, is its shortage of English-speakers in a staff that now numbers 40. 
The reporters start at a monthly salary of $33 for college graduates. 
Experienced editors like Miss Zheng earn about $90 a month.
''You know, at the present moment,'' Miss Zheng said, ''we don't have enough people. 
A lot of young people are eager to work for us, but they don't have the English.''
