
China may be forced to resort to ''nonpeaceful methods'' to reunify Taiwan with the mainland if the United States carries out the defense provisions of the Taiwan Relations Act by supplying new weapons, a new Chinese foreign affairs journal has warned.
The quarterly journal, Research on International Problems, said in its first issue that advancement or retrogression in relations with the United States depended on the extent to which certain ''upperclass Americans'' carried out the act in violation of American commitments to Peking.
''The provisions in the Taiwan Relations Act, which interfere in the internal affairs of China, can only encourage Taiwanese authorities to reject peaceful talks and oppose peaceful unification,'' said the article, which was approved for publication by senior officials. 
''As a result, China may be forced to resort to nonpeaceful methods to settle the Taiwan problem against its wish.''
China may use "nonpeaceful methods" to reunify Taiwan with mainland if US supplies Taiwan with new weapons
The New China News Agency described the article as a response to American leaders who were ''committed to obstructing the peaceful settlement of the Taiwan problem.''
It called the Taiwan Relations Act an attempt ''to resuscitate in a disguised way the mutual defense treaty'' abrogated by the United States when the Peking Government was recognized in 1979.
 
It Became an Issue in Campaign
The Taiwan Relations Act was adopted by Congress in 1979 to govern unofficial relations between Washington and Taipei. 
Peking paid little attention to it when it was passed but began to take it seriously last summer when Ronald Reagan made it a campaign issue by calling for a reinstitution of official relations with Taiwan.
Since then China has studied the act carefully and objected to almost all of its provisions as an effort to abrogate Chinese-American understandings and create a ''one China, one Taiwan'' policy.
''An obstinate United States approach based on the Taiwan Relations Act will certainly do serious damage to the normal relations between China and the United States, relations that were established only after long and painstaking efforts by the two countries,'' the article said.
The article appeared to be part of a campaign to warn President Reagan that Peking had been put into a position in which it had to react in some negative way to blunt new American efforts to steel Taiwan against mainland overtures, weapons sales being chief among them.
 
Taipei Rebuffs Efforts
China's efforts to open postal, telephone and telegraphic links with Taiwan have been rebuffed. 
Secretary Haig expressed some sympathy for Peking's view after he left China last month, saying that he hoped a decision on selling advanced fighters to Taiwan would be based on the island's genuine defense needs. 
He said he saw no need for urgency on a decision.
The Chinese seem to be seeking an initiative from the White House to help them foster peaceful links with Taiwan so that the Peking leadership can demonstrate progress in its reunification effort. 
Normalization of relations between Peking and Washington was a step in that effort. 
Chinese sources say Mr. Reagan is in a position to argue to his friends on Taiwan that a thaw in contacts would not harm them but would show progress in Peking's quest.
