
Chinese Catholics of all ages crowded shoulder to shoulder here today for a Latin mass that marked the reopening of the Beitang Church, possibly the most historic structure of Christianity in China.
Elderly worshipers were tearful as the Bishop of Peking, Michael Fu Tieshan, spoke from the altar about the twin-spired edifice ''returning to the arms of the church.''
The consecration ceremony was followed at midnight by the Christmas mass, once again sung in Latin, with a still larger congregation spilling out into a courtyard. 
Winston Lord, the United States Ambassador, and his wife Bette, joined 4,000 other worshipers in singing ''Silent Night,'' ''O Come All Ye Faithful'' and other carols.
Apart from children sharing pews and aisle space with their families, there was probably no one among the thousands present who was unaware of the sorrow that befell the church after 1958, at the start of the Great Leap Forward, when it was locked on the orders of Mao Zedong and turned into a warehouse for electrical generators.
 
Red Guards Devastated Church
In 1966, at the start of the other Maoist upheaval of the Cultural Revolution, young militants known as Red Guards broke into the church, smashed its stained glass windows, shattered its stone statues and carried off its hand-carved pews for firewood.
This year the authorities decided to restore the church to the Catholic Patriotic Association, the official group that runs Catholicism in China since May forced Chinese Catholics in 1957 to break their ties with the Pope. 
Because of the break, Catholics in China have not shared in the changes decreed by the Second Vatican Council in 1962-65, such as the holding of mass in indigenous languages rather than in Latin.
For the renovation of the Beitang Church, which is also known as the Church of the Savior, the Peking city administration allocated one million yuan ($310,000) and made available carpenters, painters and masonry workers. 
Helped by volunteers, they completed the work barely 24 hours before the consecration ceremony today.
As the voices in the ceremony sounded more like a lament than a celebration, a man of 82 who attended with his son and grandson recalled having been baptized in the church, taken his first communion there and later, after earning a doctorate in Germany, having returned to be married there.
''This was our spiritual home,'' he said in German. 
''Now we have the building back, but a faith is more than buildings. 
It is here in the heart, and our hearts are still yearning for something the party has denied us.''
 
Adamant Against Ties With Rome
He was alluding to the Communists' continuing refusal to allow formal links between Catholics and the Vatican.
According to official figures, there are three million Catholics in China, 30,000 of them in Peking. 
For them, the last few years have seen improvements from the Mao era, when churches were closed and worship was forbidden. 
This year alone has seen the reopening of churches in Peking, Shanghai and Tianjin, and the independent Chinese Catholic group has played hosts to Catholic visitors from abroad, including Mother Theresa.
In Rome, Pope John Paul II has responded with conciliatory remarks, but his insistence on recognition of papal authority has been rebuffed here.
According to the old man who spoke of the lost link with Rome, some believers prefer to worship in private rather than attend the official churches. 
Since many of these people had managed to observe the sacraments throughout the Cultural Revolution, he said, it was not difficult for them to continue to do so.
''The feeling for the Pope is very strong, particularly this Pope,'' he said, referring to Polish-born John Paul. 
''He is loved here for his strength and his vitality, and because he, too, has known what it is to be a believer in a Communist land.''
From the scene in the Beitang, it seemed that for many Catholics the opportunity to worship openly, to hear a choir singing ''Kyrie Eleison,'' to listen to the pealing of church bells, even if only on a recording, was more compelling than doctrinal disputes.
 
Worshipers in Padded Ovcercoats
In pew after pew, men and women in padded overcoats fingered antique rosaries that had somehow survived Red Guard searches, or leafed through yellowing prayerbooks. 
One woman had copied the entire Latin mass into a dog-eared notebook by hand. 
Elsewhere, people clustered around neighbors with photocopies of the responses, or sat with their faces buried in silent prayer.
To the purist's eye, much about the restored church might have seemed alien - the crude figuring of the new stained glass, the roughly wrought brass of the cross carried by a novice to the altar, the bold reds and greens and golds of the pillars along the nave, more akin to the coloring of an imperial pavilion than a church.
Yet none of this seemed of much consequence to the worshipers, some of whom claimed connections with the Beitang going back nine generations.
''We have waited for this a very long time,'' said Diao Defu, a 61-year-old medical technician, who attended with his wife. 
''Now we wish to enjoy it.''
