
In a fresh peace overture, a prominent Chinese official has written Taiwan's President, Chiang Ching-kuo, offering to visit the island and to discuss in person Peking's proposals for reunification of Taiwan and the Chinese mainland.
The letter, written by Liao Chengzhi, a deputy chairman of the National People's Congress and the director of Peking's Office of Overseas Chinese Affairs, called Mr. Chiang ''brother'' and referred fondly to an earlier friendship - they apparently met in Moscow in the 1930's. 
Its apparent purpose was to revitalize Peking's campaign for peaceful reunification, which was begun late last September by Ye @Jianying, chairman of the National People's Congress, the nominal Parliament.
Mr. Ye announced a nine-point proposal that would let Taiwan retain its armed forces and socio-economic system and give posts in the Peking Government to Mr. Chiang and other senior officials of the Nationalist Government in Taiwan. 
The proposal was promptly rejected by Taiwan as a trick.
PEKING, July 25 - In a fresh peace overture, a prominent Chinese official has written Taiwan's President, Chiang Ching-kuo, offering to visit the island and to discuss in person Peking's proposals for reunification of Taiwan and the Chinese mainland.
Mr. Liao's letter was circulated today by the New China News Agency, which said that it had been sent by cable to President Chiang on Saturday. 
It appeared later today on the front page of People's Daily and other major newspapers and was read in full on the evening television newscast.
 
Concern Over U.S. 
Arms Sales
It was unclear why the Peking Government was publicizing yet another appeal for reunification that contained nothing new beyond Mr. Liao's offer to visit Taiwan and his hint of a future role for the Kuomintang in China.
But the Chinese appear to be concerned at the prospect of new United States sales of F-5E combat jets to Taiwan, especially after Secretary of State George P. Shultz's tacit approval of such sales at his confirmation hearings, and may be anxious to press for new talks with the Nationalist regime.
In an oblique reference to the United States, Mr. Liao told Mr. Chiang in his letter: ''Peaceful reunification is entirely an internal affair of China. 
Those outsiders who talk glibly about it have designs on our Taiwan. 
This is common knowledge.''
A long article earlier this month in People's Daily and several other publications accused the United States of having coveted Taiwan for the last 140 years.
''The longing for old friends grows with age,'' Mr. Liao wrote. 
''If it is convenient to you, I would pack and set out for a visit to Taibei to seek enlightenment from our elders.''
 
'Time Does Not Stay'
If Mr. Chiang entered into peace talks, Mr. Liao wrote, ''the two parties would be able to coexist for a long time to come, supervising each other while joining in the glorious effort to revitalize China.''
He did not say how the two ideological enemies could work together, beyond noting that they had twice cooperated in the past.
Mr. Liao's letter also reflected the concern among the aging Peking leadership that successive generations of Chinese would grow less emotionally interested in Taiwan's return to the mainland. 
''Time does not stay, and brief is the day,'' Mr. Liao wrote.
Pointedly noting the Taiwan President's advancing age and poor health, Mr. Liao told Mr. Chiang, who is 72 years old, that his reconciliation with Peking would be a patriotic act insuring his place in Chinese history.
''You would be doing a meritorious service to the country and your name would be inscribed in the temple of fame,'' Mr. Liao wrote, adding, ''hesitation, procrastination or leaving the problem to other days would only lead to difficulty and distress and you, my brother, would hardly be able to escape the blame.''
 
Periods of Cooperation
The letter, which must have been approved if not drafted by the Peking leadership, recalled two previous periods of cooperation between the Kuomintang and the Communist Party, first in the 1920's and later in the late 1930's and 1940's against the Japanese invaders. 
Both were followed by a return to hostilities.
Mr. Liao declared that Mr. Chiang could not hold out forever. 
''Taiwan is bound to return to the embrace of the motherland eventually,'' he wrote. 
''An early settlement would be in the znterests of all.''
The letter also reiterated that after reunification, the remains of Mr. Chiang's father, the late Chiang Kai-shek, should be returned from Taiwan for burial ''in the native soil - in Fenghua, Nanjing or Lushan - in fulfillment of your filial wishes.''
Such an invitation was extended last October by the Communist Party Chairman, Hu Yaobang, at a rally here celebrating the 70th anniversary of the 1911 revolution.
