
Deng Xiaoping, the Chinese leader, today opened the 12th congress of the Chinese Communist party, which is expected to abolish the party chairmanship and thoroughly revamp the leadership.
In an opening speech, he pledged that China would continue to follow an open-door policy toward the outside world but stressed that China would never become any nation's vassal state.
''Independence and self-reliance have always been and will forever be our basic stand,'' Mr. Deng told the 1,600 delegates in the Great Hall of the People here.
Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping opens 12th congress of Chinese Communist party
Later the congress was due to hear a keynote speech by the party chairman, Hu Yaobang.
 
Deng Expected to Step Down
Mr. Deng, who is expected to step down to sit on a new central council of advisers, said China's affairs should be ''run in our own way and by our own efforts.''
''We will unswervingly follow a policy of opening to the outside world and actively increase exchanges with foreign countries on the basis of equality and mutual benefit,'' he said. 
''While we Chinese people value our friendship with other countries and peoples, we value even more our hard-won independence and sovereign rights. 
No foreign country can expect China to be its vassal.''
Mr. Deng said the present congress would be one of the most important party meetings since 1945, when Mao Zedong first became party chairman. 
After Mao died in 1976, China underwent a sweeping liberalization in all fields of political and economic life, but recently the party has begun to tighten its grip again.
The prospective council of advisers that will include Mr. Deng has been designed to provide a consultative role for aging but respected leaders so that they can retire from day-to-day decision-making to make way for younger men.
Discussing the issue of China's new links with the West, Mr. Deng said China must keep a clear head while learning from foreign countries. 
He said China must ''firmly resist corrosion by decadent ideas from abroad and never permit the bourgeois way of life to spread in our country,'' he said.
Mr. Deng outlined his three main tasks for the 1980's, first laid down in a speech to national leaders two years ago. 
These are to intensify the pace of modernization, to strive for reunification with Taiwan and to fight ''hegemonism'' and safeguard world peace.
Hegemonism used to refer to the Soviet Union, though recently the official Chinese press has used the word to criticize the United States as well.
 
Leadership to Be Restructured
Chinese leaders have told visitors that the congress would restructure the leadership by doing away with those posts to make it more difficult for any one man to hold absolute power.
Mr. Hu, the new party chairman, has indicated that the party will be ruled by a revamped secretariat headed by himself as general secretary.
He told a French delegation last week that the 23-member Politburo would continue to exist ''in the second line'' after the smaller secretariat.
This would mark a return to the more classical Communist model followed by the Chinese party in the 1920's and 30's, and make it similar in structure to that of its political rival in the Soviet Union.
