
Qian Qichen, a Deputy Foreign Minister, left today for the Soviet Union to resume talks aimed at establishing more normal relations between Moscow and Peking.
Mr. Qian, who also traveled with Huang Hua, who was then Foreign Minister, to the funeral of Leonid I. Brezhnev, the Soviet leader, last November, has been the special envoy heading the Chinese side in the consultations. 
He was seen off at the Peking airport today by the Soviet Ambassador, Ilya S. Shcherbakov, and by other Chinese Foreign Ministry officials.
In the second round of the talks, which Peking refers to as consultations, the Chinese side is expected to press the Russians to end their support for the Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia as a first step in improving Peking's ties with Moscow.
PEKING, Feb. 
27 - Qian Qichen, a Deputy Foreign Minister, left today for the Soviet Union to resume talks aimed at establishing more normal relations between Moscow and Peking.
Soviet support for the Vietnamese in Cambodia is one of three obstacles that Peking asserts is obstructing the normalization of relations between the two countries. 
The other two obstacles are the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan and what Peking says is a Soviet military buildup along China's frontier with the Soviet Union and Mongolia.
 
Cambodia Conflict Continuing
Privately, some Chinese officials have said that the relaxation of tensions with the Soviet Union should begin in Cambodia, where Vietnamese forces have been trying to crush remnants of the former Pol Pot regime recognized by Peking.
On Saturday, People's Daily, the Communist Party newspaper, criticized as ''a fraud'' Hanoi's latest offer to withdraw some of its ''volunteers'' from Cambodia and again blamed the Soviet Union for Vietnam's presence there.
''The so-called volunteers are none other than the barbarian aggressors sent by the Vietnamese authorities four years ago with Soviet support to cross the Vietnamese-Cambodian border, capture Phnom Penh and then occupy the whole of Cambodia,'' the newspaper article said.
China has indicated that it would accept a neutral and nonaligned Cambodia under a coalition headed by the deposed Prince Norodom Sihanouk, who spends part of his exile living in Peking as a guest of the Chinese Government.
The Soviet Union gave a hint last month that it preferred to deal with the disputes over the Chinese-Soviet border at the new round of consultations, which are expected to begin in Moscow this week.
A commentary in the Soviet foreign affairs weekly New Times in January accused China of obstructing better relations by pressing claims to parts of Soviet territory and using this pretext to generate Chinese hostility toward the Russians. 
The charge, which evidently surprised Chinese officials, was seen as a move to divert Peking's attention from its more difficult demands for an end to Soviet involvement in Afghanistan and Cambodia.
 
Soviet Accused of Distortion
China replied through its magazine World Affairs that it was making ''no territorial claims whatsoever'' on the Soviet Union. 
It also accused the Kremlin of distorting the Chinese position in the border dispute.
Chinese officials reported privately after the first round of talks, which went on for 17 days last October, that no progress had been made in moving toward more normal relations.
Last November, Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang reiterated Peking's position that any improvement in relations depended on whether Moscow moved to eliminate its three ''threats'' to China's security.
While Chinese officials seem pessimistic that the new round of talks will be any more fruitful than the first, Peking has agreed to the consultations with Moscow as part of its effort to stake out a more independent foreign policy that will deal equally with both the United States and the Soviet Union.
 
----
 
Qian Arrives in Moscow
MOSCOW, Feb. 
27 (Reuters) - Qian Qichen, the Chinese Deputy Foreign Minister, arrived in Moscow today for a second round of talks aimed at improving Chinese-Soviet relations, the official press agency Tass reported.
