
China said today that it had intensified its shelling of Vietnamese border positions and that the clashes, which began Saturday, had spread to a second border region. 
The fighting appeared to be the worst military clash between the Communist neighbors in nearly two years.
On Saturday Chinese frontier artillery units in the Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region opened fire on Vietnamese earthworks in response to what the New China News Agency charged were ''armed provocations'' by Vietnamese troops along their common border. 
Today the agency reported that artillery manned by Chinese frontier troops in neighboring Yunnan Province began firing at Vietnamese positions across that border.
''According to a report from the forward command post, the shelling destroyed the enemy's surface fortifications,'' the Chinese report said. 
''The Vietnamese position is in a mess.''
PEKING, April 17 - China said today that it had intensified its shelling of Vietnamese border positions and that the clashes, which began Saturday, had spread to a second border region.'Bombardment Is Still Going On'
''The bombardment,'' it added, ''is still going on.''
Details remained skimpy, with the official press agency not reporting the exact locations, scope of the fighting or casualties. 
China's border units are armed with mortars and light artillery pieces and the apparent lack of regular army involvement suggested the shelling was limited in area.
But the fighting seemed the most serious since May 1981, when tanks as well as artillery were involved in a clash in Yunnan Province. 
Later China claimed to have killed over 150 Vietnamese soldiers.
 
Chinese Invaded in 1979
There was no evidence so far in the latest outburst that China might be planning a new invasion of Vietnam, such as it conducted in early 1979. 
That offensive involved fierce fighting, with the Chinese Army suffering substantial casualties before it withdrew across the border.
While the Chinese press insisted that the current artillery shelling was purely in response to Vietnamese provocations locally, some Western diplomats here said they believed the move was aimed at disrupting Vietnam's latest offensive against insurgents in Cambodia and tying down more Vietnamese forces on the border.
A prominent commentary today in the official People's Daily newspaper acknowledged that the border tensions were linked to Vietnam's drive against the Chinese-backed guerrillas in Cambodia, also known as Kampuchea.
People's Daily said that whenever Hanoi launched major ''aggressive military operations'' in Cambodia, the Chinese-Vietnamese border became tense because of ''provocations'' by the Vietnamese.
''The Vietnamese authorities have increased provocations on the Chinese-Vietnamese border in an attempt to tie up China and prevent her from supporting the just struggle of the people of Kampuchea and Thailand,'' the official commentary said.
People's Daily warned Vietnam that ''the military provocations and aggression against China must be stopped at once.''
The shelling into Vietnam by Chinese artillery based in Guangxi and Yunnan provinces follows accusations traded earlier this month between the two former allies.
On April 10 the Chinese Foreign Ministry handed the Vietnamese Embassy here a note accusing Vietnam of conducting armed provocations and intrusions along their common border. 
Vietnam responded two days later with a diplomatic note protesting 25 similar incidents by Chinese forces in the final week of March.
 
'Whitewashing and Covering Up'
The New China News Agency also charged that on April 11 Vietnamese troops fired more than 3,100 shots on 62 occasions at peasants in eastern Guangxi Province, among other incidents.
The Hanoi radio this month called China ''a thief crying 'Stop thief,' '' and said its charge of Vietnamese border provocations ''is aimed at whitewashing and covering up its own criminal acts.''
Today the New China News Agency said Chinese frontier guards in Yunnan were compelled to fire back because the Vietnamese troops since the latter half of March ''repeatedly fired'' into Chinese territory, ''killing Chinese border inhabitants working in the fields.''
It gave no details about such fatalities.
The press agency also charged that Vietnamese infiltrators had set fires in mountain areas, burning 2,000 acres of woods, bamboo groves and rubber trees as well as destroying some houses and telecommunications wires.
On Saturday the New China News Agency said spring plowing in the Guangxi border area had been hampered by constant harrassment and intrusions of Vietnamese troops. 
It charged that the Vietnamese launched more than 50 ''armed provocations'' in March alone and that these had increased in April.
 
No Outside Observers Allowed
When the Chinese launched their bombardment, the agency reported, ''the border people were overjoyed at and hailed the counterattack.''
The border tensions have previously been characterized by reports of isolated shooting, infiltrations and seizure of fishing boats at sea. 
The charges are virtually impossible to confirm independently because neither side will let outside observers visit the frontier.
