
Peking has appointed new officers to senior positions in regional military commands, the Government reported today.
The disclosure came a day after the Central Military Commission announced it would trim the 4.2 million-member army by a million troops ''in an orderly manner'' over two years.
China appoints new officers to senior positions in regional military commands; disclosure comes day after Central Military Commission announces it will trip 4.2-million-member army by million troops over two years (S)
''Younger and more competent Chinese Army officers have succeeded to the top posts in the country's regional military commands,'' the official New China News Agency reported.
''The younger senior officers were appointed to their new posts at an enlarged meeting of the Central Military Commission held between May 23 and June 6,'' the agency said.
It said the meeting, attended by Deng Xiaoping, ''set reduction and reorganization as the main tasks for the army in the coming two years.''
The report did not identify the new officers or who they replaced. 
It also did not explain whether ''top posts'' meant the posts of military commanders, subordinates or both.
Mr. Deng, who heads the military commissions of the Government and the Communist Party, has vowed to retire elderly generals, promote educated officers and end overstaffing and waste.
China is organized into 11 strategic military regions. 
Five have changed hands since 1982, when officials sympathetic to Mr. Deng's modernization plans were appointed to key posts.
The commanders of five other military regions have been appointed since Mr. Deng began to take control of policy in 1977, a year after the death of Mao Zedong, who enjoyed strong support in China's military establishment.
The agency said Mr. Deng and his protege, the party general secretary Hu Yaobang, spoke at the Central Military Commission meeting.
There has been speculation that Mr. Hu might take over the commission chairmanship from Mr. Deng, who at 80 has said he is in semi-retirement.
