
''As close as lips and teeth'' was the way Communists in China and Vietnam described their relationship during Vietnam's wars against France and the United States.
But the national interests of the two Communist Governments have radically diverged since then, and their hostility has resulted in a border war and numerous lesser clashes since early 1979.
The quarrel stems in large part from the perception on each side that the other seeks to control Southeast Asia. 
In China's view, Vietnam's ambition became clear when Vietnamese troops invaded Cambodia five and a half years ago and overthrew its Communist Government. 
In Vietnam's view, the military ''lesson'' that China then tried to teach Vietnam was proof of Peking's desire for regional dominance.
The conflict has also reflected the larger ideological and strategic tensions between China and the Soviet Union. 
Moscow became Vietnam's main backer during the Vietnam War and now presumably views Vietnam as a strategic, if expensive, ally in Asia. 
Peking says it believes Moscow's alliance with Hanoi means China is threatened from the south as well as the north.
 
An Old Antagonism
Since the border war of February 1979, China and Vietnam have also pointed out that their hostility dates back for thousands of years.
Thus, in Vietnam these days, the nation's history is portrayed as one long struggle for political and cultural independence from China. 
Between 311 B.C. and A.D. 939, a string of Chinese dynasties ruled what is now northern Vietnam, and several wars were fought. 
After a Chinese invasion in 1407, the Vietnamese finally expelled their neighbors.
Recent Chinese teachings about Vietnamese history have tended to emphasize Vietnam's reported desire to create a Vietnamese-dominated federation consisting of Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos. 
Each side in the conflict has also combed the files of Communist Party history and found much evidence for the other's plots.
From the 1940's through the early 1970's, however, Chinese Communist support for the Vietnamese revolution was crucial, and the railroad link through Friendship Pass on their common border became a funnel for Chinese arms and other supplies for Ho Chi Minh and his followers.
The Vietnamese now say China turned against them even during the Vietnam War. 
Chinese leaders, they say, secretly agreed with President Nixon not to aid Vietnam if American forces bombed North Vietnam.
 
Soviet Provided the Aid
After Hanoi's victory over Saigon's forces in 1975, the question of aid to the shattered country was paramount, and the Soviet Union was Vietnam's indispensable provider, economically as well as militarily. 
Relations continued to cool between Hanoi and Peking during the late 1970's, as Peking's relations with Washington improved.
Relations soured further as the Communist regime of Pol Pot in Cambodia, which owned much to Maoist theory and Chinese aid, began to speak out bitterly against its former Vietnamese allies. 
According to Prince Norodom Sihanouk of Cambodia, the Pol Pot regime also coveted territory in southern Vietnam that Cambodian monarchs had controlled centuries before.
Vietnam's attitude, meanwhile, toward its own Chinese minority grew hostile in 1977-78 and caused an exodus of tens of thousands of ethnic Chinese ''boat people'' to China and other havens.
On Christmas Day in 1978, Vietnam invaded Cambodia and, within a few weeks, occupied most of the country. 
China threw its support to Pol Pot's guerrillas, who have resisted the Vietnamese ever since. 
On Feb. 
17, 1979, Chinese troops poured into far northern Vietnam, where they sat for a month before departing.
China has since threatened to teach Vietnam a ''second lesson'' if it goes too far in Cambodia. 
Observers of the ebb and flow of Chinese-Vietnamese border shellings and other ''provocations'' note that trouble there tends to increase each dry season, as Vietnamese troops step up their attacks against Pol Pot's guerrillas. 
One theory of why Vietnam has failed to crush those guerrillas is that China, in the north, poses too great a threat for Vietnam to risk the troops it needs to win in Cambodia, to the west.
