
China has successfully test-fired its first submarine-launched missile, the official New China News Agency reported tonight.
The agency said a ''submarine-based carrier rocket launching test'' was carried out in the East China Sea between Oct. 
7 and 16. 
Earlier, the Japanese daily Yomiuri Shimbun said test firings of intermediate-range ballistic missiles from a nuclear-powered submarine took place last Tuesday. 
The first official Chinese reports indicated that only one missile had been fired.
PEKING, Oct. 
16 (Reuters) - China has successfully test-fired its first submarine-launched missile, the official New China News Agency reported tonight.
The successful test makes China only the fifth country to have developed submarine-launched missiles. 
The others are the United States, the Soviet Union, Britain and France.
 
Launched ICBM's in 1980
China has already developed intercontinental ballistic missiles, or ICBM's. 
In May 1980, China fired what were initially described as carrier rockets in the central Pacific Ocean. 
They were later identified as ICBM's, and a handful of them are now believed to have been deployed. 
Last month, China announced it had successfully launched its 12th space satellite, and Western experts believe the Chinese are capable of placing multiple nuclear warheads aboard the ICBM's.
The New China News Agency said the Communist Party Central Committee, the Government and the party's Military Commission had sent a telegram of congratulations to all personnel involved.
The agency said after the launch button was pressed, ''a rumbling was heard, followed by a slight tremor, and the rocket broke through the sea surface with the force of a thunderbolt.''
Observers aboard nearby naval surface ships monitoring the launch burst into cheers, it said. 
The command post for the launch was on a hill near the sea, the agency said, with the entire operation directed by a commander and his deputy sitting at a control console.
Observers in helicopters watched the missile land in the target area, it added. 
The agency said the danger area had now been reopened to sea and air traffic. 
China had declared the area closed between Oct. 
7 and 26 for a missile test but had not said that it would be launched from a submarine.
 
100 Attack Submarines
This week's missile test would have taken place in waters controlled by China's east sea fleet, based at Ningbo, south of Shanghai, Western experts said.
This is the biggest of the navy's three fleets. 
The others are the northern fleet with headquarters in the former German concession port of Qingdao and the southern command sailing out of Zhanjiang.
Western experts say the Chinese Navy remains essentially a coastal defense force. 
It has a large number of patrol boats equipped with guided missiles and more than 100 attack submarines, according to latest Western estimates, but the experts see them as vulnerable to the superior technology of potential foes.
