
China has begun a major campaign against what it disparagingly calls ''spiritual pollution'' - the influx of unwelcome Western trends and liberal values that have been attributed to China's open-door policy toward the West.
The crackdown has come in the aftermath of last month's full session of the Communist Party's Central Committee, which announced a three- year program to clean up the party and rid it of radical and corrupt members.
Deng Xiaoping, China's foremost leader, raised the issue of spiritual pollution in a major speech to the closed session of the committee. 
The text of his speech has not been made public, but some Western diplomats speculated that it was part of Mr. Deng's strategy for undercutting opposition to the party's so-called rectification campaign.
China begins major campaign against what it disparagingly calls 'spiritual pollution,' influx of unwelcome Western trends and liberal values that have been attributed to open-door policy toward West; campaign is directed principally against literature and the arts; photos (M)
The party's propaganda chief, Deng Liqun, recently confirmed that the crackdown on spiritual pollution was ''closely linked'' with the party's rectification campaign. 
He went on to identify four categories of cultural contamination.
 
'Indulgence in Individualism'
These were, he said, the spread of ''obscene, barbarous or reactionary things,'' vulgar artistic performances, gainseeking and ''indulgence in individualism, anarchism, liberalism, etc.'' and writings or speeches that contradicted China's Communist system.
The campaign has been directed principally against literature and the arts, familiar scapegoats in previous ideological crusades. 
The broad scope became more apparent today when People's Daily published a self-criticism by Minister of Culture Zhu Muzhi, in which he apologized for his ministry's ''slow reaction and weak attitude'' in fighting the cultural contamination.
In the same newspaper, Ai Qing, a prominent poet who suffered under the Maoists, was also quoted as complaining that some Chinese literary magazines were ''polluting'' the minds of readers with material that ran counter to the official ideology. 
Several regional literary magazines have been suppressed for not being orthodox enough, according to reports in the Chinese press.
There was evidence earlier that a tougher line was being taken toward liberal trends. 
In September a play by Jean-Paul Sartre was closed down in Shanghai. 
Mr. Sartre's writings were criticized last year for having a negative impact on young Chinese.
Last month the China Youth newspaper denounced a light musical performance at a hotel in Canton, partly because the singers wore the traditional tight-fitting dress with a slit up the side, called a ''qipao,'' that revealed their thighs.
 
'Bourgeois Spiritual Pollution'
Peking Daily said last month that workers in the capital, over half of whom are 35 or younger, would undergo two weeks of ideological study because they lacked enough experience to recognize ''bourgeois spiritual pollution.''
Lin Jianqing, a senior party official, recently told a trade union congress here that ''we should help workers distinguish the beautiful from the ugly so that they favor the good and oppose what is ugly, vulgar and self-centered.''
The head of China's Academy of Social Sciences, Ma Hong, said last month that Chinese scientists, while studying the experiences and opinions of foreign scientists, must be on guard against the ''pollution by bourgeois ideology.''
The major assault recently on spiritual pollution has come in the current issue of the party's ideological journal Red Flag, which called it ''like air pollution, a public hazard.''
It also railed against vulgarity in literature and the arts, suggesting that these would be visible targets of the campaign.
Red Flag complained that ''frivolous and depraved drama and literature'' were increasing in China. 
It also said pornographic videotapes, photographs and hand-copied manuscripts were circulating ''with demoralizing and poisonous effect.''
 
Ideological Debate Within Party
The article, which was signed Shi Youxin, a pseudonym for a collective editorial effort, took a hard-line position when it said that ''many comrades'' were aware of the decadent trend but ''dare not resist for fear that they may be accused of being 'left.'
''
Red Flag also hinted that an ideological argument was under way in the party when it asserted that ''alienation'' was not possible in a Communist society. 
This contradicted a previous assertion by Zhou Yang, an adviser on literature and the arts to the party's propaganda department, that alienation was a universal phenomenon.
Last month Peng Zhen, a leading Politburo member and ally of Mr. Deng, told a forum that concern about liquidating spiritual pollution did not mean a change in the party's policy of encouraging diversity. 
Mr. Peng explained that such a policy of ''letting a hundred flowers bloom and a hundred schools of thought contend'' was intended to promote a Communist culture. 
''It is wrong to mistake it for a policy of liberalization,'' the official New China News Agency quoted him as saying.
Wang Zhen, a member of the Central Committee, indicated recently that some party officials had been careless about letting liberal tendencies develop. 
According to the New China News Agency, Mr. Wang said ''a few people on the ideological and theoretical front had spread in publications and classrooms many erroneous theories and viewpoints'' that ran counter to Marxist fundamentals.
