
The Chinese Communist Party has published a platform of party goals that appeal to almost everyone except people opposed to continued Communist rule of China.
The platform calls for slow but steady economic development and improvement of living standards, gradual extension of democracy under party control, a loose mix of public and private enterprise, a legal system that guarantees people's rights, a commitment to intellectual achievement, protection of religious freedom, a modernized army as the economy improves and more autonomy for ethnic minorities.
At a rally in the Great Hall of the People today, the new party chairman, Hu Yaobang, said that China would stress the role of competent managers in a new era of orderly economic development and would no longer tolerate a single all-powerful ruler like Mao Zedong. 
(Page A12.)
Chinese Communist Party publishes platform of party goals with priority on economic development and improvement of living standards
Problem of 'Degenerate Elements' The party platform calls for ''weeding out degenerate elements who oppress and bully the people.''
But, the platform warns, ''any word or deed which denies or undermines'' the party's leadership and its commitment to Communism ''cannot be tolerated.''
The statement of goals and policies is contained in a book-size assessment of the party's successes and mistakes being made public on the 60th anniversary of the party's founding in Shanghai in July 1921. 
The party assessment acknowledges major errors by party officials, including Mao, and pledges never allow them to happen again.
Endorsed Saturday by the Central Committee, the platform amounts to an official endorsement of the policies that Deng Xiaoping, the party's senior deputy chairman and China's most powerful leader, set forth in December 1978, declaring political struggle to be subordinate to the goal of upgrading the living standards of China's one billion people.
Political struggles have continued since then. 
Mr. Deng has forced supporters of radical Maoism out of power and shunted others aside in a systematic campaign to put supporters of his policies in leadership roles. 
That struggle reached a watershed of sorts on Monday when Mr. Hu, a protege of Mr. Deng, was named party chairman replacing Hua Guofeng, a staunch supporter of Maoist policies that are now officially declared to have been wrong.
The party's platform affirms Mr. Deng's goal of modernizing China ''systematically and in stages'' without resorting to unrealistic campaigns that in the past resulted in ''colossal waste and losses.''
It says that anyone who opposes Communism for China ''is wrong,'' but it calls for modifications to suit China's conditions. 
Without the Communist Party in control, the platform says, ''our country, for a variety of reasons, both internal and external, would inexorably fall apart.''
Although the party will make mistakes, ''in no case should one use the party's mistakes as a pretext for weakening, breaking away from or even sabotaging its leadership,'' the document says.
The platform says the biggest mistake the party made in the past was dwelling on class struggles against exploiters when they had long been basically wiped out, and not shifting in the 1950's to the goal of economic development.
 
Private Enterprise Encouraged
Although state enterprises and planning will predominate in China, the report said, private enterprise and market forces must complement and help government-run efforts to increase production. 
It urges flexibility, saying, ''There is no rigid pattern for the development of socialist relations of production.''
The party's political goals, the report says, include ''gradual establishment of a highly democratic socialist political system'' that will ''gradually realize direct popular participation'' in grassroots democracy. 
The neglect of democracy in the past, it says, helped foster the feudal-like rule of individuals like Mao and his wife, Jiang Qing, during the Cultural Revolution.
On the rule of law, the platform says: ''We must turn the socialist legal system into a powerful instrument for protecting the rights of the people, insuring order in production, work and other spheres, punishing criminals and cracking down on the disruptive activities of class enemies. 
The kind of chaotic situation that obtained in the Cultural Revolution must never be allowed to happen again in any sphere.''
 
Appeal to Intellectuals
In an appeal to intellectuals, who were punished during the Cultural Revolution simply because they were educated, the party platform says:
''We must firmly eradicate utterly fallacious views that denigrate education, science and culture, and discriminate against intellectuals.''
The party, it says, needs people who are both ''red and expert.''
In the past, being red meant being a good Communist and that was thought better than being an expert.
The platform says that China's ethnic minorities, made up of 60 million people spread over half of the nation's territory, were gravely wronged during the Cultural Revolution by party leaders who attempted to force them to give up customs and traditions and adher to Communist practice.
''We did not show due respect for their right to autonomy,'' the platform says. 
''We must never forget that lesson.'':
