
PEKING IF it did not quite match the drama of Richard M. Nixon's visit in February 1972, there was nonetheless unusual interest in the arrival here last week of Soviet
deputy Prime Minister Ivan V. Arkhipov for the start of the most important encounter between China and the Soviet Union in 15 years.
Mr. Arkhipov's visit began on an upbeat note when his Chinese counterpart, Vice Premier Yao Yilin, first grasped the Russian's hand, then embraced him. 
Later, four Politburo members greeted the Russian in similar fashion, telling him of their pleasure in seeing him and of the gratitude China still feels for the Soviet assistance immediately after the Communist takeover in 1949. 
The warmth persisted as Mr. Arkhipov held four days of talks here, then flew south for a tour of the Shenzhen special economic zone, the showcase of China's distinctly un- Soviet attempt to modernize with the help of foreign investment, private enterprise and competition.
At the end of the week, as Mr. Arkhipov wound up his visit, assessments of it were mixed but the official upbeat note was maintained through the final banquet Friday. 
From the frequency with which Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang and other Chinese leaders referred to the 77-year- old economic specialist as ''an old friend'' and as a man who had ''worked swimmingly together'' with the Chinese during his years as chief of the Soviet aid program here in the 1950's, there was no doubting that the atmosphere was good. 
Nor was there any disposition to belittle the value of personal contact between high-ranking leaders for dispelling some of the bad blood that has bedevilled relations between Moscow and Peking.
All the same, there was plenty of evidence that it will take more than affection toward an old comrade to solve the knotty problems blocking the normalization of political relations that both sides have avowed as their goal. 
The talks ended with the announcement of four new economic and technical agreements, including a long-term trade pact, that were already in the works in May when the Arkhipov trip was scrubbed in a fit of Soviet pique over President Reagan's successful talks here in April and renewed border fighting between China and Vietnam. 
But the Chinese leaders were careful to restate the conditions for a broader political accommodation, which the Kremlin has already refused.
What emerged more strongly than before was China's decision to allow commercial and economic ties to move ahead on an independent track. 
In this, there is less sentiment than hard-headed calculation about the benefits China can reap by allowing natural flows to resume. 
In the decade up to the border clashes in 1969, the heavy trade built up in the 1950's was reduced to barely $30 million a year, and this crept back up to only $300 million by 1982. 
Once China's leader, Deng Xiaoping, decided to emphasize economic growth, inhibiting the potential that the two economies have for servicing each other became self-defeating. 
Thus, it was agreed that for 1985, trade would be increased by 22 percent, to $1.8 billion. 
The Russians also agreed to modernize several dozen factories built in the 1950's with their help. 
The commitment to a five-year trade pact signalled a willingness on both sides to put matters onto a surer footing than year-to-year arrangements have allowed. 
But even the most generous estimates by Chinese and Soviet officials place a ceiling of about $6 billion on the barter trade the two nations will be conducting by 1990, when the trade pact will expire. 
This is about as much trade as the United States and China will do in 1984. 
Peking's hunger for American technology suggests that the total will go much higher in future years. 
The trade figures reflect a wider truth. 
Although the fashion among Chinese officials these days is to play down the strategic relationship that developed with the United States after Mr. Nixon came, there is much that attests to the strength of the American tie. 
The Arkhipov visit has to be balanced in this year alone against the trips to Washington made by Prime Minister Zhao and Defense Minister Zhang Aiping, and the visits here by Mr. Reagan, Navy Secretary John Lehman and the American delegate to the United Nations, Jeane Kirkpatrick.
A Threatening Presence
On the other hand, there is still much in the relationship with the Russians that the Chinese consider threatening. 
The ''three obstacles'' to normalization that were emphasized again last week - Soviet support for Vietnamese actions in Cambodia, the Soviet presence in Afghanistan and Soviet troop deployment along Chinese frontiers - are examples of Moscow's muscle-flexing on Peking's doorstep. 
In 27 months of Foreign Ministry talks, the Soviet Union has shown no readiness to compromise on any of the three, a stand that leaves 50 Soviet divisions arrayed along the border and nuclear-armed aircraft at Mongolian bases barely half an hour away from Peking. 
And far from preparing to move out of Afghanistan, the Soviet Army marked the fifth anniversary of its entry into that country with a continuing offensive in the countryside against stubborn guerrilla resistance. 
(For President Reagan also, the Soviet occupation was ''a serious impediment'' to improved relations.)
The part of the Arkhipov visit that seemed particularly interesting was the Russian's visit to Shenzhen, the area bordering Hong Kong, where the Chinese have granted tax and tariff concessions to foreign investors eager for low-cost labor. 
Together with the unleashing of market forces and the decentralization of economic authority sponsored by Mr. Deng, the experiment embodied at Shenzhen makes for a stark contrast with the halting reforms the Kremlin has launched at home. 
Soviet propagandists have predicted confidently that the Chinese policies will fail, but the fact that Mr. Arkhipov went there - on his own initiative, the Chinese say - suggests that Moscow was at least curious and wanted to look things over all the same.
