
A prominent cultural official has offered an apology for his own ideological shortcomings in a move interpreted here as a signal that stricter ideological conformity is again being demanded of China's writers and artists.
Zhou Yang, an adviser to the party's propaganda department and chairman of the state-controlled China Federation of Literary and Art Circles, offered a self-criticism for ''shortcomings and mistakes'' in a major address to a symposium commemorating the 100th anniversary of the death of Karl Marx.
His self-criticism, in the form of an interview with the New China News Agency, was featured today on the front page of Guangming Daily, a newspaper read by many educated Chinese, and also appeared in the party newspaper, People's Daily.
In his speech, which he gave last March, Mr. Zhou contended that alienation - the estrangement of an individual from society - could exist in Marxist as well as in capitalist countries. 
He also suggested that humanitarianism was a legacy shared by Marxists and Western thinkers.
Zhou Yang, prominent cultural official in China, offers apology for his own ideological shortcomings in move interpreted as signal that stricter ideological conformity is again being demanded of country's writers and artists (M)'Socialist Society Is Superior'
''Socialist society is undoubtedly superior to capitalist society, but this by no means says that there is no alienation in Socialist society,'' Mr. Zhou had said, and went on to cite some instances in China.
''A thoroughgoing materialist ought not to be afraid of admitting facts,'' Mr. Zhou had continued. 
''Only by admitting that there is alienation will he be able to overcome alienation.''
Such seemingly arcane philosophical points are watched carefully here because they define the parameters of creativity permitted in the Communist state. 
Mr. Zhou had seemed to imply that writers and artists should be allowed to portray contemporary China more realistically.
But his interview circulated by the New China News Agency quoted Mr. Zhou as saying, ''I did not pay proper attention to drawing a clear line ideologically between Marxist and bourgeois views on this question.''
Mr. Zhou said his report last March was ''open to distortion'' by some people with anti-Marxist views and had created ''some ideological and theoretical confusion'' about the nature of Marxist society.
Mr. Zhou's self-criticism, which was a common device used to correct divergent views under Chairman Mao, seems linked to a new drive against ''spiritual pollution,'' a code word for values, ideas and trends from the West.
 
What Is Significance of Move
The significance of the drive, and Mr. Zhou's self-criticism, is debated by Western diplomatic analysts here. 
Some believe that Mr. Deng decided to rein in literature and the arts to get wider support from hard-liners for his ''rectification'' or bloodless purge of the party, which was launched last month.
But some other diplomats think that the spiritual pollution campaign indicates that Mr. Deng has run into tougher opposition than was evident from party conservatives who opposed not only a shake-up of the party but also the changes that he has introduced over the last few years.
The new campaign reflects the assumption that life in capitalist societies is inherently pessimistic and degenerate and that therefore life in Communist societies should be portrayed as unfailingly optimistic.
Mr. Zhou, who is believed to be 75 years old, made his reputation both as a translator of Tolstoy and as a literary theoretician and propagandist. 
He was disgraced after the Cultural Revolution got under way in 1966 and then was rehabilitated 11 years later, becoming a deputy chief of the party's propaganda department.
At the 12th party congress in September 1982, he joined Mr. Deng and some other aging officials in retiring to the newly created advisory committee, but he remained with the propaganda department as an adviser.
Though he was active in the anti- rightist campaign of 1957 that persecuted writers who had veered from the party line, Mr. Zhou developed a more liberal reputation in recent years.
