
The Squibb Corporation said yesterday that it had received final approval for a joint venture with China to make and market pharmaceutical products in that country.
Michael W. Percopo, president of Squibb International, who said that he spent two and a half years negotiating the deal and made at least 10 trips to China, stated:
''We will share the profits equally and sell under the Squibb label.''
He added that each of the partners, Squibb and a Chinese Government organization called the Shanghai Pharmaceutical Industrial Corporation, will provide the equivalent of $1 million in capital. 
To this will be added another $6 million borrowed by the partners. 
The money will be used to build a plant outside Shanghai in an area called the Ming Hong district. 
Some will also be spent to import machinery from the United States.
The Squibb Corporation said yesterday that it had received final approval for a joint venture with China to make and market pharmaceutical products in that country.
The Japanese already have announced a joint venture involving hospital medications, and several American companies, including Avon Products Inc. and the Coca-Cola Company, also have pacts with the Chinese.
 
'A Great Potential'
''We view the Chinese market as offering a great potential, and the Chinese definitely have a great need for our products,'' Mr. Percopo said.
Products that will initially be manufactured in Shanghai include Cephradine, an antibiotic; Corguard, used in cases of angina and hypertension, and Capoten, used for hypertension. 
Vitamins also will be manufactured in the plant, he said, along with, eventually, a full range of Squibb products.
The new venture, which will have five Chinese directors and five directors named by Squibb, will be called Sino-American Shanghai Squibb Pharmaceuticals Ltd. 
The board will name a Chinese director as chairman, and Mr. Percopo will serve as vice chairman and president, along with continuing his presidency of Squibb International.
Mr. Percopo added that the agreement consists of a 15-year contract that can be renewed by the partners.
