
China has expressed satisfaction with Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang's visit to the United States, with People's Daily calling his trip ''significant and fruitful.''
An editorial in the Communist Party daily said Mr. Zhao, who is now in Canada, had achieved his goal ''to seek increased mutual understanding, stabilize the relations between China and the United States, enhance Chinese- United States friendship and help to preserve world peace.''
The editorial said United States support for the Chinese Nationalists in Taiwan was a ''major obstacle'' to the development of relations between Peking and Washington. 
But it offset this by stressing that other progress had been made in scientific and industrial cooperation, including the loosening of restrictions on the transfer of American technology.
China has expressed satisfaction with Prime Min Zhao Ziyang's visit to US, with People's Daily calling his trip 'significant and fruitful' (M)
The article was typical of the extensive treatment that Prime Minister Zhao's visit has been given in newspapers and on television, where it dominated the evening news.
The tenor of the reports suggested that Peking had become better disposed toward President Reagan, who is scheduled to make a visit to China in April.
Peking has put aside its characterization of the United States as a hegemonistic superpower along with the Soviet Union, though the Peking radio quoted Mr. Zhao today as having referred to ''superpower rivalry'' in a speech in Canada.
The People's Daily editorial characterized the talks with President Reagan as ''candid, serious and friendly.''
It said Mr. Zhao had ''clarified China's positions and views on bilateral relations and major international issues'' and had listened to what Mr. Reagan had to say.
''This has deepened the mutual understanding between the two sides and laid the groundwork for the furtherance of relations between the two countries,'' the editorial said.
It also expressed satisfaction that Mr. Zhao had met other Americans and had familiarized them with the situation in China.
''These friendly exchanges played a role that could not otherwise have been played in promoting understanding and friendship between the people of China and the United States,'' the editorial said.
But Mr. Zhao's complaints about American support for Taiwan have also received attention. 
People's Daily said ''some notable figures in the United States'' still considered Taiwan an independent political entity and were ''unwilling to relinquish the many relationships'' with Taiwan that existed before Washington established diplomatic links with Peking five years ago.
The newspaper reiterated Peking's contention that American ties with Taiwan constituted interference in China's internal affairs. 
The Chinese Communists consider Taiwan a breakaway province over which sovereignty must be reclaimed.
Echoing a sentiment expressed by Mr. Zhao, People's Daily said, ''We have no intention to ask the United States to help us achieve national reunification.''
But it said that Peking expected Washington to adhere to joint communiques that acknowledged the existence of a single China and committed the United States eventually to phase out its arms sales to the Chinese Nationalists in Taiwan.
People's Daily reiterated the expectation that the United States, by reclassifying China as a friendly nonaligned country, would move to abolish ''the various discriminative limitations'' on economic and technological cooperation.
''The Chinese Government and people have always attached importance to their relations with the United States and will continue efforts for their development,'' People's Daily said. 
''We hope the United States will also take manifest actions to show that it will really keep its repeated promises. 
Chinese-United States relations could thus enter a new stage of stable development.''
