
IF you've ever wondered why the names of so many computer products use nonstandard capitalization or punctuation, like WordStar, Compute! and dBASE, now we have an answer. 
It's a conspiracy to improve our typing skills.
At least that's what occurred to me in a moment of whimsy while using IntelliType, a thorough and often entertaining series of typing lessons for owners of Amiga computers. 
The program is described as ''the first typing tutorial for adults.''
IntelliType guides the learner through 30 lessons of warm-ups, drills, tests and analyses. 
Each lesson takes about 45 minutes, and at the end of the course you should be well on the way to becoming an accomplished touch typist.
An initial diagnostic test establishes your current level of ability. 
After that, the program may suggest that you start with a more advanced lesson. 
I chalked up a score of 47 words a minute with 97 percent accuracy, and so was moved ahead to about the middle of the course. 
After working through a lesson or two, I was told that I needed more work on capital letters, and I was drilled by having to type passages of words full of capital letters.
Especially valuable are the three bar charts that sum up your strengths and weaknesses at the end of each lesson. 
The first analyzes your accuracy, the second your speed (in both cases, for each key), the third your susceptibility to common typing errors like transposing, skipping or adding letters.
So why is this program specifically for adults?
Well, starting with the fourth lesson, much of your practice consists of retyping passages from the story of Ted and Laura, a couple whose amorous adventures are more silly than salacious, though salacious enough, and whose dialogue contains an improbably high percentage of hard-to-type words. 
There are also spies and car chases.
IntelliType is a product of Electronic Arts, 1820 Gateway Drive, San Mateo, Calif. 
94404, and costs $49.95 for the Amiga. 
If it is not available at your dealer, you can order it directly from the company at (800) 245-4525.
In this age of computer ubiquity, efficient typing is a valuable skill, and the computer is the perfect machine on which to learn. 
But what do microprocessors and hard disks have to do with a 5,000-year-old system of writing?
Chinease, a new program from China Books and Periodicals, is a series of lessons that uses I.B.M. 
PC-style machines to teach the meaning, pronunciation, history and proper way of drawing 80 Chinese characters. 
As the characters are shown on the screen, the learner is shown how to draw them onto paper.
Many people would enjoy learning a smattering of the calligraphy for esthetic reasons alone. 
In addition, Chinese-Americans might find Chinease a pleasant way of keeping themselves, or their children, in touch with their heritage.
I ran a demonstration disk that gives a sample of the lessons. 
The program uses simple animation attractively, and the Chinese characters are quite beautiful.
The demonstration disk is $5. 
The full course comes on three disks, and costs $67.50. 
Either may be ordered from China Books and Periodicals, 2929 24th Street, San Francisco, Calif. 
94110. The phone number is (415) 282-2994.
''Ahoy!'' magazine has been around about four years for those Commodore 64 and 128 enthusiasts who have more than a casual interest in their computers. 
Now it has a spinoff, ''Ahoy!'s AmigaUser,'' for owners of Amiga computers.
''AmigaUser'' is a quarterly, at $2.95 an issue, with more than a passing resemblance to its parent publication, which is published eight times a year. 
In the first issue, there is a list of the two dozen ''best'' Amiga games, two pages of computer-generated art contributed by readers, reviews, technical columns and features on graphics, sound and communications, complete with programs you can type in at your own keyboard.
Generally, the magazine assumes that the reader commands a fair amount of computer knowledge, somewhere between advanced beginner and intermediate. 
For anyone who matches that description, it is well worth taking a look.
''Ahoy!'s AmigaUser'' is published by Ion International of New York.
