
A businessman linked to Chinese diplomats at the United Nations attempted to export missiles and plans for F-14 fighter aircraft to China, the United States authorities charged in documents disclosed in court today.
The disclosure came during a detention hearing for Chang-Yao Chi, 65 years old, a New York businessman arrested Sunday and charged with conspiracy to illegally export arms.
Mr. Chi has links to ''high-ranking members of the United Nations (Chinese) delegation and the People's Republic of China,'' an Assistant United States Attorney, Mark S. Olinsky, said.
The complaint said that all the negotiations were with a Government undercover agent, and that no missiles or plans changed hands.
 
Detained Without Bail
A United States Magistrate, Stanley R. Chesler, ordered Mr. Chi detained without bail after finding a risk of his fleeing because of his diplomatic and Government contacts.
The missiles involved were the TOW anti-tank missile and the Sidewinder. 
The F-14 is the Navy's principle fighter jet and has never been sold to China.
The complaint, filed in United States District Court, said the case began last January, when a Qamar Babar introduced Charles Chang to a Customs Service informant at Newark International Airport to discuss the purchase of the missiles, launchers, parts and training, and the aircraft plans. 
The complaint gave no further information about Mr. Babar.
The complaint, signed by Customs Agent Frank Ventura, said Mr. Chang asked the informant about prices of the equipment. 
The informant gave a false name of a supplier, actually another undercover agent, to verify the reliability of the missiles.
After several phone calls with the undercover agent, Mr. Babar and Mr. Chang met him at Mr. Chang's business, Abacus Brokerage & Realty Limited, in the Flushing section of the New York City borough of Queens. 
Mr. Chang showed the agent a notebook with notes in Chinese that Mr. Chang said ''were written for him by some generals and engineers in China.''
The agent said he could sell 10 stolen TOW missiles for $250,000.
Mr. Chang was arrested in August, and agreed to record telephone conversations with Mr. Chi.
At a meeting with Mr. Chang on Sept. 
7, Mr. Chi ''indicated that the buyers of the stolen missiles, who are individuals associated with the Chinese mission to the United Nations, were being cautious about the methods to obtain and to transport these stolen missiles.''
Mr. Chi's attorney, Alan Zegas, denied that he was involved in the plot.
