
Years of arduous negotiations with China are finally starting to pay off for some of the largest oil companies, yielding contracts to explore and drill in areas off the Chinese coast that may hold the largest untapped reserves in the world.
Already, the Atlantic Richfield Company, the British Petroleum Company and the Occidental Petroleum Company have been granted rights to drill there, and the Exxon Corporation said yesterday that it expected to have a contract soon.
''This is the longest virgin coastline in the world, and we think it holds tremendous potential,'' said Paul Ravesies, the president of the Arco International Oil and Gas Company, the division of Atlantic Richfield that is at work in the Chinese waters.
Although it had long been thought to hold large reserves, the continental shelf off China was not evaluated by geologists from outside China until 1981. 
It was then that Atlantic Richfield, B.P., Exxon and a handful of other companies were invited by Peking to perform seismic and geological studies of the area; the companies spent more than $200 million on the research.
Western oil companies, after years of negotiations with China, are beginning to win contracts to explore and drill in country's offshore waters, which may hold largest untapped reserves in world; Atlantic Richfield, British Petroleum and Occidental Petroleum have contracts, and Exxon expects to have one soon; production could begin in '88, although large-scale production is probably at leat 10 years off; China's energy shortage, which is handicapping its industrial development, is said to be incentive to quick development; map (M)Estimates on Reserves
The size of the reserves is still undetermined. 
But Russ Hill, a spokesman for British Petroleum in London, said yesterday that the best estimates were that the offshore area in China could yield 30 billion to 100 billion barrels of oil.
Even at the low end of that range, the Chinese reserves would surpass the proven onshore and offshore reserves in the United States, which last year totaled 29.8 billion barrels.
''Our thinking is that offshore Chinese reserves represent at least another North Sea, and perhaps more,'' Mr. Hill said. 
The North Sea, which has some of the world's richest offshore oilfields, is currently estimated to have 10 billion to 30 billion barrels of reserves. 
''What we're looking at in China has very, very attractive potential,'' he added.
Mr. Hill and other oil industry executives said the companies currently holding contracts to drill in Chinese waters might begin producing oil as early as 1988. 
But they added that large-scale production was probably at least 10 years away.
Last August, 33 oil producers from the United States, Canada, Britain, Japan and other countries bid for rights to drill off the Chinese coast. 
British Petroleum, the first company to win drilling rights on the basis of the bidding, announced its contract in May. 
Occidental said last week that it had also received a contract.
Atlantic Richfield, which conducted its negotiations with the Chinese before the other companies submitted bids, was awarded a drilling contract last September. 
Arco has drilled two exploratory wells in the South China Sea, and has reported finding large volumes of natural gas in one of them.
Exxon, the world's largest oil company, said yesterday that it expected to be awarded drilling rights soon. 
It declined to confirm a report that a contract would be signed on Aug. 
23, but a company spokesman, Chet Bushnell, said Exxon was ''optimistic'' that a contract ''will be finalized in the near future.''
Western experts maintain that China, which is finding its industrial development handicapped by an energy shortage, has a vital need to develop its offshore oil reserves quickly. 
China is now the world's sixth-largest oil producer, pumping about two million barrels daily from onshore wells. 
But the productivity of those wells has begun to decline.
''Even if their reserves are as big as the optimists suggest, China won't be another Saudi Arabia,'' said Selig Harrison, a senior associate with the Carnegie Endowment for Peace and a specialist in Chinese energy development. 
''Because of their enormous population, their energy needs are going to cover most of the production.''
Nevertheless, Mr. Ravasies, of Atlantic Richfield, said he expected the Chinese to ''export as much oil as they can.''
Mr. Harrison also said offshore oil production could benefit China's economic development by giving it a sorely needed commodity that could earn foreign exchange.
United States oilmen have been attempting to persuade Peking to open up its coast for exploration and drilling since the late 1970's.
The negotiations, only now yielding drilling contracts and joint ventures, have involved a variety of oilfield equipment and services concerns, as well as the major production companies. 
Officials of these companies say that in all cases, China has insisted that its own geologists, construction companies and field personnel be taught offshore techniques so that a foreign presence in Chinese waters would be only temporary. 
At the same time, American oilmen say dealing with Chinese officials has often been a slow, bureaucratic process. 
That stands in stark contrast to the free-wheeling business environment of an industry where transactions are often closed on the basis of a single phone call or a handshake.
For example, the Hughes Tool Company, a major United States manufacturer of drill bits for oil wells, said it began discussions with Chinese officials in 1978. 
These discussions led to the opening two months ago of a drill-bit factory in China in which Chinese workers, using parts provided by Hughes, will assemble finished bits.
But Hughes said its agreement provided that beginning next year, the Chinese would begin manufacturing some of the parts themselves, and that by 1985, the Chinese would be making the entire bits.
 
Focus on Technology
''Their main interest is in the technology,'' said Robert Lockhart, president of the Hughes Trading division of the company. 
''They want to do it themselves.''
Another American concern, the Baker Marine Company, a Texas concern that makes drilling platforms, said it had been holding disucussions with China since 1980. 
Although these discussions have not brought Baker any new orders, the company did build a rig for an American oil production company with the help of the Chinese in 1981.
Steven Griffin, a Baker spokesman, said the company was offered the use of a Chinese shipyard in exchange for employing Chinese engineers and construction workers. 
''It was an exchange that allowed the Chinese to look over our shoulders and get some hands-on experience,'' he said.
