
The Communist Party organization of the ousted Pol Pot regime in Cambodia has announced that it is disbanding, the New China News Agency reported today.
The announcement of the dissolution was attributed to a press release issued by the Cambodian party's central committee and broadcast by the radio of the Pol Pot forces, which diplomats here believe has operated from territory inside southern China.
The news surprised Peking-based diplomats and prompted speculation about what was behind the unexpected move and whether it was sanctioned by the Chinese Government. 
The Chinese have continued to back the Pol Pot faction since it was toppled by the Vietnamesebacked regime under Heng Samrin now in power in Phnom Penh.
Communist Party organization of ousted Pol Pot regime in Cambodia announces that it is disbanding
Some Communist and Western diplomats here believed that the dissolution constituted a tactic by the Pol Pot forces to gain international respectability by shedding the trappings of their unsavory past and making a show of cooperating with other insurgents against the new Phnom Penh regime.
 
Insurgency to Continue
Though this could not be confirmed, the announcement made clear that the Pol Pot insurgency was not closing down as well. 
The New China News Agency quoted the press release as saying that the regime would ''continue to perform its historical task'' of leading its army and guerrillas to drive the Vietnamese ''aggressors'' out of Cambodia.
The Pol Pot group is believed to have 30,000 to 40,000 armed insurgents operating inside Cambodia with some military aid from Peking.
Although this is the largest guerrilla faction in the country, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations as well as Western countries like the United States are more sympathetic to the smaller non-Communist Khmer People's National Liberation Front headed by Son Sann, who once served as Prime Minister under Prince Norodom Sihanouk. 
A third group owes nominal allegiance to Prince Sihanouk.
Other nations have expressed a revulsion toward the Pol Pot faction, which still enjoys United Nations recognition, because it was accused of committing widespread atrocities against its own people after it took over Cambodia in 1975. 
Some diplomats here wondered whether the Chinese Government was also pulling back its support, because contacts have been carried out partly on a party-toparty basis.
 
Southeast Asia Group to Meet
However, a senior Asian diplomat said that some time would be needed to draw any accurate conclusions from the announcement. 
He observed that the five-member Southeast Asian nations group was holding another meeting in Thailand later this week and thought that the dissolution might have been timed as an overture to that organization.
In a joint statement on Sept. 
4 after a meeting in Singapore, leaders of the three Cambodian resistance movements expressed a common desire to cooperate in driving out the Vietnamese, to avoid fighting each other and to set up an ad hoc committee to find some way to form a coalition government.
The committee subsequently met between Sept. 
13 and Nov. 
14 to work out a political program. 
The Pol Pot faction, in a communique dated Nov. 
30 and subsequently circulated here, accused Mr. Son Sann of trying to amass government authority for himself and said it had agreed to study a further coalition proposal for two months.
Mr. Son Sann visited Washington this month to ask for American financial and military support, but the State Department said there were no plans to provide such aid to any of the insurgent groups in Cambodia.
 
'Scrupulous Discussion' Cited
The New China News Agency's report of the latest announcement said that the decision to disband the Communist Party had been made after ''scrupulous discussion and consideration'' that started in February 1979.
In a tacit acknowledgment of the atrocity accusations, the announcement said that ''despite mistakes committed in the complicated situation during its march forward, the Communist Party of Cambodia has remarkably carried out its glorious march.''
