
Pope John Paul II said an unusual mass in St. Peter's Basilica today on behalf of the Roman Catholics of China and afterward called on about 40,000 people in St. Peter's Square to pray that China's Catholics might again enjoy normal links with the center of their faith.
On Saturday, the leadership of the Chinese Catholic Church that is supported by the Government denounced the Pope, saying his recent assertion that Chinese Catholics were being persecuted was ''vicious slander'' and blasphemy.
Church sources noted the exceptional character of the Pope's actions today, pointing to the rarity of his saying a mass in St. Peter's except on holidays or other special occasions.
In a day marked by tributes to victims of political repression, John Paul also paid homage to Archbishop Oscar Arnulfo Romero of San Salvador, who was assassinated by right-wing terrorists two years ago. 
The Pope called once more for ''a just solution of the grave problems that torment'' El Salvador.
Pope John Paul II said an unusual mass in St. Peter's Basilica today on behalf of the Roman Catholics of China and afterward called on about 40,000 people in St. Peter's Square to pray that China's Catholics might again enjoy normal links with the center of their faith.
In the afternoon, the Pope visited the Ardeatine Caves outside Rome and prayed at the graves of 335 civilians, including 73 Jews, who were slain there by the Nazis in 1944.
 
Prays for China Every Day
A senior Chinese priest here said the Pope was very concerned over the fate of the church in China, where the Government has fostered the creation of a so-called Patriotic Church that denies the authority of the Vatican and where all other Catholic activity has been surpressed since the early 1950's. 
The priest reported that the Pope said a special prayer for China every day.
In his homily, the Pope said bishops and priests all over the world were devoting a mass to China today in response to a call he issued in January. 
The Pope's mass was broadcast live to China by the Vatican radio; since he became Pope, John Paul has ordered mass to be broadcast to China every Sunday.
Although the Roman Catholic Church faces difficulties in all Communist countries, the Catholics of China are generally believed to constitute the most repressed church.
Since it took power in 1949, the Communist regime has treated Catholics, especially priests, as agents of a hostile foreign power, and an unknown number of bishops and priests have been in prison for more than 30 years. 
The Vatican has no diplomatic relations with Peking, and a papal repesentative below ambassadorial level is accredited to the Nationalist Government in Taiwan.
 
15 Cardinals in Attendance
Four priests of Chinese origin said the mass with the Pope today, and Chinese were given special access to the basilica, which was filled with worshippers. 
Fifteen cardinals attended, to underline the importance of the mass.
In implicit recognition of the Peking regime's success in isolating Chinese Catholics, the mass was said in Latin, with only some readings and chants in Chinese. 
Because of the break with the Vatican, the Patriotic Church, the only one that is allowed to hold Catholic services in China, has not recognized the innovations of the Second Vatican Council and holds masses in Latin only.
The liberalization in China in recent years has profited the Patriotic Church, which was also persecuted during the Cultural Revolution, but has brought little relief to those Catholics who have stayed away from the pro-Government churches. 
But under the liberalization an unknown number of bishops and priests have been freed from labor camps.
Last November, however, about 20 Catholics, including about half a dozen released priests, were arrested in Shanghai on vague charges of helping organize pilgrimages and giving information to foreigners.
 
Peking Published Attack
In anticipation of today's special mass, the Peking Government on Saturday published an attack on the Pope by pro-Government clerics, It described the arrested Catholics as ''counterrevolutionaries in religious clothing.''
Few specifics are known about the Catholics who remain faithful to Rome or about the ''underground church'' in which many are believed to participate. 
Laymen and priests of Chinese origin who have visited China and have been allowed to visit relatives outside the big cities have reported a fervent faith among Catholics faithful to Rome and clandestine masses in private homes, particularly in villages.
The Patriotic Church is believed to exist only in big cities. 
No priests have been ordained since the early 1950's, when there were about 2,600 Chinese priests. 
How many survive, how many are at liberty or how many still consider themselves bound by their vows is not known. 
One well-known priest, Bishop Ignace Gong Pinmei of Shanghai, has been in a hard-labor camp for 26 years.
Similarly, no one knows how many Catholics there are. 
Their number was 3.2 million in 1949. 
Recent visitors report many secret baptisms and say many Catholic families still bring up their children in the faith.
