
Pope John Paul II named 25 new Cardinals today, including two Americans and a Lithuanian whose nomination was said to reflect a determination to strengthen the Roman Catholic Church inside the Soviet Union.
The two Americans elevated to the rank of ''prince of the church'' were Archbishops James Aloysius Hickey of Washington and Edmund Casimir Szoka of Detroit. 
As with all the others named today, they are considered conservatives on matters of doctrine who follow the Pope's line on major church issues. 
[List of new Cardinals and sketches of Americans, page 4.] Several American bishops who by tradition might have been expected to be made cardinals were ''notably excluded,'' said a senior Vatican official, who added that this was a matter of practical constraints rather than a policy decision. 
#5 Active U.S. 
Cardinals Altogether five American archdioceses will now be headed by cardinals, compared with eight when the Pope was elected in 1978. 
Los Angeles, St. Louis and Philadelphia have often been headed by cardinals but are not now. 
In addition, there are now four American Cardinals who are retired and one in the Vatican.
The Lithuanian named today, Bishop Vincentas Sladkevicius, has been free to perform his church duties only since 1982, having spent the previous 25 years under virtual house arrest in an rural village. 
The 67-year-old Bishop, the son of peasant farmers, is Apostolic Administrator of Kaisiadorys.
When the new Cardinals are officially installed on June 28 at a ceremony called a consistory, Bishop Sladkevicius will become the first Lithuanian Cardinal in several centuries and only the second Cardinal now resident in the Soviet Union. 
John Paul named Julijans Cardinal Vaivods of Riga, Latvia, in 1983.
 
'A Surprise' for Moscow
Asked if the Soviet authorities had been advised about the Bishop's designation as a Cardinal, the Vatican spokesman, Joaquin Navarro-Valls, said, ''It was a surprise for them.''
The nomination of cardinals is one of the most important exercises of a Pope's authority because they elect his successor after his death.
Moreover, the College of Cardinals forms the most important governing body in the Catholic hierarchy. 
It can be called by a Pope to review policy on specific issues, as it was in 1982 when it examined a scandal touching on the Vatican Bank.
In another appointment important to the church's relations with Communist nations, the Pope elevated Bishop John Baptist Wu Cheng-chung of Hong Kong, the British Crown Colony that is due to revert to Chinese sovereignty in 1997. 
No Catholic cardinals have been allowed to function in mainland China since the Communist authorities made Chinese Catholics break with the Vatican in the 1950's.
Commenting on the new Lithuanian and Chinese Cardinals, Mr. Navarro-Valls said, ''These are not symbolic appointments, but they are options for the future.''
The Cardinals named today come from 18 countries, and most lead important archdioceses, including Vienna, Montreal, Genoa, Naples and Sydney. 
Also elevated today was Archbishop Laszlo Paskai, who as Primate of Hungary is in a post traditionally held by a Cardinal.
Today's papal announcement, which came at the end of a High Mass in St. Peter's Basilica, had long been expected because in recent years many cardinals have died or reached 80, the age at which they are ineligible to vote in the conclaves electing new popes.
Pope Paul VI set the age limit in 1975. 
He also ruled that there should be no more than 120 ''electors.''
The number of electors had dropped to 97 cardinals, and the Pope named 24 new cardinals of voting age today. 
The limit will be exceeded for less than a month until another Cardinal reaches his 80th birthday.
 
John Paul's Fourth List
This is the fourth time John Paul has named a group of cardinals, and he has now chosen 85 of the 161 members of the College of Cardinals, including a majority of the electors.
Making the announcement, John Paul said, ''The entire church takes joy because once again it sees underlined in their choice its own universality.''
He noted that the new cardinals include prelates from every continent.
The Pope has often expressed his intention to internationalize the hierarchy. 
But after today's nominations, Italians will still constitute by far the largest national group in the College of Cardinals; they have 23 electors, just three fewer than when John Paul was elected the first non-Italian Pope in 455 years.
The Cardinals named today included three Archbishops holding senior Vatican posts and a senior Vatican diplomat. 
Their nominations indicate that important changes in the Vatican leadership will be made soon, because they are not likely to remain in their current jobs, Vatican officials said.
 
Two Older Men Elevated
In addition, John Paul exercised a traditional perogative by elevating two older men in recognition of their life work. 
They were Archbishop Jacques Martin of France, 79, who is now retired after serving as head of Prefect of the Pontifical Household for many years and the Rev. Hans Urs von Balthasar of Switzerland, 82, an influential Swiss theologian.
The Pope again confirmed today that there is a Cardinal whose name he has kept secret since naming him in 1979. 
That Cardinal is widely believed to be Bishop Julijonas Steponavicius, 76, who is officially the leader of the church in Lithuania but is considered by the Vatican to be impeded from fulfilling his duties by the Soviet authorities.
The 2.6 million baptized Catholics in Lithuania represent the largest concentration of Catholics in the Soviet Union, although the Vatican, like the United States, does not officially recognize Soviet sovereignty there.
 
THE 25 CARDINALS NAMED BY THE POPE
 
Hans Urs von Balthasar, 82, Swiss priest and theologian
 
Giovanni Canestri, 69, Archbishop of Genoa
 
Edward Bede Clancy, 64, Archbishop of Sydney
 
Jose Freire Falcao, 62, Archbishop of Brasilia
 
Angelo Felici, 68, Italian Archbishop, Apostolic Nuncio in France
 
Michele Giordano, 57, Archbishop of Naples
 
Paul Gregoire, 76, Archbishop of Montreal
 
Hans Hermann Groer, 68, Archbishop of Vienna, Primate of Austria
 
Franz Hengsbach, 77, Bishop of Essen, West Germany
 
James Aloysius Hickey, 67, Archbishop of Washington
 
Antonio Maria Javierre Ortas, 67, Spanish Archbishop, secretary of the Congregation for Catholic Education
 
Jean Margeot, 72, Bishop of Port Louis, Mauritius
 
Jacques Martin, 79, French Archbishop, honorary head of Pontifical Household
 
Eduardo Martinez Somalo 61, Spanish Archbishop, Vatican Deputy Secretary of State
 
Lucas Moreira Neves, 62, Archbishop of Sao Salvador da Bahia, Brazil
 
Anthony Padiyara, 67, Archbishop of Ernakulam, India
 
Laszlo Paskai, 61, Archbishop of Esztergom, Primate of Hungary
 
Simon Ignatius Pimenta, ,68, Archbishop of Bombay
 
Mario Revollo Bravo, 68, Archbishop of Bogota, Colombia
 
Alexandre Jose Maria dos Santos, 64, Archbishop of Maputo, Mozambique
 
Achille Silvestrini, Italian Archbishop, Secretary of the Council for the Public Affairs of the Church, Vatican foreign minister
 
Vincentas Sladkevicius, 67, Bishop and Apostolic Administrator of Kaisiadorys, Soviet Lithuania
 
Edmund Casimir Szoka, 60, Archbishop of Detroit
 
Christian Wiyghan Tumi, 57, Archbishop of Garoua, Cameroon
 
John Baptist Wu Cheng-chung, 63, Bishop of Hong Kong
