
Two $12,500 awards given by a United Nations population agency to Prime Minister Indira Gandhi of India and to China's family planning chief have been denounced as a travesty by a United States economist whom the agency enlisted as an adviser.
The economist, Theodore W. Shultz of Chicago, said that the United Nations Fund for Population Activities had ignored the recommendations of private consultants and rewarded two nations that have used brutal methods to curb population growth. 
Mr. Shultz, a recipient of the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Science, told the agency to remove his name from any material involving the prize.
In a letter to Rafael M. Salas, the Fund's executive director, Mr. Shultz said the awards would damage family planning programs. 
''The harm was done by awarding the prize to a public official in China where public policy is responsible for the appallingly high rate of female infanticide and a prize to the head of state of India despite her cruel mandated sterlization,'' Mr. Shultz wrote.
UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., July 23 -Two $12,500 awards given by a United Nations population agency to Prime Minister Indira Gandhi of India and to China's family planning chief have been denounced as a travesty by a United States economist whom the agency enlisted as an adviser.Forced Sterilization
During the emergency rule she imposed on India from 1975 to 1977, Mrs. Gandhi's Government was accused of forcing men in villages to undergo sterilization. 
China, whose family planning minister, Qian Xinzhong, received the other award, uses a system of punishment for couples who have two or more children. 
Women carrying a second child who refuse an abortion can lose 20 percent of their pay.
Mr. Shultz, in a telephone interview, said this policy had caused ''a large increase in female infanticide.''
Mrs. Gandhi has said the charges against her were exaggerated, but they are among the reasons given for her defeat in elections in 1977. 
The Chinese Government has said female infanticide stems from a ''feudal mentality'' and that those who practice it would be punished.
Mr. Schultz said he was one of five advisers chosen by the United Nations Fund for Population Activities to help a committee of diplomats who chose the winners of the prize. 
He appeared at a meeting in New York last March after studying the files of about 80 nominees, he said. 
The diplomats, he said, announced they would only consider heads of state or high officials for the prize, which is given for ''the most outstanding contribution to the awareness of population questions.''
''None of the qualified nominees is a head of state or high public official,'' Mr. Shultz said in the interview. 
''The decision of the committee was totally self-serving. 
As state-appointed members, they decided to court the favor of those to whom they are beholden regardless of the excellent qualifications of other nominees.''
 
U.N. Defends Awards
Mr. Salas, the director of the United Nations Fund, defended the awards in a telephone conversation from Tokyo. 
He female infanticide is outlawed in China and its ''official policy is family planning.''
He said Mr. Schultz's charge that the harshness of this program encourages killing of female children ''is an inference.''
Mr. Salas acknowledged there ''were such accusations'' of forced sterilization in India under Mrs. Gandhi in the past, but added, ''There is no such complaint in India today.''
Mr. Salas said his committee had limited its consideration for this year's awards to ''public statesmen,'' but he denied the judges had engaged in selfpromotion.
The chairman of the committee, Anwarul Karim Chowdhury of Bangladesh, declined to make any comment. 
The other diplomats who served as judges came from Australia, Mexico, Yugoslavia, Japan, Egypt, Burundi, Colombia, China and Tunisia.
