
The White House announced today that President Reagan and Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang of China would hold a meeting in the United States this year.
Administration officials said Mr. Zhao's visit to the United States would probably take place in June or September. 
They said today's announcement had been timed to coincide with Secretary of State George P. Shultz's visit to Peking.
In Peking, Mr. Shultz said at the end of his four days of talks with Chinese leaders that his visit had established a new atmosphere of mutual trust and had ''set the stage for renewed advances'' in relations. 
(Page 9.)
WASHINGTON, Feb. 
5 - The White House announced today that President Reagan and Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang of China would hold a meeting in the United States this year.
Officials here view Mr. Shultz's meetings in Peking as aimed at signaling that after a period of considerable difficulties, relations between the two nations are back on track.
White House officials said tonight there was a possibility that President Reagan would visit China, perhaps even this year. 
''Nothing is ruled out, including a visit this year,'' one official said.
 
Invitation Disclosed by Zhao
Mr. Zhao said Friday that he had accepted Mr. Reagan's invitation to visit the United States but made the plan sound somewhat tentative by adding that he hoped the trip would take place even though ''the obstacles in our relations cannot be removed.''
He said the Taiwan problem remained the main obstacle to better relations.
Administration officials conceded that there were ''various problems'' in the United States-Chinese relationship and said the planned visit was intended, in effect, to permit continued efforts to improve the ties between the two nations despite some strains. 
In the last two years, the key difficulty has been caused by American military sales to the Chinese Nationalist regime on Taiwan.
One Administration official said that despite ''difficulties'' in the relationship, the planned visit was intended to underscore the ''steadiness'' in the two countries' ties. 
The official noted that ranking Administration officials, including Vice President George Bush, Treasury Secretary Donald T. Regan and Mr. Shultz had visited China, and Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger was tentatively planning to go.
Administration officials said details of Mr. Zhao's trip had been worked out by Mr. Shultz. White House officials said Mr. Shultz had presented a letter from Mr. Reagan to the Chinese Prime Minister inviting him to visit this country.
''The President has invited Premier Zhao Ziyang of the People's Republic of China to make an official visit to the United States in 1983,'' the official statement said. 
''The Premier has accepted the invitation and will meet with the President on a date to be mutually agreed upon.''
The visit by Mr. Zhao ''is just a continuing part of the relationship between the U.S. and China,'' one official said. 
He added: ''I don't see this as a dramatic announcement. 
There's been a steadiness in the relationship.''
Mr. Reagan and Mr. Zhao met at the economic conference of industrialized and developing nations held in Cancun, Mexico, in October 1981. 
Officials said today's announcement was unrelated to Mr. Reagan's offer earlier this week to meet with the Soviet leader, Yuri V. Andropov, ''whenever and wherever he wants'' to sign an agreement to ban all intermediate-range, land-based nuclear missiles.
One official said the Taiwan issue was ''difficult for this Administration'' because President Reagan himself had had a long commitment to a continuing United States relationship with the Nationalist regime. 
Taiwan was recognized by Washington as the legitimate seat of the Chinese Government until 1972.
 
'Political Trouble' Held Likely
One Administration aide speculated that Mr. Reagan would have ''some political trouble'' in the United States if he visited China, especially among Taiwan's traditional supporters in the Republican Party and in conservative quarters. 
Officials insisted, however, that this would not deter Mr. Reagan from visiting China, possibly even this year.
The Reagan Administration has been seeking a meeting with the Chinese Prime Minister for over a year and a half. 
It was originally viewed under Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. as a way of demonstrating ties between Washington and Peking in the East-West context against Moscow.
Problems have centered on the continuing American ties to Taiwan. 
Last August these were resolved in large part in a so-called Taiwan communique that included a promise by the United States to phase out arms sales to the Nationalists in return for China's pledging that it sought reunification of Taiwan with the mainland by peaceful means only.
 
'Back to Correct Relationship'
An Administration official said today that before the communique, ''we didn't have a normal relationship with China.''
Relations were ''very difficult and sticky,'' largely over the Taiwan issue, he said. 
''Now we're back to a correct relationship,'' the official said.
It appears that the general aim in the Administration is to seek to use high-level bilateral meetings to cast Chinese-American relations into a firm long-term mold, while at the same time accepting the frictions within the relationship.
Officials have acknowledged that over the last two years the Reagan team has undergone a shift in its thinking about China. 
Initially Mr. Reagan's advisers saw Peking as a diplomatic counterweight to Moscow.
Now officials indicate that expectations about the relationship have been lowered. 
Although China is viewed as an important strategic anchor, holding almost 50 Soviet Army divisions on its borders, it is also seen as a struggling Asian economic power lagging far behind Japan.
