
If you fly on Pan American or CAAC, the Chinese airline, and stay overnight in either Los Angeles or San Francisco, then again in Tokyo, your body gains time to adjust to a different rhythm of waking, sleeping and eating. 
You would then have to leave China and make a connection in Tokyo or elsewhere nearby to get to Taiwan, since there are no direct connections between Peking and Taipei.
Or, using a combination of other carriers, you might choose among Los Angeles or San Francisco, then Honolulu, Manila and Hong Kong as overnight rest stops along the way. 
Any combination of carriers and rest-stop connections you choose will decrease the amount of time you can spend in China and on Taiwan; you might want to reconsider where you plan to visit and how long. 
Before making reservations, determine how many layovers, and of what duration, may be taken without additional charge.
Travel Question and Answer columnQuestion:A friend and I would like to visit several different national parks this summer; we plan to start out from New York City and end our trip in the state of Washington. 
Is there one place I can get information on all the parks?
- M. B., New York, N.Y.
 
Answer:For an introduction to the park system write to the National Park Service (Public Inquiries Office, 18th and C Streets N.W., Washington, D.C. 
20240; 202-343-4747) requesting the brochure called ''Guide and Map: National Parks of the United States.''
For a fuller description of each park, ''Index 1979 National Park System and Related Areas,'' send a check or money order for $3.25 to the Superintentent of Documents, U.S. 
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. 
20402. The index's stock number, 024-005-00763-6, should be included in your request.
You may then write again to the Public Inquiries office with a list of the parks you want to visit and they will send you more detailed information on each. 
Or, if you have sufficient information from these and other sources, you may write directly to the superintendent of each park for campsite or other required reservations.
In recent years many of the parks have experienced overflow crowds during the summer, so it is a good idea to make your plans and your reservations as soon as possible.
 
Question:I will be in France this year and would like some information about thoroughbred racing. 
I already have a schedule of races but I have been unable to get details concerning admission costs and how to obtain handicapping information. 
Are there multiple admission charges to the Chantilly track outside Paris?
How is a bet placed?
And is there a paper, similar to The Racing Form, giving performance information intelligible to someone with a scant knowledge of French?
- M.Z., Forest Hills, N.Y.
 
Answer:Admission to Chantilly race track is eight francs weekdays and 20 francs on Sundays. 
For a seat you have to pay an extra 12 francs on weekdays and an extra 20 francs on Sundays. 
Parimutuel bets are placed at any guichet (window). 
Placing a bet and gleaning information from the daily racing paper Paris-Turf requires a small French vocabulary that includes numbers. 
Trains leave frequently from the Gare du Nord for Chantilly; a shuttle takes spectators from the local station to the race track. 
A one-way train ticket costs 26 francs in first class and 17 francs in second.
Readers are invited to send written questions about travel to Q & A, Travel Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 
10036. Questions may be answered only through the column, not by mail or telephone.
