
As Elizabeth II touched her right foot to the ground here this evening, she became the first British sovereign to enter China.
With a smile and a wave of her gloved hand, the Queen, in a wide-brimmed white hat and a lemon-yellow dress, emerged from the door of her plane and walked down a flight of steps to receive two bouquets of red and white flowers, each clutched by a young Chinese girl and boy.
On the concrete tarmac, beyond the dour, gray cement terminal, China's Foreign Minister, Wu Xueqian, led a delegation of officials in greeting the Queen. 
''I extend a warm welcome to your majesty on behalf of President Li Xiannian,'' Mr. Wu said.
''I'm very glad to come to China,'' the Queen replied.
Prince Philip, the Queen's husband, who arrived half an hour earlier, stood with Chinese officials as his wife stepped onto the red carpet to begin her six-day visit.
The visit comes not quite two years after the two countries agreed on the future of the British Crown Colony of Hong Kong, and during a time of increasing British-Chinese trade. 
Four years ago, Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher paid a state visit.
 
Flowers and Flags
After the brief welcoming ceremony at the airport, the Queen rode in a black Mercedes-Benz down the airport road lined with carefully pruned willow and poplar trees, past fields and small brick homes, into the capital, where streets were festooned with flowers and flapping British and Chinese flags.
She was then taken to the state guesthouse, where hundreds of children on a platform, wearing elaborate costumes, were singing and waving colored pennants as her limousine drove into the compound.
During her stay in China, the Queen, 60 years old, is to meet with the Chinese leader, Deng Xiaoping, as well as President Li and Hu Yaobang, the party General Secretary, and Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang. 
But the bulk of her visit will be devoted to touring historical monuments.
Although she is the first British sovereign to visit China, her ancestors made repeated efforts to approach the Chinese. 
The first British monarch to try contact with China, Queen Elizabeth's great-great-great-great-grandfather, King George III, was soundly rebuffed by the 11th Qing emperor, Pianlong, who imperiously lashed the King for seeking to send an ambassador to the Chinese court.
 
'The Blessings of Civilization'
''You, O King, from afar have yearned after the blessings of our civilization, and in your eagerness to come into touch with our converting influence have sent an embassy across the sea,'' the Emperor wrote.
''I have ever shown the greatest condescension to the tribute missions of all states which sincerely yearn after the blessings of civilization, so as to manifest my kindly indulgence. 
I have even gone out of my way to grant any requests which were in any way consistent with Chinese usage.
''I do not forget the lonely remoteness of your island, cut off from the world by intervening wastes of sea, nor do I overlook your excusable ignorance of the usages of our celestial empire. 
But the demands presented by your embassy are not only a contravention of dynastic tradition but would be utterly unproductive of good result to yourself, besides being quite impracticable.''
Although George III was deterred, the guns of his granddaughter Victoria's warships opened China not only to England but to other Western powers as well. 
Memories of that humiliation have been interwoven both in the political history of modern China and in the country's relations with the West.
 
The Suspicion Remains
The China that welcomed Elizabeth II today echoes little of the 19th century, although there remains a fundamental suspicion of foreigners, a distrust that confines non-Chinese to insular, guarded compounds. 
But it is a China that has overcome foreign invasion, civil war, disastrous economic policies and the bloodbath of the Cultural Revolution from 1966 to 1976.
It is a China grappling with the future, a China strenuously trying to escape the stultifying bonds of tired bureaucracy by encouraging free, or comparatively free, economic enterprises. 
It is becoming the age of the Chinese consumer.
But the relics of China's past are what the Queen will be shown, a past sundered by Mao's revolution.
No events were scheduled for the Queen today, who arrived with a large retinue, including the Mistress of the Robes, a lady-in-waiting, the Master of the Household, a medical officer, a chief inspector of Scotland Yard and other assorted assistant dressers, private secretaries and an equerry-in-waiting.
During their four nights in Peking, the Queen and Prince Philip will stay in the elaborately restored state guesthouse west of the Gate of Heavenly Peace in the city's center.
The formal arrival ceremony is to take place on Monday outside the walls of the Forbidden City, once the residence of the Emperor Qian Long.
Queen Elizabeth is to spend three days sightseeing in and around the capital, including the Forbidden City, the Great Wall, and the tombs of Ming emperors.
Then the Queen is to visit Shanghai, which was shelled by British ships in 1842 in a campaign to force the Chinese to buy opium sold by British merchants. 
She will also go to Xian and on to Kunming in southwestern China and Canton. 
The Queen is to sail from Canton next Sunday for Hong Kong aboard the royal yacht Britannia.
Correction
A Peking dispatch Oct. 
13 on Queen Elizabeth's visit to China misidentified the Chinese emperor who ruled at the time of George III. 
The emperor was named Qianlong, and he was the fourth ruler in the Qing dynasty.
Correction-Date: November 3, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition
