
Deng Xiaoping, China's paramount leader, urged President Reagan on Saturday to prod Taiwan into steps toward political reunification with the mainland, but Mr. Reagan rebuffed the overture, American officials said.
Later, in an interview on Chinese television, Mr. Reagan said:
''We believe that this is a problem of the Chinese people on both sides of the strait to work out for themselves. 
We do not believe that we should involve ourselves in this internal affair.''
An American official said Mr. Reagan had used virtually the same language when Mr. Deng sought to involve the United States as a broker to get talks going with Taiwan on such issues as postal links, family visits, fishing rights, technical exchanges and trade.
 
Official Talks Concluded
The 100-minute meeting of the two leaders concluded Mr. Reagan's three days of official talks in Peking.
American officials report Deng Xiaoping, China's paramount leader, urged Pres Reagan to prod Taiwan into steps toward political reunification with mainland; Reagan, in later interview, says problem should be worked out by Chinese themselves; American official says Reagan used virtually same language when Deng sought to involve US as broker to get talks going with Taiwan on such issues as postal links, family visits, fishing rights, technical exchanges and trade; photo(M)
The American officials said Mr. Reagan had declined to put pressure on Taiwan or to act as a broker. 
Apparently alluding to recent experience in Lebanon, the officials said the White House feared that initial dealings on ''a tangential issue may lead you down a slippery slope'' to deeper involvement. 
Although both sides wound up their talks with optimistic dinner toasts hailing the potential for Chinese-American trade, disagreements on foreign policy were underscored when Chinese television for the second day in a row censored Mr. Reagan's indirect criticism of the Soviet Union. 
(Page 10.)
 
Protest Ordered by Reagan
This time it came in a taped interview with a television reporter. 
On Friday, television excised portions of a videotaped speech in which Mr. Reagan attacked the Soviet downing of a South Korean airliner and the stationing of troops on the Chinese border. 
The White House had expected both the speech and the interview to be broadcast in full, possibly even live.
Mr. Reagan ordered his spokesman, Larry Speakes, to issue a public protest over the censorship of his views on foreign policy and free enterprise.
''We regret the fact that statements by the President which would have given the Chinese people a better understanding of our country and its people were not included in Chinese media coverage of the speech,'' a White House statement said.
A Chinese spokesman said it would have been inappropriate for China to broadcast Mr. Reagan's attack on another nation over state television.
Among the censored portions were comments by Mr. Reagan about American values, freedom, the worship of God and the principle of law. 
When a White House official was asked whether the President had compounded differences with his remarks, the official burst out angrily:
''We stand for something and, God damn it, I don't care where we are, we're going to say so.''
Despite policy differences, Mr. Deng said, his talks with the President had produced ''much progress.''
American officials said neither side had changed established positions on issues.
''The most important progress is that I met the President the first time,'' Mr. Deng said, indicating that he attached significance merely to having the President visit China.
When the two leaders, sitting together at the start of a 55-minute working luncheon, were asked whether there had been any diplomatic breakthroughs, neither chose to answer.
On Monday, the two sides will sign a tax treaty and an extension of a cultural accord, and initial a nuclear power pact.
With the official discussions over, Mr. Reagan began the sightseeing part of his six-day visit to China with a 45- mile drive through the flat, dusty farmlands to see the Great Wall winding over hills northwest of Peking. 
The stone wall, 3,500 miles long, 26 feet high and 18 feet across at the top, was built originally to provide a protective perimeter against hostile nomads.
 
Reagan Calls Wall 'Awe-Inspring'
Surveying the battlement, Mr. Reagan called it ''awe-inspiring'' to think the wall had been built by hand.
''It is something walking up,'' he said, holding Mrs. Reagan by the hand and peering at the horizon. 
''Imagine walking up carrying boulders.''
''How would you like to have one in Washington?'' a reporter asked.
''Around the White House,'' the President joshed, drawing a circle in the air.
On the drive to the Great Wall, people dressed in baggy blue cotton outfits lined the sidewalks of the Avenue of Eternal Peace as the motorcade sped out of the city center. 
Bicyclists craned their heads, but there was no visible commotion or show of emotion.
At some intersections, the crowds were three to six deep. 
People looked down from balconies, peered through factory gates, stood on prefab concrete slabs, sat on sewer pipes or dirt mounds, and even stood around near the barbed wire fence of what was apparently a prison.
There were no flags, no cheering and no jeering. 
Occasionally a hand waved.
A camera crew for the Reagan-Bush re-election campaign committee traveled with Mr. Reagan, taking shots for possible commercials.
Saturday was Mr. Reagan's most varied day in China so far. 
It began with the taping of the television interview followed by recording of his regular Saturday radio broadcast, the meeting and luncheon with Mr. Deng, the visit to the Great Wall, some politicking with members of the American community here, and a dinner for Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang in the Great Wall Hotel.
The setting provided the most successful theme for the talks so far. 
At the dinner, Mr. Zhao said there was ''great potential'' for active economic and technical cooperation.
''The common interest of maintaining world peace and bringing benefit to the people of both countries requires that our two sides transcend the difference of social system and ideology and work for expanded cooperation based on equality and mutual benefit,'' he said.
 
Satisfied With Technology Flow
Mr. Deng told Mr. Reagan that he was ''reasonably satisfied'' with the flow of American technology, but wanted it speeded up, an American official reported. 
In his radio broadcast, Mr. Reagan said trade with China would mean ''more jobs'' for Americans.
But Mr. Deng told Mr. Reagan that the Taiwan issue limited the pace of improvement. 
The Chinese have said that they would allow Taiwan to keep its political, economic and social structure, and today, as an apparent inducement, Mr. Deng added that it could keep ties with the United States. 
But Mr. Reagan declined to help.
On issues such as Central America and American missile deployment in Western Europe, American officials said Mr. Deng told Mr. Reagan that his policies were disrupting relations with Western allies and other friendly countries. 
According to the officials, Mr. Reagan replied that the Atlantic alliance was holding together.
The American officials contended that Mr. Deng had ''concurred'' in the American arms buildup. 
They said that, even though the Chinese had ''a different agenda'' on foreign policy, it was ''not inimical to ours.''
An official said Mr. Deng reported that China's improvement in relations with the Soviet Union was ''glacial.''
Mr. Deng greeted Mr. Reagan and his wife warmly before the talks began and invited Mrs. Reagan to ''come by herself independently'' on another visit and ''bring your grandchildren along.''
Age appeared to be on Mr. Deng's mind as they bantered.
''You look very healthy and strong,'' he told Mr. Reagan. ''Today we are in the same age group, we are in our 70's. 
But in three months I will be 80.''
The President, who is 73, demurred.
''Along about after the 70's, it doesn't matter much really,'' he said. 
''I will be there shortly myself.''
Mr. Deng persisted.
''It is not a good thing to enter the 80's,'' he said. 
''I am sure when you reach 80, you will certainly be much stronger than I am now.''
The President again disagreed.
''Oh, no,'' he said.
After a few more pleasantries, reporters were ushered out and the two leaders continued their talks in private.
