
President Reagan arrived here today for a six-day visit to China and quickly plunged into meetings with senior Chinese leaders.
After landing at Capitol Airport, Mr. Reagan drove to the Great Hall of the People for a 21-gun salute and a half- hour meeing with President Li Xiannian. 
This evening, he is to exchange toasts of friendship with President Li at a dinner also attended by Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang, who visited the United States in January.
Wu Xueqian, the Chinese Foreign Minister, was on hand to greet Mr. Reagan at the airport and travel with him to the eastern court of the Great Hall for the 21-gun salute, a review of the Chinese honor guard and an exchange of national anthems.
Pres Ronald Reagan arrives, Peking, for six-day visit to China and quickly plunges into meetings with senior Chinese leaders; is met at airport by Foreign Min Wu Xueqian and is given 21-gun salute outside Great Hall of People; meets with Pres Li Xiannian; is to attend dinner with Pres Li and Prime Min Zhao Ziyang; is scheduled to appear on Chinese national TV three times during visit; illustration (M)
White House officials, excited and optimistic about the trip, attached significance to the fact that President Li, instead of inviting Mr. Reagan to a large dinner, will go to the guest house where Mr. Reagan is to stay to act as host at a small dinner for only 40 Americans and Chinese.
Mr. Reagan is due to meet with China's paramount leader, Deng Xiaoping, on Saturday. 
The meeting, scheduled for 90 minutes and to be followed by a working luncheon at the Great Hall, is expected to cover issues relating to the Soviet Union, which are considered to be the most sensitive and important topic on this trip.
Aides said Mr. Reagan hoped to advance the Chinese-American relationship to the point of reaching a mutual understanding about the importance of what is perceived as a Soviet threat in Asia and elsewhere around the world.
American officials said that perhaps the most extraordinary gesture was Chinese willingness to let Mr. Reagan appear on national television three times during the visit.
The televised appearances include a speech on Friday in the Great Hall to an audience of scientists, business officials and other community leaders, an interview with Chinese journalists on Saturday, and, on Monday, a question- and-answer session with students at Fudan University in Shanghai.
The meeting with Mr. Deng is to serve as the culmination of eight hours of conversation with Chinese leaders. 
Most of the time is to be spent with Prime Minister Zhao, the head of government, with whom Mr. Reagan got along well in January.
Mr. Reagan will also have an hourlong session with Hu Yaobang, general secretary of the Communist Party, who is regarded as a second heir-apparent, along with Mr. Zhao, to the paramount leadership after Mr. Deng.
The sightseeing aspect of the trip is intended to focus on three themes. 
In Peking, the emphasis is to be on the relationship between the United States and China.
In Xian, the stress will be on visions of Chinese history offered by the archeological excavation of the tomb of Shih Hwang-ti, the first emperor of the Chin dynasty, who built most of the Great Wall during his reign in the third century B.C.
In Shanghai, China's biggest city and manufacturing center, Mr. Reagan is to emphasize the growing economic relations with the United States by touring a factory set up by the Foxboro Company of Foxboro, Mass, manufacturers of industrial-process control equipment.
 
Visits to Rural Areas Planned
Visits to a farm, a rural market and a commune are also planned in Xian and Shanghai.
Before leaving Peking on Monday, Mr. Reagan is to sign various agreements, including a treaty that eliminates the possiblity of double taxation for American corporations operating in China.
White House officials now say they expect Mr. Reagan to witness the initialing of a treaty on nuclear cooperation, rather than signing the treaty himself. 
The treaty would permit American companies to bid on the construction of nuclear reactors in China.
The general terms were agreed on last week, according to White House officials. 
The text of the initialed agreement is to be reviewed by the State Department legal specialists and by the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency and the Department of Energy in Washington.
 
Congress Is to Be Consulted
Administration officials said Congress would be consulted because the treaty would entail a pledge by China to honor the terms of an American law requiring guarantees and safeguards for the use of reprocessed nuclear fuel at reactors built with American help. 
Congress wants such fuel to be kept under strict control and not to fall into the hands of a country that might use it for nuclear weapons.
Administration officials said that if neither the Senate nor the House of Representatives moves to block the treaty, it would be ready for signature after 60 days of its being initialed.
