
President Reagan said today that the pledge by the United States to gradually reduce arms sales to Taiwan was based on ''the full expectation'' that China would abide by its promise to seek reunification with Taiwan by peaceful means.
Seeking to reassure the Nationalist Government on Taiwan and its American supporters that the Chinese-American communique issued today did not undermine the security or well-being of Taiwan, Mr. Reagan said in a statement that ''we have paid particular attention to the needs and interests of the people of Taiwan'' in agreeing to the communique.
''My longstanding personal friendship and deep concern for their well-being is steadfast and unchanged,'' he said.
 
Taipei Expresses Regret
In Taipei, the Nationalist Government expressed ''profound regret'' over the United States-Chinese communique. 
In a sharply worded statement, the Foreign Ministry said the communique was ''in contradiction of the letter and the spirit'' of the Taiwan Relations Act, which provides for continued United States arms sales to Taiwan. 
(Page A13.)
WASHINGTON, Aug. 
17 - President Reagan said today that the pledge by the United States to gradually reduce arms sales to Taiwan was based on ''the full expectation'' that China would abide by its promise to seek reunification with Taiwan by peaceful means.
The communique, the result of 10 months of negotiations between Peking and Washington over the issue of continuing American arms sales to the Nationalists, contained a statement by the Chinese Government that its stated position of seeking peaceful reunification of Taiwan with the mainland was a ''fundamental policy to strive for a peaceful solution to the Taiwan question.''
In response, the United States said in the communique that, taking that statement into consideration, ''it does not seek to carry out a long-term policy of arms sales to Taiwan, that its arms sales to Taiwan will not exceed, either in qualitative or in quantitative terms, the level of those supplied in recent years since the establishment of diplomatic relations between the United States and China and that it intends to reduce gradually its sales of arms to Taiwan, leading over a period of time to a final resolution.''
But John H. Holdridge, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee this afternoon that there was ''no time frame'' for phasing out the arms sales to Taiwan and that the United States had rejected Peking's efforts to secure a specific commitment for ending such sales. 
The arms sales amounted to $835 million in 1980, the high point in recent years.
 
Some See Contradiction
The Administration's stated willingness to reduce arms sales to Taiwan drew criticism from members of Congress today, some of whom said it seemed to contradict the Taiwan Relations Act, adopted in 1979, in which the United States undertook to supply Taiwan with sufficient defensive arms even though there would no longer be official diplomatic relations. 
Some senators, like John H. Glenn, Democrat of Ohio, noted that Mr. Reagan as a Presidential candidate in August 1980 had promised not to impose new restrictions on Taiwan.
In January 1979 the United States established diplomatic ties with Peking and severed those with Taiwan. 
Mr. Holdridge, under attack from Mr. Glenn and some others at the Foreign Relations Committee, said particular significance should be attached to China's inclusion of the words ''fundamental policy'' in describing its peaceful approach to the Taiwan question.
A senior official said the Chinese had agreed to include the terms ''fundamental policy'' as a concession in the last weeks of the negotiations that were concluded in Peking on Sunday.
Mr. Holdridge said that the Chinese characters for those words carry the connotation ''of unchanging and long-term.''
Another State Department official said the Chinese characters, ''@dazheng,'' which translate as ''fundamental,'' literally mean ''great'' and ''governing'' and are used only to describe major policies.
American officials have never been sure why the Chinese made the Taiwan arms issue so important. 
They have speculated on internal splits within the Chinese leadership with opponents of Deputy Chairman Deng Xiaoping trying to undermine his policy of close relations with the United States by pressing the Taiwan arms issue to the limits. 
Because of this, Washington went out of its way to try to reach an agreement on a document that would be ambiguous enough to satisfy the Chinese leadership without seriously compromising the Taiwan Relations Act.
Reactions on Capitol Hill were mixed. 
Mr. Reagan, who had campaigned on a strong pro-Taiwan plank, which has been significantly modified since he took office, invited about 30 members of Congress to an afternoon meeting to explain that he had not undercut Taiwan.
Not all conservatives were critical. 
Senator S.I. 
Hayakawa, Republican of California, said, ''There are enough ambiguities in the agreement so that no one should be seriously offended, no one should feel sold out.''
 
Baker and Goldwater Differ
Senator Howard H. Baker Jr., the majority leader, said he was pleased with the document, but Senator Barry Goldwater, Republican of Arizona, the Senate's leading supporter of Taiwan, said it was ''a bad agreement.''
As a result of the communique, the Administration will send to Congress either on Wednesday or Thursday official notification of plans to extend co-pro@duction of F-5E fighters between the Northrop Corporation and Taiwan, a decision that was announced last January, but that was delayed in being carried out because of Washington's desire to secure at least tacit approval from Peking, which it says it has done in the communique.
