
President Reagan's appeal for China to move forward ''hand in hand'' with the United States appears to mark a remarkable personal turnabout.
Mr. Reagan has long harbored an ideological enmity toward this nation, which he has derided as ''Red China.''
Now he seems to be engaged in a pragmatic courtship of the Peking Government.
To be sure, the President has not cast off his anti-Communism nor eased his views of the need for global struggle with the Soviet Union, whether in the arms race or Central America.
Analysis of apparently remarkable personal turnabout by Pres Reagan in his appeal for China to move forward 'hand in hand' with US; notes Reagan has long harbored ideological enmity toward China and now seems to be engaged in pragmatic courtship of Chinese Government (M)
But he arrived here Thursday portraying himself as a missionary of change, proposing to bury the past, wanting to play down differences, willing to take a new tack with Chinese Communism and eager to draw it toward market economics.
 
Looking to the Future
''I have not come to China to hold forth on what divides us, but to build on what binds us,'' he told 500 senior Chinese officials today. 
''I have come not to dwell on a closed-door past, but to urge that Americans and Chinese look to the future because, together we can and will make tomorrow a better day.''
Warm words for a politician whose words for nearly three decades rang with staunch partisanship for Chiang Kai-shek and other Nationalist Chinese leaders who settled on Taiwan.
Indeed, when President Nixon made the first American Presidential visit to Peking in 1972, Mr. Reagan said if it had been done by a Democratic President, ''I'd be up the walls screaming'' because ''a Democratic President would be appeasement-minded.''
And when President Carter opened diplomatic relations with Peking in 1979, abrogating a defense treaty with Taiwan and closing down their official relations, Mr. Reagan charged: ''We callously betrayed a longtime friend and ally,'' and ''we did so with brutal rudeness.''
Earlier Mr. Reagan savaged ''the regime'' of Mao Zedong's successors as ''still authoritarian and repressive, a statist monopoly founded on violence and propaganda and destructive of the humane traditions of the Chinese people themselves.''
In the 1980 Presidential campaign, he touched off a new confrontation with Peking by declaring that as President he would reverse the Carter policy and restore ''official'' relations with Taiwan. 
A few months later he backed down but he entered office in an atmosphere of mutual distrust with Peking.
The reversal of his position has unfolded gradually, in stages. 
Indeed, some Government officials contend that even now the real Ronald Reagan has not altered his inner beliefs or that, at the most, he has undergone a change of the head but not of the heart. 
For he continues to assert that to make new friends in Peking he will not desert old friends on Taiwan.
 
New Policy Direction
But Mr. Reagan's mission here this week is concrete evidence of his new policy direction. 
Those favoring the shift say the visit represents Mr. Reagan's most difficult and important exercise in political realism.
Some of his longtime political associates contend that six days of personal exposure to the land, people and leadership of China will confirm and accelerate the changes in his thinking.
''The President doesn't read a great deal,'' said one old political ally, speaking privately. 
''His strength is in sizing up people and situations, person-to-person. 
My only regret is that it's China he's visiting and not Russia. 
I don't think he would ever have denounced Russia as an 'evil empire' if he had met the Soviet leaders. 
It's much easier to demonize people in the abstract.''
Whether this trip makes Reagan foreign policy more flexible, more pragmatic and more open in the future remains to be seen. 
But he has already traveled a considerable path from his early testy months of friction and suspicion with Peking.
The Chinese leaders have treated his shift as simply common sense in today's world. 
When reporters asked Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang how the Chinese felt about having in their midst such an ardent anti-Communist who had often harshly denounced their country, he replied, ''Any politician with vision will see that it is an outmoded idea'' to base policy on ideology.
Mr. Reagan's first major step was his agreement in August 1982 to a ceiling and a long-term reduction of American arms sales to Taiwan, provided that China and Taiwan settled the issue of reunification peacefully. 
His second important move, last May, was to upgrade China to the status of a friendly nonaligned nation, permitting it to purchase advanced American technology barred to the Soviet Union. 
Finally, last fall he agreed to make his visit to Peking, and in January he warmly played host to Prime Minister Zhao in Washington.
A diverse political coalition slowly engineered Mr. Reagan's political evolution. 
It included anti-Soviet Republican conservatives and State Department strategists, including former Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr., who told him China was a potential ally or, at minimum, a vital regional bulwark against Moscow. 
Others in this coalition were influential businessmen who saw China as an enormous market for American exports and who got strong support from Vice President Bush and top Cabinet officers, and Mr. Reagan's political inner circle at the White House, who were thinking about his re-election campaign and concerned about possible voter dissatisfaction with his deadlock with the Russians.
Beyond that, the President appears greatly intrigued, as he indicated in his speech today, by the thought that by stimulating extensive American commerce with China, he can play a role in weaning China away from Communism to a more capitalistic economy.
