
President Reagan, in his first official engagement since his cancer surgery, agreed today to a pact with China that opens the way for the sale of American nuclear reactors and technology.
Larry Speakes, the White House spokesman, said the long-delayed agreement ''provides a legal framework'' for the supply of equipment for China's nuclear power program. 
The pact is subject to Congressional review, although White House officials said it was improbable that Congress would seek to block it.
Mr. Reagan agreed to the pact during a meeting with the President of China, Li Xiannian, who is on a visit to Washington. 
The accord was signed later in the day by Energy Secretary John Herrington and China's Deputy Prime Minister, Li Peng, who oversees his country's energy industry.
Pres Reagan, in first official engagement since cancer surgery, meets in Washington with Chinese Pres Li Xiannian and agrees to pact that opens way for sale of US nuclear reactors and technology to China; White House spokesman Larry Speakes says long-delayed agreement provides 'legal framework' for supply of equipment for China's nuclear power program; pact is subject to Congressional review, although White House officials say it is improbable that it will be blocked; photo (M)Military Technology Barred
Officials said the pact provided for no technology with military application and prohibited the use of American equipment to help other nations acquire nuclear weapons. 
They said Chinese assurances were unwritten and based on public and private comments.
''It is designed for the peaceful use, and only the peaceful use of nuclear materials,'' Mr. Speakes said. 
''Specifically, it says no nuclear materials or equipment subject to the agreement will be used for any nuclear explosive device, or for research or development of any nuclear explosive device or for any other military purpose.''
#15-Minute Ceremony Mr. Reagan, who returned from Bethesda Naval Hospital on Saturday after major abdominal surgery, walked stiffly and lacked his usual ruddiness while greeting President Li on the South Lawn. 
In brief remarks, Mr. Reagan's voice was raspy.
But Mr. Reagan, 74 years old, assisted Mr. Li, who is 76, to the podium and placed his arm around him to guide the Chinese leader to his seat during the abbreviated 15-minute welcoming ceremony. 
A dinner at the White House was also cut short as Mr. Reagan skipped the receiving line and planned to forgo - with President Li - the entertainment, which included Grace Bumbry, the opera singer.
Mr. Li, long one of the leading Chi-nese Communist economic specialists, was made President in 1983 when this largely ceremonial office was restored after an eight-year hiatus.
President Reagan, in his remarks on the South Lawn, said that although differences existed between the two nations, ''We will continue to put any differences in perspective.''
He said the two nations would proceed in the spirit of ''mutual respect, mutual benefit,'' repeating the words in Chinese.
President Li, in a speech read by an interpreter, told Mr. Reagan:
''I am very happy to see you are recovering so fast and I am deeply touched by your participation in this welcoming ceremony.''
 
'Tortuous Road' of Relations
President Li cited the ''tortuous road'' of United States-Chinese relations in the last two centuries and voiced optimism that mutual ties would be cemented.
''I hope that a dozen years hence, when we look back, we shall be able to feel gratified, as we do today, that as we proceed difficulties are increasinngly reduced and our steps grow more vigourous,'' Mr. Li said.
The two leaders then entered the White House, where they posed for pictures in the Green Room and then conferred in the Blue Room for about 30 minutes. 
Usually, these meetings are held in the Oval Office.
Although President Li's position is largely ceremonial, American officials said he was a key policy maker who sits on the six-member Standing Committee of the Politburo and was, as one official said, ''a leader with over 50 years of significant and, in Chinese terms, almost legendary contributions to his country and his party.''
Also signed today were agreements involving educational and cultural exchanges and fisheries.
 
Pact Stalled Since April 1984
But the dominant event was the signing of the nuclear agreement, which had been stalled since April 1984, when Mr. Reagan initialed the pact while visiting Peking.
The actual signing was delayed when United States intelligence officials found that Chinese nuclear specialists had been seen at a nuclear plant in Pakistan, where work on a nuclear device was believed under way. 
The Pakistanis have denied that they are developing a nuclear device.
Because the Chinese are believed to have left the Pakistani site -and because China has stated publicly its intent not to help other nations develop nuclear weapons - United States officials resumed efforts to sign the agreement.
 
U.S. Law Constraints Noted
An official briefing reporters today said in response to a question:
''If we are convinced that China is engaged in activities assisting other countries with reprocessing or enrichment, under conditions other than the very stringent ones applied in U.S. law, we would be forced to suspend cooperation. 
The law is very clear. 
We cannot cooperate with China under this agreement if we find that China is helping other countries acquire nuclear weapons.''
About 30 Chinese Nationalist demonstrators from Taiwan protested on the Ellipse as the Chinese Communist President was welcomed by Mr. Reagan, and several other hundred other demonstrators, protesting what they called Communist China's attempt to take over Taiwan, carried placards and chanted across from the White House.
Correction
A Washington dispatch on July 24 about the meeting between President Reagan and President Li Xiannian of China incorrectly described a group of about 30 demonstrators on the Ellipse who protested what they called China's attempt to take over Taiwan. 
The demonstrators included Americans of Taiwanese descent who said they favored self-determination for Taiwan. 
They said this entailed oppo sition to the political policies of the Nationalist Government as well as Peking's claim to sovereignty.
A correction in this space on Thursday, referring to Grace Bumbry as a mezzo-soprano, was itself erroneous. 
As described in a Washington dispatch Wednesday about the state dinner for President Li Xiannian of China, Miss Bumbry is a soprano. 
She once sang mostly mezzo-soprano parts, but in recent years has taken predominantly soprano roles and now regards herself as a soprano.
A Washington dispatch yesterday about President Reagan's welcome for President Li Xiannian of China incorrectly described Grace Bumbry. 
Though she has occasionally sung soprano roles, she is a mezzo-soprano.
Correction-Date: July 31, 1985, Wednesday, Late City Final EditionJuly 27, 1985, Saturday, Late City Final EditionJuly 25, 1985, Thursday, Late City Final Edition
