
STEVEN R. WEISMAN
TACOMA, Wash., April 19 - President Reagan told a group of lumber industry executives today that he would seek to ease trade barriers to American exports when he travels to China next week.
''You know, as I do, that occasionally the interests of diplomacy and the interests of American industry sometimes seem to collide,'' Mr. Reagan added. 
''I see it as our job to reconcile the two.''
Pres Reagan, without offering specific examples of trade difficulties with China, says he will seek to ease trade barriers to American exports when he visits China next week, speech to group of lumber industry experts, Tacoma, Washington (M)
The President offered no specific examples of the trade difficulties with China. 
But Administration officials have been upset that China has failed to meet its commitment on grain imports. 
China, on the other hand, has run into American roadblocks in increasing high-technology imports and also exporting textiles to the United States.
Mr. Reagan said ''we were in a kind of period of strain'' over textile and high-technology products, but that the strain had eased. 
He said further that China had promised to meet its full quota of grain purchases this year and make up for the shortfall it incurred last year. 
The President made his comments during a visit to the log export facility operated by the Weyerhaeuser Company.
For the second consecutive week, Mr. Reagan found himself on the defensive with a public audience about high interest rates. 
Asked by a dock worker why the rates were so high, he said that in part it was because of the heavy demand for borrowing that resulted from the economic boom, and in part because money markets were being ''unnecessarily pessimistic'' that there would be a resurgence of inflation.
The President said ''I have a hunch'' that if the Congress joined his Administration in ''whittling away at the deficit,'' interest rates would go back down.
Mr. Reagan flew here from Washington this morning, and afterward flew to Santa Barbara for a brief weekend at his ranch. 
On Easter Sunday Mr. Reagan is to leave for overnight stops in Honolulu and Guam before arriving in Peking on Thursday. 
He will be in China for six days before returning via Fairbanks, Alaska.
At the Weyerhaeuser headquarters in a lush campus-like setting, Mr. Reagan heard from local business leaders that trade with China and other nations in the Pacific was absolutely essential to the local economy. 
In response, he promised to press the need for trade in traveling to China, adding that he would do everything up to putting a ''Buy America'' sticker on his suitcase.
