
President Reagan will seek support at the economic summit meeting here for a United Nations resolution threatening Iran and Iraq with an arms embargo if they refuse negotiations to end their war, White House officials said today.
The resolution would be the centerpiece of the Administration's strategy for forging a united posture on gulf policy among the leaders of the seven major non-Communist industrialized nations. 
Their talks begin here Monday.
Officials said that the decision to pursue the measure in the General Assembly was made out of the recognition that Mr. Reagan would be unable to secure a unified position among the summit nations' leaders for increased military action in the Persian Gulf to keep its sea lanes free from attack.
''Realistically, it is the only thing,'' said a senior White House official here.
 
Reagan May Lift Sanctions
On another matter that may arise at the summit meeting, ostensibly on economic matters, the White House indicated that Mr. Reagan could be near lifting economic sanctions against Japan. 
The President imposed the sanctions April 18 on a range of Japanese consumer electronics products in reprisal for what Washington called Tokyo's failure to live up to a trade agreement. 
The accord was intended to help the semiconductor industry in the United States.
Indicating that the United States and Japan could be close to resolving the trade rift, the White House spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, said the President is reviewing new data on whether Tokyo is opening its semiconductor markets and on whether it continues to sell the chips in third countries below cost, a practice known as ''dumping.''
The senior White House official said that there was some support within the Administration for the President to lift the sanctions while here, but that Mr. Reagan has not made a final decision.
On policy in the Persian Gulf, officials said that the United Nations resolution envisioned by the Administration would be similar to one that has been stalled in the Security Council.
 
Iran Arms Embargo Threat
The thrust of that measure is to warn Iran and Iraq that unless they agree to a ceasefire, withdraw to international borders, and negotiate a compromise, they would be subject to a United Nations-approved arms embargo.
White House officials said the President's attempt at seeking support here for a new initiative was regarded as a way of getting such a measure out of the Security Council. 
The endorsement of the leaders attending the summit meeting, one senior aide said, would bring new pressure on the Chinese, which the Administration has accused of selling missiles to Iran, and which has opposed such a resolution thus far.
''The Chinese would not want to stand alone on this,'' the aide said.
The Administration had stepped up public criticism of China as Mr. Reagan arrived here on Wednesday. 
Frank C. Carlucci, the President's national security adviser, said the United States was ''obviously displeased'' that the Chinese were selling missiles to Iran, and that the practice added ''new dimensions'' to the threat in the Persian Gulf.
 
Gulf a Key Issue
Mr. Reagan's discussion of the Persian Gulf has emerged as a key political issue at the summit talks in the wake of an Iraqi missile attack on the American frigate the Stark, in which 37 sailors were killed. 
In the atmosphere of heightened tension since that attack, the United States is preparing to allow 11 Kuwaiti tankers to fly the American flag and to provide naval escorts for those vessels in the gulf.
Although Administration officials declined to discuss what Mr. Reagan will seek in the talks in the way of gulf policy, aides here said he had decided to pursue a new United Nations resolution following a review of options submitted after a meeting Friday of top foreign policy and national security advisers.
On Wednesday, Mr. Carlucci cautioned against Mr. Reagan seeking support for increased military involvement in the region, saying that the nations attending the summit meeting had ''varying capabilities.''
He noted, for example, that Japan's and West Germany's Constitutions prohibit such military involvement.
Administration officials have also expressed uncertainty about France's support for such a plan, noting that country's reluctance to engage in what might be perceived as a joint exercise led by the United States.
Similarly, Italy's Foreign Minister, Giulio Andreotti, indicated Wednesday that his caretaker Government was not interested in such a plan after meeting with a high Iranian official.
 
Japan Weighs Contribution
 
TOKYO, June 4 (Special to The New York Times) - Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone hinted today that Japan might consider requests for financial contributions to international efforts in the Persian Gulf war.
But Mr. Nakasone said he wanted first to discuss the matter at the Venice summit conference.
A newspaper report today quoted an unidentified senior Foreign Ministry official as saying that Mr. Nakasone was prepared to offer financial help to protect oil tankers in the gulf ''if money can solve the problem.''
Asked about the report, Mr. Nakasone pointedly did not repeat the argument that Japan was unable to take such action. 
Instead, in remarks to foreign journalists, he took a noncommittal stand.
In their public comments, Ministry officials have noted repeatedly that Japan's Constitution prevents Tokyo from getting involved, even financially, with military operations far from Japan's shores.
Correction
Because of an editing error, a Venice dispatch yesterday on United States plans to seek a resolution threatening Iran and Iraq with an arms embargo if they refuse talks to end their war misidentified the body in which the measure is being sought.
 
It is the United Nations Security Council, not the General Assembly.
Correction-Date: June 6, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition
