
After less than three weeks in office, the Reagan Administration finds itself in a political confrontation with the Soviet Union and facing potential crises in Poland and El Salvador even before it has had time to put together a comprehensive program for dealing with the dozens of other foreign policy problems demanding answers.
What about China and Taiwan?
Should Israel and Egypt be pressed to negotiate on Palestinian autonomy?
When should arms control talks with the Russians be resumed?
What can be done about Afghanistan?
How should Namibia and South Africa be dealt with?
What about Iran, now that the hostages are home?
The list is long.
Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. has tried to take charge of the foreign policy machinery only to discover how slowly the system can move. 
He has had to deal with budget cutters threatening America's ability to use foreign aid as a policy tool; he has had to argue with agricultural interests that want to end the grain curbs against Moscow even as Soviet troops remain on alert around Poland, and he has had to try to insure that the Administration speaks with one voice.
There has been little foreign policy comment from the White House, which has been preoccupied with getting its economic recovery program started. 
President Reagan, in his few remarks on foreign affairs, has demonstrated a lack of expertise.
Bernard Gwertzman's discussion of probable U S foreign policy under Reagan Administration presents overview of likely relations with different nationsPriority Given to Tough Talk
The Reagan Administration's perception of the world military balance as moving dangerously in the direction of the Soviet Union has given priority to tough talk about building up defenses and standing up to the Russians, the like of which has not been heard in Washington since John F. Kennedy came to office 20 years ago, worried about a ''missile gap,'' wars of national liberation and Cuban subversion.
There has been considerable discussion in diplomatic circles about a new cold war, but that seems to be an exaggeration for the moment. 
Anatoly F. Dobrynin, the Soviet Ambassador, may have been deprived of his parking privileges in the State Department basement, but he was highly visible a week later sitting next to Mr. Haig at a Washington Press Club dinner.
Despite the polemical exchanges, highlighted by Mr. Reagan's charge that the Russians reserve the right to ''commit any crime'' to advance their goals, both sides seem to want to leave the way open for eventual discussions.
For diplomats and journalists looking for a checklist of priorities and goals, it has been frustrating. 
Mr. Reagan has so far produced nothing like Jimmy Carter's blueprint of 1977: a Panama Canal treaty, Middle East negotiations, a strategic arms limitation treaty, a Rhodesian settlement and normalization of relations with Cuba, Vietnam and China. 
Instead, this Administration, as it struggles with the issues, has produced certain attitudes that will presumably affect substance.
 
Administration's Likely Views
From listening to Mr. Haig and his top aides, these points can be made with some authority about the Reagan Administration:
- It will openly criticize Soviet behavior around the world. 
It wants to insure that Moscow understands that it cannot have ''business as usual'' unless it subscribes to a international code of conduct, as yet undefined.
- It regards human rights as a proper subject for diplomatic discourse, but the emphasis will be on the violations committed by terrorists and Washington's adversaries, not by countries friendly to the United States, such as South Korea.
- It will seek to avoid public disputes with allies by consulting intensively on all problems and trying to confine disagreements to diplomatic channels.
- It has no fascination for developing countries, which Mr. Haig has referred to as ''the so-called third world.''
Those that cooperate with the United States will be rewarded wherever possible, as when tanks were sold to Morocco recently. 
Soviet penetration of Africa and Asia will not be regarded as inconsequential.
Despite its acerbic exchanges with the Russians in its first week in office, the Reagan Administration has moved cautiously. 
It deliberately avoided being drawn into the emotional outpouring against Iran in the days after the hostages' return.
 
Minimum Revenge Toward Iran
Recognizing that long-term American interests favored keeping the door open to future contacts with Iran, the Administration limited itself to the minimum retribution. 
It said it would not sell arms to Iran, a decision dictated as much by a desire to remain neutral in the Iran-Iraq war as by the rough treatment of the hostages. 
It also advised caution in future trade.
Yet Mr. Reagan, in his most considered foreign policy remarks, ruled out ''revenge'' although he was ambiguous about what the United States might do in a similar situation elsewhere.
The Administration's main concerns have focused on the continuing tensions surrounding Poland and El Salvador. 
Both involve the risk of military involvement, the first by the Soviet Union and other Warsaw Pact forces if the Polish situation disintegrates internally; the second, if guerrillas backed by the Soviet Union and Cuba step up efforts to oust the moderate junta now in power.
In both cases, the Administration deeply hopes that the crises can be avoided but has gone ahead with contingency planning in case they cannot. 
It is already clear that a Soviet move into Poland would create a breakdown in East-West relations, with even such countries as France imposing an economic boycott on the Russians. 
Mr. Haig's first message to Foreign Minister Andrei A. Gromyko repeated the West's warning about the dire consequences to East-West relations if there is intervention in Poland, and the Secretary of State sent copies to all the allies.
 
Bogged Down in Salvador
In El Salvador, the hope is that increased American aid will allow the army to prevail. 
There is already concern on Capitol Hill that the United States might be drawn into ''another Vietnam,'' this time close to home. 
A French diplomat worried the other night that the United States would become as bogged down in El Salvador as the Russians seem to be in Afghanistan.
In keeping with the Administration's caution, it has not disclosed exactly what it would do if the crises exploded in Poland or in El Salvador.
The Reagan Administration seems to lack a senior conceptual thinker in foreign policy. 
Neither Mr. Haig nor Richard V. Allen, the White House national security adviser, seems comfortable developing broad schemes. 
They seem more at home with pragmatic decisionmaking.
Nevertheless, they bring to their positions certain ideas, and they have inherited certain realities, that will inevitably influence policy. 
Following are summaries of some of the basic problems the Administration must deal with in three major areas.
Soviet Union
The Administration sees the Soviet Union as dangerous, untrustworthy and antagonistic to Western interests. 
But it recognizes that it must deal with the Russians. 
The problem is when to talk and what to say. 
There seems little interest at the moment in reviving the cultural exchange agreements that were suspended or canceled when Moscow intervened in Afghanistan, but there seems to be a recognition that American public opinion, American strategic interests, and allied concerns all compel resumption of certain arms control negotiations.
Last week the Administration said it ''strongly supported'' the decision by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in December 1979 to go ahead with the deployment in Europe of 572 new American missiles, while at the same time pursuing negotiations with the Russians on reducing each side's missiles in Europe.
The European allies have always put considerable stress on seeking arms control arrangements with the Russians. 
With the second strategic arms limitation treaty virtually dead, the negotiations on theater nuclear forces have become even more important in European eyes, even though the chances for an early agreement seem slim.
The Reagan Administration, despite its opposition to the second strategic arms accord, is publicly committed to resuming the quest for a ''real'' strategic arms agreement, and one of the studies now under way in the State and Defense Departments is about how to approach such negotiations - whether to try, for instance, to amend the second treaty or to begin negotiating a new one.
Mr. Haig said at his confirmation hearings that strategic arms limitation was ''an urgent and important task'' but that ''we acquire breakthroughs in negotiations with the Soviet Union in arms control only when they perceive that the alternative facing them is a willingness on the part of the United States to match or better what they are willing to deploy.''
Both he and Mr. Reagan have repreatedly stressed that there can be no arms control negotiations without reference to Soviet actions elsewhere - the so-called linkage theory.
Thus, if the Polish crisis worsens, there is no chance of any arms control negotiations, officials assert. 
But even if Poland remains relatively calm, the Administration must decide on a timetable for probing Soviet intentions; it is unclear what it would link to such talks to make them possible.
China
Given the Administration's stated antipathy toward the Soviet Union, it would seem logical to expect it to move rapidly toward a closer relationship with Peking, Moscow's main adversary, in order to build on the framework erected by the Carter Administration when it formally normalized relations on Jan. 
1, 1979.
If Mr. Carter had been re-elected, it is fairly certain that his Administration would have moved toward a much closer military arrangement with Peking to offset the Russians in Afghanistan and elsewhere, despite concerns by some in the State Department that this might damage relations with Moscow.
But such a policy by this Administration has been hampered by Mr. Reagan's preference for what Peking considers a two-China policy. 
The President's campaign statements indicated that he believed the United States should have a more official relationship with Taiwan, which since 1979 has had only unofficial links with the United States.
Those campaign statements produced two sets of responses. 
Taiwan was enthusiastic and has been lobbying privately and publicly for more access to official circles in Washington and for the right to buy the F-16 jet, an advanced fighter that the Unites States has refused to sell to the Nationalist Chinese.
Peking, however, was angered by the statements. 
State Department experts believe that Peking is considering curbs on its growing contacts with the United States if the Adminstration does not stop talking about Taiwan and if it fails to follow the path charted by the Carter Administration.
In particular, China wants the Administration to declare the normalization communique of 1979 to be the basis of relations, and not the Taiwan Act passed by Congress. 
China would also like a sign that the Administration is interested in building on the security links with China that were begun in the previous Administration.
The Administration affirmed, in a little-noticed statement last week, that it would live up to the normalization agreement, but it did not commit itself on security arrangements. 
Some American officials believe that Peking was probably pleased by the cordial Washington welcome recently given to the South Korean President, Chun Doo Hwan, and the pledges by Mr. Reagan to keep 39,000 American troops in South Korea and to maintain security ties in East Asia. 
Indirectly, that increases stability in an area threatened by a growing Soviet military presence.
Mr. Haig said in his confirmation hearings that ''the challenge of this decade'' for the United States is to provide Peking with the incentive to maintain good relations with Washington while not provoking the Russians to the point that East-West relations are permanently damaged.
Middle East
There are two aspects to this problem that demand answers. 
The first, the direct result of the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan, concerns the American security role in the Persian Gulf area. 
The Carter Administration, while talking of the dire threats to world security, moved very gingerly. 
It refused to offer Pakistan more than what amounted to symbolic aid and would not give an ironclad security guarantee for fear of antagonizing India.
Mr. Reagan has talked of having an American military presence in the region, but as Mr. Haig said at his confirmation hearings, it is difficult to find a country that would accept a permanent garrison of American troops. 
Any that might, such as Israel, would taint those forces in the eyes of the rest of the region. 
The key countries in the area are Iran, Saudi Arabia and Iraq, and the United States has diplomatic relations only with the Saudis.
Any long-term policy must consider ways of increasing American influence in the region, but experts are quick to point out that at the recent conference of Islamic nations in Taif, Saudi Arabia, the emphasis was not on ridding Afghanistan of Soviet troops, but on the traditional concern of ending Israeli domination over the West Bank and Jerusalem.
Mr. Haig, aware that Israeli elections are to be held this summer, is in no rush to plunge into the complexities of the EgyptianIsraeli negotiations on Palestinian autonomy. 
He seems to think it is better to wait until after the elections, when it is likely that the Labor Party, which is believed to be more flexible than Menachem Begin's governing Likud, will be restored to power. 
But as so often happens in the Middle East, the best laid plans may come to naught.
President Anwar el-Sadat of Egypt is pressing to come to Washington in the next month or so, and that means that Mr. Begin cannot be far behind. 
This will force the Reagan Administration to begin to develop a negotiating strategy for the region. 
So far it seems to have given surprisingly low priority to that task.
Until there is some progress toward resolving the Palestinian problem - meaning, at the minimum, self-rule in the West Bank - there will continue to be problems in dealing with Iraq and to a growing extent, Saudi Arabia. 
Relations with the Saudis may be further strained if another dispute arises in Congress on whether to supply them with additional equipment for the F-15's that were sold to them after a grueling fight in 1978.
