
Many years ago a young girl grew up in the company of giant pandas who then were all white. 
One day as she was playing with her animal friends, a leopard attacked a baby panda, The girl fought to defend it, and saved its life, but in the process she herself was badly wounded and died. 
Other pandas heard of her bravery, and came down from the mountains to pay her tribute. 
They wore black on their shoulders, arms and legs to show their grief, and, when they wept, they rubbed their eyes with their front paws and created eye patches; they put their heads in their paws, making their noses black, and then reached up and stained their ears. 
That is how the panda got its distinctive markings. 
- ANCIENT CHINESE LEGEND
 
By BAYARD WEBSTER
BECAUSE it is so reclusive and isolated in the inaccessible mountains of southwestern China, the giant panda has rarely been seen in the wild and surprisingly little is known about one of the world's most adored animals. 
But new studies by a team of American and Chinese scientists in the bamboo-forested hillsides of the province of Sichuan have begun to shed some light on the behavior and the ecological role of Ailuropoda melanoleuca, the bearlike bamboo-eating mammal that has remained unchanged since the Pleistocene, about four million years ago.
New studies by American and Chinese scientists sheds light on behavior and ecological role of reclusive Panda
George Schaller, who headed the American scientific contingent and who has just returned from China's snow-encrusted mountains, is one of the few scientists to have seen pandas in the wild. 
In an interview in his office at the Bronx Zoo, where he heads the New York Zoological Society's animal research and conservation center, Dr. Schaller said the research team had found new information on the panda's habits and nutritional needs, factors that might help to preserve the slowly dwindling species.
Dr. Schaller, who has studied lions in the Serengeti, leopards in the Himalayas, gorillas in Africa, and tigers in India, spent nearly two years studying the pandas in the damp, cold, foggy and snowy mountains surrounding Wuyipeng in the Wolong Nature Reserve. 
In the dense forest of conifers and bamboo, Dr. Schaller, Dr. Hu Jin-chu, the leader of the Chinese team, and their coworkers succeeded in trapping six giant pandas and fitting radio-transmitter collars to five of them before releasing them back into the wild.
The radio signals, which persist for two years or more, indicate both the location and degree of activity of the solitary animals, Dr. Schaller said. 
''We've found that the female has a small range and sometimes will stay for months in the same one-quarter-square-mile area,'' he said. 
''With all that bamboo there, they have no reason to travel.''
The male, however, has a bigger range that may include several female ranges, the scientists discovered.
 
Checking Up on Females
By monitoring the radio signals for 24-hour periods several times a week, and by tracking footprints in the snow, the researchers found that the male would drop in on several females during the winter, apparently to determine where they could be found later during the spring mating season, and to be sure they were compatible.
A male would mark the female ranges he had visited by leaving urine scent marks on a tree and marking it with his claws, thus apparently claiming the female in residence as his own. 
The discovery of such a behavior pattern may help scientists to encourage captive breeding, since so little had been previously known about the mating behavior of pandas.
 
An International Field Project
The panda research is part of a joint conservation project of the Chinese government, the New York Zoological Society, the World Wildlife Fund and the Smithsonian Institution. 
The project is the result of an agreement between the Chinese Government and the World Wildlife Fund, signed two years ago. 
It involves field and laboratory investigations in the panda's known habitats, the designation of a dozen panda sanctuaries in China, and construction, now under way, of a huge panda research and conservation center in Wolong.
The center, designed by Chinese and American architects and wildlife experts, will contain panda breeding centers, reproduction and nutrition laboratories, clinical and veterinary care centers and support facilities for scientists.
Thousands of years ago the giant panda was distributed widely over southern China but is now found in only a relatively few mountainous areas in the southwest. 
Although a giant panda resembles a bear more closely than it does any other animal, scientists who have studied its anatomy, molecular structure and behavior, are still at odds over its proper classification in the animal kingdom.
 
Bear, Raccoon or Neither?
Some think it is a kind of bear, others believe it should be listed in the raccoon family. 
And some believe it is the closest relative of the red, or lesser, panda, a fox-sized animal of the raccoon family which weighs about eight pounds. 
Dr. Schaller believes it is neither raccoon nor bear, but a genus of its own.
The giant panda leads a solitary life except during the mating season in April or May. 
The female gives birth to one or two tiny infants after a gestation period of four to six months. 
The panda's only predators are leopards and wild dogs, neither of which is a match for a healthy, adult panda.
Citing the difficulties of breeding pandas in captivity, Dr. Schaller pointed out that the female panda is in heat for only about three days in the spring of each year. 
''We've tried everything but we still don't know how to achieve a successful mating,'' he said. 
Very few captive pandas have been bred successfully by natural methods and, because of the short period of heat and the difficulty of identifying the few signs of ovulation, there have been very few successful artificial inseminations.
Another obstacle to panda-raising, Dr. Schaller said, is the disparity between the mother's weight (about 300 pounds) and that of her newborn infant (about five ounces). 
A mother panda can accidentally roll over her baby, crushing it to death, as happened recently in a Mexican zoo.
 
Little Success With Breeding
Dr. Schaller pointed out that even Chinese scientists, the most knowledgeable researchers into the behavior of their native animal, have had comparatively little success with their breeding attempts. 
In a letter from China to the World Wildlife Fund, he noted that in one of China's captive-breeding compounds the outstanding characteristic of the three adult male pandas was ''their complete lack of ardor when confronted by a female in heat.''
A panda has a carnivore's digestive system, designed for the ingestion of high-protein flesh, and yet it subsists almost exclusively on bamboo. 
Scientists therefore have long sought to chart the animal's eating habits precisely.
Like cattle, most vegetarian animals can digest the cellulose in plants and make use of the nutrients in it by fermenting it with stomach bacteria. 
Carnivores, however, do not have such stomach bacteria, and so must consume huge quantities of grass to obtain nutrition from it. 
The China researchers estimate that a panda must eat from 40 to 90 pounds of bamboo a day, depending on the kind of bamboo. 
As a result, they spend about 16 hours a day foraging and the remainder dozing or sleeping.
 
A Gourmet Bamboo Diet
The researchers have observed that pandas eat five different species of bamboo, consuming stems, stalks or leaves, depending on the time of year. 
From the end of March to July, for example, the scientists found that pandas would confine themselves to the stems.
To determine why, researchers in the Animal Science Department at Cornell University examined bamboo specimens collected by the panda researchers. 
They found that the taste and nutritional value of different parts of the plants varied according to the season. 
Between March and July, the leaves contained high quantities of silica, making them unpalatable and difficult to digest. 
In July, the silica content drops and the pandas resume eating the leaves. 
''This has implications for managing pandas in the wild or in sanctuaries,'' said Dr. Schaller, who will return to China next spring to continue the research.
