
During the harsh years of China's Cultural Revolution, a family of Chinese Protestants in Shanghai set out for the old international church every Christmas Eve. 
It made no difference that the church had been shut down and turned into a warehouse. 
For an hour, despite the winter cold, the family mounted their silent vigil outside the church, before wending their way home through the dark streets of Shanghai.
This week, the same family will celebrate Christmas inside their church, with thousands of other Chinese who sustained their faith through that terrible decade.
Christopher Wren comment discusses Chinese Protestants in Shanghai (China)
Across China, 180 Protestant churches have reopened, according to the Rev. Chen Zemin, vice principal of the Union Theological Seminary in Nanjing. 
Bishop Zhang Jiashu, vice president of the China Patriotic Catholic Association, reports that more than 80 Catholic churches are also operating. 
Last week, two bishops were consecrated by the Chinese Catholic Church, and two more were scheduled to be consecrated today. 
''Our clergymen and ordinary believers are enjoying full freedom of religious belief,'' Mr. Chen recently declared.
Whether the freedom is indeed complete is open to interpretation. 
A new religious tolerance extends to Moslems and Buddhists too - but it's all very much on the sufferance of Deng Xiaoping's regime. 
That regime enjoins Moslems and Buddhists to avoid arousing nationalist sentiments, particularly in sensitive minority regions like Xinjiang and Tibet, and encourages Christians to distance themselves from their foreign missionary origins. 
Last month, four elderly Chinese Catholic priests, three of them Jesuits, were arrested in Shanghai, along with some other Catholics. 
While details remain sketchy, the four priests, all of whom served previous prison sentences, were apparently accused of maintaining underground links with the Vatican, whose primacy the Government-sanctioned church rejects. 
In explaining the incident, Zhang Zhiyi, an official of the party committee responsible for maintaining links with non-party groups, told a gathering of Chinese religious leaders that ''counterrevolutionaries hidden in religious circles'' had engaged in ''criminal activities'' on behalf of the Vatican to undermine the independent Chinese Catholic Church. 
''It is fully correct to hit at these people; this is a political question and not a religious question,'' he was quoted as saying.
Religious life in China is at the moment a matter of mutual accommodation. 
The Government has rewarded those ''patriotic'' religious organizations that do not challenge the authority of the state. 
The Protestant seminary in Nanjing, once ransacked by Red Guards, reopened last March, and there has been talk of starting a Catholic theological college in Peking. 
In Ningxia, $24 million has been allocated to set up a Moslem foodstuffs industry complying with Islamic dietary laws for the region's one million Moslems. 
And some young Buddhist monks are again studying at Peking's Fayuan temple, which was a storehouse in the Cultural Revolution.
The Limits of Freedom
In return for such concessions, churches seem eager to prove their patriotism by backing the Government's policies. 
At a tea party in Peking a week ago, Protestant, Catholic, Buddhist, Moslem and Taoist notables pledged to work together in the campaigns to modernize the country and to achieve reunification with Taiwan.
Many Chinese Christians, like Mr. Chen, contend that Christianity in China is stronger for having severed its Western ties, which historically were associated with foreign domination. 
The Protestants formed the ''Three Self Patriotic Movement,'' pledging to make their church self-administering, self-sustaining and self-propagating. 
''Now we have identified ourselves with the Chinese people, so Christianity has gained respect,'' Mr. Chen said.
The Catholics have had more difficulty rendering unto Peking what some believe should be reserved for the Vatican. 
The strains became visible last summer when the Chinese Government vetoed Pope John Paul II's appointment of Monsignor Deng Yiming, a Jesuit imprisoned for 22 years, as new archbishop of Guangdong province. 
This blow to Vatican hopes for reconciliation was followed by the consecration in Peking of several Chinese bishops without Rome's consent.
The Protestants worry about having their delicate coexistence with the state jeopardized by interference from well-meaning sympathizers overseas. 
A Western evangelical group last summer claimed to have landed a million Chinese-language Bibles on a beach near Shantou. 
Protestant officials confirm the smuggling took place, but say the tide washed most Bibles out to sea while the militia seized the rest. 
''To connect the Bible with smuggling is to discredit the Bible and the Christian religion,'' Mr. Chen complained. 
He reported that the Chinese church printed 135,000 Bibles in 1980 and might double the output soon.
Together, Protestants and Catholics number at most several million in a population approaching one billion. 
Nevertheless, the revival of religion, which has attracted some young people disillusioned with Marxism, has prompted concern in the Communist Party press. 
In principle, a Chinese party member should not believe in God. 
The official People's Daily recently admonished China's 39 million party members to disregard the new climate of religious tolerance and keep propagating atheism. 
In the coastal province of Fujian, the party newspaper alleged that ''foreign religious forces'' were infiltrating the party and Communist youth league.
But within limits, it's not surprising that a regime as pragmatic as Deng Xiaoping's should display relative religious tolerance. 
The ideological journal Red Flag noted earlier this year that believers comprised 61 percent of the world's people and that their faiths generated ''a formidable social force'' in countering Soviet-style hegemonism.
