
Hundreds of men and women who resettled in the countryside during the Cultural Revolution broke a taboo on public protests today by occupying the steps of Peking's Communist Party headquarters and demanding permission to live in the capital.
Nearly 17 years after they set off for Shaanxi province proclaiming their support for Mao Zedong, the former Red Guards returned in a mood of truculence and disillusion. 
Although the policy of forcing young city dwellers to settle among the peasants was abandoned more than a decade ago, hundreds of thousands of people were never given the residence permits required to come home.
Resentment can be found wherever resettlement took place, but concerns about retribution have generally stifled public protests. 
Instead, those separated from their families and friends have generally concentrated their efforts on working the network of influential contacts, known as guanxi, that Chinese try to develop as a means of getting favors from the bureaucracy. 
20,000 Reportedly Still in Shaanxi Those who joined the protest today were the losers in this game of maneuver. 
As they sat beneath large red-and-white banners proclaiming their cause, a member of the group said they represented about 20,000 people still ''exiled'' in Shaanxi, out of 400,000 originally sent there from the capital in 1968. 
Most were in their teens or early 20's at the time, and are now approaching middle age.
Hundreds of Chinese resettled in countryside during Cultural Revolution break taboo on public protests by occupying steps of Peking's Communist Party headquarters and demanding permission to live in Peking; although policy of forcing young city dwellers to settle among peasants was abandoned more than decade go, hundreds of thousands of people were never given residence permits required to return home; photo (M)
''I was born and brought up in Peking,'' one man said. 
''It's the capital and the cultural center of China. 
I want to rejoin my parents and relatives.''
Although the 1982 Constitution guarantees the right to demonstrate, public protests have been effectively banned since a wave of protests that took place in the ''free speech movement'' in 1979. 
But the police guarding the entrance to the party headquarters during today's sit-in took no action. 
An official at the doorway refused to comment, saying, ''This is our internal affair.''
As is commonly the case when Chinese look for redress of their grievances from Peking, the demonstrators appeared to look first to Deng Xiaoping, China's paramount leader, who was exiled to a remote provincial town during the Cultural Revolution and forced to work as a lathe operator.
''Save us, Comrade Xiaoping,'' read one of the banners. 
Mr. Deng, 80 years old, has condemned the forced resettlement, but has noted the problems involved in getting all those concerned back into the overcrowded cities.
The protesters said about 500 people had traveled to the capital by train from a region of Shaanxi that lies about 200 miles west of Peking. 
The area is known as one of the poorest in central China, and many of those who spoke with reporters complained of being tied to unskilled jobs at low pay, and living among local people who regarded them as interlopers. 
Some had not seen their Peking relatives for years.
 
Promises Given on Permits
Members of the group said that they had sought a meeting with Peking's Mayor, Chen Xitong, but that they had seen only one of Mr. Chen's deputies. 
They said he had promised that efforts would be made to give residence permits to married people whose spouses lived in Peking, widows and widowers, and those who had never married. 
None of the people mentioned would qualify to join waiting lists for housing, which are already several years long.
Many of the protesters were reluctant to talk to Western reporters, or refused to give their names. 
But a common thread in their remarks was the feeling that they had sacrificed themselves to the party and been betrayed.
''When we left in 1968 we weren't concerned about about when we would come back,'' one woman said. 
''We were answering Chairman Mao's call to 'build socialism,' but now we have considerations of our own, including our children's future.''
The demonstrators began their protest after talking to city officials, and said that they plan to continue their sit-in during the working hours each day until their demands are met.
