
FOR several months following its opening in July, the Sichuan Pavilion exhibited a marked unevenness, both in service and cooking. 
But based on about eight visits in the last five or six weeks, the 10 chefs from China have certainly hit their stride, and so has the dining room staff.
The food served now at this North Chinese restaurant is exceptional, with only a few disappointments, and if the management would add the requested amount of spicy seasonings to the appropriate dishes, this rating would be four stars instead of three. 
On a menu as large as the Sichuan Pavilion's, there are bound to be a few offerings that do not measure up to the kitchen's most successful efforts, but for the most part, this is the best Chinese food we have ever had in New York when ordering from a standard menu. 
The quality and intricacies of the dishes have been exceeded elsewhere only when we were known and had ordered meals in advance.
Comfortably laid out in the premises formerly occupied by Ho's Pavilion on 44th Street between First and Second Avenues, the two dining rooms with their cheerful paintings of pandas, their meloncolored napkins, their carnations, comfortable lighting and a decent noise level are far more felicitous than most of their Chinese counterparts in the city.
Mimi Sheraton reviews North Chinese restaurant, Sichuan Pavilian
The array of recommended dishes is dazzling and the appetizers alone could add up to a marvelous meal. 
Among the hot first courses were fragrant and soothing turnip patties studded with ham and black sesame seeds, silky little dumplings in a sauce that needed a more generous lacing of chili oil - as did all other hot dishes - and, most unusual, meltingly tender spareribs in rice flour, served in small metal steamers. 
Similar containers held moist and aromatic beef strips. 
The petite, crisp spring rolls were heady with minced scallions, giving new meaning to this standard specialty.
Two dishes that had the proper sting of dried chilies were cold marinated Sichuan cabbage and cold, tangy coriander-scented chicken, which came close to matching the spiciness of the cabbage.
Our cold appetizer selection was completed by chewy slivers of dried and sweetly mellow marinated beef, crunchy with sesame seeds, tender and gently smoked fillets of fish and shredded rabbit meat in a rich sesame dressing. 
All this went beautifully with a tall, cool scotch and soda. 
Tsingtao beer could be ordered as an alternate, as could Chinese and European wines, but to us scotch has always seemed more astringently refreshing.
Soups lacked the interest of other first courses. 
Most disappointing of all was the hot and sour soup, which was pink, bland and vaguely sweet. 
Better choices were Sichuan-style wonton soup in a light and flavorful chicken broth and chef's special soup, a brew perfumed with sesame oil and steamed in a ceramic jar with pork and vegetables. 
But unless you consider soup essential to the success of a Chinese meal, skip it.
Three exquisite seafood dishes include Chengdu fish - a whole sea bass braised with minced vegetables and spices in a darkly rich hot sauce, a crispy whole bass, scored in diamond cuts and deep fried to parchment fragility, and a steamed bass prepared Cantonese style with black beans, scallions and ginger. 
One captain assured us that such Cantonese preparations are preferable because the gossamer sauce does not mask the fresh and fugitive flavor of the fish itself.
A pink and spicy garlic sauce can be served on satiny chunks of chicken, on slender, moist shreds of pork, on sliced large shrimps or on filmy strips of eggplant. 
Savory toasted peanuts, also in a sesame-and-chili-oil sauce, did as much for the diced chicken or rabbit meat as they did for the large snowy sea scallops. 
And the hot and spicy sauces on lobster chunks or bean curd are also delicious, even though too mildly seasoned. 
Dollops of slightly sticky, soothingly bland rice, or the chewy double side golden-fried noodles with shrimp and vegetables, or the pan-fried beans can bridge the gap between the heavier fish and meat dishes.
The duck is lean, meaty and filled with the earthy essence that American-style duck dishes generally lack. 
Whether smoked, crispfried or braised to melting tenderness with vegetables (Buddha's duck), all proved to be masterpieces. 
Tinkling bells with sliced pork sizzled musically as meat and vegetables were poured onto a hot metal platter in the dining room and garnished with curlicues of crisply fried Sichuan dumplings.
Disappointments included the rather tasteless crispy rabbit meat loaf, flat and somewhat stale lamb ''quick-fry'' with brown sauce, Napa cabbage with dried shrimp, scallops overpowered by enormous and ordinary white mushrooms and a simmered combination of vegetables made up of broccoli, white mushrooms, frozen peas and similar banalities.
There is a lovely, soul-satisfying dessert - puree nuts that is really a warm, pudding-like creamed froth of walnuts lightened by a pearly meringue. 
For more exotic tastes there are slippery sweet rice cakes steamed in bamboo leaves and for the less adventurous, melon balls and canned lichee nuts.
In addition to all of the above, which appear regularly on the menu, some special meals are available. 
On Saturday and Sunday from noon to 3 P.M. there is a small dim sum tea lunch, and though the waiter at first said it was served only to Chinese, we were able to order it. 
Wonton soup, the round dumplings, deeper pastry puffs filled with pork, and a number of the regular appetizers and desserts are included. 
Each small dish is enough to serve three or four and prices range from $1 to $4.25 a dish. 
Four is the perfect number, allowing a sampling of all dishes, and as is customary, wind up with some of the pan fried noodles to fill empty corners of your stomach.
Two banquets are offered as standards and must be ordered several days in advance. 
It is possible to substitute dishes to suit individual preferences. 
One is $30 a person, the other $50. 
At each a minimum of 8 guests is required. 
These banquets are especially popular with Chinese and United Nations officials. 
Our banquet, at $50, was perhaps the single most extraordinary Chinese meal any of us have had in this country. 
Some of the menu's regular appetizers were served along with a lavish butterfly composed of various fancy-cut cold meats, vegetables, bean curd and fish. 
A domed aspic encased shrimp and vegetables, and two kinds of pickled cabbage lent their cold, clear bite to the course. 
Stir-fried spicy lobster and a fried roll of chicken and walnuts were followed by ''gold fish at play with lotus soup'' - a steamy, diamond-clear chicken broth with tiny quenelle-like fish studded with corn and peas. 
This was accompanied by a round beef cake not unlike a piroshky. 
Rabbit in both a spicy and an orange sauce preceded pandas at play - the pandas being sculpted of pureed fish with a sort of dried black-green vegetable marking off arms, ears and eyes, all leaning agains an Alpine peak formed of fish whipped and steamed with egg white and flecked with smoky, nut-flavored ham. 
Sharks fins mingled with chicken and ham, squares of rather tough fried abalone and dried scallops lending their briny zest to verdant hearts of cabbage, and a spicy crisp fish rounded out the meal. 
Dessert was a silken dish of almond gelatin in a cool sweet broth and a round pastry that could almost have been Viennese, with its candied fruits and cinammon sugar overtones. 
Garnishing was exquisite, with intricate floral mosaics of cut vegetables.
Prices for the regular meals are moderately high and run to about $35 a person, tips included, for a generous meal with drinks. 
Food at Sichuan Pavilion can be portioned for you, or you can dip into it family style, by far the better way. 
Most of the time service is cordial, helpful and patient. 
Only once were we told we would have to hurry because there were many reservations.
 
Sichuan Pavilion ***
322 East 44th Street (between First and Second Avenues), 986-3775. 
Atmosphere: Bright and attractive modern dining room with comfortable lighting and decent noise level. 
Excellent service that is only occasionally rushed. 
Recommended dishes: All hot and cold appetizers, wonton soup, chef's special soup, double side golden-fried noodles, Chengdu-style whole fish, steamed bass Cantonese style, crispy whole fish, hot spiced lobster, diced rabbit, shrimp, scallops or chicken with peanuts; chicken chunks, sliced shrimp or shredded pork in garlic sauce; Buddha's duck, smoked duck, hot and spicy bean curd, pan-fried string beans, eggplant strips in garlic sauce, puree nuts, sweet rice cake in bamboo leaves; all dishes in special banquet priced at $50 a person, Saturday and Sunday dim sum lunch. 
Prices: Lunch and dinner, a la carte, with main courses from $9 to $24. 
Dim sum from $1 to $4.25. 
Credit cards: All major cards. 
Hours: Noon to 11 P.M. daily. 
Reservations: Recommended.
What the stars mean: (None) Poor to fair * Good ** Very good *** Excellent **** Extraordinary These ratings are based on the reviewer's reaction to food and price in relation to comparable establishments.
