
ALTHOUGH we paid six visits to the Home Village Restaurant on Mott Street in Chinatown and tried some 40 dishes, including several that were not on the menu, this review probably should be marked ''To be continued.''
That's because the 40 dishes represent only 20 percent of a menu listing 185 dishes as well as 15 or more available for special house dinners.
Moreover, as far as we know, this is the only restaurant in the city that presents a menu with the food of the Hakka - the mountain people of Canton -listed clearly for the most part - in English. 
According to E. N. Anderson Jr. and Marja L. Anderson, writing on the modern cuisines of south China in the book ''Food in Chinese Culture,'' the Hakka have been regarded as simple mountain folk who do little cooking. 
The authors say that this is a mistaken belief and that on any given night a Hakka restaurant can provide patrons with more than 100 dishes prepared from local products.
The seven-month-old Home Village Restaurant, with its two floors of trim, bright and cheerful modern dining rooms, lives up to this reputation for instant variety. 
The Chinese patrons outnumbered the non-Chinese by about 30-to-1 on our visits, and there seemed to be no difference in the way food was prepared for the two groups.
Mimi Sheraton reviews Home Village Restaurant in Chinatown
Service is best when the restaurant is least crowded - week nights and afternoons - when waiters and managers offer patient explanations and show a desire to please. 
Friday and Saturday night and all day Sunday can be hectic and customers may be treated prefunctorily.
Hakka or non-Hakka, most of the food here is unusual and much of it is positively delicious. 
Only a few preparations were lackluster; the most serious failures were bland beef and veal dishes in brown sauces that were heavy with cornstarch and in overdone and soggy vegetables, most especially mushrooms with dried scallops.
Appetizers are not listed on the menu as such, so it is not easy to decide where to start. 
Several of the Hakka dishes make good beginnings, however, including the crisp, tender poultry giblets baked in salt and the tiny beef balls of finely ground, tightly packed meat braised in brown sauce and decorated with broccoli. 
The house egg roll, which has a thick, puffy, crisp skin, is far above average. 
So is a variation - fried rolled beef liver in the same skin. 
Shrimp (called prawns) baked in the shells with salt and spiced with green chilies could be eaten shell and all. 
Curried crabs also make an excellent appetizer and chunks of lobster in the shell baked with a fine crust of a cheddarlike cheese were succulent and pungent. 
Either lobster or clams in black bean sauce also is a satisfying appetizer or main course.
Two soups worth considering are the blend of assorted vegetables, diced bean curd and sliced pork, and the shark's fin with crabmeat, which at first was overly thick but which was lightened with some rice wine vinegar and hot mustard. 
Both condiments were offered and their uses explained on a slow night, but they had to be requested on a busy one.
Steamed and braised fish dishes were superior to those that were fried. 
Sole steamed with scallions and ginger achieved a pearly, custardy consistency, as did a sea bass (listed as C B on the menu) in a soy and wine sauce. 
Sea bass in sweet sauce can be skipped and so can the fried or panned sole, which were too dry and greasy. 
Sauteed shrimps mixed with frozen peas or rancid cashew nuts also should be passed up in favor of sauteed squid, crackling with tender, briny freshness. 
For a dish that tastes as delightful as it looks, order the stir-fried assorted seafood and vegetables in a deep-fried basket of noodle-fine grated taro root, described on the menu as a bird's nest.
It would be a mistake to pass up the tender, moist golden-skinned chicken baked in salt and left rose-pink at the bone so the meat remains snowy and silky, or the roast chicken that is equally good. 
Both were excellent when dipped into a sauce that seemed to combine sesame, soy, ginger and star anise. 
Chunks of chicken in black bean sauce had mustily stale overtones, but half-crisp roasted duck could not have been better.
Among the more esoteric Hakka main courses are the combinations based on what the menu lists as ''biche de mer,'' apparently taken from the French beche-de-mer. 
The Chinese refers to a sort of giant sea slug that attains a gelatinous consistency not unlike a chewy steamed cucumber. 
Combined with black mushrooms, beef balls or roasted duck feet, this may be something that the more adventurous will want to try. 
Another Hakka dish that was served at a special dinner seemed to be smoked and sugar glazed sole, a fishy and pungent delicacy inexplicably served with bottled orange-colored French dressing. 
Our Chinese neighbors dipped into this happily, but for our taste it spoiled the fish.
An extraordinary meat dish, chef's special steak, could be a variation on chicken fried steak. 
The meat must have been pounded to tenderness, then breaded and fried to crispness and finished off with a soy and wine sauce. 
Pot-roasted veal and kale was decent, but it was no match for the marvelous Chinese-style pork chops - thin, chewy and mellow in a honeyed hoisin glaze.
Only two vegetables dishes proved interesting -spinach melted in a sharp sauce of preserved bean curd, and pillows of fresh bean curd stuffed with finely minced pork and shrimp.
There is a ghastly fried rice specialty here that is topped with a syrupy-sweet tomato ketchup and onion sauce, but the white version with strands of egg, shrimp and pork can be recommended. 
So can the savory, curry-gilded Singapore fried rice vermicelli sparked with cayenne and green chilies.
When a large group appears at Home Village, the management tries to sell a special house dinner - its version of the French menu de degustation. 
Such meals are priced at $50, $79 and $108, depending upon the number of people. 
Resist the temptation to take this easy way out and choose the dishes you prefer no matter how long the deliberation takes. 
When a house dinner was ordered, the captain agreed to some substitutions, but they were not made. 
It is better and cheaper to plan your own menu. 
A copious and fascinating dinner can be had here for $10 to $15 per person. 
Order just a few dishes at time so that all do not arrive at once and grow cold.
Soft drinks are available, but you must provide your own liquor or beer. 
Oranges are the only satisfactory dessert. 
Avoid the dreadful white agar gelatin pudding topped with canned fruit salad that comes as a banquet dessert. 
Plastic chopsticks are heavy, slippery and hard to handle.
A la carte
Even the strongest-willed calorie watcher will have trouble resisting two desserts we succumbed to recently. 
An immediate temptation on the pastry cart of the Four Seasons, 99 East 52d Street (754-9494), is the napoleon as created by Bruno Comin, the pastry chef. 
It is a trim and crunchy marvel of puff pastry baked in a mold and brushed with apricot preserves accented with lemon juice. 
The filling is a cloudlet of vanilla-scented pastry cream folded into whipped cream.
At the trim and pleasant Italian restaurant Bruno, 240 East 58th Street (688-4190) what are offered as profiteroles are really tiny, individual ovals of Italian zeppole - the deep-fried yeast crullers sold at street fairs. 
Here the greaseless golden puffs are filled with a custardy pastry cream in the manner of true profiteroles, and they are served with a rose-beige chocolate whipped cream sauce that is only mildly sweet.
 
Home Village Restaurant Ltd.
 
**
20 Mott Street. 
964-0381. Atmosphere: Neat and orderly upstairs and downstairs dining rooms with tablecloths and typically atmospheric decorative touches; service is generally good but can be perfunctory at busy times. 
Recommended dishes: House egg roll, braised shark's fin and crabmeat soup, sliced pork soup with assorted vegetables and bean curd, baked chicken with salt, roast chicken, roast duck, steamed sole, sauteed sea bass with soy sauce, braised seafood in bird's nest, lobster or clams with black bean sauce, lobster with cheese, baked prawns with chili and spiced salt, @sauteed squid, baked crabs with curry, fried oysters, deep-fried fresh rolled liver, beef ball with brown sauce, baked giblets with salt, Chinese-style pork chop, chef's special fried steak, steamed stuffed bean curd, @sauteed spinach with preserved bean cake sauce, fried vermicelli rice noodles Singapore style. 
Prices: Complete lunch, $2.95 to $5.95 (includes main course, fried rice and fresh fruit); lunch and dinner, a la carte, with main courses from $2.75 to $22; family dinners - $50 serves four to six people, $79 serves six to eight people, $108 serves eight to ten people. 
Credit cards: None. 
Hours: Sunday through Thursday, 11 A.M. to 1 A.M., Friday and Saturday, 11 A.M. to 2 A.M. Reservations: Recommended on weekends.
What the stars mean: (None) Poor to fair * Good ** Very good *** Excellent **** Extraordinary These ratings are based on the reviewer's reaction to food and price in relation to comparable establishments.
