
WE ARE CRUISING THE blacktop in our air-conditioned Toyota minibus at a comfortable 45 miles an hour. 
The driver rams his favorite tape into the deck and I begin to hear the mellow tones of ''Old Black Joe.''
I sip my can of Sprite and stare out the window at the stream of passing tankers and timber-laden trucks. 
This is the old Burma Road where Americans sweated their pack mules over the mountains in World War II?
This is the back-country trail Mao Zedong's Red Army followed on its Long March to power?
A few days later. 
Now I am riding a pack mule with a broken saddle bound up with bandage gauze (we haven't any rope), edging along a flint trail 3,000 feet above the Golden Sands River. 
I hiked in - it took four hours - to see how the Red Army made its crossing, but I am thankful to be riding out. 
Nothing has changed here in 50 years. 
No blacktop. 
The trail, the mountains, the dangerous river are as they were in 1934. 
THE SPINY RIDGES OF THE MOUNTAINS OF GUIZHOU ARE as convoluted as the hemispheres of the brain - switchbacks, switchbacks, switchbacks. 
Here and there, unmarked paved roads discreetly lead off to - where?
Heavy transporters rumble past, their cargo concealed under olive-drab tarpaulins. 
We see a great industrial works that fills the tight-walled valley. 
''What is that?''
I ask. 
The question hangs in the air. 
Finally, the interpreter whispers: ''A weapons plant, I think.''
There are many of these plants folded into the knife-edge valleys, so sheer I don't see how you could slide a bomb into them. 
Much later, someone is talking about Guizhou's natural resources: ''You know we have uranium there.''
I hadn't known. 
WHEN YOU TRAVEL 70 DAYS IN OFF-THE-MAP CHINA, AS I did last spring, following the route of Mao Zedong's Red Army in its Long March (map, page 46), you see and hear many things.
I went on the march to gather materials for a book on the epic retreat of the Red Army, which lasted from Oct. 
16, 1934 to Oct. 
19, 1935 - a bloodstained, successful gamble by the Communists to escape Chiang Kai-shek's clutches. 
Almost 50 years later, I, too, progressed in a great clockwise circle from the mountains of Jian gxi, through rain-drenched Guizhou, over the Red River, into subtropical Yunnan, past the surly Golden Sands River (the upper reaches of the Yangtze), along the jagged edges of Sichuan, up the Great Snowy Mountains deep into Tibetan country, across the grasslands, briefly along the Yellow River, then into Gansu and on to the loess hills of northern Shaanxi to Yanan, where the Long March ended. 
The main Red Army traveled some 6,000 miles; I went about 7,400 miles in order to see something of the routes followed by the secondary armies.
The materials on the Red Army I got. 
But I got something else as well, an insight into today's China such as few Westerners have had. 
If you journey thousands of miles by road, by minibus, by Jeep, by Land-Rover, by foot and even by mule, and if that journey takes you almost continuously to distant regions not yet open to outsiders, you come very close to the flesh and blood of contemporary China - contradictory, complex, contrasting. 
And if it doesn't form a neat, compartmented picture, that is because China is not a neat, compartmented whole.
In the Tibetan area of Sichuan, the prayer flags wave over the Tibetan houses like a forest of streamers. 
Across the line in the Tibetan part of Gansu, hardly one can be seen. 
The explanation?
No official will venture one. 
My guess: Sichuan authorities are more tolerant than Gansu authorities.
Across a bridge, near Baxi in northeast Sichuan, yaks' heads have been hung below the planks to keep the spirits from sending floods to sweep the bridge away. 
Outside the villages in neighboring Gansu, spirit guards - looking like scarecrows from the Land of Oz - ward off disease and disaster. 
In both areas, though, rural medical services are first-rate, and when peasants are ill, they call for the doctor.
What is happening in this part of the country where 80 percent of China's population lives and works, where time moves by the calendar and not by the clock, where the moon regulates man's affairs and he is born on the fifth day of the sixth lunar month and dies on the tenth day of the ninth month, where a battle is recalled as being fought at the time of the autumn harvest festival and the flood is remembered as coming two weeks after the spring moon.
This is the world of peasant China, that continent of which Mao spoke when he told the American journalist Edgar Snow: ''Whoever wins the peasant will win China.''
Mao won the peasant, and in 1949 the Chinese Communists came into power - to the astonishment, dismay and anger of both Joseph Stalin and John Foster Dulles.
Who holds the Chinese peasant's sympathies today in his thatched Yunnan hut, his half-timbered Sichuan house (so like the half-timbered houses of England), his brick house with the bird- wing eaves in Guizhou?
This is the heart of the matter, for here in the countryside live 800,000,000 of China's 1,034,500,000 people - give or take a few tens of millions.
I don't know much about Chinese hearts, but I think that Deng Xiaoping and his new economic policy have swept the rural masses like nothing since the revolution itself. 
The revolution gave the peasants land. 
The new policy came in six years ago in some places; five, in others. 
Today, it is giving the peasants prosperity.
It doesn't take 70 days of travel through six provinces to learn what is activating the peasants today. 
It is a five-letter word: money. 
Their pockets bulge with it. 
They are making money as never before in the 6,000-year history of China. 
They love it. 
So do the officials in the villages, towns and cities of the countryside. 
So do the officials at the top in Peking - with some reservations.
The men at the top couldn't be more pleased with the economic consequences of the new policy, but not all are sure they know where China's course is leading. 
And not all the immediate consequences are positive. 
In the city, a young man earns only 46 yuan a month in his Government job. 
The young woman he wants to marry earns 42. 
Only with the help of their parents can they get along. 
Why, he asks, should the peasants earn so much more?
And some plant managers are upset because production workers are leaving the city and going back to the village where they can make two, three or four times as much as the 60 yuan in the factory.
This problem was addressed by the third plenary session of the Communist Party Central Committee late last month when it approved the new urban-industrial economic program. 
By allowing urban industrial enterprises to increase productivity and profitability, the program aims to bring wage earners' salaries in line with the spectacular boost in rural family incomes.
The torrent of cash comes from phenomenal increases in productivity in the agricultural and livestock sectors and the liberation of peasant entrepreneurship. 
Mao's Red Army starved to death, dropping in their tracks by the hundreds, in crossing the barren grasslands of northern Sichuan and Gansu. 
That was 1935. 
Today, hundreds of thousands of yak, millions of sheep and goats fatten on sections of those once-desolate marshes.
Drainage is the answer. 
Drainage has turned much of the grasslands into as lovely a pasture as you will find in Wyoming or Montana. 
The flow of meat and butter and wool is almost embarrassing. 
Not all the grasslands have been reclaimed, of course. 
Some of the worst parts - and because of poor guides the Red Army waded through the worst parts - are still water-logged. 
But today, no one would apply the adjectives ''barren'' and ''desolate'' to the grasslands.
China's grazing lands are not all as productive as the grasslands. 
Only last summer, for example, there were cattle losses of millions of heads in Inner Mongolia because of overgrazing and drought. 
Even so, overall agricultural results have been strongly favorable. 
A record grain crop of more than 400 million tons is forecast for 1984.
TWELVE YEARS AGO, I asked Zhou Enlai, then China's Prime Minister, if I could retrace the route the Red Army followed in its march from southern Jian gxi to northern Shaanxi.
Zhou didn't take my idea seriously. 
Nor did a succession of Chinese officials over the years. 
Too much high politics involved in those days. 
Finally, in August last year, my persistence paid off. 
The Chinese said I could make the trip.
I was not alone on this adventure. 
I was accompanied every foot of the way by my wife, Charlotte. 
We had made our first long journey through China in 1972. 
This was our fourth. 
Charlotte had sworn after our third, which took us to Tibet, to Lhasa and down the rugged trail past Mount Everest to Nepal, that she would never go again. 
She did. 
The third member of our group was John S. Service, the old China hand of the State Department, one-time victim of McCarthyism, who was born in Chengdu and who first learned China's back country on long hikes with his Y.M.C.A. father in the 1920's. 
We had two Chinese companions, Gen. Qin Xinghan, a scholar and Long March specialist, and Zhang Yuanyuan, a Foreign Office interpreter.
Putting the trip together had not been easy. 
The negotiations took months. 
For one thing, I insisted on traveling the whole crooked, arduous route of the Red Army (I did forego one of the four crossings of the Red River in Guizhou). 
Then, too, I planned to talk to Long March survivors along the way, consult local historians, discuss political problems with provincial authorities, examine old archives and newspaper files. 
No one, not even the Chinese, had ever done this. 
Why me?
Why give a foreigner access?
I think they want the story told, the tale put down before the last of the heroes dies. 
Many of them now hold high office, and they know official historians could never cut through the red tape and get the story written in their lifetimes.
MANY BACK-COUNTRY TOWNS HAVE NO HOTELS AND NOT much by way of guesthouses. 
At Liping in eastern Guizhou, the prefect's office was turned into a guest facility - everything repainted in white and green, new carpets, new armchairs, new bright curtains, new table lamps, new enamel spittoons, new beds, new blankets in new green silk blanket covers, a new flush toilet installed on a stair landing. 
But, alas, we changed our plans and halted only for a luncheon snack (of eight dishes) and a quick wash-up.
In the Tibetan area of north Sichuan, for some distance we followed a route taken last year by the Panchen Lama and, a few months later, by Hu Yaobang, the General Secretary of the Communist Party. 
We inherited the rooms painted and redecorated for these distinguished visitors, warmed our frozen feet at the electric heaters installed for them, used the spick-and-span thundermugs, delicately placed behind corner curtains.
IN CHINA IN SITU, BEyond the beyond, the visit of Americans is such an event that the town of Hadapu in southwest Gansu declares a holiday. 
Here, the Red Army re-entered Han territory and had its first good meal in weeks. 
To welcome the Americans, schools are let out. 
Everyone in town - and all those who have come for market day - line the streets, waving and cheering. 
While we are briefed in the house where Mao had his headquarters, I hear a boom. 
Then another. 
And another. 
My God, I exclaim, they are giving us a salute!
Not so. 
Hail clouds have been sighted and rockets are fired to disperse the hail and protect the crops. 
The rockets don't work. 
As we drive out of Hadapu, we run into a terrible hailstorm - pellets the size of crab apples. 
BLACKTOP ROADS traverse almost all the back-country mountains and river valleys. 
They cut across the grasslands and embrace the Great Snowy Mountains, a range that almost did in the Red Army. 
They are proving a revolutionary influence on the countryside.
The road system got its first boost at the time of the Long March when Chiang Kai-shek's German military advisers built roads so that troops could move rapidly and bottle up Mao. 
Before, there had been little but footpaths in China south of the Yangtze. 
The Japanese war brought on another spurt of road building and the Communist regime has made a modern road system a key component of its modernization drive.
In Jiangxi, the blacktop runs mostly north and south because that is the way the mountains run. 
In 1934, there were no roads in Jiangxi. 
None. Just mountain trails too narrow for even a cart. 
Now, Jiangxi's highways are the scene of the biggest building boom China has ever known. 
In village after village, we see the houses going up - all individual, all in traditional style, each the property of the owner to rent, to sell or to will to his children.
The owner and his family build the houses. 
Sometimes, he hires a man to help. 
He pays for this with the profits of his grain and animal production. 
No Government subsidies. 
The housing boom is uneven. 
In one day's travel in northern Guizhou I spotted only three new houses; across the line in Jiangxi I saw thousands. 
I can't account for the difference; perhaps the land in Guizhou is poorer.
I WENT TO EVERY place I asked to see except one - the plant in northwest Guizhou where they make maotai, the fiery national Chinese liquor that tests out at 190 proof. 
I wanted to go to the town of Maotai because, according to legend, the troops of the Red Army discovered the colorless liquor there and, not knowing it was fit to drink, bathed their weary feet in it. 
Somehow, I couldn't believe the Red Army troops were that naive.
Every other place was in, but Maotai was out, I was told. 
That's because maotai is China's secret weapon, I teased. 
Finally, the Chinese relented. 
I went to Maotai, but only got a look at the famous distillery from the outside - don't ask me why.
If anyone should think the journey was some kind of Potemkin trip through a gussied-up China, well, the route was more than twice as long as that between New York and San Francisco. 
Even the remarkable Chinese couldn't have managed to do over half the country for the benefit of my expedition. 
We changed our route and schedule again and again, and halted 20 or 30 times a day to take pictures and comfort stops.
Everywhere - or almost so - we found private enterprise booming, even at comfort stops. 
Enterprising peasants have erected thousands of walled, pit-style toilets along the roads - free for the use of any passing traveler. 
The excrement is the peasant's reward - he hauls it off to fertilize his fields. 
But now competition has come in. 
When one peasant puts up a facility at a choice site, another is apt to erect one next door. 
In fact, some peasants now find their original comfort stop boxed in by competitors on either flank, not unlike gas stations competing for the motorists' dollars, three in a row. 
SERVICE FACILITIES HAVE not kept pace with China's rapidly expanding highway system. 
Twice, our chauffeur had to siphon gasoline from other vehicles because the local pumps were dry, and often he filled an extra 10-gallon can, just in case. 
When an accompanying Jeep unaccountably caught fire crossing the 12,000-foot pass that divides the basins of the Yellow River and the Yangtze in northern Sichuan, it had to be towed many miles to a town that possessed a ''House for Disabled Automobiles.''
Truck drivers have a kind of clan system. 
If a truck breaks down and the driver can't fix it, he waits for another truck of his company to come along and help. 
Sometimes he has to wait two or three days.
Some highways, particularly in Jiangxi, sport more roadside one- liners than in the old days of Burma Shave slogans. 
These are admonitions to drive safely. 
They are needed. 
In 70 days, we passed the sites of 10 serious accidents, each almost certainly fatal. 
They had been caused by fast driving and trucks that got out of control coming down the corkscrew bends.
An accident can tie up a road for hours. 
Neither car may move until the police arrive and take photographs. 
Just outside Lanzhou one sunny June morning, we encountered a monstrous tie-up. 
A truck was halted over a grade crossing where a switch engine half blocked the road. 
The truck driver and the railroad engineer were swearing violently at each other. 
Neither would move. 
There had been no collision, but each blamed the other for a near miss. 
Finally, they were persuaded to move their vehicles, but they were still shouting at each other when we inched by. 
SOME HIGH-LEVEL PARTY officials worry about consistency. 
A few years ago, the countryside was organized into communes and production brigades. 
Everything was done collectively. 
No private property. 
You saw platoons of men and women cultivating huge fields. 
No more. 
Now, it is a handful here, a handful there, even a lone man or a lone woman, cultivating private plots. 
The communes and brigades still exist on paper, but basically it is each family for itself.
During the Cultural Revolution, animals were put into common herds. 
The peasants sometimes ate and slept in common barracks, each man and each woman dressed almost alike. 
That was the ''blue ant'' phase. 
No more. 
China is still a long way from the couture stage, but market day in Lijiang in northern Yunnan splashes almost as much color as a shopping plaza in Michigan - the brash blacks and yellows and greens of the minority women's dresses vying with the bright reds, pinks, lavenders and purples of the Han women's blouses.
A few reminders of the old days: a Long March slogan miraculously preserved under smeared clay on a temple wall at Goshi near the Wu River in Guizhou. 
It reads: ''Mobilize!
Take Arms!
Down With the Landlords and Evil Gentry!''
That must have been put up in 1934. 
No one seems to have bothered to preserve the slogans of the Great Leap Forward of 1958, but here and there I see along the roadside sagging, rusted remains of the famous ''backyard steel mills'' with which Mao hoped to leapfrog China into the 20th century.
There are just too many slogans of the Cultural Revolution for them to be all blotted out. 
They still shrill their faded summons: ''Raise High the Thought of Chairman Mao!''
(the Little Red Book is what they meant) and ''Down With the Capitalist Roaders!''
(those like Deng Xiaoping who were accused of plotting to put China back on capitalist rails).
Today is not an era of sloganeering. 
We pass through towns where I see no slogans at all except the ubiquitous poster of the smiling baby girl and the numeral one - the admonition to limit your family to a single child. 
One other appears and reappears: ''Serve the Country; Make the Peasant Rich.''
No one plunging into this archeology of slogans can worry too much about consistency. 
Communist rule has been built on change. 
Perhaps the real worry of some ideologues is that the peasants like the present course so well they will not want to change. 
THE ROUTE TO DALI IN northern Yunnan reminds me of Colorado - a drape of mountains on the horizon, great deserts (usually irrigated), clear air. 
There are trucks bringing down eucalyptus logs from the mountains and convoys of coal trucks from the open strip mines. 
The air is hot, humidity zero. 
This is a minority, non-Han area, and women stroll the blacktop in embroidered jackets and skirts of flowered silk. 
The men look as though they have walked off the set of a Mexican movie, wearing rawhide boots and cowskin capes slung like serapes over their shoulders.
Dali lies in a chain of lakes, and officials are hoping to turn it into a tourist spot. 
They have already had a mild success - a folk festival for which they got the area opened to visitors and drew a sprinkling of young Europeans, descendants of the 1960's hippie invasion of Asia. 
I see a handsome Nordic couple, a woman with flowing blond hair and a man with reddish beard; not all, it seems, have left town.
Housing the visitors was no problem. 
It was turned over to private initiative. 
People opened ''hotels'' in their houses. 
There is still a sign in awkward English letters: ''Inside There Are Calm Rooms Specially Prepared.''
No running water, of course. 
Outdoor toilets. 
Mosquito net- ting on the narrow beds. 
Pillows filled with beans. 
Mattresses of peanut shells.
The economy of Dali is doing well. 
The county magistrate reports that peasant family farm income is now up to 160 yuan a year (about $70) - twice what it was a few years ago. 
''But, of course,'' he adds, ''they make at least four times that from their private enterprises.''
In fact, that means incomes in the 1,500-yuan range, magnificent in the Yunnan countryside where the peasants grow their own food, own their own houses and pay vestigial taxes. 
In northern Sichuan, I meet families of six or seven members who boast of earning 4,500 yuan a year.
The press has begun to publicize authentic examples of ''10,000 yuan'' families - peasant households with earnings of upward of 10,000 yuan a year. 
There are even cases of families earning 30,000 or 40,000 yuan a year.
What kind of ''other enterprises'' have the peasants rushed into?
The best place to observe this is on the blacktop. 
Here, they bring their goods and services to sell. 
They set up sewing machines and make dresses and suits while you wait. 
A shoemaker spreads his wares and takes orders for the red pumps with the two-inch heels which almost every young Chinese woman wears, even as she trots off to the rice paddies.
Here are the beemen and their families, some private traders, some from communes. 
They scatter 20 to 30 hives along the highway where buckwheat or wild flowers are in bloom, camp in dun-colored pup tents, let the bees do their work, then move on, following the season from southern Yunnan north into Inner Mongolia. 
Very lucrative. 
China doesn't consume much honey. 
Most of it is sold to Poland.
One day in the Guizhou mountains, our minibus screeches to a halt on a highway curve. 
The dropoff is about 500 feet. 
Our Chinese escorts tumble out. 
Beside the road, three girls, 10 or 12 years old, are selling the family handicrafts - small wooden chairs and stools, small tables, chopping blocks, wooden platters and washboards. 
The prices are a fraction of what the Guiyang shops charge, the quality high. 
Each Chinese buys an item or two to take back home. 
WHEN I SEE THE Chinese going to market, it reminds me of Chaucer's ''Canterbury Tales.''
Often, the first signs appear 10 miles from the market town - a peasant trudging along with a fat trussed pig slung at the end of a carrying pole across his shoulders. 
(The carrying pole is used in Jiangxi; in Guizhou, it is an oblong basket woven of bamboo fiber; in Sichuan, a conical basket. 
In Gansu, the load is slung across a donkey.)
Then I see women hidden under loads of brush they had cut in the mountains and will sell for fuel. 
The traffic thickens - women with babies in their carrying baskets; on the way back, the baskets will be filled with purchases and the babies will toddle beside their mothers. 
A man passes carrying half-a-dozen hewn boards on his shoulder. 
Here is a woman with two geese slung over a carrying pole; here, a wheelbarrow filled with sacks of rice; a woman with a dozen straw hats, rising like a juggler's stock high in the air, and a man with a sad ''yellow cow,'' the nondescript beast used by those who cannot afford a water buffalo. 
WE ARE PUSHING through the market town of Meitan, not far from Zunyi in Guizhou, the crowds pressing their noses against the windows of the minibus. 
Along the street there are posters of the human torso studded with directional arrows (an advertisement for a patent medicine man); a pink pig's head painted on canvas (a pork dealer); an owlish pair of spectacles (a glasses man). 
There are rows of braziers, over which meat and sausages are cooked. 
There are corn muffins, eggs sold in clusters held together with rice straw, sides of pork. 
There are pigs, piglets, dogs (for eating, I'm afraid), puppies, kittens, goats, horses, chickens, ducks. 
And new plastic dishes - blue and yellow and red - plastic raincoats, home-fashioned woven-grass raincoats, racks and racks of skirts and towels, beds, chairs, chests, coffins, lumber, firewood, coal, charcoal.
It seems that anything that can be grown or made by a peasant is for sale. 
More, it seems to me, than I saw in the Peking department stores in 1972. 
There are sellers of pots and pans, sellers of hot bean curd, sellers of fried buns and strips of fried dough, sellers of soda water and orange pop, of tea in cups and long sticks of barberpole candy (which is not allowed to be sold in Peking because of the dyes). 
There are heaps of melons and mountains of onions, garlic and Chinese cabbage. 
It's private trade for the most part, buying and selling, buying and selling, buying and selling. 
BUT WAIT A MINUTE - China is a Communist state. 
How can it tolerate this eruption of profits, of wheeling and dealing?
What's in it for the state?
What about ideology?
Well, in many years of reporting in Communist countries - I was a correspondent for years in Moscow and have reported from every Communist country except Cuba - I have learned that ideology is pretty much what the man at the top says it is. 
You can find a quotation from Marx or Engels or Lenin to justify just about any policy. 
Deng Xiaoping, the tough pragmatist who now runs China, couched his policy in a dozen or so words a dozen years ago: ''It doesn't matter whether the cat is black or white - so long as it catches the mice.''
This flourishing of the countryside and of small-time enterprises in the cities stems straight from Deng's words. 
Deng was faced with an almost bankrupt country as a result of the anarchy of the Cultural Revolution. 
In effect, he told the peasants: Go out and make money. 
That was an order they followed with enthusiasm as soon as they assured themselves he was serious.
The peasants now work on what is cloudily called the ''responsibility'' system, a simple deal between Government and peasant. 
The peasant contracts to deliver at a fair price, say, 2,000 pounds of rice to the state. 
In return, he is free to produce as much rice as he can and sell it for what he can get. 
And he can engage in other profit-making enterprises. 
The profits go into his pocket.
What's in it for the state?
Lots. The surge of farm production has taken the monkey off the Government's back - the nightmare of not being able to feed one billion people. 
True, China must still import food - millions of tons a year, mainly from the United States. 
But it has pushed back the fear of famine. 
Never have China's peasants poured out food as they have been doing along the Long March route in 1984 - so much so that recently the Government reported that surpluses were piling up in the storehouses and it began to call on the people to buy more food.
The bouyancy of China's agricultural economy brings the cities an abundance of food; the spread of a small urban market economy helps to provide goods in exchange for the yuan bulging from peasant pockets. 
There is an almost ritualistic priority in what the peasant buys once he has the money. 
First, he buys clothes (cotton goods are no longer rationed) for his wife. 
Next, a radio (if he has not already bought one). 
Then a clock, a sewing machine, a television (he is beginning to trade in the old black-and-white for color these days), a wristwatch, a refrigerator and - the No. 1 current aspiration - a small personal tractor or a truck, both of which can be put to work to make even more money.
One of the favorite stories around Peking concerns two peasants who come to town with bundles of money. 
They already have televisions, refrigerators, bicycles, clocks, wristwatches. 
They want to buy a small garden tractor, not for plowing but to haul stuff along the roads. 
What they really want is a truck. 
They have read in the People's Daily stories of peasants who are making thousands of yuan in the trucking business. 
But they haven't quite enough money for that. 
What to do?
Someone tells them about Maxim's, the scaled-down version of the famous Parisian restaurant that Pierre Cardin has opened in Peking - identical decor, fine linen and silverware, perfectly trained Chinese waiters, French ma,itre d' and French chef, Parisian prices. 
They go there, blow $260 on dinner and return happily to their village.
BUT IN ALL THIS does the party have, as one might say, a water buffalo by the horns?
Now that the peasant has become accustomed to money, to plenty, to exercising his capacity for free enterprise - can you lead him back to the Communist Manifesto?
This is a serious question. 
Some ideologues comfort themselves with the analogy of Lenin who, after the civil war, in 1921 put Soviet Russia onto what he called the New Economic Policy - a mixture of peasant initiative, limited private enterprise and joint state-capitalist ventures, which in some respects resembles the current Chinese program. 
Russia was put back on a ''Communist'' course by Stalin's brutality, his police apparatus and concentration camps. 
That prospect is not appealing to any level of Chinese society, especially with memories of the outrages of the Cultural Revolution fresh in mind. 
Besides, no one seems convinced that the peasants can be restrained in their headlong rush toward plenty.
In a sense, the introduction of the ''responsibility'' system in the countryside is only the first step in a complex process. 
It has led - inevitably - to the skewing of incomes, to comparative prosperity in the villages and some economic stringency in the cities. 
Urban industrial production and productivity have not kept pace with those in the rural areas.
A giant second step has now been proposed: the freeing of management in urban industries to compete in the marketplace, a bottom-line approach to Government subsidies and a bundle of internal reforms all intended to stimulate the industrial sector.
Will it work?
And if it works, will it carry China further along the road toward a mixed, socialist-private economy?
The answers to these questions are not clear. 
It took at least three years for the ''make the peasant rich'' campaign to begin to display a success. 
It will take at least that long for the urban industrial innovations to take hold.
Deng Xiaoping feels confident that China is on the right track. 
The new system has had experimental tryouts, notably in Sichuan. 
When Peking applied the ''responsibility'' system to a traffic-snarling cloverleaf near the airport, two years were cut from the estimated completion date.
When I spoke with the party chief, Hu Yaobang, a few months before the plenary innovations, he conceded that the rural-urban imbalance was a difficult problem, but he said that the Government was working to resolve it. 
BEYOND-THE-WALL China doesn't exist in a vacuum. 
It is part of the whole and the command to the peasant - Enrichez vous!
- is not the only note in the national chorus.
When I returned to the big cities of China - Kunming, Chengdu, Lanzhou, Xian and Peking - I didn't hear as many questions about the boom in the countryside as I did about the New Long March. 
How was it going?
What did I think?
The New Long March is shorthand for what is more properly called the Four Modernizations - the drive to bring industry, agriculture, science and technology and military force up to modern levels. 
This is the industrial- technological face of the prosperity coin I saw in the villages.
Stalin financed the industrialization of the Soviet Union during those colossal five- year plans by driving the peasants into collectivization and using the profits to pay for the steel mills at Magnitogorsk and the great new industries of the Urals and Siberia.
China is turning that approach inside out. 
It seems to believe it can pay for industrialization by enriching the peasants and then channeling their windfall - through Government savings bonds, for instance - to create a modern industrial and military establishment.
The prosperous peasant and an extraordinary reliance on foreign investment, foreign know-how, joint enterprises, every device that Chinese ingenuity can conceive - all this is expected to shove China forward on her New Long March.
This is the philosophy underlying those weapons factories so cunningly fitted into the folds of Guizhou. 
This is what lies behind the almost magical creation of a spread like that of Dukou, a massive integrated steel mill and fabricating facility molded into the narrow valley of the Golden Sands River in southern Sichuan. 
It took about 20 years to build the center, with the outside world virtually ignorant of what was going on. 
Security consciousness was high. 
Now it sprawls for 18 miles along the steep banks of the river, its industrial wastes polluting the river 100 miles downstream, almost to the spot where the Red Army crossed its turbulent waters at Jiaopingdu in the Long March.
The plant is a great success, say the Dukou authorities, but I only saw it from the outside and no production figures were vouchsafed. 
China needs all the steel it can make and clearly this is a big works. 
For years, specialists had been puzzled by China's breakneck building of a rail road connecting Chengdu with Kunming along the Golden Sands River. 
Now, the explanation is obvious. 
It links Dukou north and south with mainline transportation.
We bumped into a couple of other built-from-scratch cities, but on a smaller scale. 
One was Kaili in Guiz hou, a city of 100,000, which 20 years ago was a minority village of 1,000, and Maoerkang in northern Sichuan, a settlement of a few hundred in 1960, now a regional center of 20,000 and rapidly growing. 
China has literally hundreds of these brand-new towns to accommodate its massive population growth and provide sites for expanding industry. 
WHEN THE RED ARMY finally reached northern Shaanxi in 1935, it settled down in a faraway dust bowl, as poverty-poor as China possessed - no industry, scant and unproductive agriculture. 
Edgar Snow made a furtive journey in 1936 by horseback across the yellow loess - an area denuded of people, of vegetation - following foot trails and finally arriving at the village where Mao and the Red Army lived in caves carved into the sides of hills.
We followed the same trail from Xian northward, driving along a blacktop road that was jammed with trucks, most of them coal carriers from the big mines to the north. 
We amused ourselves in the minibus listening to General Qin sing satiric songs from Peking opera.
All the minibus drivers loved tapes. 
One's taste was especially modern - ''Oh!
Susanna,'' the theme song from ''Doctor Zhivago,'' something from ''Fiddler on the Roof.''
We found pumping oil wells sighing beside the roadway and heard that to the north of Yanan a big oil field had gone into production. 
Many mountainsides glistened green with reforestation, and the fields just north of Xian were yellow-bright with wheat being harvested.
Beyond the wheat fields, we drove for miles through countryside that reminded me of the Garden State Parkway outside of Newark - a concentration of industry not quite so dense as in New Jersey but the same mix of petrochemical plants, cement factories, copper-processing facilities and God knows what else - pink, black, reddish, brown and gray smoke polluting the air from the tall chimneys.
I saw nothing to remind me of Snow's lonely journey through the arroyos and foothills, when he worried about old-fashioned brigands and patrols of Nationalist troops. 
Everywhere now was the face of the New Long March.
This is the kind of modernization on which China has set its course. 
This is the China of Deng Xiaoping. 
What happens when he dies or turns over the reins of power to another?
Will China stay on course?
No one in or out of China can give an answer. 
The longer Deng stays at the helm, the more deeply engraved on China's ancient face will be the lines of this special blend of profit, free enterprise and the Chinese kind of Marxism that was created by Mao. 
Much depends on how well it works. 
If it continues to produce the results that can be seen in the countryside today, the post-Deng leadership is not likely to tinker with a winning formula.
Deng has created a team that seems to be dedicated to his formula. 
Hu Yaobang, the party chief, is a man very much in Deng's image - energetic, possessed of an intensely inquisitive mind, interested in every variety of political, industrial and social system in the world. 
Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang is a vigorous, enterprising executive who seems to put the bottom line ahead of dogma. 
The military may be more conservative - military men usually are, whatever their country.
Deng is 80 years old. 
He has said that his main task now is to live as long as he can to achieve as much as he can for China. 
But who can say?
China has gone through some hairpin turns in the last 20 years - the Cultural Revolution, the Lin Biao coup attempt, the era of the Gang of Four, Mao's death and finally the emergence of Deng Xiaoping. 
Another abrupt turn is not impossible. 
But everyone - from the generals of the high command and the top leaders of the Government to the ordinary farmers of Sichuan and Jiangxi with whom I spoke - echoed a single line: No more sudden changes. 
Let things move along steadily. 
No surprises. 
WHEN WE FINALLY ARrive in Yanan, that shrine of the Chinese revolution, the place where Mao and his company spent 10 years preparing for the move to take over China, I find few traces of the austere cave city I first saw in 1972.
We pick our way through torn-up streets, lots of construction going up in a rather haphazard way, new sewers being laid, apartment houses replacing the old cave dwellings. 
Yanan has gone on an industrial binge. 
It has joined the New Long March and now boasts much new, small-scale industry - a textile plant, a wood-processing plant, some small assembly plants, even a watch- assembly factory, now shut down because it wasn't profitable.
I do not find much interest among the local officials in the caves of the Long March period. 
Some have fallen in. 
Some are forgotten. 
Some have been taken over to relieve the housing shortage. 
Only those of Mao and a few top leaders seem to be maintained. 
Yanan's focus is not the past but the present and the future. 
It does not want to fall behind in the New Long March.
It is, I suppose, the price that must be paid for ''progress,'' whether in northern Shaanxi or in sunbelt America. 
Still, I wonder as we drive out of the city if it is not a bit too high. 
Looking back from half a mile down the road, I can't see the great pagoda that was Yanan's beacon all those years when Mao's revolution was gestating here. 
The smog of the New Long March has hidden it from view.
