
TO many Americans, rice is rice. 
It comes in a box with short but intimidating directions. 
When it's cooked, you eat the part that you didn't burn with some other kind of food that has some kind of taste. 
The fact is, to many Americans, rice is boring.
That view may soon be changing, thanks to some recent breakthroughs by California rice growers. 
Five years ago their experiments led to a strain of long-grain rice that is now thriving in California's rice-producing regions, the Sacramento and San Joaquin Valleys. 
In its relatively short public lifetime, it has already won wide general appeal.
The hope, however, was that the new rice would be acceptable to this nation's fast-growing Asian populations, particularly the Sichuan segment. 
Unlike other Chinese cooking, which makes use of sticky, glutinous short-grain rice, Sichuan dishes center on the fluffy, separate grains of the province's own long-grain variety. 
So special is it that those who can do so use only rice imported from their homeland.
The California product had its first hands-on test last December when Vivian Chiang, administrative director of San Francisco's Chinese Culture Center, brought samples of California rice to Chengdu, the cultural and culinary capital of Sichuan Province. 
There she met with four master chefs, who will be preparing all the food for the San Francisco Sichuan Food Festival, which is being sponsored by the center and will run through this month.
''They couldn't believe it at first -that I'd bring rice from America!''
Ms. Chiang said, explaining that in Sichuan rice is planted and harvested year round. 
''It was like the proverbial coals to Newcastle.''
Reluctant at first to believe that their famed rice had a rival, the chefs were quickly impressed with the texture and color of the California product. 
They agreed that it would serve them well in California.
This evening in San Francisco these same chefs will prepare a 22-course banquet featuring rice in many of its guises. 
Even inveterate rice lovers may not know they are eating rice when it appears in the form of cakes, dumplings, stuffings, pastas, thickeners, pastries, fillings, wrappings and even wine. 
Martin Yan, a chef and cookbook author, acting as an interpreter for the visiting chefs, explained that in China ''rice is used in as many ways as we use wheat.''
On tonight's menu, for example, there will be tsungi or ''Chinese tamales'' made of flavored whole-grain rice wrapped in lotus leaves. 
Another Sichuan tidbit, which looks like a miniature jelly doughnut, is formed from a dough of rice flour and pureed yam. 
Rice may be crushed with spices and used as a pungent coating, as in a dish called little steamer beef. 
For sizzling rice soup, boiling liquid is poured into the rice cooking pot and the residual encrusted rice is scraped into the stock.
Rice is transformed yet again in twice-cooked pork, where the meat is boiled in rice wine. 
For important occasions and honored guests, rice is flavored with exotic seasonings and made into a stuffing for whole meats, fish or fowl. 
At tonight's banquet, even the table decorations will be rice paintings, with the grains arranged in the geometric patterns of Chinese folk motifs.
Rice is also prized as a vehicle for the flavors of seasonings and sauces, like the sweet and sour Sichuan classic, lychee flavoring, the so-called odd flavor sauces (the term ''odd'' or ''strange'' denotes a multidimensional taste) and kai-yan, actually a Chinese pronunciation of ''cajun,'' describing the imported dried shrimp that flavors some sauces.
In Sichuan Province, rice is intimately bound up with the ancient Chinese principle of yin and yang, of harmony and contrast; it is inseparable from the fabric of society and from the activities of daily life. 
Sichuan families traditionally eat rice three times a day; breakfast is a thin and warming rice soup.
Rice is the subject of much Chinese poetry about the time and energy needed for its cultivation. 
According to Sue Yung Li, producer of the Public Broadcasting System series ''A Taste of China'' and chairman of the Sichuan Food Festival, Sichuan children are told ''always finish your rice,'' not because of its nutritional value but because the farmers work so hard to produce it.
This recipe, which uses rice in two forms, is for a traditional Sichuan street food. 
Vendors prepare it on the spot in their portable kitchens and serve it in individual bamboo steamers. 
Home cooks can use two eight-inch steamers for the recipe.
 
Little Steamer Beef
 
Preparation time: 1 hour Cooking time: 20 minutes)
2 tablespoons fresh ginger, peeled and finely chopped
3 tablespoons water
1/8 cup glutinous rice (see note)
1/2 cup long-grain rice
1 teaspoon Sichuan peppercorns (see note)
3 tablespoons vegetable oil
3 tablespoons soy sauce
1/4 teaspoon ground white pepper
1 tablespoon Sherry
1 teaspoon Sichuan whole black bean sauce (see note)
1 teaspoon Sichuan broad bean chili sauce (see note)
1 teaspoon sugar
1 pound New York or top-round steak
2 large cabbage or lettuce leaves
1/2 teaspoon ground red chili pepper
3 scallions, chopped
1/2 bunch cilantro, cleaned and chopped.
1.Start preparing a marinade by soaking ginger in the water for one-half hour.
2. Meanwhile, place rices in a heavy pan over medium heat. 
Stir continuously until rice is toasted to a light brown. 
Do not allow to smoke. 
Crush rice in blender to a coarse consistency. 
Set aside. 
In the same pan, toast Sichuan peppercorns. 
Grind in blender. 
Set aside.
3.Remove ginger from water and discard ginger. 
Combine vegetable oil, soy sauce, white pepper, Sherry, whole black bean sauce, Sichuan broad bean chili sauce, sugar and the ginger-water in a medium-size mixing bowl.
4. Cut steak into very thin strips about 1 1/2 inches long, 1/4 inch thick and 1/2 inch wide. 
Toss strips into the marinade. 
Add crushed rice and toss to coat. 
Marinate for half an hour.
5.Line a bamboo steamer with large lettuce or cabbage leaves. 
Place meat strips in steamer in one layer. 
Sprinkle top of meat with ground red chili pepper and ground Sichuan peppercorns. 
Place steamer in a wok and add enough water to reach bottom rim of steamer (several steamers can be stacked). 
Steam at high heat 15 to 20 minutes.
6.Uncover steamers and garnish meat with chopped scallions and cilantro. 
Serve directly from steamers.
Yield: 4 servings.
NOTE: Available in Oriental grocery stores and in some supermarkets.
