
Taiwan is making some progress but has quite a way to go to live up to its stated commitment to human rights and greater democracy, according to the rights group Asia Watch.
Although there have been some ''encouraging developments'' in the last two years, the citizens of Taiwan ''are still deprived of internationally recognized civil and political rights,'' the group said in a report issued last week.
The report was based on interviews and research in 1986 and 1987 that included a two-week mission to Taiwan by an Asia Watch delegation. 
The level of Government cooperation with the mission was generally excellent, the report said, with the exception of the Ministry of National Defense.
Positive Steps Noted
Among the positive steps cited by Asia Watch, the Washington-based affiliate of the Helsinki Watch Committees, were the ability to obtain opposition publications despite heavy press censorship, the release of many political prisoners, the easing of restrictions on travel to mainland China for family visits and the formal establishment of the opposition Democratic Progressive Party and its participation in the 1986 elections.
The report said that, although not legally recognized, the Democratic Progressive Party did better in the elections than any opposition had ever done before under the governing Kuomintang, which has ruled Taiwan since the Nationalist Chinese were driven from mainland China by the Communists in 1949.
The report said the new National Security Law that replaced 37 years of martial law on Taiwan last summer included a number of restrictions on internationally recognized rights but also contained some welcome changes.
The gains notwithstanding, the report urged the Government to amend the new law to eliminate the remaining restrictions on freedom of assembly, association and expression.
 
'A Severe Problem'
Although the abuse of political prisoners ''has by all accounts diminished'' in Taiwan, abuse of common criminals and suspects ''remains a severe problem,'' the report said.
The report said that most Taiwanese workers were ''bereft of meaningful labor representatives'' and urged the Government to allow workers to organize freely and to take collective action.
Political changes to bring about more democracy would be all but meaningless, the report said, unless the Government addressed the ''increasingly dire problem'' that many members of the central governmental bodies serve for life.
''Even the most sweeping electoral reforms would accomplish little unless they were accompanied by the right of the people on Taiwan to select those persons empowered to make decisions on their behalf,'' the report said.
