
The Soviet and Chinese Foreign Ministers will exchange visits next year in a further effort to broaden talks between the two nations, according to Soviet officials here.
The officials said Foreign Minister Wu Xueqian was expected to travel to Moscow in May for meetings with his Soviet counterpart, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, who would return the visit later in the year. 
It would be the first exchange of Foreign Ministers in more than 20 years.
The Soviet officials presented the plans as evidence of growing momentum in the relations between Peking and Moscow. 
For months Soviet diplomats in Peking have been saying privately that the United States has an eroding position here and that China is moving toward an ''equidistant'' relationship between the two superpowers.
Western diplomats take a more cautionary view. 
On the plan for the Foreign Ministers to exchange visits they note that the two nations have already exchanged visits at the more senior level of Deputy Prime Minister in the last 12 months, and that efforts to improve relations have been continuing in twice-yearly meetings at the Deputy Foreign Minister level since 1983.
 
Meetings at U.N. Session
The two Foreign Ministers have met in each of the last two years during the fall session of the United Nations General Assembly, each time without any significant breakthrough on the three issues that China has called obstacles to better ties. 
These are Moscow's backing for the Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia, the Soviet presence in Afghanistan and the Soviet military presence on China's border.
''It's not an avalanche,'' one Western diplomat said of the planned talks between Mr. Wu and Mr. Shevardnadze. ''It's just another step in the process of developing a high-level dialogue, only this time they'll be doing it at home instead of in New York.''
Other diplomats said it was probably a mistake to pay too much attention to issues like Cambodia and Afghanistan, which were unlikely to yield progress at any time soon. 
While dramatic improvements in relations were unlikely, the diplomats said, the two countries had already made progress in matters of trade, Soviet assistance in the modernization of Chinese industry, and scientific, cultural and sports contacts.
