
Jim McAllister, who calls himself the unofficial historian of Salem, Mass., conducts guided tours of his adopted hometown. 
''There are four reasons why people come to Salem,'' he said. 
''Maritime history. 
Architectural history. 
Nathaniel Hawthorne. 
And witches.''
As Mr. McAllister noted, there's a lot more than witchcraft to Salem, though a visitor might be forgiven for thinking otherwise. 
Every other Salem shop window seems to sport dark-robed mannequins wearing pointy hats and looking like leftover sorcerers from an early Disney animated cartoon, while gothic letters scream the attractions of the Witch House, the Witch Museum and the Witch Dungeon.
Yet this tidy little town of 38,000 on the North Shore, 15 miles from Boston, has much else to recommend it, including a cluster of handsome early houses in Colonial and Federal styles, many open to the public; the birthplace and other memorabilia of the great 19th-century novelist, and the impressive collection of maritime historical material in the Peabody Museum of Salem.
Lately a new item has been added to the list of attractions - Asian export art, especially as displayed in the stunning Asian Export Wing that opened this spring in the Peabody Museum. 
The new wing houses a collection of the arts and crafts that were created in Asia for markets and avid consumers in Europe and America. 
Most of this material was exported from China, but Japan, India and other East Asian countries also played a part in the trade.
With four galleries devoted to Chinese export porcelain alone, and significant display space for Chinese silver and gold wares the Asian Export Wing has already become an important center for study and research by scholars and collectors. 
Beyond ceramics and precious metals, there are galleries of period furniture produced in the workshops of Canton and India, as well as fans and screens, shawls and fabrics, lacquerware, enamels and ivories, nearly life-sized figurines of Chinese merchants and other memorabilia.
The wing's stairwells, illuminated by skylight, are hung with paintings and drawings of Asian scenes by Western artists, most notably George Chinnery's detailed views of early-19th-century Hong Kong, Canton and Macao. 
Pacific rim may be the latest jargon from the West Coast, but wandering through the galleries of the Peabody's new wing one has the distinct impression that those old Salem sea captains and merchants, the Crowninshields, Derbys and Bowditches whose ships roamed the East in search of fortunes, would have felt at home with the term.
Among the oldest museums in the country, the Peabody was established in 1799 as the East India Marine Society. 
One of its purposes, according to the museum's original charter, was to form ''a museum of natural and artificial curiosities,'' which the members, a dauntless group of Salem entrepreneurs and master mariners, would collect on their voyages.
First settled in 1626, Salem had become one of the leading commercial centers of the 13 Colonies by the time of the Revolution. 
A few years after the Revolution, Salem ships were trading with China and, under charter to the Dutch East India Company, with Japan. 
Until the last East India vessel was taken out of service in 1880, Salem vessels sailed to China for tea and silk; to Calcutta for textiles, hemp and jute; to East Africa for hides; Arabia for coffee, and Sumatra for pepper.
Right from the start, then, Asian exports were an obvious focus for the Peabody Museum collections. 
In 1984, a merger with the the China Trade Museum in Milton, Mass., tripled the size of the Peabody holdings in export art. 
The China trade museum had been established in 1964 as a scholarly labor of love by Dr. Crosby Forbes, now curator of the Peabody's Asian export collection. 
Indeed, some of the pieces from the China trade museum, now in the Peabody, were from his or his family's collections. 
On a recent tour of the new wing, he pointed to a display of ornately handsome silverware, heavy with decoration and complete down to the ''pseudo-London'' hallmark: ''My mother was horrified to discover the family silver wasn't Georgian at all,'' he said. 
''Instead it's a Chinese imitation.''
Designed by the Boston architects Kallmann, McKinnell & Wood, the interior of the new wing soars with a thoroughly modern sense of light and space, even as it reflects the sober proportions of the original museum building, the Federalist-style East India Marine Hall, built in 1824 of gray granite.
The variety of the collection sometimes borders on the bizarre, as in the early-18th-century carved ivory secretary, lavish with intricate and ornate decoration, or the reverse painting on glass of ''The Apotheosis of General Washington,'' in which the first President grimly clenches his false teeth as angels attempt to pull him heavenward. 
Travelers in 19th-century Asia were apparently just as attracted to expensive souvenir kitsch as modern tourists are.
The wing also performs a useful didactic function, with clear explanations of the processes of porcelain manufacture, for instance, or of the market forces that drove this youthful nation's trade with the countries of East Asia.
Just down Essex Street from the Peabody Museum is the Essex Institute, established in 1821 as a center for the study of Essex County, one of the early areas of British settlement on this continent. 
The institute library is a scholarly resource, with information and documentation in both published and manuscript form. 
The museum in the same building may come as something of a disappointment after the glories of the Peabody, but it has much to recommend the diligent, including one of the few known portraits of a youthful and Byronesque Nathaniel Hawthorne.
The period rooms are the work of George Francis Dow, one of the first and best-known workers in historic restoration. 
They are maintained not because they are considered particularly accurate but because they indicate something of the romantic view of the past that obtained among historians earlier in this century.
The Essex Institute also maintains several historic houses, some of which are open to the public, a few by appointment only. 
On the grounds of the institute are the John Ward House (1684, with later additions), with its Elizabethan gables and mullioned windows, and the gambrel-roofed Crowninshield-Bentley House (1727), a first-rate example of the Georgian Colonial style. 
Guided visits to these can be arranged at the main desk of the institute; not open but still worth looking at from the outside are the Andrew-Safford House, with its striking three-story, columned portico on the garden side, built in 1818 and 1819 for a Salem merchant made rich by Russian furs; and the more soberly handsome Gardner-Pingree House (1804), one of the masterpieces of Salem's great Federal period architect, Samuel McIntire. 
(The Gardner-Pingree House is currently undergoing a major restoration that is expected to be finished by June 1989.) There are several other McIntire houses in Salem, but just one is currently open to the public and only by appointment. 
Visits to the Peirce-Nichols House at 80 Federal Street (1782, remodeled by McIntire in 1801), thought to be McIntire's first major commission, can be arranged through the Essex Institute. 
Information about McIntire and a discussion of his Salem houses is available in ''Architecture in Salem,'' a survey of the town's buildings from earliest times to the present by Bryant F. Tolles Jr., with Carolyn K. Tolles (Essex Institute, 1983; $9.95), available in the institute's bookshop and at the Peabody.
Outside the Essex Institute a red line painted on the sidewalk marks the Salem Heritage Walking Trail. 
Following it along Essex Street and across Hawthorne Boulevard will bring you to the broad expanse of Salem Common, also known as Washington Square, lined on all sides with Federal-period brick mansions. 
Like Chestnut Street at the other end of town, Salem Common is the quintessence of a prosperous old New England town; as impressive as the individual houses are, the full impact comes from seeing them together in their original setting. 
The heritage trail continues across the common and down to the waterfront where another group of historic houses clusters around the House of Seven Gables, once owned by Nathaniel Hawthorne's Ingersoll relatives and the model for the house in the novel. 
With the exception of the Ingersoll place, the period buildings (among them Hawthorne's birthplace), set in a waterfront garden looking across the harbor toward Marblehead, were collected from other sites by the House of Seven Gables Settlement Association (508-744-0991). 
The $4 fees ($2 for those aged 6 through 17) for visiting the houses, which are accessible only through guided tours, go to support the association's settlement house nearby. 
The houses, although sometimes heavily restored, are nonetheless rare examples of 17th-century domestic architecture. 
The site is open through Labor Day from 9:30 A.M. to 5:30 P.M., and the rest of the year from 10 to 4:30.
Heading back toward the town center along the waterfront, walkers will come to the Salem Maritime National Historic Site (508-744-4323), with the Custom House, built in 1819, where Hawthorne worked as surveyor of the port of Salem between 1846 and 1849; Derby Wharf, once the focus of the maritime empire of Elias Hasket Derby, a prominent China trade merchant and said to be America's first millionaire, and Derby House (1762), a gambrel-roofed brick mansion built as a wedding present for Elias when he married Elizabeth Crowninshield. 
Both the Custom House and Derby House (guided tour only, three times a day) are open to the public from 8:30 A.M. to 6 P.M. (5 P.M. after Labor Day). 
There is no admission fee. 
Derby Wharf, a half-mile-long, grassy verge extending into the harbor, makes a fine site for a picnic or just a quiet rest stop.
There is at least one witch in Salem. 
Her name is Laurie Cabot and she has a shop on Essex Street opposite the Essex Institute beneath a sign that proclaims ''Official Witch of Salem.''
If spells and incantations are part of her product line, it is not immediately apparent, but the shop does sell amulets and souvenirs, incense and packaged herbs.
 
STAYING, SIGHTSEEING AND DINING IN SALEM
 
Museums and Tours
 
All addresses are in Salem.
The Peabody Museum (161 Essex Street at East India Square; 508-745-1876), is open Monday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.(Thursday until 9); Sunday, noon to-5. 
Admission is $4; $3 for senior citizens, and $1.50 for those aged 6 through 16.
The Essex Institute (132 Essex Street; 508-744-3390) is open Tuesday through Saturday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. (open Monday June 1 through Oct. 
31); Sunday, 1 to 5. 
Admission is $3; $2.50 for seniors, and $1.50 for children 6 through 16. 
The cost of tours of the historic houses (June 1 through Oct. 
31 only) and the institute galleries vary from $3.50 to $5.
Derby Square Tours (508-745-6314) are run by Jim McAllister Thursday through Sunday until Labor Day; after then special tours can be arranged. 
His regular tours leave at 6 P.M. from Old Town Hall in Derby Square, last for approximately 75 minutes and cost $4, $2 for children between 7 and 17.
 
Where to Stay
 
The Salem Chamber of Commerce (82 Derby Square, 01970; 508-744-0004) can provide a list of area accommodations with prices.
The Hawthorne Hotel (18 Washington Square West; 508-744-4080) is at the corner of Essex Street and Hawthorne Boulevard. 
Double rooms average $98 a night. 
At the other end of Essex Street, on the corner of Summer Street, is the Salem Inn (7 Summer Street; 508-741-0680). 
Prices here go from $79.28 to $100.42 for single or double rooms.
Many bed and breakfasts are in historic Salem houses. 
The most famous is the Nathaniel Bowditch Guest House (2 Kimball Court; 508-745-7755) the birthplace of the navigator. 
Unfortunately, only one bedroom is currently available, at $75 for two with Continental breakfast.
 
Where to Eat
 
The North Shore is not known for good eating places although the situation is improving.
Signs of a new order can be found at the Courtyard Cafe on the ground floor of the Salem Inn (7 Summer Street; 508-741-4086) where in good weather diners have the option of eating in the patio garden. 
Lunch entrees range from $4.95 to $6.95; dinner prices are from $10.95 to $18.95. 
The chef and owner, Anthony Young, is commited to using fresh and, when available, local ingredients, especially in a variety of crisp summer salads.
Tea is served in the quiet lobby of the Hawthorne Hotel from 3 to 5:30 P.M., weekdays only. 
A pot of tea is $2 and for $3.75, one can choose from a selection of such goodies as banana bread, strawberry bread and a warm cheese tart.
For outside dining with a view of the water, there are several options at Pickering Wharf, the development of shops and restaurants west of the Salem Maritime National Historic Site. 
Among them are: Topsides Seafood Grill (508-744-8500); Victoria Station (508-745-3400), and the Chase House (508-744-0000). 
At all three, main courses run from around $7.50 to $18 or $20 for dinner.
Finally, there is Fragata (21 Congress Street; 508-745-5776), a Portuguese restaurant with moderate prices. 
The menu offers a number of robustly flavored seafood stews. 
Dinner, including two copious courses and a glass wine, costs about $18 a person.
 
Shopping
 
Both the Peabody Museum and the Essex Institute have first-rate museum shops, with a good selection of books on local and maritime history, Asian arts and anthropology, and jewelry, reproduction Canton ware, ceramics, posters, toys and games.
Asia House (18 Washington Square West; 508-745-8257) has a small but well selected collection of Asian antiques. 
Prices range from $65 for a little blue and white porcelain saucer to $4,000 for a Burmese bronze ceremonial drum. 
Open Tuesday through Saturday, noon to 5 P.M.
Chocolates made by Ben Strohecker's Harbor Sweets can be tested at various locations but the chocolate factory is at 85 Leavitt Street (508-745-7648), near the Palmer Cove Yacht Club, where visitors are welcome Monday through Friday (except holidays) during business hours.
The Alden Merrell Cheesecake Company, (19 Congress Street; 508-744-2820) is renowned locally for their lush cheesecakes ($4.55 for six-inch plain), dense carrot cakes ($4.30 for a six-inch cake).
