
THE WEST HAS LONG been familiar with the art of China and Japan, but Korean art remained relatively unknown until the mid-1970's. 
Viewed as a mere imitation of its two neighbors, the culture was generally overlooked. 
One effort to correct this situation is an exhibition of 100 works - ''From the Land of Morning Calm: Korean Art at the Brooklyn Museum.''
The exhibition, which opened recently and continues until Jan. 
4 testifies to the distinctness of that culture, maintained throughout a 5,000-year history of occupations by China and Japan as well as internal feudal turmoil.
The Brooklyn Museum's permanent collection of Korean art is modest in number compared to those of the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston and the Newark Museum. 
But, according to Robert Moes, the Brooklyn Museum's curator of Oriental art, its 250 pieces constitute the most comprehensive Korean art collection in this country, because it includes folk art - an area that is not represented either in Boston or Newark. 
''The Brooklyn is the only American museum that has a collection of folk art - it is seldom seen outside of Korea,'' Mr. Moes said. 
The museum's first Korean holdings were brought over in 1913 by Stewart Culin, then its curator of ethnology. 
But when Mr. Moes came to Brooklyn in 1973, he found no Korean art on display; it was all stored in the basement. 
A year later, part of the Japanese wing was renovated to include a small Korean gallery.
This exhibition, which ranges from scholarly and noble art to folk art, consists of items from the collection chosen as fine and characteristic examples of their genre. 
One-fourth of the installation is devoted to folk art.
Koreans developed an earthy artistic style. 
For many centuries, Korea was a cultural crossroads where Chinese and Japanese traditions converged - a bridge to Japan from mainland Asia. 
But although China was a major influence, the culture of Korea has individuality.
''Unpretentiousness, directness, spontaneity and joy are the qualities that give Korean art its compelling appeal as well as its uniqueness,'' Mr. Moes said. 
''Japanese art and Korean art are as different from Chinese art and from each other as are the languages and personalities of the three peoples.
''One of the charms of Korean art is the use of colors,'' he continued. 
''They use very bright mineral greens with red and blue, and jarring combinations, completely different from the color schemes of Chinese and Japanese works. 
The Koreans' love of colors and naivete comes through, even in the more official forms of art, in spite of the heavy overlay of Chinese style.''
The earliest work in this collection, which ranges from the Bronze-Iron Age to the mid-20th century, is a bronze belt hook from the Han Dynasty (A.D. 108-313). Excavated at the Lo-lang Chinese colony in northwest Korea, it is shaped like a horse, and its full, rounded forms and firm posture show the influence of early Chinese nomads of Central Asia.
The exhibit also contains celadon porcelain of the Koryo Dynasty (918-1392), which was for a long time the only form of Korean art that the Western world admired. 
One example of this work is a 12th-century wine vessel, considered one of the finest pieces of celadon ware in the world. 
The ''Ewer With Lid'' has several notable features: Its lustrous glaze is kingfisher blue, ''a rare color found on only the best 12th-century celadons,'' Mr. Moes said. 
Its round body is incised and carved with lotus petals and ornamental motifs. 
Slips of black were applied on the eyes of a small butterfly which sits on the lotus-flower lid. 
These tiny dots were applied with the point of a brush.
A ceramics industry has always thrived in Korea. 
Celadon porcelain was an official art form, produced for the aristocracy. 
Common people used functional, glazed-stoneware pottery - known as punch'ong, which means light blue - that was plain or simply decorated.
Representative of the refinement of this functional art is a Yi Dynasty (1392-1910) white porcelain storage jar. 
''The energy is extraordinary,'' Mr. Moes said of the 17th-century jar, which is in the exhibit. 
''It is Korean folk ceramics at its best. 
The shape is powerfully round and the simple, iron-brown painted dragon motif is bold. 
The freedom and naivete of the dragons have led some to suggest that they were painted by children.''
During the Yi Dynasty, the technique of Chinese literati (scholarly) paintings was redefined, and artworks depicting scenes of everyday life were popularized in Korea. 
A 17th-century six-panel silk-screen painting, ''Kuo Tzu-i's Banquet,'' is a Korean painting based on Chinese style. 
The figures, composed of thin, even lines, are lavishly filled in with bold, vibrant colors, creating a happy scene.
Folk-art motifs of animism and mythical creatures, based on the ancient beliefs of Korean shamanism, were used as auspicious symbols to bring long life and good fortune. 
Images were boldly drawn and almost abstract, as seen in a 19th-century hanging-scroll painting known as ''Tiger and Magpie.''
Tiger-and-magpie paintings were one of the most popular Korean folk-art themes - the tiger was a symbol to repel evil and the magpie represented good fortune.
According to Mr. Moes, it is in Korean folk art that one finds a pure indigeneous form: direct, volatile and with little pretense or over-refinement. 
A hanging-scroll painting in the exhibition, ''Spirit Shrine'' (1811), exemplifies these characteristics. 
''It has a rugged kind of beauty - colors are so vivid and forms are so direct, full of vitality and wit,'' he said.
Among the antiquities in the show is a fourth-century Kimhae gray stoneware jar with a coil-like surface, which resembles American Indian pottery. 
Also on exhibit are a pair of polychromed wood figures, known as altar attendants, that typify 18th-century folk sculpture with its rich color combinations - harsh juxtaposition of mineral green, orange-red and a bright blue that is uniquely Korean.
