
The cranes in the harbor are mostly idle, the berths for the heavier vessels empty. 
Guards sit drowsily at the gate in the tropical heat. 
Beyond the breakwater, rusty freighters ride at anchor, outnumbered by high-fantailed junks.
A mood of blighted hope has settled over the capital of Hainan Island. 
A backwater for 1,000 years, known best for its pirates and its exiles, the island is on the downside of a short-lived boom. 
In Haikou, where 20th-century luxury had brought little to most people but motorized rickshaws and 40-watt bulbs, there were a few heady months last year when the port became one of the busiest on the China coast.
This spring, the bubble burst. 
Instead of prosperity for the island's 5.8 million people, many still living in homes of mud and thatch, there was scandal - a $1.5 billion web of skulduggery that sent tremors all the way to Peking. 
Nothing like it has struck China since the Communists came to power in 1949. 
It is still not clear how deep the political consequences may run.
 
A Showcase of Reform
The seeds were sown in March 1983, when Deng Xiaoping and his fellow reformers granted the island a range of tax and duty exemptions previously limited to four Special Economic Zones, smaller trade-and-investment areas along the South China Sea. 
By making the island a showcase for Mr. Deng's ''open door'' economic reforms, Peking hoped to end the poverty that had become synonymous with Hainan's name.
New men were drafted from the mainland to manage the anticipated flow of investment in the island''s fisheries and plantations. 
But these required years of development, and the pressure was for quick returns. 
The island's top officials opted for a shortcut. 
Instead of investment, they went into luxury imports - goods that could be resold, at high profit, to China's inland provinces.
The decree granting duty exemptions specified that imports were to be for local use, and warnings came from the provincial capital, Canton, and from Peking. 
But the local men persisted. 
Over a 14-month period, until last March, they authorized the import-for-resale of 89,000 cars and light trucks, nearly 2.9 million color television sets, more than a quarter of a million videotape recorders and 122,000 motorcycles, along with a wealth of cosmetics, food and toys.
 
Mercedes Limousines
By Chinese standards, the scale was grotesque. 
The motor vehicles arriving here and in the harbor at Sanya, a resort town on the island's southern coast, exceeded the total imported by the rest of the country in a year. 
Many were in the luxury class, including 20 Mercedes-Benz limousines that sell for more than $50,000 in Hong Kong. 
Harbors were choked, and navy landing craft from the island's west coast were chartered to ship vehicles to the mainland.
Temptations to join in were overwhelming. 
Among nearly 900 institutions on the island that went into the car business was the island's principal newspaper, The Hainan Ribao, which turned a $1.4 million profit, its first in years, from the resale of 400 Toyota vans.
In the end, 27 of the country's 29 self-governing regions, some of them 2,000 miles away, bought some of the tainted goods, paying as much as 300 percent of the original import price. 
When Peking clamped down, a team of 100 investigators sent to the island discovered that in order to exploit the import loophole, local agents had mounted the biggest black-market currency operation in the country's history.
The agents had raised 4.2 billion yuan in loans from local branches of two Peking banks, equivalent to $1.5 billion at the official rate of exchange. 
They took the money to the mainland, principally to the Special Economic Zone at Shenzhen, outside Hong Kong, where they traded it at black market rates to trading companies granted foreign exchange allowances to import technology for the country's modernization.
 
'Red Packet' Bonuses
When the dust settled, more than 2 billion yuan, equivalent to $700 million, was unrecoverable. 
Much of it had been paid out in special ''red packet'' bonuses to employees at participating institutions, including 800 yuan each for reporters and editors at The Hainan Ribao. 
The island's physical culture commission used its profits to build a stadium. 
Other government agencies commissioned new office buildings.
Only three officials were arrested, among them the chief editor of The Hainan Ribao, Guan Xin, accused of pocketing a 10,000-yuan commission. 
Senior officials who initiated the scheme, pleading that they had made no personal profit, got off lightly. 
For having made ''serious mistakes'' and for having turned ''a deaf ear'' to warnings from higher levels, the two top government officials on the island, Lei Yu and Chen Yuyi, were transferred to lower-ranking jobs. 
The island's party boss, Ao Enxu, received a reprimand.
For many on the island, the scandal was a body blow. 
A settled part of China since the Han Dynasty, 2,000 years ago, it had been neglected by generations of rulers in Peking. 
Even after the Communists took power there was still little effort to improve the economy. 
In some years the island's entire output was worth less than that of some of the more prosperous counties on the mainland.
The injection of money from the import boondoggle raised hopes that matters were turning for the better. 
Instead, a clamp has been placed on all new investments, particularly those involving foreign exchange, while investigators unravel what occurred. 
The effects are visible everywhere in abandoned construction sites, deserted restaurants that were booming last year, and empty rooms where trading companies have disappeared.
 
Rusting Vehicles
Outside Haikou, thousands of new Japanese cars and trucks sit in muddy lots, rusting in the sea air. 
In the hinterland, along sinuous roads that run through thick groves of rubber and papaya trees, signs of the bubble are evident in the Honda motorcycles and Toshiba refrigerators that sit by village homes. 
But mostly the mood is one of disillusion, as though the island must resign itself to becoming a backwater once again.
The malaise is palpable at the island's tourist headquarters in Haikou. 
Plans for a rapid increase in the number of visitors - 24,000 came last year, all but 750 of them overseas Chinese - are in doubt because of a construction halt on many of the 18 new hotels.
Liu Min, deputy manager of the office, admits to feelings of resentment at the officials who allowed it all to happen. 
''After the scandal, investors are hesitating to put money on the island,'' he said. 
''They seem doubtful of the stabilityI of our policies.''
He paused, and added: ''It is all a great pity. 
For generations people on the mainland thought that we on Hainan were like monkeys, strange people who were not like them at all. 
Now we have a lot more persuading to do.''
