
EACH month, 20,000 Russian language copies of Scientific American magazine are snapped up as soon as they hit the streets in the Soviet Union. 
In Peking, the circulation of Discover magazine, published in the United States by Time Inc., is expected to go above 100,000 by 1986. 
In Shanghai 50,000 translated copies of the American publication Science News are printed each week.
The popular science journals of the United States are being circulated to the far corners of the earth as foreign governments, including the Soviet Union and China, recognize their education value in keeping pace with the explosive growth of high technology elsewhere.
Article on popularity of science journals of the United States, which are being circulated to far corners of the earth as foreign governments, including Soviet Union and China, recognize their education value in keeping pace with explosive growth of high technology elsewhere; Jonathan Piel, Scientific American's president, says in capitalist countries, foreign edition is a joint effort with local publisher who arranges for translations, production and distribution; Scientific American appears in Moscow as In the World of Science, with a subtitle indicating that it is a Russian-language version of Scientific American; foreign editions also appear in Chinese, French, German, Italian, Japanese and Spanish; illustrations and photos (M)
Ironically, such foreign language editions are proliferating as the Reagan Administration seeks to stem the overseas flow of high technology information.
Scientific American, for example, is now published in eight foreign languages. 
Jonathan Piel, Scientific American's president and editor, said foreign publishers may occasionally substitute an article of local interest for one that appears too parochial for its audience or that would raise political problems.
For example, the Russian edition, produced by Mir Publishing in Moscow, did not use an article on the controversy over the Reagan Administration's missile-defense program that was published in the United States edition last June. 
This, Mr. Piel suspects, may have been because the article included information on Soviet antisatellite and space surveillance systems whose publication in the Soviet Union might be illegal or might be taken as confirmation of Soviet military strategies.
On the other hand, an article in the August issue entitled ''The Climatic Effects of Nuclear War'' was included when that issue was reproduced in full as the October issue of the Moscow edition. 
The Moscow edition appears monthly under the title, in Russian, ''In the World of Science,'' with a subtitle indicating that it is a Russian-language version of Scientific American.
Foreign editions of the magazine also appear in Chinese, French, German, Italian, Japanese and Spanish, as well as the original English. 
According to Mr. Piel, in capitalist countries the foreign edition is a joint
effort with a local publisher who
arranges for translations, production and distribution. 
In China and the Soviet Union
the arrangement is by contract
with a governmental institution,
such as the Institute for Scientific and Technological Information in Chongqing. 
In each
country articles are farmed out
to bilingual specialists in the
subject of the article and their
translations are then polished
by an editorial board. 
While the quality of color
reproductions in the Soviet edition is not up to the standards of
the American one, it is remarkably good compared to other
Soviet publications. 
In contrast
to the numerous advertisements
in the American edition, advertisements in the Russian edition are chiefly limited to those promoting other products of the Moscow publisher.
On the other hand, the Chinese edition of Discover routinely carries advertisements for such products as Marlboro cigarettes. 
In view of the current Chinese emphasis on catching up with the West, James B. Hays, publisher of Discover, said he hopes that American manufacturers of computers and other such items will also place advertisements.
 
Collapse of Connecticut Bridge
Under the contract between Discover and the Chinese, revenue from such advertisements would go to the American magazine. 
In view of the present trend in China toward free enterprise, Mr. Hays said he also expects Chinese concerns to place advertisements. 
Revenue from them would go to the publisher in Peking.
The Chinese edition of Discover, which sells for the equivalent of 30 cents, first appeared in 1983 and includes high-quality full-color photographs on heavy paper, usually with English text, intermingled with Chinese text and illustrations.
It appears quarterly and the Chinese editors select only part of what is published in the United States edition. 
Articles in recent issues have dealt with such subjects as the collapse of the Mianus River bridge on the Connecticut Turnpike, with diagrams to illustrate the suspension system that failed.
 
Pirated Editions of Science News
Science News, published in Washington by Science Service, appears in a Chinese edition that is essentially pirated, although the magazine cooperates by sending each issue to Peking. 
According to Edward G. Sherburne Jr., the American publisher, the Chinese publisher has available 200 scientists and engineers qualified to translate articles on specific subjects, and the translator is identified at the end of each article.
Science Digest appears in Danish, Italian, Norwegian and Swedish, and until recently a Portuguese edition was published in Brazil. 
Science Digest is published by the Hearst Corporation, some of whose other publications, such as Cosmopolitan, also appear in foreign languages.
Last year, according to John Wrede, president of McGraw-Hill Publications Company, individual issues of four McGraw-Hill magazines were translated into Chinese in a joint venture with China Consultants of Hong Kong. 
They were Aviation Week and Space Technology, Chemical Engineering, Power, and Textile World. 
From 1979 to 1983 the same consortium published in Chinese a journal, American Industrial Report, containing selected articles from American journals.
 
Science 85 in Italian
Before Science 85 was born in 1980 as Science 80 (it changes its title annually) it was approached by an Italian publisher interested in producing an Italian edition. 
According to Allen L. Hammond, the editor of Science 85, the Italian press run is now 40,000. 
It uses photographs and color separations provided by Science 85, which is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science.
In recent years popular science magazines have proliferated in Italy, as they have in the United States, with six started in recent years, Dr. Hammond said. 
Half, however, have already gone out of business, he added.
''We don't want to make investments abroad,'' Dr. Hammond said. 
His magazine grants a license rather than sharing profits. 
A Japanese magazine uses a great deal of material from Science 85, which is also negotiating for two other foreign outlets whose identities have not been disclosed.
Soon after the magazine appeared it discussed with the Chinese a possible edition there, and some issues were translated. 
But, according to Dr. Hammond, it was decided that the content was better suited to a college-educated American audience than to one in China.
Psychology Today has contracted to provide publishers of Dutch, German and Italian magazines with exclusive rights to its articles. 
Earlier arrangements with Japanese and French publishers have ended, although the French still buy a number of articles, according to Patrice D. Horn, the editor.
