
YOU have to say this for ''Tai-Pan'': it's ridiculous - but in a big way. 
It's two hours of Super Comics: Bearded Brutes!
Busty Belles!
Bloody Blades!
Exotic Settings!
Colorful Costumes!
A Beheading!
A Castration!
A Typhoon!
The movie, which opens today at the Criterion Center and other theaters, is taken from James Clavell's best seller of the same name, part of his million-page saga about Western traders in mid-19th-century China.
We meet Tai-Pan, which means, loosely, the boss trader (Bryan Brown in a rolling Scottish accent), as he is being chased out of Canton by the Emperor, who is displeased with foreigners bearing opium. 
Tai-Pan is so strong that he can demolish a boatful of rough-looking Chinese attackers single-handedly, but when it comes to white men, he has trouble one on one. 
Anyhow, he gets the British Government to take over the island of Hong Kong so he can set up shop. 
Yes, he's the man to thank for all that duty-free stuff.
Tai-Pan has two virtuous and handsome sons in their 20's, one by his Glasgow wife, the other by a former Chinese concubine. 
He also has a Chinese mistress about a third his age (Joan Chen, being unbearably cute) who occasionally tries on a Scottish burr and often takes off her clothes. 
And he has a bitter enemy (John Stanton), who has a pathological son on whom he dotes and a ninny of a daughter for whom one of Tai-Pan's handsome, virtuous son falls.
The Cast of Thousands is all dressed up, and there's no end of posing, strutting, milling and glowering. 
There's also a lot of scenery, shot in China, Macao and Hong Kong by the reliable Jack Cardiff. 
As for the acting, the screenplay does not make that easy. 
The lines often seem to have been cribbed from an English-language primer: ''I am proud to be British, but I am also proud to be Chinese.''
''This is not the Mary Sinclair I know.''
Only Norman Rodway as a dissolute but good-natured artist manages to bring a bit of life to his role.
The director, Daryl Duke, shows an infallible talent for accentuating the obvious. 
He is abetted by Maurice Jarre's music, which can be very noisy. 
But not noisy enough to cover lines like ''I'll use the devil to break you and, by God, break you I will.''
 
EXTRAVAGANZA
 
TAI-PAN, directed by Daryl Duke; screenplay by John Briley and Stanley Mann, based on the novel by James Clavell; photographed by Jack Cardiff; edited by Antony Gibbs; music by Maurice Jarre; produced by Raffaella De Laurentiis; released by De Laurentiis Entertainment Group. 
At Criterion Center, Broadway and 45th Street; Manhattan Twin, 59th Street East of Third Avenue; 86th Street Twin, at Lexington Avenue; Movieland Eighth Street, at University Place; Olympia Quad, Broadway at 107th Street. 
Running time: 127 minutes. 
This film is rated R. Tai-Pan...Bryan Brown; May-May...Joan Chen; Brock...John Stanton; Culum...Tim Guinee; Gorth...Bill Leadbitter; Gordon...Russell Wong; Mary...Katy Behean; Tess...Kyra Sedgwick; Shevaun...Janine Turner; Quance...Norman Rodway; Orlov...John Bennett; Vargas...Derrick Branche; Jin Qua...Chang Cheng; Captain Glessing...Patrick Ryecart.
