
FLASHMAN AND THE DRAGON By George MacDonald Fraser. 
320 pp. 
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $16.95.
AT the heart of good history, even the most rarefied and scholarly history, is a naughty little secret: good storytelling. 
A history that isn't implicitly a colorful, twisty yarn is at best fodder for other specialists - and not particularly nourishing fodder at that, for a historian's richest insights generally come when he asks himself what it would have been like to have been there, to have confronted the personalities, conditions and conundrums of which history is made. 
The British novelist and screenwriter George MacDonald Fraser understands all this, but he works from the opposite direction: at the heart of his vivid storytelling is plenty of solid history. 
In creating his justly celebrated Flashman novels, of which the rousing ''Flashman and the Dragon'' is the eighth, he seizes on a historical milieu and then hurls himself into it - or rather he hurls his dastardly alter ego, Sir Harry Flashman V.C., the self-avowed lecher, blackguard and coward whose military and amorous exploits Mr. Fraser has been chronicling since 1969.
Flashman's putative memoirs are set amid the great intrigues and upheavals of the Victorian era, from the Indian Mutiny to the Crimean War, and without Mr. Fraser's scrupulous regard for history they would probably read like third-rate Ian Fleming, meandering accounts of blood and villainy leavened only by the occasional roll in the hay. 
But Mr. Fraser's enthrallment with history is infectious. 
He coaxes its remotest figures to life, footnotes with zeal, corrects his hero's memory when it strays from documented fact (and the ever-so-slight straying adds to the memoirs' verismo), and gives the old soldier an admiring slap on the back wherever his observations prove most pungent.
''Flashman and the Dragon'' sets us down in China at the height of the 14-year Taiping rebellion (1850-64), during which a fanatical Christian army (led by a Cantonese madman whose hallucinations of holy conquest began shortly after he flunked his civil service exams) battled the Manchu dynasty in the bloodiest civil war the world has ever known. 
Flashman enters the fray in customary fashion, enticed by a lissome blonde into running guns to the Taipings. 
Thereafter, we find him lying and lovemaking among scurvy Christian soldiers, Manchu cutthroats and the odd Yangtze River pirate queen; marching northward to Peking alongside Lord Elgin (whose father had stripped Greece of the marbles that bear his name); and playing secret paramour to the Imperial Yi Concubine, who would later rule as the last Empress of China.
But there are longueurs and passages of meretricious vulgarity. 
Mr. Fraser is not above composing paeans to ''the satin gleam of bums, bellies and boobies in the candle-shine.''
And his narrative structure is irritatingly slack. 
His most delicious characters - a concupiscent giantess in a steel collar, for instance, or a portly rebel kingpin whose suave cruelty reminds one of Sydney Greenstreet - no sooner captivate us than they're dropped from the novel forever. 
Mr. Fraser even abandons the fascinating Taipings about two-thirds of the way through, the better to concentrate on their more vaguely sketched (though equally vicious) enemies. 
For readers who, like me, take pleasure in the tapestry of correspondences and cross-references that careful novelists weave, Mr. Fraser's linear doodling looks lazy.
Still, history creates correspondences of its own, and Fraser exploits these beautifully. 
It's great fun to find Chinese Gordon, the future martyr of Khartoum, looting a Manchu palace while cooing, ''What pleasure to look at a gift for a dear one at home, and think of the joy with which it will be received.''
And Mr. Fraser's historical perspective doesn't stop at Victorian celebrity-spotting. 
His vibrant descriptions of life among the Taipings pointedly remind one of the Khmer Rouge, or the Maoist Chinese before them. 
And he uses his portrayal of the Yi Concubine to construct a masterly portrait of eroticism and power. 
As much as Flashman adores her, he is also repulsed by her, by ''the sudden capricious change from hellish scheming to playful mischief, from the cold, unspeakably cruel calculation that meant dreadful death for men she'd never seen, to happy high spirits demanding crackling with cherries, and a tea-leaf pillow because her eyes were tired.''
Flashman himself has deepened. 
True, he still dubs any man with skin darker than the full moon a ''nigger''; and yes, he remains a rat with women, a liar with men and a poltroon perfectly willing to kowtow to savages when braver souls would rather die. 
But one grows fond of Flashman, fond of the delight he takes in the world's absurd propensity to mistake him for an honorable man, fond of the way his cynicism balances with a genuine amazement at the wonders he beholds. 
He is no longer merely the serviceable mock-up of a Victorian cad that he was when Fraser adopted him from his previous incarnation as the bully in Thomas Hughes's ''Tom Brown's School Days.''
The hero of ''Flashman and the Dragon'' is a man of our era, a man who brings a subtle 20th-century sensibility - and a wickedly eloquent tongue - to the beauties and barbarisms of 1860's China. 
He would make a terrific historian.
