
Stanford University's expulsion of a graduate student, on the basis of a secret report by faculty members who investigated his anthropological work in China, has touched off a dispute about academic freedom.
The student, Steven W. Mosher, was dismissed from Stanford's doctoral program by an 11-0 vote of the anthropology department last February, with no reported dissent. 
But the secrecy surrounding the decision and conflicting accounts of the charges against the student have raised questions over whether Stanford had bowed to pressure from Peking to retaliate against Mr. Mosher.
Mr. Mosher, 34 years old, conducted research in a village near Canton in 1979 and 1980. 
He was one of the first American scholars allowed to work in China after normal relations between Peking and Washington were restored.
Stanford University's expulsion of a graduate student, on the basis of a secret report by faculty members who investigated his anthropological work in China, has touched off a dispute about academic freedom.Work Led to Chinese Ban
He gathered a highly unusual collection of local police and government documents that the Chinese consider secret, and he later published an article in a Taiwanese magazine that described a campaign to force many women to undergo abortions as part of China's birth control program.
The Chinese were angered by Mr. Mosher's activities, and soon after his departure, whether by coincidence or not, banned all further field research by American academics. 
In conversations with other American scholars, Chinese officials also began accusing Mr. Mosher of a long list of charges, including spying, smuggling and immoral conduct with a woman. 
Several of the scholars reported the charges to Stanford.
Stanford then set up a three-member investigating committee that reported that Mr. Mosher had engaged in ''illegal and seriously unethical conduct'' in China. 
But the anthropology department has refused to release the 47-page committee report on which the vote to expel Mr. Mosher was based, contending that it ''contains information that may be injurious to innocent parties.''
In a statement this spring responding to critical letters and editorials, Donald Kennedy, president of Stanford, termed the dispute over Mr. Mosher ''one of those unfortunate cases in which we find two important social values in collision.''
He said the university would like to be able to release the information to answer questions about ''possible infringements on academic freedom or about the operation of political influence.''
''But an equally strong set of values attaches to the need for privacy,'' he went on, saying that the information might be ''damaging'' to other people.
A spokesman for the university said Mr. Kennedy had not read the investigating committee's report.
 
Ex-Wife Said to Be a Source
Although members of the anthropology department have offered differing accounts of the charges against Mr. Mosher, several professors said the critical evidence had been supplied by his former wife, Maggie So, a Chinese born in Hong Kong.
In the spring of 1980, after a bitter quarrel over Mr. Mosher's demand for a divorce, Miss So went to the United States Consulate in Canton, where she accused him of bribing local officials to obtain documents, the anthropology professors said. 
She complained that Mr. Mosher's actions were endangering her relatives who still lived in the village, they said.
In early 1982, after the couple were divorced, the professors said, she repeated her accusations to the Stanford investigating committee, calling collect from France. 
One professor said Miss So had also charged Mr. Mosher with financing his operation by smuggling Chinese antiques to Hong Kong, though other professors said this was untrue. 
Miss So's current whereabouts are unknown.
 
'Abolutely False,' He Says
Mr. Mosher derides Miss So's information as ''absolutely false and unsubstantiated slander'' from a ''scorned woman who vowed to ruin me.''
In a telephone interview from Taiwan, where he now lives, Mr. Mosher said he had been dismissed because of Chinese anger over the abortion article and pressure from American China scholars eager to please Peking.
Stanford has denied both charges. 
Clifford R. Barnett, the chairman of the anthropology department, insisted that the department had been fair and had, for example, excluded China specialists, who might have appeared to be subject to pressure from the Chinese Government, from the investigating committee and the departmental vote.
 
Stanford Widely Criticized
The university, however, has been widely criticized for its handling of the case. 
Editorials in The New York Times and The Wall Street Journal questioned the need for secrecy and suggested that Mr. Mosher might have been expelled to mollify the Chinese. 
Arthur Wolf, a Stanford anthropology professor, said all department members had received critical letters from groups that oppose abortion.
Several professors at such universities as Harvard, Brown and Yale, who asked not to be named to avoid cooler relations with colleagues at Stanford, have raised questions about how much authority a university should exercise over students' actions off campus. 
They pointed out that Harvard University, along with some other Ivy League schools, had adopted a policy of limiting disciplinary action to offenses connected with a student's academic record or behavior on campus.
Irving Louis Horowitz, the editor of Society magazine and a professor of political science and sociology at Rutgers University, said there was a serious question whether Stanford could withhold a degree from a student without making public the charges against him.
 
Quality of Work Termed Issue
''The issue is not whether Mosher's a nice man but the quality of his work,'' said Mr. Horowitz. ''I've read his manuscript,'' he added, referring to Mr. Mosher's proposed dissertation, ''and I'd be glad to have him as a graduate student.''
''I think Stanford felt they had to deliver a head to the People's Republic,'' Mr. Horowitz charged. 
''If Mosher had done the same things in the Soviet Union, he'd be a hero.''
He noted that many American academics disliked the Soviet Union but had a favorable attitude toward China.
Thomas Grey, a professor at the Stanford law school and one of the three members of the investigating committee, disputed Mr. Horowitz's contention. 
''We were aware from the beginning that the Sinological community had a bias in this, so we kept them out,'' Mr. Grey said.
''I certainly didn't have any ax to grind,'' he added, ''and it took a lot of time away from my work at the law school.''
As an indication of Stanford's sensitivity, Norman K. Wessels, dean of the School of Humanities and Sciences, has appointed a panel of three scholars, including one from outside Stanford, to hear a threepage grievance Mr. Mosher has filed against the school. 
Mr. Wessels asked the panel to recommend how he should deal with the case and requested a report that could be published.
 
Student Says He May Sue for Libel
Mr. Mosher, who has the investigative committee's report on the charges against him, has not released it. 
He has said he might sue Stanford for libel and that releasing the report himself would undermine his case.
Mr. Barnett, stressing that he had tried to insure a fair investigation, said the department had rejected a number of unsubstantiated accusations made by Peking and by fellow China scholars, including the charge that Mr. Mosher was a spy and that he illegally imported a van into China and gave it to village officials.
Still, Mr. Barnett asserted that some of the Chinese charges, including one that Mr. Mosher traveled without authorization into Guizhou Province, which is closed to foreigners, indicated a pattern of questionable behavior.
One Stanford professor said Miss So's evidence had been corroborated at least in part by Richard Williams, who was the United States Consul General in Canton when Mr. Mosher was in China. 
Mr. Williams, now deputy consul general in Hong Kong, said by telephone that it ''wouldn't be appropriate'' for him to comment on the case.
To support his contention that Stanford bowed to pressure by China scholars, Mr. Mosher cited a letter from Kenneth Prewitt, president of the Social Sciences Research Council in New York, to Stanford after he talked with Chinese officials late in 1981.
The exchange program between China and the United States ''could be harmed if the American scholarly community took no action on what the Chinese regarded as improper behavior by Mosher,'' Mr. Prewitt warned.
Stanford itself has conducted an active exchange program with China.
 
Abortion Campaign Described
In a book, ''Broken Earth: The Rural Chinese,'' to be published in September, Mr. Mosher paints a portrait of apathy, corruption and poverty among China's peasants and village officials.
He also describes, as he did in the article published in Taiwan, a campaign in his village in the spring of 1980 to force abortions on pregnant women who were not permitted to have children under Peking's strict birth control rules. 
At a family planning meeting he attended, he wrote, a local official told the pregnant women, ''None of you have any choice in this matter.''
''The two of you who are eight or nine months pregnant will have a Caesarean,'' Mr. Mosher quotes the official as saying. 
''The rest of you will have a shot that will cause you to abort.''
In a nearby village, Mr. Mosher asserted, a woman seven months pregnant who had no sons had an ordered abortion and was found to have been carrying twin boys.
The woman's husband, Mr. Mosher wrote, went in a fury to the home of the official who had ordered the abortion. 
''Seizing the man's two sons, aged 8 and 10,'' he wrote, ''he heaved them into the courtyard well and then leaped in himself. 
All three drowned.''
The magazine article, published in May 1981, brought accusations from Peking that its content, and its publication in Taiwan, was an attack on China. 
And the head of Mr. Mosher's dissertation committee at Stanford, the anthropologist G. William Skinner, wrote Mr. Mosher that he was ''appalled at your irresponsibility and insensitivity'' in not concealing the identity of the women facing abortions. 
Concealing subjects' identity is a canon of anthropological ethics.
 
Chinese Had Been Complaining
Chinese officials had already been complaining to American scholars about Mr. Mosher, and Stanford decided to set up the investigating committee. 
When it began its work in October 1981, however, it lacked proof. 
The committee head, Prof. Jane F. Collier, wrote to Zhao Fusan, a deputy director of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, appealing for evidence. 
''Much of the information we have received on these charges,'' she said, ''has been indirect and secondhand, consisting of reports by American scholars of complaints made to them by Chinese officials.''
Mr. Zhao's response only reiterated the allegations that had been gossiped about, said Mr. Barnett, the anthropology department chairman.
But in December 1981, Miss So began making her accusations to Stanford, according to several professors familiar with the investigative report.
Mr. Mosher asserts that Miss So had little first-hand knowledge of the village, though she had cousins there, because she visited him infrequently. 
Instead, she was either finishing graduate school at the University of California at Berkeley or working out of Hong Kong for an import-export company.
 
'I Will Ruin You'
''Matters came to a head in March 1980,'' Mr. Mosher said. 
''She came to the village and I said I wanted a divorce.''
''She replied, 'You can't, I will ruin you,' '' Mr. Mosher said. 
About the confidential documents, Mr. Mosher insists he was given access to them legally after three Chinese officials from Peking visited the village shortly before his arrival in 1979 and ordered the local authorities to cooperate with him.
The documents included land registers, household registers and class status registers, giving a social and economic profile of each peasant going back to the 1940's. 
Mr. Mosher also obtained crime reports prepared by the local secret police. 
Scholars say no American had ever gained access to such material.
Mr. Mosher said he did give his Mazda van to the village and turn over to his wife's cousins a house he built. 
But his only other gifts, Mr. Mosher said, were dinner invitations to peasants who helped him.
 
Gifts Held Improper
Professor Barnett concedes that anthropologists routinely provide their research subjects with money or gifts in exchange for their information or time. 
But, without elaborating, he asserted that Mr. Mosher ''went way over the line'' with his gifts.
Before he was expelled, Mr. Mosher had planned to give all his documents to the Hoover Institution on War, Revolution and Peace at Stanford. 
An official of the politically conservative institution said he had already turned over some materials on education and a microfilm file of the local county newspaper, a valuable tool for scholars.
Unfortunately, the film he took was of such poor quality that it is unusable, the official added.
