
From the inside of a 23-foot 3-inch-long blue-black Fleetwood Brougham Cadillac stretch limousine with a 5-liter V-8 engine, vinyl roof, whitewall tires, air-conditioning, push-button (and tinted) windows, color television, AM-FM radio, dual refrigerators, bar stocked with Gorham lead-filled crystal glasses, lace antimacassars on the backs of the red plush seats, driven by a young chauffeur in a new blue uniform with bright brass buttons, the Peoples' Republic of China seems like a different country.
As one pulls out of the Great Wall Sheraton Hotel in Peking, where the Union Car Rental Company has just opened for business with a fleet of 20 new Cadillacs and 26 Mercedes-Benzes, and turns onto North Donghuan Road through the flow of crowded buses, bicycles, donkey carts and curious pedestrians, one feels as if one were hardly in China at all, but rather sitting in the soft seat of a wide-screen movie theater back in the United States watching a travelogue.
As the dusty earthbound world of China slides silently by outside with nothing more than the sound of the air-conditioner inside, it is hard not to be struck once again by the magnitude of change that has been taking place in China these last few years. 
Looking out over the enormous shining metal hull of this so-American car as it navigates through the sea of traffic, the familiar Cadillac emblem on the hood seems like a contemporary version of the figureheads that were once carved on the bows of the great clipper ships that first opened trade between China and the West.
Although one hardly notices the flotillas of limousines that clog the streets of the great cities of the West, it still comes as a shock to see these hallmarks of western capitalism -the first imported entries of their kind in China - in what had once been a heartland of the Communist world.
Now, if one wishes to tour Peking and its environs from the inside of a Cadillac (pronounced in Chinese as ''Kah-dee-lah-kuh'') Fleetwood Brougham limousine, all one has to do is call 5005566, extension 2339, at the Great Wall Sheraton and ask for Comrade Wang Shaojun or Comrade Wu Wei at Union Car Rental's polished red granite counter in the lobby. 
For about $35 they will meet you at the airport, and for $115 a day, they will rent you a limousine from 8 A.M. to 6 P.M. (75 free miles) complete with driver.
''Now that China has adopted a policy of opening to the outside, we want to be able to provide the best car and the best drivers possible for our foreign V.I.P. guests,'' said Wang Shaojun, a young woman in a gray flannel suit who is the company's assistant general manager. 
''To do this, our head, Mr. Yong Yiren, decided to import these cars. 
Our intention was to become something like Avis. 
But, since there are problems in China with foreigners driving their own cars without Chinese licenses, for now we must provide chauffeurs.''
Mr. Yong, a former Shanghai industrialist, is the chairman of the board of the China International Trust and Investment Corporation.
When I ask Miss Wang whether she feels that there are any contradictions between China's previous committment to Spartan egalitarianism and these luxury cars, she replies matter-of-factly:
''Formerly people might not have been able to accept these kinds of things, and might have become angry. 
But now, everything has changed and we're more open-minded. 
We believe China should develop and look to the future on all fronts.''
Since Peking is still far from accustomed to such high-class livery, and since the city has just recently become swamped with taxis, business for Union Car Rental has been somewhat slow in starting. 
As recently as two years ago, when a serious taxi shortage left throngs of angry Western businessmen stranded outside their hotels late for important meetings, a car rental service would have had no trouble finding clients regardless of cost. 
But now, as the city's taxi fleet has suddenly swollen to epic proportions -14,000 in Peking compared to 11,000 medallion cabs in New York, but with rates about three-fourths the cost of the limousines -Union Car Rental finds itself with much unanticipated competition. 
During its first few weeks, it rarely had more than four or five cars rented at a time. 
But with so many foreign businessmen arriving to check out the China market, and with many heads of state paying official visits to Peking, Yong Yiren's gamble may yet pay off handsomely. 
Who can say exactly what it is that kindles a yearning for limousines among contemporary Americans?
Whatever it is, they bring it with them to China.
What C.E.O. of a large Western multinational would feel comfortable arriving for a banquet at the Great Hall of the People in a Toyota cab, much less one of the old mental-hospital-green Shanghai sedans, taxis that still ply the street, albeit in waning numbers?
What foreign businessman who has been trying to hammer out a difficult new joint venture agreement with an immovable Chinese counterpart would not sometimes dream of arriving in a glistening new stateside limo at the No. 2 Peking Steam Turbine Factory in hopes of gaining a little needed face and jolting the comrades into a needed concession?
Or what wealthy tourist might not be tempted by the whimsical idea of throwing a reception for friends with French Champagne on the Great Wall, all arranged by Union Car Rental or Great Wall Sheraton's food and beverage service, or of taking a limousine excursion to the Ming tombs, complete with a catered picnic banquet (about $10 a boxed lunch) all set up and waiting at the tomb of his choice when he arrives?
Indeed, Cadillac limousines are only the most recent addition to a whole new layer of luxury services that are appearing in China, making travel for wealthy foreigners easier and earning dollars and other Western cur-rencies for China at the same time. 
Luxury foreign-managed hotels are opening in most of China's major cities. 
Deluxe German-made train cars are now available to foreigners on certain rail lines. 
Luxury air-conditioned cruise ships have long since been plying the China coast and the Yangtze River. 
Club Med has just opened a resort on Kunming Lake at the Summer Palace outside Peking, and will soon finish a club in Shenzhen across the border from Hong Kong. 
And while deluxe services are not generally available to local Chinese since they are enormously expensive and must be paid for in foreign currency, they are emblematic of the direction in which Chinese society is heading as a whole.
Wondering what had happened to the old notion of self-reliance, which had once been painted on almost every wall, chimney and billboard in China, I asked Miss Wang, the assistant manager, what had become of all the old Red Flag limousines. 
With their wooden dashboards, curtains in the back windows and chrome characters for Red Flag (Hongqi) written after Mao's own hand emblazoned on the rear trunks, these 100 percent Chinese-made automobiles had once plied the streets of Peking without competition from foreign interlopers.
''Red Flag cars are somewhat backward,'' she replied unenthusiastically. 
Then, brightening a little, she continued: ''They have stopped making the old models. 
But I hear that they are now trying to design something more up to date which will include mechanical parts from your Lincoln company.''
Like so many other hallmarks of Maoist China, these Red Flag limousines will now doubtless vanish almost as fast as portraits of the chairman himself. 
For, alongside the newly arrived Fleetwoods and the Mercedes, these clunky-looking automotive behemoths from China's era of socialist self-reliance do indeed look like throwbacks to another age.
While Mao still lived, I used to watch curiously as high-ranking officials were whisked, shrouded behind curtains, through the then nearly car-less streets of Peking to what then seemed to me to be mysterious and forbidden destinations. 
In a land that was supposed to have purged itself of all distinctions of rank and privilege, these limousines were among the few visible if anomalous symbols of a social privilege that endured even through the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution.
Indeed, as these strangely forboding conveyances sped by on the street, one could even then feel a gust of imperial China blow past. 
The hauteur of those modern-day officials -their Maoist slogans notwithstanding - harkened back to a time when high officials and members of the imperial family made no pretense of ''being at one with the masses,'' and would pass through the streets of their capital in curtained sedan chairs.
One night this spring, as I took a short cut home through the underground parking garage of the Great Wall Sheraton Hotel, I happened upon three or four of these old socialist war horses parked off to the side on slowly deflating tires. 
As I passed, I saw that these relics of an earlier time were so covered with the dust that blows down each spring onto Peking from the steppes of Mongolia, they seemed almost to have become interred in their parking spots. 
And when I came up from underground to the front of the hotel, where the Union Car Rental's fleet of new Cadillacs stood ostentatiously parked near a modern fountain, I felt a little like an archeologist who has just emerged from an ancient tomb where he has happened upon the ceremonial relics of a culture that was all but lost. 
That night, as I slept eight floors above the abandoned cars, I dreamed of home in California and the giant condors, which like Red Flag limousines are also an ungainly but very native species that has been brought to the edge of extinction by evolutionary pressure from the modernizing world around them. 
And in my dream I saw several battered old condors silhouetted against the cobalt blue sky staring down from their thatched nests in tall pine trees onto gleaming rows of predatory Cadillac Fleetwoods below.
In the morning, when I went downstairs to have a cup of imported coffee and a croissant with Swiss jam, this image still burned in my mind like the outline of a light in the dark long after it has been turned off. 
When I left the hotel, I found myself drawn back once again to the underground parking garage where the Red Flags still rested under their coats of dust like mothballed warships. 
Whatever it is in human beings that makes us lament the passage of time - as things may be improving around us - was at work on me.
Besides the exhilaration I usually felt at watching China come alive, I now also felt a sense of wistfulness over how rapidly this country, which I had first come to know over 10 years ago, was changing. 
And as I drove away from the ultramodern hotel in a new Japanese taxi through streets newly choked with traffic past scores of new high rise buildings, I knew that my state of mind was not only caused by the fact that Red Flag limousines were vanishing into history, but also that China itself was being transformed; that just as the country had frequently passed from one dynastic period to another during ancient times, so now it was irrevocably passing from one era into another.
