
Senator Henry M. Jackson said today that Chinese-American relations were improving at a pace that could soon bring an exchange of visits between President Reagan and Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang.
Mr. Jackson, Democrat of Washington, commented after a meeting with Deng Xiaoping, China's paramount leader. 
The Senator, greeting Mr. Deng with a bear hug in the Great Hall of the People, met with him for more than two hours.
Sen Henry Jackson, in Peking, says improving Chinese-US relations could lead to exchange of visits between Pres Reagan and Prime Min Zhao Ziyang; meets with Deng Xiaoping, who gives Jackson bear hug; illustration; delivers Reagan letter (S)
''In the recent period there is some improvement in our bilateral relations and I'm hopeful of that,'' Mr. Deng was later quoted as saying.
Senator Jackson delivered a letter from President Reagan expressing a desire to continue to improve relations and Mr. Deng said, ''We welcome this,'' according to the official New China News Agency.
Chinese ties with the United States, strained since Mr. Reagan was elected, have improved in the last three months and ''the opportunity is now present to expand our relations,'' Senator Jackson said at a news conference.
''I believe we have weathered a very difficult period,'' he said.
When questioned about the possibility of a visit by Prime Minister Zhao to the United States, Senator Jackson said, ''I think things are improving for that visit and some time after the first of the year, hopefully, the Premier's visit would be reciprocated by the President of the United States.''
 
'Movement Is Favorable'
The Senator said no decision has been made, but the ''movement is favorable'' for a Zhao visit in November or December. 
Mr. Jackson said a Reagan trip to Peking could probably come in early 1984 before United States election campaigns intensify.
Mr. Zhao accepted a Reagan invitation last year, but the trip was shelved as relations faltered over continuing United States arms sales to Taiwan and Chinese complaints that Washington was holding back purchases of United States technology.
Mr. Jackson, who has had about 20 hours of talks with Chinese officials since his arrival Aug. 
15, said Taiwan and technology transfers were still major issues, although Washington recently upgraded China's status as a purchaser.
