
South Korea, whose Government is as fiercely anti-Communist as any to be found, has mounted a full-scale diplomatic offensive to improve relations with Soviet-bloc countries and China.
The atmosphere in Seoul was almost giddy last week when officials announced that Hungary would set up a trade office here next month to complement a South Korean office that opened in Budapest in mid-December. 
Poland, Yugoslavia and East Germany are all considering similar operations.
While the level of South Korean trade with the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe is small - $240 million last year - it is growing fast. 
And with the Soviet bloc saying it will take part in the Olympic Games here this year, Government leaders and exporters here talk expansively about business, tourism and cultural opportunities.
Quietly, South Korean conglomerates like Samsung are also exploring investment possibilities in Vietnam. 
Meanwhile, officials have trained their sights more sharply on their most important target, China.
 
China Trade Is Strong
They have stopped whispering about the size of their trade with China, long an open secret, and brag that it exceeded $1.5 billion last year and should top $2 billion in 1988. 
That, they say, is more than twice the level of China's trade with its ally, North Korea.
Perhaps more important, some officials say, hope now exists for eventual diplomatic relations with Beijing, an ideological enemy since the two countries fought in the Korean War.
''It is only a matter of time,'' said Park Soo Gil, an Assistant Foreign Minister. 
''North Korea is the only factor standing in the way.''
The South's long-stated objective, opposed by the Government in Pyongyang, is for ''cross-recognition'' by the four major powers in the region. 
This means formal acceptance of the North by the United States and Japan, and recognition of the South by the Soviet Union and China.
 
Normal Chinese Relations
During South Korea's recent presidential election, Roh Tae Woo, the victorious ruling party candidate, predicted that normal relations with China would be arranged during his five-year term. 
But some experts caution against over-shooting the mark.
''I'd rather de-emphasize the political meaning in our short-term dealings with China,'' said Kim Dal Choong, who heads an institute on East-West relations at Yonsei University.
The rush to deal with Communist nations has given some South Koreans pause on ideological grounds. 
Seoul has no formal relations with any Communist country, and has preached the evils of Communism insistently.
Park Young Jin, a senior Education Ministry official, has said hat textbooks may now have to be revised to give students ''a true picture of Communist societies.''
 
North Korean Isolation
Such considerations aside, officials say that they now have an opportunity both to isolate North Korea from its natural allies and to reduce a bit the North Korean dependence on the United States, which absorbs 40 percent of this country's exports.
Seoul's emphasis comes at a time of rising tensions with Washington over demands that South Korea open its markets wider to American beef, tobacco and insurance companies.
Resentments deepened last week when the Reagan Administration announced that it would end special trade preferences for South Korea and other powerful East Asian economies. 
Although the action came as no surprise here, it reinforced a conviction among Koreans that they must do more to diversify their markets.
Some South Koreans worry that if North Korea feels it has been painted into a corner, it might be more prepared to consider terrorism to disrupt the Olympics. 
But Mr. Park said the South's diplomatic and economic advantages - the North has the military edge - could force Pyongyang to adopt accommodating policies.
Correction
Because of an editing error, an article on Feb. 
5 about a South Korean effort to improve relations with Communist countries misstated the trade relationship between the Koreas and the United States. 
It is South Korea, not North Korea, that depends heavily on trade with the United States.
Correction-Date: February 25, 1988, Thursday, Late City Final Edition
