
Two Mercedes-Benz cars and a British Ford of recent vintage were parked in the enclosed courtyard of the wellmaintained villa in what was once the French Concession in this most cosmopolitan of Chinese cities, and the two men who were seated in armchairs in what was once the drawing room looked as if they belonged there, or in the rear seats of the cars, despite their regulation Mao suits.
There are no privately owned automobiles in China. 
They and the villa have been assigned to the Shanghai Federation of Commerce and Industries, an anachronism that unites the surviving former capitalists of China's capital of industry, commerce and banking.
Now that China pursues its program of ''the four modernizations,'' the former men of means have been recalled from the menial jobs that they had been given to meet foreign businessmen and potential investors and to employ their once-scorned skills to attract badly needed foreign capital and technology.
Henry Kamm profiles Chinese construction company's general manager and chairman, Han Zhiming, and Liu Jingji respectively
It is not only their skills that have been enlisted. 
To advance ''the four modernizations,'' 1,300 members of the federation have ''invested'' their private fortunes in the Patriotic Construction Company, which was formed in 1979.
 
'Contribution' Proposed
''After the 'Gang of Four' was smashed, a lot of our money was returned to us with interest,'' said Han Zhiming, the 69-year-old deputy general manager of Patriotic Construction. 
''There was no way of spending it. 
We suggested that we could make a contribution to the 'four modernizations.'
We could contribute to socialist construction.
''We have relatives abroad and in Hong Kong and Macao,'' he explained. 
''They could help us introduce new equipment and technology to China.''
By voluntary contributions, Mr. Han asserted, the company raised 57 million yuan, the equivalent of about $38 million. 
Mr. Han, the former owner of a cotton mill, contributed 400,000 yuan, or about $268,00, as did the other deputy general manager present, Zhang Chensheng, once the owner of a cigarette factory.
The two men of wealth - with which they can buy very little because necessities are rationed and luxuries are available only for foreign currency - said they were far from being the biggest ''investors.''
Chen Yuaching and Liu Jingji, both former textile industrialists, invested 2 million yuan each. 
Mr. Liu is the company's chairman and managing director.
 
Shareholders' Return Is Limited
The allocations are investments in name only, because no matter how the affairs of the Patriotic Construction Company may flourish, its shareholders receive only the 6.84 percent annual interest that the funds would earn if they were left in bank accounts. 
In five years, the shareholders can decide whether to withdraw their capital and return it to the bank or commit it for five more years.
The surviving personal fortunes derive from the properties that the men operated until the Communist takeover of the Government in 1949. 
Until the Cultural Revolution of 1966, the former capitalists continued to draw interest on the equities that the Government granted them after their concerns were taken over. 
Payments stopped in 1966 and bank accounts were confiscated, to be returned beginning in 1978.
Mr. Han and Mr. Zhang conceded with embarrassment in the presence of the officials who monitored the interview that the total expropriation of their equities in 1966 had not been undone by China's present leadership.
''After 1967, there was no more exploitation by capitalists,'' said Mr. Zhang. ''The enterprises were transformed through socialism.''
Mr. Zhang, a large man who wears gold-rimmed, tinted glasses, has a son who has been studying engineering at Ohio State University since last year, a rare privilege for a person of ''capitalist'' family.
 
Company Will Build Apartments
The Patriotic Construction Company's principal project is to be two 15-story apartment towers containing 180 flats, to be sold to overseas Chinese who would like to provide for their families here. 
The housing shortage is Shanghai's principal social problem. 
Piledriving for the foundations has been completed, but as is the case with many capital projects in China, construction appears to have been stretched out and the target of completion by the end of next year seems unlikely to be met.
The company also plans to build houses for former capitalists disposessed in the past. 
It has invested in 29 neighborhood projects in the food and service sectors, aimed at providing work for the masses of young people returning from banishment to the countryside during the Cultural Revolution. 
These people have been added to the ranks of youths finishing high school who can find neither employment nor access to higher education.
The two former capitalists said that they had learned that exploitation of the many by the few had been wrong and declared that they had come to believe that Communism was China's best hope. 
Asked if he was a member of the Communist Party, Mr. Zhang said: ''The requirements are high, and I am not under consideration.''
