
Lu Guiying, a portly woman in a white apron and cap, stood glumly outside her restaurant, her arms folded across her chest.
''This week, all of a sudden, business is down,'' she said. 
''We used to take in 1,000 yuan a day; now we're making less than 500,'' a sum equivalent to $135. 
''People think they're going to get sick here.''
Everywhere in Shanghai, life is stalling as this city of 12 million confronts its worst epidemic of hepatitis-A, an inflammation of the liver, in more than a decade. 
City officials report that as many as 20,000 people may have contracted the illness and the numbers are expected to grow.
''Some people predicted that there would be a problem with hepatitis near spring festival,'' said Dr. Yan Zuyan, referring to the approach of the Chinese Lunar New Year on Feb. 
17. ''Nobody thought it would be this serious.''
The English-language China Daily described the rapid spread of the disease as causing ''public panic.''
 
Hospital Wards Are Overflowing
Hospitals in Shanghai are filled with patients, with wards overflowing and beds jammed into hallways and corners. 
Schools, now empty of children for the spring festival holiday, have been converted into isolation wards for thousands of bedridden patients. 
Pharmacies have exhausted their supplies of banlangen, an herbal cold remedy.
Dr. Yan, a pediatrician who is director of the No. 4 People's Hospital here, said the spread of the disease had been spurred by Shanghai's tremendous overcrowding. 
The disease, while not fatal, is debilitating and highly infectious. 
Victims often lose their appetite and taste, suffer nausea and have pain in the liver area.
''The housing problem here is very serious,'' Dr. Yan said. 
''One thing we try to do is isolate patients at home. 
But many people live in crowded conditions and this is very difficult.''
Like all large Chinese cities, Shanghai suffers from an acute shortage of housing so that often three generations of a family crowd into a single one- or two-room apartment.
The outbreak of hepatitis-A began two weeks ago, Dr. Yan said, when shipments of what are now believed to have been contaminated clams arrived in Shanghai from nearby clam flats east of the city.
''About 90 percent of the patients we have identified have eaten this sort of shellfish,'' Dr. Yan said. 
Why the clams were contaminated remains unclear, according to Dr. Yan and an official from the municipal health bureau. 
However, it is common practice in China for cities and towns to dump raw sewage into rivers and harbors. 
''People like shellfish in this city and this province,'' Dr. Yan said. 
''They only dip the clams in boiling water for a moment, not really long enough to kill the virus.''
 
Many Lack Immunity
The disease has spread rapidly, Dr. Yan said, because much of the city's younger population does not have an immunity to the virus.
People who once have hepatitis-A, he explained, cannot get it again. 
They are not immune to the more serious hepatitis-B, which is caused by a different virus.
''There was an outbreak of hepatitis five years ago,'' Dr. Yan said, ''but it was not very severe and not many people were infected and got immune.''
At his 350-bed hospital, Dr. Yan showed a visitor an obstetrics ward that had been transformed into an isolation area for hepatitis patients.
Patients, bundled in layers of sweaters and jackets against the leaden cold that hung in the unheated building, lay quietly on iron-framed cots in the hall of the ward. 
Nurses and doctors wrapped in surgical gowns and masks moved among the beds quickly, dispensing a bit of medicine here and there.
''There are no bedside tables,'' Dr. Yan pointed out. 
''Conditions are not so ideal here. 
We are very crowded.''
In the city itself, residents are more wary of what they eat, what they touch. 
An official from the city health bureau, Zhang Zhuen, declined to shake a visitor's hand. 
''I used to shake the hands of foreigners,'' he said. 
''Now I don't think it's a good idea.''
Mr. Zhang said the city had mounted a ''propaganda'' campaign to encourage citizens to wash their hands frequently and not to eat shell fish. 
''We destroyed all the clams that came in once we realized they were one of the causes,'' he said. 
''But people still must be careful.''
''We've told people to pay attention to personal sanitation,'' he said. 
''We've also said that people should not visit their relatives because the disease is very infectious. 
And we've told people to be careful to clean their cooking utensils.''
Shanghai's water and sewer system, often rudimentary in many areas, is more than 60 years old in the central part of the city and clean drinking water is sometimes hard to find.
According to the city's health statistics, the illness has largely been confined to young adults in their 20's and 30's, Mr. Zhang said. 
For the most part, he said, older people have developed immunities from previous epidemics and younger children tend not to eat shellfish, thus reducing their exposure to the virus.
 
Medicine Is Sold Out
At the Ruijin herbal pharmacy downtown, a pharmacist said that there were no supplies of banlangen to be had in Shanghai. 
''We're completely sold out,'' she said, leaning on a counter displaying various types of ginseng.
Down the street, Wang Yafang emerged from a store with her two daughters, 7 and 8 years old. 
''I'm not too worried,'' she said. 
''I gave the children banlangen and they're all right.''
At the restaurant, Mrs. Lu surveyed the empty tables as other workers drifted onto the street to warm themselves in the sun.
''We can only try our best,'' she said. 
''One of our workers caught hepatitis and is in the hospital. 
We had inspectors from the city come in to check the restaurant. 
I've never seen a situation like this before. 
But I'm not worried for myself. 
Not at all.''
A young man also in a white apron eavesdropping on her comments laughed. 
''Of course she won't get sick,'' he said. 
''Look how chubby she is. 
She's too healthy.''
