
INSTEAD of the traditional harvest festival so customary in New England in autumn, a procession of dancers garbed as ferocious Chinese lions will converge upon the Sharon Town Green on Saturday. 
Their huge papier-mache heads bobbing up and down, they will dance to the clamor of bells, gongs and whistles that marks the beginning of a daylong festival promoting the cultures of Asia and Indonesia.
The festival will feature Indonesian dances, Indian shadow puppet shows, Asian food and crafts booths and demonstrations of Chinese cooking. 
The event is sponsored by the East-West Fusion Theater of Sharon, with a matching grant from the State Commission on the Arts.
Although the East-West Fusion Theater has toured nationally and in Canada since it was formed four years ago, the festival will mark the group's formal debut in its hometown, said the company's artistic director, Teviot Fairservis Pourchot, an actress.
''Because we do not have our own performing facility, many of our events have had to be private,'' she said. 
''This is a way for us to introduce our work publicly and share it with the local community.''
Based at the Center for East-West Studies, a nonprofit organization based in Sharon, the group brings together artists and scholars from around the world to create an international form of theater based on the traditions of Asia and other non-Western cultures. 
The company uses acting, dance, music, masks, puppetry and techniques of Asian theater.
In addition to mounting performances, the East-West center is a resource facility for people studying China, India, Indonesia, Japan, the Pacific Islands and the Soviet Union, Mrs. Pourchot said.
''We're hoping the festival will make people aware of the center and the resources we have here,'' she said. 
''We have a library, a costume collection and a collection of artifacts, which are available for research. 
For us, it's really important to be seen as that kind of a resource.''
Mrs. Pourchot said she was also hoping the event would encourage people who have lived abroad to share their experiences. 
Among the area residents who will be on hand are the authors Charlotte and Harrison Salisbury, both of Taconic, who have traveled extensively in China and written about their experiences. 
They will give the keynote address at noon, Mrs. Pourchot said.
Throughout the day, there will be many exhibits on the grounds of the Sharon Playhouse, including demonstrations of the Japanese tea ceremony, shiatsu message, karate and Asian costumes. 
Chinese cooking will be demonstrated by Danny Lee, a master Chinese chef at New York's Culinary Institute of America. 
Food booths will also sell Chinese, Indian and other international delicacies, and there will be a tea tasting, pottery and paper-folding demonstrations.
Also throughout the day and into the night, a number of theatrical performances will feature international artists, including the Chinese opera performer Kuang-yu Fong of Taiwan, the Indonesian dance expert Deena Burton and the Music for Homemade Instruments Ensemble, a New York-based ensemble.
The members of the East-West Fusion Theater will also present plays, including a comic Chinese opera, ''The Black Bowl''; ''Animal Tales of India,'' Indian folktales staged with authentic costumes and masks; ''The Ramayana,'' the famous Hindu love story of Prince Rama performed in West Javanese masked dance; ''The (Balinese) Frog Prince,'' the story of a frog who turns into a prince, and ''Traditional Japanese Comedies and New Fusions,'' which includes comic plays and dances from the Kabuki and Kyogen repertories.
At dusk, there will be a candlelight procession and prayer for peace and in the evening, a performance of ''The Magic of the Orient,'' a tribute featuring authentic dance and costume, Mrs. Pourchot said.
The festival will coincide with other exhibits on display at nearby sites, including ''Faces of China,'' an exhibition by the photographer Tom Zetterstrom now on display at the Hotchkiss Library, and ''Contemporary Asian Artists,'' an exhibit of work by Japanese and Korean artists on display at the Sharon Library.
Most of the events will be held at the Sharon Playhouse and its grounds, with the opening and candlelight processions on the Town Green.
In addition to the Saturday festivities, East-West Fusion Theater will present ''The Orient Express,'' four plays from the four cultures, on Oct. 
12 and 13 at 3 P.M. at the playhouse. 
In the event of inclement weather, all activities will take place in the Sharon Center School.
Admission to the exhibits is free, but performances are $5 each. 
A ''passport'' ticket entitling the bearer to all the performances except ''The Magic of the Orient'' is $12.50 for adults, $10 for the elderly and $5 for children. 
Families may purchase a special ticket for $30, which entitles admission to two adults and up to four children.
For further information and tickets, write East-West Fusion Theater, P.O. 
Box 141, Sharon, Conn., 06069 or call 364-5220.
