
Each morning just before 10, every day of the year, four blocks of Kowloon along Canton Road are transformed into a street lined with jade, a path called the Jade Market by Hong Kong's Western population but referred to by the Chinese as Jade Street. 
For a shopper it is a seductive wonderland of green temptation with more than 300 dealers sitting along Canton Road from Jordan Road to Saigon Street, under jerry-built awnings or large umbrellas, on camp chairs or on their haunches, unfolding tables, cloths or racks of red satin- backed cards all displaying jade rings, necklaces, bracelets, pendants and carvings. 
One man sits on a curb in front of a towel on which are piled stacks of black-green jade carvings; another perches on a padded folding chair behind a glass-covered display case filled with what he swears is nothing but the finest of deep apple-green imperial jade. 
A woman ambles up the street with several dozen red, white and green jade necklaces suspended from her wrist and forearm, stopping whenever someone shows interest. 
Children watch the jade while their parents go off for tea or some food in one of the two narrow alleys that cut through Jade Street, Ningpo Street and Nanking Street.
In the street, ignoring the traffic, are other jade peddlers, dealing among themselves with a ritual so old that nobody can remember its origin. 
They bargain with their hands, but their hands are under cloths, white or black. 
One man or woman will hold a piece of jade in one hand while the other hand is hidden. 
The prospective buyer will put his hand under the cloth. 
Then they will speak. 
The seller might say ''yat'' and extend three fingers. 
Yat designates a unit of 100 and three fingers means three units, or $300. 
The buyer will grab, perhaps, only one finger, which means he is offering $100. 
And so it goes, hands under cloths with units of 1,000 designated by ''teo,'' units of 10,000 by ''tso.''
Jade Street is the world's only open-air bazaar devoted entirely to the gem that the Chinese regard with some degree of veneration. 
A beautiful woman is often called a woman of jade, and a handsome man is said to have a countenance of jade. 
Every Chinese baby is presented either with a tiny jade wrist bracelet or with a ''pi,'' a circular, smoothly polished piece of jade with a hole in the center, a tiny doughnut of jade, if you will, that has been for centuries a symbol of heaven. 
Confucius is said to have suggested that jade's smoothness represented gentleness of character, its varying colors and texture wisdom and nobility, its solidity for one's duty towards one's neighbor.
Jade ornaments as symbols of wealth, rank and power were commonplace in the imperial courts of China and the emperor's accouterment, his scepter, sword, throne and altar, even his sandals, were usually of highly prized, ornately carved jade. 
A flat stone, shaped octagonally, with a hole in its center, is often worn as a good luck talisman, to ward off evil spirits
Its mythology notwithstanding, jade is a highly regarded stone among all people, and to shop for it in the Jade Street bazaar is an extraordinary experience.
You cannot help but be goggle-eyed as you watch the jade sellers unpack their stones and ornaments from satchels, schoolbags, cookie tins, food containers and plastic bags, and spread them out for inspection.
Know a bit about jade before you go, resolve to bargain hard and long mainly because that is more than half the fun of shopping in Jade Street, and make up your mind that you will spend no more than $20 or $25, and you will have a rewarding time. 
Bear in mind that some of the imperial green jade might be chemically color-enhanced (genuine imperial green jade is the most desirable), that the men and women who sell jade know a good deal more than you do and will give away nothing.
A bit about jade: What is known as jade is either jadeite or nephrite. 
Jadeite comes in differing grades of red, called ''fei'' by the Chinese, or green, called ''tsui.''
Green is most highly prized; when it is deep apple, pure in color, with no traces of either deep bottle green or white, and almost transparent, it is considered to be the finest. 
It is not unusual for a tiny stone of imperial jade to sell for as much as $10,000.
Nephrite, which can be pale green but is mostly creamy white or off-white, is often called mutton fat and is best for carving. 
But jade can come in shades of brown, rust, almost yellow, peach, almost blue, gray and black. 
Some black and gray jade, deeply carved into bracelets are highly thought of by the Chinese, and often family members who have died are buried with jade bracelets of these colors on their wrists. 
Such pieces are called, appropriately, Dead Jade.
The traders along Jade Street will tell you ''Chinese jade, Chinese jade,'' but that is usually jade from Burma that has been imported into the People's Republic, carved, then shipped to Hong Kong for sale. 
North Burma remains the source of most fine jade.
Perhaps more than any other jewelry stone, jade is sold most often on esthetic appeal alone. 
Its marbled texture; the way green will blend into black or into white; whether the dragon and phoenix design, the yin and the yang of Chinese culture, are carved to satisfaction; whether carving is new or old, or merely looks old, all of these enter into one's purchase. 
And so should they for the tourist, the casual buyer.
As you wander along the narrow sidewalk, with jade hawkers both right and left, look for what pleases. 
Think what would look best hanging from a gold chain around your neck, what would look best sitting on a carved teak stand on your mantel, then either make an offer or ask a price and make a counter-offer. 
That is when the fun begins. 
I remember seeing what I considered a nice piece of carved jade, of a light green with some dark mottling. 
I asked the price.
''Three hundred fifty dollars, Hong Kong,'' replied the seller. 
This was the equivalent of about $50 in American money.
''No,'' I said, and began walking away.
''How much?'' called the seller.
''One hundred,'' I called back.
''No,'' he said, shaking his head with great sadness.
''Okay,'' I said and continued walking.
''OKAY!'' he called after me.
Back I went and bought the carving for $100 Hong Kong, a little more than $15 U.S. 
And I was satisfied. 
Did I get a bargain?
I thought so. 
Did the seller make a profit?
I'm sure he did. 
Were we both happy?
I'm pretty sure we were. 
And that is the essence of shopping along Jade Street.
 
How to find the Jade Market
That part of Canton Road called Jade Market or Street is convenient from both sides of Victoria Harbor. 
From Hong Kong island the Jordan Road Ferry (fare about 10 cents) will deposit you about two blocks from the intersection of Jordan and Canton roads. 
From the Kowloon Star Ferry Terminal the No. 9 Bus (fare about 9 cents) will drop you off at the corner. 
A taxi will cost about 65 cents and all you need do is tell the driver Jade Street. 
The new Hong Kong subway will also take you there for about 30 cents. 
Get off at the Jordan Road station and Jade Street is just at the top of the stairway. 
The market is open formally from 10 A.M. until 2 P.M. daily. 
But you can begin shopping as early as 9:30. 
By 2 P.M., however, most of the dealers have finished for the day and are in the teahouses.F. 
F.
