
Joao Rodriguez, a Portuguese missionary, wrote of finding a varnish of unsurpassed quality, like ''smooth shiny ivory,'' applied to everything from jewelry to armor in an island kingdom east of China during the 16th century. 
Early traders, dazzled by this rare lustrous coating that was produced from the sap of an indigenous tree of the sumac family, christened it with the name of the land of its origin -Japan.
Today fine lacquerware can be seen in shops all over Japan and in museum collections in Tokyo. 
It's also possible, and rewarding, to visit the handful of rural towns, like Wajima on Japan's western coast, where old networks of small factories and craftsmen survive.
In an age of plastic, few younger Japanese use wooden lacquerware in daily life. 
But among older and wealthier Japanese - for whom the warmth and glow of a simple soup bowl can evoke deep cultural values - the mystique lives on.
One connoisseur is Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone, whose gift to the visiting President Reagan in 1983 was a lacquer chest of drawers embossed with a powdered gold maki-e, or sprinkled painting, of butterflies. 
It was produced in Wajima, a small town on the Sea of Japan and the home of Japan's most renowned regional variety of lacquer.
When he returned from his mission to open trade with Japan in 1854, Commodore Matthew C. Perry brought lacquer gifts for another President, Millard Fillmore, and noted in his report that it was ''one art in which they excel the world.''
Perry added, ''It is said, however, that the best specimens are never sent out of the kingdom.''
The oldest known Japanese lacquer, found on wooden implements excavated near Fukui on the coast of the Sea of Japan, dates from 2400 B.C. Buddhist and feudal artisans began producing sophisticated decorative styles around A.D. 500, copying Chinese and Korean masters at first, then inventing their own techniques, most notably gold and silver maki-e.
By the time the priest Rodriguez arrived in Japan, lacquer was ''the most universal art in the kingdom,'' applied to tableware, helmets, beaded armor, chopsticks, temple art, furniture and miniature boxes, called inryo, which were hung from sashes.
The coating adhered to wood, metal, rock, bamboo and even stiffened linen to produce feather-light teacups. 
The aging of milky crude lacquer produced a black tint. 
Chemicals were added to make other colors - red, yellow, green and Prussian blue. 
Embossing, etching and inlays of ivory, shell, metal and stone evolved.
When exported, gaudy Japanese lacquer became the rage in the salons of Europe and America. 
Marie Antoinette, for one, amassed a huge collection.
The industrial revolution and the end of feudalism in the mid-19th century brought an end to the golden age of lacquer. 
Export markets were soon flooded with cheap mass-produced lacquer products.
Today the industry is segmented. 
Lacquered plastic, said to account for $20 million worth of the lacquer business a year, has replaced wooden lacquerware on most Japanese tables.
As for traditional lacquer, there are still some masters, like Gonroku Matsuda, 89 and deemed a living national treasure, who create works rarely seen in public for an elite clientele. 
Mr. Matsuda, who lives in Tokyo, combines the skills of woodworker, embellisher and painter to fashion decorations and furniture fit for the Imperial household. 
His powdered gold maki-e and glossy gold-flecked nashi-ji, or pear-skin, surfaces are extraordinary.
A walk through the National Museum of Modern Art in Tokyo provides a primer on the tradition Mr. Matsuda represents. 
A Matsuda crane poised on gold foil legs seems to rise from a shimmering thicket of willow leaves on a decorative box. 
Its wings are formed of bits of varnished quail eggshell. 
On a glossy black table large molten birds swirl in a golden sun.
''Properly made,'' Mr. Matsuda has said, ''a lacquer article will last almost forever.''
Other craftsmen, found mostly in remote areas of northern and central Japan and along the Sea of Japan, produce traditional lacquer art - on a more modest scale - that can be used as well as admired. 
The best known of these towns is Wajima, which produces a durable red and black lacquer called Wajimanuri as well as fine designs of maki-e and chinkin, etchings usually filled with gold powder or foil. 
Kazuo Yamagishi, 30, one of a younger generation of Wajima craftsmen, compares the patina of the lacquer process to the effect of severe weather on the people and landscape of the Noto Peninsula, a curl of land in the turbulent Sea of Japan where Wajima sits. 
He doubts whether outsiders can fully appreciate his art's subtlety.
''The most common question Westerners ask is why do you have to paint it so much?''
Mr. Yamagishi said recently. 
''You must live in Japan and experience the seasons to understand the art of lacquer,'' he added.
Mr. Yamagishi makes boxes and tea containers with chinkin designs in the home of his father, Mori, a bowl latherer, whose shop is near the churning Sea of Japan. 
In winter, snow drifts surround it. 
During the typhoon season, waves splash over the sea wall across the street.
For Mr. Yamagishi, the difficult technique and muted beauty of fine lacquer embody traditional values that are still a way of life in this wind-buffeted region. 
He etches common road-side grasses and flowers with steel styluses on polished lacquer. 
It's a modern touch that sets his chinkin work apart from more traditional depictions of cherry, plum and pine. 
Once tamped with crushed gold, the patterns resemble negative images of sumie (ink paintings).
The Omukai Kokudo Company, which produced the chest given to President Reagan, operates two of the dozens of small lacquerware factories in Wajima. 
Modern technology has done little to speed up the process. 
Companies employ craftsmen and contract with others to work at home.
After cutting and shaping the wood, latherers dry it and smoke it in ovens for as long as five years. 
Zelkova wood is used for round objects, warp-resistant cypress for flat ones.
The tough finish of the typical wan, or soup bowl, results from about eight coats of lacquer, some laced with baked clay, which are each slowly hardened and buffed with ash, whetstones and water. 
Strips of cloth, glued underneath the primer coats, strengthen fragile edges. 
Finer pieces may have as many as 60 coats of lacquer and take a year to complete.
The lacquer hardens by slow chemical oxidation of the varnish in damp rooms or compartments. 
The hardening takes from about eight hours for thin primer coats to four days for the finishing layer of lacquer.
Traditionally, Japanese lacquer -which contains from 40 to 90 percent more of the main hardening ingredient, urushiol, than other Asian lacquers - was favored. 
But an imported Chinese variety is now used.
Leveled during World War II to make more room for food crops, most of the lacquer trees were never replaced, according to Masato Nakayama, the director of a cooperative representing 8,000 manufacturers.
The cheaper Chinese product remains the choice of all but a few artists, like Mr. Matsuda, who represent a small percentage of Japan's annual $40 million wood lacquer industry, Mr. Nakagawa said.
The cultivation of a lacquer tree is itself painstaking. 
A tree takes 15 years to reach maturation and then produces small amounts of top grade sap in the summer and early fall for about six years before it must be cut down to start again.
In the Omukai workshop, painters wearing nylon clothing apply the last coats of lacquer in glass-encased rooms. 
A piece of lint can destroy months of work.
In two adjoining tatami rooms, craftsmen paint shimmery designs on finished pieces with various brushes. 
Hair from the forelegs of mice is said to be best for fine detail work. 
Maki-e specialists sprinkle gold dust from pencil-thin bamboo tubes on wet lacquer drawings. 
Others use gold-laced paint. 
A chest similar to the one made for President Reagan would cost about $2,000, according to company officials.
During a visit to the small shop, next to the plant, which sits on a narrow lane a few blocks from the sea, the company's president, Mitsugu Omukai, 66, the mayor of Wajima, or his son, Minoru, may appear, and guests may be treated to Japanese tea and rice jelly sweets while browsing. 
Mr. Yamagishi has some works on display.
Now visitors can also observe the lacquer process at the company's new factory and showroom near City Hall across town.
Besides Wajima, the Ministry of Industry and Trade recognizes 16 towns where the lacquer tradition survives. 
Yamanaka, for example, produces a clear lacquer that highlights the wavy grain of native zelkova wood and cherry. 
Kamakura and Murakami specialize in Chinese-influenced carved vermilion lacquer on chestnut wood.
Some varieties of multihued, mottled or pitted lacquers resemble swirls of latex, tortoise shell and bark. 
Among other places noted for lacquer are Tsugaru, Kyoto, Kanazawa, Kiso and Hida, which makes a caramel-like lacquer.
In Tokyo, Wajimanuri and other varieties of regional lacquer are sold at the Japan Traditional Crafts Center in Minami Aoyama. 
The center employs staff members who speak English and will show, on request, videotapes on lacquer and other folk arts, some of which have English narratives. 
Two tapes focus on the work of Mr. Matsuda, who was trained in Kanazawa, and Taiho Mae, a chinkin master from Wajima who died in 1977.
The Omukai company has a shop on the first floor of the same building, where prices are the same as in Wajima.
Yujiro Sahara, an adviser at the traditional craft center, which is run by an association that promotes crafts, suggests visiting smaller shops in Tokyo where, because of special arrangements with craftsmen and smaller commissions, prices are apt to be lower than in large department stores. 
The cost of top-quality lacquer in shops like Omukai and the crafts center in Tokyo can range from about $30 for a black or red soup bowl with matching cover to more than $1,000 for a large low table with an ornate gold-embossed design. 
A decorative tray costs about $100, and boxes range from $150 for a small gold-etched one to about $200 for a larger, gold-embossed one that can be used to store documents. 
A set of five small tea coasters sells for about $20, a vase for about $190.
Neither shop ships to the United States, and the craft center warns that fragile lacquer can be damaged in transit. 
The Omukai factory in Wajima and larger department stores like Takashimaya and Mitsukoshi, both in Tokyo's Nihombashi district, will, however, arrange shipping on request.
Dealers say that lacquerware should be kept in the shade away from dry air and wrapped loosely if stored. 
In museums, lacquer pieces are displayed next to a glass of water. 
During the winter, lacquer shops use humidifiers to keep the air moist. 
The traditional crafts center has an expert in the repair of scratched or damaged lacquer on its staff. 
Where to see lacquerware Museums The National Museum of Modern Art (in the Takebashi district of Tokyo) is open from 9:30 A.M. to 5 P.M. every day but Monday. 
Modern lacquerware is normally exhibited in the museum's traditional crafts building. 
Entry fee: $1.20. 
The National Science Museum (in the Ueno district) is open from 9 A.M. to 4:30 P.M. every day but Monday. 
An exhibit of the lacquer-making process and finished pieces are on permanent display. 
Entry fee: $1.20. 
Shopping Tokyo: The Japan Traditional Craft Center (Minami Aoyama district) is open from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. every day but Thursday. 
The center sells a wide variety of folk crafts and sponsors daily demonstrations and exhibits. 
With a $10 membership, you can receive a 10-percent discount on purchases. 
Free admission. 
Dial 403-2460. 
The Omukai Kokudo Company shop on the first floor of the same building as the craft center is open from 11 A.M. to 7 P.M. every day but Thursday. 
Dial 479-1313. 
Kuroeya (Nihombashi district), a shop carrying many regional lacquers, is open from 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. every day but Saturday. 
Dial 271-3356.
Wajima: A visit to the Omukai factory can be arranged by calling the company's shop in Tokyo or the plant directly for an appointment with an English-speaking guide. 
The local phone number is 2-1313. 
The factory is open from 8 A.M to 5 P.M. every day but Sunday.
The showroom of another Wajima lacquer company, Wajimaya, is open from 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. every day. 
An adjoining coffee shop displays a new line of modern lacquerware - tables with curved chromium steel legs, saucer-shaped lacquer-on-steel lampshades and monochrome tableware in a rainbow of colors. 
A lunch of Japanese buckwheat noodles and wild vegetables served with lacquer tableware costs about $4. 
At 7 o'clock each night, the shop reopens, and there is a free performance of the thunderous music of taiko, hide-covered wooden drums, by a nationally known troupe, Gojinjo Daiko (the drums of the gods).A K. O.
