
TERRY TRUCCO is a Tokyo-based writer.
Di Yung-zu may be the most hospitable merchant in Taipei. 
Dressed in an old T-shirt, Bermuda shorts and sandals, he greets his customers warmly, bowing, smiling, offering a cigarette and patting a chair.
Briefly he disappears to fuss with his teapots. 
But within moments he returns to present his visitor with a thimble-size china cup filled with a flowery jasmine brew.
Shopper's World describes tea merchant in Taipei
The customer is admonished to savor the tea, hold the warm liquid in the mouth, then swallow it slowly, allowing it to caress the throat. 
''Tea is very, very healthy,'' he says, sipping from a cup of his own. 
''It improves the blood circulation, settles the stomach and helps you sleep.''
When the last jasmine drops are gone, Mr. Di produces a pot of oolong, the blend for which Taiwan is famous. 
Then just as his guest thinks it is time to leave, out comes a sampling of Chinese green tea, rich and tangy. 
All are delicious and making a selection is difficult. 
The customer leaves laden with three large tins.
For more than 40 years Di Yung-zu has held impromptu tea parties each day at his humble shop, the Hua Yei Tea Company. 
Tea is the staple drink for this country's 18 million people, and Taiwan's capital supports an estimated 1,000 tea establishments, old and new, large and small.
What distinguishes Mr. Di's enterprise is its appearance, which immediately marks it as a traditional Chinese tea shop. 
A neat, handpainted sign labels the place, and with no front windows or doors, customers enter by walking past an old-fashioned wood-framed display case of tea jars and tins.
The place, Mr. Di says proudly, has changed little since the day it opened in 1939. 
Even then he made no attempt to be up to date, equipping the shop with the dim lighting, bright-colored tins and traditional wooden tea crates used for decades.
''Many young people think tea has to be displayed in a more modern style,'' Mr. Di says, holding a worn, rust-colored teapot, which is more than 200 years old and still in daily use. 
''But I've kept my store this way for historical reasons, for the same reason some people collect antiques.''
Styles of clothes may change, he adds, ''but the tea doesn't change.''
For someone with an eye for tradition Di Yung-zu made a brilliant real estate decision. 
Though Taiwan's brisk economy has replaced many older buildings with gleaming skyscrapers, Di Yung-zu's part of town has stubbornly remained the same. 
According to one longtime resident, the area has changed little since the days of the Japanese occupation, which lasted from 1895 to the end of World War II.
The business pace is also in harmony with that of old Taipei. 
Hours are long, stretching from 8:30 A.M. to 7 7 P.M. every day except Sunday. 
But the pace is unhurried and informal, leaving Mr. Di ample time to discuss tea with his customers.
A slender, white-haired man with tea-stained teeth, Mr. Di has spent all of his adult life in the tea trade. 
Though he was not born to the business, at the age of 15 left his family's farm for Taipei, where he was apprenticed to a tea merchant.
When Mr. Di was 29 he bought his present shop and a few years back unofficially retired, turning the business over to his daughter-inlaw, an efficient-looking woman with a grown daughter. 
He still lives above the shop, and every day he comes down to chat with customers, read the newspapers and play with the neighborhood children.
He also purchases his own tea, patronizing farmers in Taiwan's northern and central regions. 
''I never owned my own mountain like some tea merchants, because this way I could select the tea I thought was best. 
Even when it all comes from the same mountain, the quality can differ, he says.''
The tea drunk in Taiwan today has a provenance as distinguished as its flavor. 
As Mr. Di says, tea cultivation in China is believed to date back to prehistoric times. 
The first of these leafy evergreen tea plants grown in the Taiwan mountains were originally imported from the China mainland, probably by the vast waves of immigrants who arrived during the Ming and Manchu dynasties.
W ith its balmy climate, ample rainfall and mountainous terrain, Taiwan proved a rich breeding ground for tea. 
Last year the island produced more than 25,000 metric tons, a 3 percent increase over the previous year.
Tea plants, which are related to the camellia family, can grow to a height of 30 feet, though when cultivated they are usually pruned to three to five feet. 
More importand than climate is site. 
The finest tea comes from the upper mountain reaches, with the quality dipping as one moves down the hill. 
At the top, tea receives the proper amounts of sun and dew, Mr. Di says, while tea grown on flatlands often suffers from too much of both.
The harvest season is vital for a quality brew, too. 
For most teas, the finest is harvested in the spring, though choice oolong tea is gathered in the summer. 
Additional caches of tea are cut in early autumn and November.
All these factors help determine the tea's price, and good tea can be expensive. 
Di Yung-zu's tea sells by the gram; 600 grams -a bit more than a pound - of the finest can cost as much as $80. 
The same amount of a lesser grade can sell for as little as $5. 
Tins cost about 50 cents extra.
If the tea is not packed in tins, it is measured into thick paper bags, never plastic, says Mr. Di. He has weighed tea for years on the type of iron scale seen in small shops all over Taipei. 
It is important to keep the tea away from light and heat, which is why the Hua Yei Tea Company's leaves are stored in old metal-lined pine boxes. 
Mr. Di has more than 50 of these brown trunk-size crates. 
''Wood keeps the temperature moderate so the tea's color won't turn,'' he says.
There are hundreds of teas, but the basic types in Taiwan are jasmine, tiehkuanyin, assam, oolong, daffodil, green tea and yen tea. 
The tea's color depends on the method used to process it. 
Black teas, such as assam, are fermented before firing. 
Oolongs are partially fermented, and green teas not at all. 
Even within a broad category like green tea, which the Chinese call bao chung, dozens of varieties exist.
The shop also sells what is best described as old tea. 
Tucked away in some of those wooden crates is tea dating back to the days when Mr. Di opened the shop. 
It is quite costly: 600 grams for $770. 
It hasn't much flavor. 
But many people believe in its medicinal effects - calming nerves, cleansing the system and releasing excess body heat. 
There is also an old myth that it can treat cancer.
How can a customer identify choice tea?
A hearty sniff helps. 
''The better teas all smell good,'' says Mr. Di. Still, the smell won't tell you if the tea comes from the mountaintop.
Almost as he spoke, two middle-aged women entered the shop, headed for the yen tea bin, scooped up a handful and held it to their noses. 
And how is the best tea brewed?
Mr. Di says you simply cover the bottom of your teapot with leaves, add boiling water and let the brew steep for two or three minutes. 
The leaves can be used again the same day and should yield almost as much flavor, provided the second brew is allowed to steep six or seven minutes.
Technically, any tea brought into the United States has to be submitted to a Food and Drug Administration examiner, but travelers have reported that Customs officials have allowed them to bring in a tin without question.
 
If you go
The Hua Yei Tea Company is at 96, Section One, Kai Fang Street in the northern section of Taipei. 
The phone number is 3114918. 
The shop willingly accepts both United States dollars and Japanese yen. 
If he is there, the retired owner, Di Yung-zu, a seasoned businessman, quickly looks up the exchange rate in the day's newspaper as a courtesy to customers. 
T.T.
