
Secretary of State George P. Shultz indicated today that he might meet with the Soviet Foreign Minister, Andrei A. Gromyko, at an East-West conference on disarmament in Stockholm Jan. 
17.
Several Western European nations, especially West Germany, have been urging that the 35-nation conference on developing safeguards against surprise attacks be begin with foreign ministers present. 
Mr. Shultz, at a breakfast meeting with reporters, indicated he would not oppose that effort, although he declined to say specifically that he would meet with his Soviet counterpart.
''It seems to be shaping up as a meeting to which foreign ministers will go,'' he said. 
''If that's the way it emerges, then the United States will be represented.''
State Sec George P Shultz indicates that he might meet with Soviet Min Andrei A Gromyko at East-West conference on disarmament in Stockholm Jan 17; several Western European nations are urging that 35-nation conference begin with foreign mins present; other points made by Shultz outlined (M)
Such a meeting would be the first high-level Soviet-American encounter since the chilly exchange between Mr. Shultz and Mr. Gromyko in Madrid on Sept. 
9 after the Soviet Union shot down a South Korean passenger airliner. 
The tension between Moscow and Washington has worsened with the deployment of American medium-range nuclear missiles in Western Europe and the Soviet suspension of the talks in Geneva on medium-range missiles.
 
Kohl Backs Deployment Schedule
In Bonn, Chancellor Helmut Kohl said he favored adhering to the deployment schedule for the American missiles as a way to to persuade the Soviet Union to return to the Geneva talks. 
(Page A13.)
In Geneva, Soviet and American negotiators met for 3 hours and 35 minutes in the current round of talks on limiting strategic, or long-range, weapons. 
They agreed to meet again next Tuesday. 
(Page A10.)
 
Joint Decision Expected
As for the Stockholm meeting, Mr. Shultz said he and other North Atlantic Treaty Organization foreign ministers would decide whether to attend when they met in Brussels next week. 
He said his attendance would not depend on whether Mr. Gromyko was coming. 
An aide said later that while there were no arrangements for Mr. Shultz to meet Mr. Gromyko in Stockholm, ''it would be logical'' for that to happen.
The United States is reported to have privately suggested to Moscow various possible topics for talks, such as technical exchanges or navigation agreements to prevent events like the Korean jet incident. 
But Administration officials are skeptical that much can be done while the state of health of Yuri V. Andropov, the Soviet leader, remains uncertain.
When asked about Mr. Andropov, Mr. Shultz replied: ''He's obviously ill. 
How ill he is and what is his illness, I don't know. 
I know that statements are issued in his name. 
There's all sorts of speculation. 
Obviously we follow these matters closely. 
But what we have to do is not try to base our policies on what we think may be happening there, but base our policies on what we think is right for us.''
In his wide-ranging one-hour session with reporters, Mr. Shultz made these other points:
- Recent conciliatory statements by the Nicaraguan Government were ''good to hear'' and ''vastly different'' from what the Sandinista junta was saying six to eight months ago. 
But Mr. Shultz said there is ''always a question of whether there is a reality behind the words.''
- Planning continues for the visit of Zhao Ziyang, the Chinese Prime Minister, to the United States in January, and for President Reagan's visit to Peking in April. 
Mr. Shultz said he assumed the visits would take place despite Chinese objections to two Congressional measures that referred to Taiwan as the Republic of China. 
The Administration has since reaffirmed its position that the Peking Government ''is the sole legitimate Government of China.''
- The Salvadoran Government risks erosion of its support unless it can take some action quickly to curb right-wing death squads and bring suspected killers to trial. 
Unless improvement from the current ''grave'' situation is made by January, Mr. Shultz said, it would be ''very difficult'' for him to report to Congress that progress on human rights was being made in El Salvador.
- Supplies of American-made cluster bombs to Israel will depend on working out a satisfactory agreement on their use, an indication that the Reagan Administration is looking for tighter restrictions to insure that such weapons are not used in areas with heavy civilian populations.
 
Conditions on Sale and Use
During this week's visit to Washington by Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir, the Reagan Administration indicated that it was ready to consider resuming supplies of such weapons. 
Those shipments were suspended 18 months ago as a sign of Administration unhappiness over Israel's invasion of Lebanon.
In response to a question about the cluster bombs, Mr. Shultz said: ''What we have said is that the suspension on sales of cluster munitions will be lifted if there is a satisfactory agreement on usage. 
We will have to see whether such an agreement can be made in the course of our meetings. 
I assume there's interest. 
If there's no interest, why, that's fine.''
Several times, he defended President Reagan's agreement with Mr. Shamir to set up a new American-Israeli political-military group as a necessary move to offset ''the buildup of Soviet arms and troop presence in Syria.''
