
Despite some tough language in China's official commentary on Secretary of State George P. Shultz's four-day visit to Peking, there seems to be considerable agreement by American and Chinese officials on what Mr. Shultz did and did not accomplish there.
In interpreting the results of the Shultz mission, however, the two sides appear to be practicing what one of Mr. Shultz's aides today called ''half full, half empty diplomacy.''
The aide meant that Peking persists in seeing the same ''cup'' of relations as half empty that the Americans see as half full.
Mr. Shultz was informed of the New China News Agency commentary when he awoke this morning. 
He read the text along with senior advisers, Paul D. @Wolfowitz, the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian Affairs, and Thomas Shoesmith, Mr. Wolfowitz's deputy. 
The commentary said Mr. Shultz's visit had helped Chinese-American relations ''to some extent'' but unless the Taiwan issue was resolved ''mutual trust between China and the United States is out of the question.''
SEOUL, South Korea, Feb. 
7 - Despite some tough language in China's official commentary on Secretary of State George P. Shultz's four-day visit to Peking, there seems to be considerable agreement by American and Chinese officials on what Mr. Shultz did and did not accomplish there.
The initial American reaction was one of relief that it had not closed the doors to improved relations, and was less negative than some early news accounts suggested. 
One aide, in talking to reporters, said, ''We don't see anything startling: in fact, there are some positive things in it.''
 
Shultz Limits Claims of Success
This assessment, of course, was in keeping with the traditional American approach to Chinese relations. 
Every secretary of state leaving China has described the results in a more positive way than have the Chinese. 
For instance, Cyrus R. Vance in 1977 said some progress had been achieved, only to have the Chinese call the visit a failure. 
Alexander M. Haig Jr. 
In 1981 was exuberant about moves in the strategic field, only to have the Chinese lash out at the Reagan Administration, and to suspend military contacts.
Mr. Shultz has limited his claims of ''success'' to having achieved a better understanding of each other's position, more mutual trust and a laying of groundwork for closer ties in the future. 
He did not claim any breakthroughs on Taiwan or anything else.
The reason Mr. Shultz's party was not unhappy about the press agency commentary was that much of it meshed with what the Americans were saying about the visit. 
These points were made by Mr. Shultz's aides:
- The two sides agreed that the visit improved relations ''to some extent'' by allowing a full airing of differences, even though problems remained.
- The press agency said the two countries were ''close in their analyses of the current international situation as well as in their views on the issues of Afghanistan, Cambodia and arms control.''
That was an even more positive statement than Mr. Shultz had made at his farewell press conference and was the first time publicly Peking said it agreed with Washington on arms control matters.
- The press agency commentary did not take issue with two potential developments made public by Mr. Shultz. The first was that the two sides had agreed to hold talks on ways of bringing about closer military relations. 
The second was that Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang had agreed to come to the United States and a date would be worked out. 
The White House said he had agreed to come this year, but Mr. Shultz was not that specific.
- Even though the Chinese raised the Taiwan issue repeatedly during the talks with Mr. Shultz, the press agency article quoted Mr. Shultz correctly as saying that he and President Reagan fully intended to live up to last August's communique calling for phased out arms sales to Taiwan.
The article went on to list what it said were violations of agreements on Taiwan, such as officials attending Taiwan receptions in Washington and the setting up of a new Taiwan office.
''Obviously, the point they are making is that Taiwan is a problem in relations,'' one American said. 
''We know that.''
What is unknown, of course, is whether the Chinese side will seek to focus so heavily on Taiwan and other problems such as the difficulty of getting licenses to buy certain advanced technology so as to prevent relations from developing further.
Mr. Shultz and his aides who sat through the long hours of talks insist the Chinese made it clear they wanted to advance the relations, even though differences persisted.
 
Felt Chinese Were Ill Informed
As a longtime mediator, Mr. Shultz believes that with patience and trust most problems can be solved, or at least ought to be. 
As he made clear on the plane flying here from Peking, he came away from the talks feeling that the Chinese side was not as well informed on American policy as it should have been and this, in his view, created distortions. 
One reason, some of his aides said, was that the former Chinese Ambassador, Chai Zemin, spoke no English, and was not able to become closely enough involved in Chinese-American relations in Washington.
The new Chinese Ambassador to Washington, Zhang Wenjin, is an old American hand, speaks fluent English, and was involved in the opening of relations in the early 1970's. 
Mr. Shultz's hope is that Mr. Zhang will become involved in such matters as licensing problems for exports, and can better appreciate the political realities in Washington that makes it impossible for any administration to renounce the Taiwan Relations Act, which obliges the United States to provide for Taiwan's defense.
It is assumed by the Americans that the Chinese harp on the differences to make clear they remain independent in their foreign policy - something crucial to their relations with the Soviet Union and the third world. 
And the Chinese may feel, American officials say, that by stressing the problems they can bring pressure on Washington to make compromises.
