
Prime Minister Nikolai A. Tikhonov said in an interview published here on Sunday that the Soviet Union is ''not going to keep from concrete steps'' toward improved relations with China, but that the process ''must not be one-sided.''
Mr. Tikhonov did not elaborate on the steps he had in mind. 
But his remark, in prepared answers to questions submitted by the Japanese newspaper Asahi, appeared to be the most positive signal from Moscow in several years on the frosty relationship with Peking.
Diplomats said it was not clear whether Mr. Tikhonov was giving an advance signal of a breakthrough or was summoning up the possibility of a rapprochement as a lever in the Soviet bid for improved relations with the United States. 
Since Washington and Peking began normalizing relations in 1971, all three capitals have engaged in feints and maneuvers of this kind.
Soviet Union's Prime Minister Nikloai Tikhonov hints at overture to improve relations with China
The Soviet Prime Minister coupled his comments on China with a review of Soviet-American relations and the situation in Poland. 
He urged the United States to abandon the ''language of power and diktat'' and to accept a ''smoothing'' of relations, and he said that it was ''staggering how reckless'' the United States and its allies were being in using the Polish situation to sour international relations.
But it was his comments on China that seemed to strike a fresh note. 
The 75-year-old Prime Minister balanced his overture to Peking by saying that ''the Chinese leaders, as is known, persistently follow in international affairs a course of animosity toward the Soviet Union, its allies and its friends.''
But even this formulation was milder than most that Soviet leaders have used in the two decades since the two nations fell into a rancorous dispute over ideology, territory and other issues.
 
'All This Cannot Be Ignored'
Mr. Tikhonov also alluded to the role that the closer relations between the United States and China have played in the equation by saying that ''there exist also other forces in the world that are pressing in every way for a further worsening of Soviet-Chinese relations.''
But it was his reference to possible improvement in the relationship that caught the eye of diplomats. 
Embassies here and in Peking have been alert to the possibility of a thaw since Moscow approached Peking last fall with a proposal that they revive talks about a new relationship that were broken off after the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan in late 1979.
''We have proceeded and continue to proceed from the view that there are no problems in Soviet-Chinese relations that could not be decided on the basis of equality and in the spirit of mutual understanding,'' Mr. Tikhonov said. 
''We are not going to keep from concrete steps that would meet vital aspirations and interests of the Soviet and Chinese peoples.''
''But this process must not be one-sided,'' he said. 
Any move to improve relations is likely to confront obstacles. 
Among them are the border dispute that led to armed clashes in 1969 and the Soviet role as the principal backer of Vietnam, which is in a state of tension with China over the Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia and other matters. 
In recent years the Kremlin has made a number of approaches to Peking seeking better ties, but the initiatives foundered each time.
 
'Scaring Themselves Stiff'
An indication of the Kremlin's perspective came in an article two weeks ago in the Government newspaper Izvestia, in which a commentator, Aleksandr Bovin, pointed to recent strains between Washington and Peking and predicted that the relationship would ultimately founder on differences in ideology and global interests. 
In the meantime, he said, ''as long as Americans are scaring themselves stiff with the 'Soviet threat,' they will always be haunted by the nightmare of normalization in Soviet-Chinese relations.''
Mr. Tikhonov's remarks on relations with the United States broke no fresh ground but were notable for continued stress on the need for the ''constructive dialogue'' that the Prime Minister advocated in a speech three weeks ago. 
Since then, Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. and Foreign Minister Andrei A. Gromyko met in Geneva for talks that produced no breakthroughs on arms control, Poland and other issues.
Mr. Tikhonov said ''a smoothing of Soviet-American relations'' would lessen international tensions and the risk of war, but added, ''Regrettably, there are so far no signs that things are moving in a favorable direction.''
Mr. Tikhonov also said that the American military buildup was futile. 
''Washington will not gain anything either by striving to introduce in diplomacy the language of power and diktat,'' he said.
