
Faced with falling foreign trade volume and declining oil prices, the Soviet Union has recently made public its interest in becoming an observer at the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
At an unusually candid news conference here recently, Mikhail Pankine, who heads the Soviet Foreign Ministry's Department for International Economic Organizations, said Moscow viewed it as ''essential'' that it be granted such status, and be allowed to observe a new round of world trade talks expected late this year or early next year.
But diplomats here, headquarters of the 90-member GATT, which works to expand and liberalize world trade, say there is little chance that the Soviet Union would gain such observer status anytime soon. 
They said industrialized nations such as the United States and the European Economic Community would block the consensus decision needed for Soviet membership or observer status, for political as well as economic reasons.
'System Isn't Compatible'
''The fundamental thing is that the GATT is an organization for free trading countries and one which is geared on the free, open market system,'' one Western diplomat said. 
''The U.S.S.R., on the other hand, is so enormous that there's some fear that it could skew the whole system. 
Their system isn't compatible with the GATT anyway, and their form of state subsidies wouldn't lend itself to GATT discipline.''
A nominal precedent exists for letting a state-trading nation such as the Soviet Union join the GATT, since Soviet-bloc allies Poland, Hungary, Czechoslovakia and Rumania have long been members, and China already has observer status. 
But there the comparisons end, the diplomats say, because the four Warsaw Pact nation's economies are too small to make a difference, and China has already begun major economic reforms more adaptable to the GATT structure.
''First of all, China is actually seeking to return to membership in the organization, since it was in fact a founding member,'' the diplomat said. 
''Their economy, though one of state trading, is in a state of change and flux so I think that if negotiations with them do begin, it will be partly because people forsee a change in the Chinese system, and believe that membership in the GATT would encourage that, whereas we don't believe letting the Russians in would change anything.''
 
Way to Expand Foreign Trade
For the Soviet Union, joining the GATT would conceivably be one way of expanding its foreign trade, still regarded as minor in comparison to the United States, Western Europe and Japan. 
And such expansion could also shore up exports that declined dramatically last year.
According to the new report of the United Nation's Economic Commission for Europe, Moscow's exports to the Comecon countries stagnated last year, while exports to market economies plummeted by a staggering l4 percent. 
The report blamed winter disruptions of production and transport of Soviet raw material and fuel exports in early 1985, and the decline in world oil prices toward the end of the year.
The continued drop in oil prices could cost the Soviet Union between $4 billion and $5 billion in hard currency this year, or about 25 percent of its export earnings, the report noted. 
That is seen as a major factor that could spur the Soviet Union to move more aggressively into the world trading system by trying to join GATT.
 
Push to Soviet Union
''You can see the effects in the decline of oil revenues and how this could clearly be giving a push to those inside the Soviet Union who have been arguing for the advantages of getting into the trading system on a bigger scale,'' the diplomat said.
But besides the economic considerations cited by diplomats here, several envoys spoke of political considerations as well. 
The primary concern among Western nations, they said, is that Soviet entry into the GATT - one of the few United Nation specialized agencies they have refrained from joining - could politicize an agency that has so far largely avoided overly political debates.
''Clearly, the relationships with the Soviet Union are different, and many countries would be reluctant to have them join,'' another Western diplomat said. 
''There is the question of whether they would act in a political manner, rather than an economic manner, like they do in the General Assembly.''
 
'Different Size of Fish'
He continued, ''The East European nations which are already members don't tend to do that. 
They haven't been digested well by the GATT, but they're so small that we can handle it. 
The Soviet Union is a different size of fish altogether.''
The Soviet Union has yet to apply formally for observer status, which would be a stepping stone to membership, but it has been sounding the waters at the organization for three years. 
Nevertheless, some Western diplomats suggest that though the Soviet Union might see membership as ''essential,'' there is little likelihood of it being granted.
''Given the size of their economy, they couldn't avoid becoming a major player,'' one diplomat commented. 
''If we let them in, I don't think the GATT could continue to function as it has. 
We believe in fact that the GATT would cease to function as we know it.''
