
The Soviet Union and China agreed today to almost double trade over the next five years, a move that diplomats assessed as a notable step in the revival of relations.
The Tass press agency said that Yao Yilin, a Chinese Deputy Prime Minister, and Ivan V. Arkhipov, a Soviet First Deputy Prime Minister, had signed an accord under which the volume of trade is projected to reach $3.5 billion by 1990. 
It is expected to be $1.8 billion in the current year.
In 1982, before relations began to improve, exchanges between the two countries were down to $300 million.
Chinese Deputy Prime Min Yao Yilin and Soviet First Deputy Prime Min Ivan V Arkhipov sign agreement to almost double trade over next five years, to total of $14 billion, move that diplomats say is notable step in revival of relations (M)
Over the next five years, during which trade is expected to total $14 billion, the Soviet Union is to supply machinery, equipment, transport, raw materials and chemicals in exchange for Chinese agricultural and industrial raw materials and consumer goods.
Moscow has also agreed to assist in building seven new plants and in modernizing 17 others in the fields of electric power generation, metals, machinery manufacturing, coal, chemicals and transport. 
Some of the industrial establishments to be modernized were built with Soviet aid during the 1950's, before the political break between the two countries.
Although the Soviet Union's trade with China is still far below exchanges with Moscow's Eastern European allies and even with some Western European countries like West Germany, Finland and Italy, there has been a major upsurge in recent years.
The trend has gained further impetus under Mikhail S. Gorbachev. In several statements since assuming office in March, the new Soviet leader has called for a ''serious improvement'' in relations with China.
The attention paid to Mr. Yao, who is in the Soviet Union on an eight-day visit, reflected the warming trend. 
The signing ceremony was shown on television, and Mr. Yao was shown laying a wreath at the Lenin Mausoleum.
The publicity given the wreath-laying was considered notable since Soviet-Chinese relations have been limited largely to the governmental level rather than the party level, which among Communist countries is considered more important. 
Although Mr. Yao's visit is at the governmental level, the wreath-laying ceremony seemed to signal at least a symbolic nod to the Soviet party.
There is no indication whether Mr. Yao will meet with Mr. Gorbachev, who was in Minsk today.
But even if the two officials meet, diplomats said, real reconciliation remains a considerable way off. 
China has not abandoned its three demands as conditions for improved political relations - that the Soviet Union withdraw its troops from Afghanistan, reduce its military presence along the Chinese border and stop backing the Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia.
Moscow has shown no readiness to meet any of these demands, and has followed the economic liberalization measures in China with skepticism.
Nonetheless, Soviet-Chinese relations have changed considerably since Leonid I. Brezhnev invited China in 1982 to end the estrangement that began around 1960. 
The two sides have held regular political consultations since then, and have reduced the level of public criticism of one another.
The steady expansion of economic contacts has been the most important measure of the warming process.
Diplomats believe that the possibilities for large increases in trade are in any case restricted by the needs of the two sides, which are mostly for the sort of technology and equipment that only the West can provide.
The more intriguing question is whether the Soviet Union and China will prove ready anytime soon to restore relations at the party level. 
Since Mr. Gorbachev came to office, Chinese officials have referred to him and other Russians, including Mr. Arkhipov, as ''Comrade,'' a term used among fellow Communists. 
Mr. Yao's homage to Lenin seemed another small step.
