
A key member of the Central Committee of the Soviet Communist Party has told a group of Japanese journalists that talks with China could result in a pullback of troops from the Soviet-Chinese border.
Participants in a conference of Japanese and Soviet journalists being held here confirmed today that the Soviet official, Viktor G. Afanasyev, who is the editor of Pravda, the party newspaper, made the remark on Tuesday during a meeting at Pravda's offices.
The suggestion was similar to one that a Chinese official was reported as having made to Western journalists in Peking during a background discussion last month after the resumption of Soviet-Chinese negotiations.
 
Efforts at an Accommodation
Kyodo, the Japanese news agency, quoted Mr. Afanasyev as having said: ''It is possible that the two sides might promise each other a reduction of military forces in border areas.''
A reporter for the agency later said the quotation was accurate. 
(Although the United States has deliberately not been voicing public concern about the improvement of Soviet-Chinese relations, Washington officials say privately that they find the trend worrisome. 
Page A7.)
MOSCOW, Nov. 
17 - A key member of the Central Committee of the Soviet Communist Party has told a group of Japanese journalists that talks with China could result in a pullback of troops from the Soviet-Chinese border.
The indication that the Soviet Union might consider troop reductions along the frontier in the context of a general improvement of the relationship was not in itself new. 
But it attracted attention in the context of the change in the Soviet leadership and the renewed Soviet overtures to the Chinese.
 
Unusual Warmth for Chinese
The new Soviet leader, Yuri V. Andropov, signaled his attitude when he greeted the Chinese Foreign Minister, Huang Hua, with what appeared to be unusual warmth at a reception that followed Leonid I. Brezhnev's funeral on Monday. 
The next day Mr. Huang met with Foreign Minister Andrei A. Gromyko for 90 minutes in what was the highestlevel discussion between the Soviet Union and China since their Prime Ministers met in 1969.
The Soviet press has also given unusual prominence to Chinese condolence messages, printing them with those from the Soviet-bloc nations.
On Tuesday, Pravda and Izvestia, the two principal Soviet newspapers, published excerpts from an interview that Mr. Huang gave to the New China News Agency. 
In it, he said:
''Peace and friendship between China and the Soviet Union fully correspond not only to the interests of both peoples and both countries, but also to the interests of peace in Asia and the whole world.''
Western diplomats assessed the remark about a possible troop pullback as another carefully considered signal. 
Mr. Afanasyev, as the principal conveyor of official news to the Soviet people, is close to the Kremlin leadership. 
When he met with an American editor two weeks ago, he spoke in general terms about the new contacts with China and did not mention the possibility of troop reductions.
In his talk with the Japanese, he said that he thought Soviet troops ''will eventually withdraw'' from Afghanistan and that he did not think the issue could be settled militarily. 
The remark was not inconsistent with Soviet policy, which has called for a political settlement, but its timing seemed significant.
Mr. Afanasyev was quoted as having said that a senior Soviet official, whom he did not identify, had been conducting discussions on Afghanistan with ''concerned'' parties, including Pakistan. 
This appeared to be a hint that the Kremlin had been making a hitherto undisclosed bid to find diplomatic maneuvering room over the issue. 
Western proposals for an international conference have been repeatedly rejected.
The editor's remarks appeared to be fashioned as a response to the demands that China has made a condition for a return to normal relations. 
The demands, restated in recent months, are for a reduction of troops on the border, a Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan and an end to Soviet backing for the Vietnamese-installed Cambodian Government.
Mr. Afanasyev's remarks, as reported by Kyodo, also included references to the new political situation here. 
According to Kyodo, the Pravda editor alluded to some kind of power struggle after the death of Mr. Brezhnev. He did not elaborate, but Kyodo quoted him as having said that Mr. Brezhnev's chief of staff, Konstantin U. Chernenko, ''had the possibility'' of succeeding Mr. Brezhnev.
However, the Pravda editor was quoted as having said that ''many responsible, sincere men'' had chosen Mr. Andropov instead. 
The editor said vacancies would be filled in the two key bodies in the Soviet power structure, the Politburo and the Secretariat of the Central Committee, which together make up the Soviet leadership group. 
These additions are expected to be announced next week. 
However, Kyodo said, Mr. Afanasyev did not expect major changes of top figures because Mr. Andropov is ''a man of prudence.''
