
The Soviet Union said today that President Reagan's remarks yesterday at a news conference confirmed his ''militaristic ideology.''
It said an American offer to sell weapons to China was ''provocative.''
Detailed reports by the official press agency Tass on the President's remarks and on the visit to China by Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. made it evident that Soviet leaders had found nothing to their liking in either.
Soviet Union says President Reagan's remarks at new conference confirmed his "militaristic ideology"
Describing Mr. Reagan's comments on arms controls, the plight of Communism, relations with China, military aid to Pakistan and American support for Israel, Tass said the President ''immediately made it clear that his Administration intended to pursue its objectives not by lessening tensions and building up mutually beneficial international cooperation and mutual understanding but by escalating nuclear terror and building up military strength as an instrument in blackmailing other countries.''
 
'Provocative Decision'
Tass asserted that the decision to lift restrictions against selling weapons to China was a ''provocative decision of the White House to supply Chinese hegemonists with offensive weapons which they could use against neighboring countries and peoples.''
But a separate dispatch on Mr. Haig's three-day visit to Peking gave only a tentative assessment of the development and no indication of its potential ramifications for Soviet foreign policy.
Tass accused Mr. Haig and the Chinese of joining in a conspiracy of aggression, imperialism and domination of other countries. 
The agency said that the United States would create opportunities for the Chinese to buy up-to-date American technology and equipment, ''including modern weapons.''
Tass noted that an agreement had been reached to expand military cooperation, and that a Chinese military mission would visit Washington to discuss it.
''Judging by the initial reports of the foreign mass media,'' Tass continued, ''this agreement has given grounds for legitimate concern not only to the Asian countries neighboring on China, against which Chinese expansionism is directed, but also to other parts of the world.''
The agency accused the Americans and Chinese of finding a ''commonality'' of aggressive aspirations around the world. 
Referring to Afghanistan and Cambodia, Tass said that the two sides ''confirmed their support for the Afghan counterrevolutionary rabble, the Pol Pot cutthroats and other Khmer reactionaries.''
The friendship proclaimed between Mr. Haig and his Peking hosts, Tass said, ''shows that the U.S. has found in Peking a welcome partner in carrying out its military strategic objectives and that Peking has stooped to teaming up directly with imperialism.''
The sharpest comments were predictably reserved for Mr. Reagan's critical comments about the Soviet Union and its governing system. 
''He besmirched in every way the socialist system and grossly slandered Soviet foreign and domestic policies,'' Tass said. 
On arms controls, Tass said that Mr. Reagan had ''mentioned only in passing'' a need to limit nuclear arsenals.
 
Nuclear Weapons in Europe
Tass said Mr. Reagan evaded a question on whether a nuclear war could be limited, ''but nevertheless he made it clear that his Administration did not rule out the possibility of the use of nuclear weapons in Europe.''
