
Mikhail S. Gorbachev said today that the Soviet Union would withdraw six regiments from Afghanistan by the end of the year, and asked that the move be matched by a reduction of Western aid to the guerrillas.
In a televised speech from the Pacific coast city of Vladivostok, he also gave a noncommittal response to President Reagan's recent letter on arms control, and called for closer relations with China.
Western diplomats said the troop withdrawal would cut Soviet forces in Afghanistan by 6 percent. 
The number of soviet troops in Afghanistan is estimated at 120,000, and the number of Afghan guerrillas as high as 30,000.
 
Call for Verification
Mr. Gorbachev said the six regiments would be withdrawn in such a way as to make possible verification by ''anyone interested,'' presumably meaning American spy satellites. 
[In Washington, the Reagan Administration indicated it did not attach great importance to the announcement. 
In another move, the State Department proposed to a visiting Soviet official that the foreign ministers meet in mid-September to begin planning for a summit meeting. 
Page A7.] In the Vladivostok speech, Mr. Gorbachev said Mr. Reagan's reply on arms control had been delivered over the weekend. 
The letter ''sets one thinking'' and is being studied with ''responsibility and attention,'' Mr. Gorbachev said.
He said the Soviet reaction would depend on whether the American positions ''meet the principle of equal security'' and ''make it possible to reach effective joint solutions in the field of ending the arms race and preventing its spread to outer space.''
In Washington last week, officials said Mr. Reagan was prepared to delay deployment of space-based missile defense systems for up to seven years on condition that the Soviet Union agree to deployment after that period. 
Western diplomats said the fact that Mr. Gorbachev did not criticize or reject the latest American offer was a positive sign. 
But they cautioned that the Soviet Union was likely to have reservations since the offer was contingent on the continued development of space-based defenses.
On Afghanistan, Mr. Gorbachev said that the withdrawal of the six regiments ''must be answered'' by a reciprocal curtailment of Western aid to the guerrillas fighting Soviet and Afghan Government forces.
It was the first announced withdrawal of Soviet troops since they entered Afghanistan in December 1979.
Western diplomats said the withdrawal of the six regiments - one armored regiment, two motorized rifle regiments and three antiaircraft artillery regiments - was a token gesture that would not significantly reduce Soviet influence in Afghanistan, but might improve the climate for efforts to reach a political settlement.
 
Contingent on Western Response
Mr. Gorbachev indicated that no additional withdrawals would occur without a cutback in Western support for the guerrillas. 
If aid continues, he said, ''the Soviet Union will stand up for its neighbor.''
In the 1985 fiscal year, the United States gave the Afghan guerrillas $280 million in aid, mostly in the form of small arms, ammunition, support equipment and clothing, according to American officials.
Mr. Gorbachev said, ''The Soviet Union is striving to speed up a political settlement, to give it another impetus.''
He said that the Soviet Union and Afghanistan had worked out a timetable for the withdrawal of all Soviet forces, and that this schedule might be speeded up if a political settlement were worked out. 
He said there had been progress in indirect United Nations-mediated talks between Afghanistan and Pakistan.
At a round of talks in June, the Afghans said their agreement with the Soviet Union provided for a phased withdrawal over a four-year period. 
Pakistan and the United States called such a drawn-out schedule unrealistic.
 
View on Summit Talks Affirmed
On a second meeting with President Reagan, Mr. Gorbachev insisted that the talks should promote progress in arms control and help reduce tension.
The Soviet leader said he could not agree with the view that the accords reached at the first summit meeting in Geneva could ''be reduced simply to the promise of having more meetings.''
''No,'' Mr. Gorbachev said. 
''The main thing on which we agreed last time with President Reagan, and what we signed, is a consent to strive for normalization of relations and for improvement of the international situation and to speed the course of talks on the reduction of armaments.''
On the issue of medium-range missiles, he insisted that any proposed elimination of Soviet missiles in Europe would mean just that - elimination - and not the transfer of such missiles to Asia.
Mr. Gorbachev spent considerable time on the issue of Soviet-Chinese relations. 
He said these had noticeably improved in recent years, and offered talks on additional measures aimed at transforming what he described as the world's longest land frontier into a ''line of peace and friendship.''
Troop Cuts Offered to China He proposed talks on reductions in Soviet and Chinese land forces and noted that the two nations had similar priorities in developing and modernizing their economies. 
He suggested that the two countries might discuss the best ways of achieving these aims.
''Why not support each other?''
Mr. Gorbachev said.
He disclosed that the Soviet Union and China were working out an accord to renew joint water management projects in the Amur River basin on their border. 
Such a program had been worked out in the 1950's, but was canceled when the two countries began to drift apart.
Mr. Gorbachev said the Soviet Union was also preparing a ''positive reply'' to a Chinese proposal to renew construction of a railroad linking the Xinjiang Uighur Autonomous Region of China and the Soviet republic of Kazakhstan. 
Such a project was also begun in the 1950's.
The Soviet leader added that Moscow had offered to train Chinese astronauts for a joint space mission. 
Relations in Pacific Basin Reviewing political and economic relations in the Pacific basin, Mr. Gorbachev said, ''We clearly realize that that the United States is a great Pacific power with legitimate economic and political interests in the region.''
But, since the mid-1970's, he went on, the United States has conducted a military build-up that is turning the Pacific Ocean ''into an arena of military-political confrontation.''
During the same period, according to the Pentagon, the Soviet Union has also strengthened its forces in the Pacific.
To reduce tension, Mr. Gorbachev proposed, as a long-term objective, a conference of Pacific nations that would work out an agreement for cooperation similar to the 1975 Helsinki accord in Europe.
Even before such an ambitious undertaking, he added, the Pacific nations might come together to consider confidence-building measures and the nonuse of force, similar to measures now being worked out by the European nations in Stockholm.
He said such an Asian-Pacific security conference might be convened in a Soviet Pacific city, possibly even Vladivostok, which as a naval base is among Soviet cities now closed to foreigners. 
He said the Soviet Union might consider ending this restriction.
''We would like it to be our widely opened window to the east,'' he said, drawing an apparent analogy to the construction in the 18th century of the city of St. Petersburg (the present Leningrad) as a ''window to the west.''
Among other diplomatic initiatives, Mr. Gorbachev called for an improvement of relations between the Communist countries of Indochina - Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos - and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, a regional grouping made up of Burnei, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand.
Mr. Gorbachev also proposed Soviet-American negotiations aimed at a reduction of Pacific naval forces, particularly nuclear-armed ships, and limitations on the deployment of antisubmarine weapons.
He suggested that the United States consider removing some or all of its military forces from the Philippines.
''If the United States gave up its military presence, say, in the Philippines, we would not leave this step unanswered,'' he said.
