
I REMEMBER thinking, as I stood on the platform waiting for my Chinese guest, that there wasn't a single bench to sit on in the whole station, and I was tired. 
I hadn't stopped rushing for hours, what with dusting my entire collection of Chinese spoons and rice bowls, making up the guest bed, hiding the grandchild's toys and preparing to act nonchalant once Hu Shiguang arrived. 
I had it all worked out to join our mutual Chinese friends for dinner out in our own special restaurant, so I wouldn't have to spend hours in the kitchen. 
My aim was to return his hospitality in Beijing, and give him a day in the countryside at peace with the world.
I searched for the train's headlight, checked my watch a dozen times, and I think I worried that train into view around the curve. 
Shiguang bounced out of the open door with a shout of, ''Hello, Penny!'' and I knew he meant his big smile. 
He was carrying a backpack and a bunch of carnations. 
We really did throw our arms around each other, he, the diminutive Chinese, I, the overstuffed American. 
''How have you been, Da Jie?'' he asked - he has always called me ''Big Sister'' because I am older than he - and we got to talking about everything that had happened to us since we had last met, as I drove us home.
''I have a dog, a big, black dog my neighbor threw away!'' he said. 
It is unheard of for a Chinese on the mainland to have a dog. 
''I called him Reagan, so everybody knows he is mine,'' he chuckled. 
''And I am learning to drive. 
My roommate bought a car for $150, and he is teaching me. 
I need a driver's license as proof of address, so I will be permitted to have a library card.''
I thought to myself, what extraordinary process of logic brought him to that conclusion?
New York University had brought him to the United States to teach Chinese poetry for one year. 
''But the students clamored for language lessons instead of poetry, and so I was drafted into a new vocation,'' he said, smiling wistfully. 
''They are all A.B.C.'s (American-Born Chinese) and they don't know the language. 
It's a difficult job for me.''
I knew that Shiguang was almost prevented from coming here, because he was the only person in Beijing who could translate the ancient poets into modern Chinese.
My husband, Jimmie, came outside to greet us and we all migrated to the backyard where Jim was whip-cutting the edge of the vegetable garden. 
Shiguang automatically squatted and proceeded to pull weeds. 
There he was, smack in the middle of all those vegetables - Chinese, of course - bok choy, snow peas, long beans - in his pin-striped pants and shiny black shoes.
''You enjoy weeding, Shiguang, a city boy like you?''
''Of course!'' he answered. 
''I am a human being.''
''Would you harvest the snow peas, if I get you a bucket?''
I asked.
''Of course!'' he said again. 
So I set about fixing the raspberries and we worked in silent rapport. 
Then we recalled his months of forced labor on a farm, during the Cultural Revolution.
''Is it true, Shiguang, that the farmers would steal your crops if you didn't post a lookout?''
He laughed. 
''They would steal anything you turned your back on, even a little piece of wire!''
''But you were all one people - why would they do that?''
''The peasants were very intolerant of the mass of intellectuals that got dumped in their midst. 
They told us, 'You have money to buy food!
Why should you be growing it?'
We were torn from our homes and families, separated from our work, but we were rich in their eyes, and envy makes a dangerous bedfellow.''
I eventually found the courage to ask him a question:
''Shiguang, I am giving a barbecue in late August for my father's 85th birthday, and I don't dare attempt to plant the back wall like I used to, because of my surgery. 
Would it appeal to you to stick in a few plants for me?''
''Of course!''
His ever-faithful reply. 
We took off in the car for the best nursery around, knowing it was late in the season for such a project, and he was delighted to see shed after shed of impatiens and begonias of so many colors.
Shiguang hand-picked 36 six-packs of coordinated colors and I watched him tenderly place them in the car. 
He unloaded everything in the shade, to await the next morning for planting.
During dinner, our friends' college-age niece volunteered to help, so we picked her up bright and early the next day. 
I had a surprise in mind for both of them and took them to the Scarsdale Women's Club Book Drop, where they thumbed through the stacks like bees checking blossoms. 
She emerged with a handful of books on shells, gems and household pets, all subjects for her art classes; he took an armful on contemporary American literature, necessary for his forthcoming book in Chinese.
In three hours the whole job was done, and marvelously, too. 
Shiguang organized the work. 
He dug the holes, and Zhen Rong planted the flowers, everything by color.
After I had fixed my favorite Chinese dinner - shredded chicken and zucchini with fish flavor - we relaxed with two symphony orchestras on television. 
Then Jimmie asked Shiguang if he had ever played computer games, to which he replied excitedly that he had wandered into an arcade once, and would like to try again. 
So my ''Little Brother'' and my giant husband banged mercilessly at the computer keyboard - forgotten was the culture gap, the exhaustion from the garden work, even the hour of the night, for they played until 1 A.M., like young boys.
The next day Hu Shiguang made ready to leave and pumped both our hands by way of ''thank you.''
''It's friendship across the oceans once again, Da Jie, isn't it?'' he said. 
I hugged him goodbye so no one could see the tear caught in my eyelash. 
Penny Stamm of Scarsdale is a member of the Westchester Chapter of United States-China Peoples' Friendship Association.
