
LOS ANGELES
It was a short, short time ago, the
way history is measured in China,
that sports were relegated to providing exercise and an example of social propriety. 
In the time when China was closed and turbulent, the sports slogan of the cultural revolution of 1966 was ''Friendship first, competition second.''
Such a short time later, China has brought 227 athletes to these Summer Games, and Lu Jindong, the assistant chef de mission of the Chinese delegation, was able to tell a news conference yesterday: ''If we win 10 gold medals, I'll be a happy, happy man.''
This is a great leap forward for a nation that has not participated in an Olympics since 1952 and has never won a medal, but China is one of the emerging nations of the Olympic movement. 
Its ambitions were clear yesterday when Mr. Lu revealed that China would consider applying to be host for the Summer Games of 2000.
Mr. Lu also said that athletes who win gold medals will be given a grant of approximately $2,000, hastening to add that it would be ''an award, a scholarship,'' and that ''it's more important that they not think of the rewards, however.''
From outsider to would-be Olympic host in a few decades would be a staggering turnaround, but China has questioned many other values. 
Since the reign of Deng Xiaoping began in the late 1970's, the sports slogan has been: ''Break out of Asia and advance on the world.''
In advancing on the world, they have sent a team that includes their best-known athlete, Zhu Jianhua, the world-record holder in the high jump, as well as Wu Shude, a weight lifter, Li Ning and Tong Fei, two gymnasts, Li Kongzheng, a diver who has rebounded from laser surgery for a detached retina, and volleyball and gymnastics contenders.
The Chinese appearance here is
part of the great upheaval of the
1980's that has brought in western culture and technology, including the news report from Peking the other day that blue jeans are now acceptable in China.
''Critics say that blue jeans represent the bourgeois life style,'' commented the English-language China Daily of Peking. 
''This really is farfetched because blue jeans used to be worn by hard-working American cowboys who had little to do with the bourgeoisie.''
It was only 18 years ago that intellectuals were sent into the countryside for re-education. 
At a reception for the Chinese team in General Lee's Restaurant in Chinatown the other day, Minnie Gan, a Chinese national who was educated in Christian schools and is now living in this country, recalled how she was sent to a farm in the late 60's to correct her thinking ''because I was an intellectual.''
Competitive sports was never a high priority for the Chinese yet it was further diminished during the Cultural Revolution. 
Xin Yun-Zhang, a 23-year-old physicist student from Peking who is now studying at the University of California at San Diego, drove up to cheer the arrival of the Chinese team in Chinatown last week. 
In very good English, he recalled how values had changed since he was young.
''Under the rule of friendship first, competition second, sports was a meeting, a party,'' he said. 
''That's not bad, that's good, people came together, but it wasn't encouraging the quality of sports.''
There were examples of teams or individuals being declared the winner because of superior attitude, or results being ignored for fear of embarrassing the losers.
He recalled a childhood when according to official teaching, ''the United States was imperialist and the Soviet Union was, how do you say it, revisionist.''
He only vaguely heard of the Olympics and said ''I didn't know that Chinese could send a team.''
But not long after the death of Mao Zedong in 1976, the young student recalled, ''they taught us about the Greek soldier who ran so far that he died after delivering his message'' - the origin of the marathon race.
Since rejoining the Olympic movement in 1979, China has entered world competition, learning technique and attitude. 
The other day at a workout of the Chinese male volleyball team at the Long Beach Arena, the dozen players wore varied outfits and smiled often and patted each other on the back. 
The body language was of friends or comrades, not of teammates expected to bring home a medal or face disgrace.
Every so often, Shen Keqin, an
older player at 26, gave a few
slap handshakes to teammates, and once, after plunking a serve for a point, he did a little strut and a wiggle that reminded a couple of American observers of Jimmy Connors.
''We get used to these expressions maybe more from the Japanese than from Americans,'' Shen said through a translator.
Asked whether he had yet observed an American-style high-five, he smiled and replied: ''That is the ultimate expression of a wonderful job, when you are very satisfied. 
Therefore, most of the time, we do not do it.''
Shen was asked if his view of competition had changed since his childhood in Maoist China. 
He said: ''Friendship and competition are in first place but friendship is still the most important.''
Later, after Shen had left, a Chinese journalist based in the West, who had translated the interview, offered another view of the shift in sports values: ''Friendship is still more important,'' he said, ''but the best way to show respect for somebody is to compete hard in sports.''
The role of athletes is still evolving. 
Zhu Jianhua is given larger portions of meat to sustain energy in his tall, slender frame, yet Zhu feels the need to share his rations with his fellow dormitory students. 
Zhu is allowed to train in his home of Shanghai rather than in the sports centers in Peking.
Xin Yun-Zhang, the young physicist from Peking living in San Diego, said ''all China will watch closely to see what happens here.''
He said he thought his homeland was becoming more expectant of results, but he added: ''The difference is expression. 
Here, the athletes are making more money, they are millionaires. 
In China, you are valued more that people will respect you. 
There is privilege in a different sense.''
Now there are rising expectations, the prospect of small grants for winning gold medals, and the hope from Mr. Lu, the assistant chef de mission:
''Friendship and understanding, peace through the world Olympic movement,'' he said, adding, ''This is a chance to learn from other nations.''
Also, he said, ''our athletes have been preparing in order to win glory for our nation.''
