
LOS ANGELES First they made history, then they
were history. 
The American
women's volleyball team won a silver medal Tuesday night and yesterday began planning a reunion, when all of them will have scattered to the corners of the earth.
The players talked about their plans with tentative optimism, but their coach, Arie Selinger, spilled out his doubts about the future of volleyball in America, his decision to step down as American coach, and his bitterness with some people's perception of him as a tyrant.
While an all-star collection of players was celebrating America's first gold medal in women's basketball, the close, cohesive 10-year volleyball effort (''I've got 11 sisters,'' Debbie Green had said) came up one medal short.
In these Summer Games, we have seen a few Americans sulk over not setting world records and brood about silver medals, but there was no all-or- nothing bravado from Arie Selinger and his players, no cheapening of America's first volleyball medal.
''We did our best, we gave it our all,'' Flo Hyman said yesterday. 
''The competition was intense. 
We accomplished a lot. 
We're proud of our silver medal.''
Volleyball's Team America brought a beautiful sport to the public consciousness, but in the end it was defeated by a deserving Chinese team in three crushing games Tuesday night.
History will make them one of the most unusual teams in American sports history. 
They came together in a suburb of Houston nearly a decade ago, and they moved to Colorado Springs and then to Coto de Caza, Calif., becoming the Jeannie Appleseeds of a sport that flourishes in the Orient.
Since 1975, they traveled to China
and Japan and the Soviet Union,
they trained together to the exclusion of college degrees and full personal lives, and as their era ended yesterday, they proudly said it had all been worth it.
''Nobody put a ball and chain on us,'' said Sue Woodstra, the captain, who is 27 years old, has been playing volleyball 11 years, and will never wear the national colors again.
They are old now - 9 of the 12 players at least 24 years old, well into the age when the body no longer thinks it's fun to dive onto the floor, landing on one shoulder, while trying to flick a hard rubber ball back into the air with the fingertips.
''The Chinese have 10 million players,'' Miss Woodstra said. 
''You see what you're up against.''
On Tuesday night they were up against Lang Ping, the best Chinese spiker, an athletic combination of lace and steel. 
Flo Hyman, the worldly and talented American spiker, has described volleyball players as ''graceful, with strength,'' and Lang Ping and her always-positive teammates were more graceful, more strong, than the Americans.
The Chinese work 358 days a year, with a national volleyball program extending into every province, since the government decided to join the world sports powers in the mid-70's.
''Friendship first, competition second,'' the Chinese used to say, but in the regime of Deng Xiaoping they changed their motto to ''Break out of Asia and advance on the world.''
On Tuesday night they advanced on the net of Team America - more agile, more subtle, more aggressive than the home team. 
The scores were 16- 14, 15-3, 15-9.
The two teams had met last Friday in the final match of the first round, with the loser knowing it would meet Japan in the semifinal round. 
Selinger admitted yesterday that he had wanted to avoid Japan, and that he had motivated his players for the supreme effort against China the first time, ''to go at least for the silver.''
If Selinger was working with his players' minds, his counterpart from China was no ''Ned-in-the-third-reader,'' as Casey Stengel used to call novices. 
After losing to the United States, Yuan Weimin had accused his players of being ''qing xu bu wen ding'' - emotionally unstable in Mandarin.
''The players felt regret on our part,'' Miss Lang said Tuesday night through an interpreter. 
''Afterward, the coach did not criticize us. 
He told us last Friday was important but this one is the tough match.''
After the victory over Peru in the
semifinals, Selinger and Miss
Hyman said they felt an important part of their mission had been accomplished. 
They had brought volleyball to national television, they had interested new fans and even some new journalists, who hadn't known a spiked shot from a spiked drink. 
But if their mission was accomplished, a second-guesser asked, didn't that detract from their gold-medal effort?
''I didn't want to make it too hard,'' Selinger said. 
''Had we won the first game, I think the Chinese would have been in a tense situation. 
Maybe, it could be, that when we lost the first game, maybe at that particular time our players said, 'We've already won the silver,' but I doubt it.''
They were proud of their silver yesterday, the last trophy this team will win. 
The team is breaking up. 
The older players will become coaches, get their degrees, stay with the game in some capacity. 
Selinger said he would step down as coach and try to gain funding for a private, amateur volleyball base, rather than work through the United States Volleyball Association. 
He defended the ''conscious decision'' to build this team ''at the top of the pyramid'' for the 1980 Summer Games that America never attended, at the risk of not building a junior program, and he acknowledged that behind the disbanding team, the cupboard is bare.
''I think at this point, we should not maintain a national team but look for the future,'' Selinger said. 
''It will be difficult to come up with a team for four or eight years. 
I'd look to go back to basics. 
We have very little at the younger ages.''
Then some bitterness surged out of Arie Selinger, a 47-year-old Polish Israeli-American, who was rescued from a ''death train'' on its way to a Nazi camp in 1945. 
He criticized articles by one Los Angeles reporter who, he claimed, had made him sound more driven, more intense, than he deserved.
''It was working on the minds of my players,'' Selinger said. 
''They found themselves in an emotional bind.''
Yesterday the players admitted the team had willingly worked
four or five hours a day with few weeks off for the past decade. 
Sue Woodstra said: ''Arie is very determined. 
If you know his background, you know what he's been through. 
He demands a lot from his players - but no more than we can deal with.''
For Arie Selinger to be the Captain Queeg of Coto de Caza, the Darth Vader of volleyball, he would have had to show some kind of mania for a gold medal, but it never surfaced, not in victory, not in defeat.
He talked about the social value of a sport that encourages athletes to be ''graceful, with strength.''
And when the time came to accept a loss to a deserving Chinese team, in the last time these 12 women will ever be together as a unit, volleyball's Team America was graceful and it was strong.
