
Artis Gilmore of the Chicago Bulls, wearing a yarmulka, has prayed at the Wailing Wall in Jerusalem. 
In Tangiers, Wes Unseld rode a camel. 
In Monaco, Walt Bellamy, while being photographed with Princess Grace, was asked to put his arm around her. 
He refused, saying, ''That would not be protocol.''
Teams from the National Basketball Players Association are playing games and putting on clinics in foreign countries
Teams from the National Basketball Players Association, playing games and putting on clinics in places like Monaco, Israel, Mexico, Italy, Spain and the Ivory Coast, have been commonplace for 14 years.
''We started this to expose our players to something more than the day-to-day basketball life,'' said Larry Fleisher, the general counsel of the players association.
Next month, in China, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar of the Los Angeles Lakers, who stands 7 feet 2 inches, or Marvin Webster of the Knicks, 7-1, or Bob Lanier of the Milwaukee Bucks, 6-11, might be playing against Mu-Tieh-chu. 
Known as Mr. Mu for short, he is 7 feet 7 inches tall. 
He weighs over 300 pounds.
A contingent of 27 N.B.A. players, composed of player representatives from each of the league's 23 teams and the association's officers, will leave July 8 for China. 
Accompanying as coaches will be Oscar Robertson, John Havlicek, Paul Silas and Lenny Wilkens. 
For the first time, the players have asked Larry O'Brien, the N.B.A. commissioner, to join them, and he has agreed.
The players will stage clinics and play five games in Peking, Hangzhou and Shanghai. 
Two of the games will be against the Chinese national team, which features Mr. Mu.
''I saw that Mr. Mu on television,'' said Lanier, the president of the players association. 
''He's big and slow, something very mechanical about him.''
Mr. Mu was not Lanier's immediate concern, however. 
The beds were.''Do they have big beds in China for us?'' asked Lanier. 
Fleisher and Robertson, who went to China to arrange the tour, said: ''Wherever we have gone, the problem has been the beds. 
They are not used to people the size of N.B.A. players, and there are usually eight or nine big beds. 
The big guys are always fighting over who gets them. 
What we have had to do in some places, is extend the beds by adding tables.''
''I wonder where Mr. Mu sleeps?'' said Lanier.
