
The faculty council at St. John's University in Queens voted yesterday to reproach the president, the Rev. Joseph T. Cahill, for removing the Asian studies program from the Liberal Arts College and the Graduate School and making it a separate entity more directly under his control.
''The liberal arts faculty council hereby expresses its concern and displeasure at the removal and the manner of removal of the Asian studies program from St. John's College and the Graduate School,'' faculty representatives declared in their statement.
By its vote, the faculty registered its disapproval, but it has no power to change the president's action. 
Father Cahill could not be reached for comment yesterday, according to Charlotte Tomic of the school's public-information office.
The faculty council at St. John's University in Queens voted yesterday to reproach the president, the Rev. Joseph T. Cahill, for removing the Asian studies program from the Liberal Arts College and the Graduate School and making it a separate entity more directly under his control.
Asked before the vote why he had taken the action, Father Cahill said through a spokesman that it was ''an administrative decision made to insure the viability of the center's academic programs.''
But faculty members throughout the university asserted that the president should have sought their approval before acting. 
The vote stems from a longstanding dispute between the administration and the faculty over how to treat the study of China. 
The Asian studies program has become the arena for the conflict.
The administration continues to maintain ties formed in earlier years with Taiwan. 
Some faculty members feel this jeopardizes the academic integrity of the program.
While programs at other universities have been increasingly open to scholarly links with China, the mainland government, St. John's has not.
Directors of the program have served in the Taiwan government, there have been publishing ties with Taiwan and money from Taiwan has supported the program and helped build its headquarters.
The differences between Father Cahill and the faculty came to light last Memorial Day weekend in connection with a conference on Chinese literature in which scholars from China participated.
 
Asian Scholars Are Summoned
Three weeks later, the Asian studies faculty was summoned to meet with Father Cahill in his private dining room in Alumni Hall. 
''He called my conference 'diabolical,' '' said Jeffrey C. Kinkley, the professor who organized the conference and invited scholars from both China and Taiwan. 
Dr. Kinkley's observation was corroborated.
''Father Cahill has no recollection of making a statement like that,'' Martin Healy said on behalf of the president, who refused to speak to a reporter, but agreed to respond to questions submitted to Mr. Healy, the university's public-relations spokesman.
Last fall, Father Cahill appointed Yih-Young Chen as a vice president of the university and director of Asian studies. 
Dr. Chen until then was director of a bureau in Taiwan's Ministry of Education. 
He has a doctorate in computer science from Tulane University.
Dr. Peter Nosco, who was associate dean for Asian studies until his removal after he had approved plans for the literature conference, Dr. Kinkley, who has a doctorate from Harvard in East Asian languages, and several other young scholars were hired in recent years, signifying an apparent intention to upgrade the program.
The Asian studies program was established at St. John's in 1959, and its first director was Paul K.T. 
Sih, who headed it until his death in 1978.
Dr. Sih had served Taiwan in its embassy in Rome, according to his autobiography. 
He took great pride in the building that was erected in 1973 to house the Asian studies program.
It is a pagoda-like structure with a yellow tile roof, contrasting with the nondescript, boxy buildings that make up most of the rest of the campus in Jamaica, Queens, overlooking the Grand Central Parkway.
Asked where the money had come from to erect the building, Mr. Healy said he would not release the names of donors, but Dr. Chen said the structure was ''a gift from the Republic of China,'' Taiwan.
In the mid-1970's, the program was prodded to give up its authority to grant doctorates, after a review by the State Education Department.
One of the outside reviewers, Charles O. Huck, a professor at the University of Michigan, said recently that ''the whole operation seemed pro-Taiwan,'' and that objective scholarship in that atmosphere would have been ''impossible.''
The program continues to offer bachelor's and master's degrees. 
Although the university press stopped operating in the 1970's, St. John's published a biography of Chiang Kai-shek under its imprint in 1981.
