
Hu Na, a 19-year-old Chinese tennis player who defected here last summer, says one of the reasons she decided to act was her feeling that Chinese officials were trying to coerce her into joining the Communist Party.
Miss Hu, who spoke in her first interview since seeking political asylum last July, also said she feared becoming caught up in a factional political struggle in China.
She recalled that on one occasion she became particularly upset when her team captain told her that whenever she lost a tennis match it would be a sign ''I had not sufficiently studied Marxist-Leninist thought.''
Until this week Miss Hu had remained in seclusion in San Francisco since her defection during the 32-nation Federation Cup tournament in Santa Clara, Calif.
 
Leader Demands That She Return
In the interview, which was conducted in Washington, Miss Hu expressed frustration over what she said was the Reagan Administration's delay in deciding whether to grant her asylum, and indicated she was worried that the Government might bow to pressure from Peking to block her request.
SAN FRANCISCO, March 19 - Hu Na, a 19-year-old Chinese tennis player who defected here last summer, says one of the reasons she decided to act was her feeling that Chinese officials were trying to coerce her into joining the Communist Party.
Miss Hu's case has become a serious issue in United States-Chinese relations, which have already been strained by Peking's unhappiness over United States arms sales to Taiwan, quotas on Chinese textile imports and restrictions on the sale of American technology to China. 
China's paramount leader, Deng Xiaoping, has taken the unusual step of personally demanding Miss Hu's return in meetings with several United States officials, according to a ranking State Department official, and the Chinese Foreign Ministry has warned that cultural exchanges between the two countries could be adversely affected if she is granted asylum.
To add to the pressure, this week the Chinese Consulate here made public the texts of two letters from Miss Hu's parents pleading for her return. 
One was addressed to Miss Hu, the other to Secretary of State George P. Shultz. Both were originally delivered to Mr. Shultz while he was in Peking last month for talks.
Miss Hu, a tall, graceful woman, suggested in the interview that one reason for Peking's intense efforts to obtain her return was that she had often played tennis with Wan Li, a member of the Standing Committee of the Chinese Communist Politburo and a close associate of Mr. Deng. Mr. Wan, she said, liked to play doubles with her and had often lectured her on Communist ideology after their matches.
 
Effect on Family Feared
Edward C.Y. 
Lau, Miss Hu's lawyer in San Francisco, said Miss Hu did not want to hurt relations between China and the United States and was worried about the effect her actions would have on her family. 
Her father is an army basketball coach and her younger brother is a star junior tennis player.
But Mr. Lau said that because of the Government's procrastination over her efforts to gain asylum, he had decided to let Miss Hu end her seclusion and tell her story. 
Last weekend he took her to Washington, where she met with several senators and represenatives who have expressed interest in her plight. 
These included Representative Stephen J. Solarz, Democrat of Brooklyn, chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Asian and Pacific Affairs, who invited her to play tennis at his house with Zbigniew Brzezinski, President Carter's national security adviser, last Saturday.
Miss Hu is not sure what she will do if she is finally granted asylum. 
She says she recognizes she is not nearly as good a tennis player as Martina Navratilova, the Czechoslovak defector, and though she has been offered tennis scholarships to two small colleges she speaks only a few words of English and has not been to school since she began playing tennis full time at the age of 14.
In the interview Miss Hu said she had decided to defect after the Communist Party leader of the tennis camp where she had trained wrote her a letter virtually demanding she join the party. 
She said he had frequently advised her, ''The Communist Party has raised you and you owe your success to the party.''
 
'I Didn't Feel Safe'
But she was afraid he only wanted to use her as a model for other young Chinese and as a pawn in his own factional battles in the party. 
She recalled that China's world champion table tennis player, Zhuang Zedong, who had risen to be Minister of Sports during the Cultural Revolution, was sent to a labor camp after the downfall of his sponsor, Jiang Qing, Mao Zedong's widow, in 1976.
''So I didn't feel safe,'' Miss Hu said. 
''You never know when one faction is going to be replaced by another.''
Miss Hu's case presents an embarrassing situation for the Reagan Administration, which risks offending either the Chinese or the President's conservative supporters in the United States. 
Her application for asylum also raises the question of whether the United States has one standard for dealing with defectors from the Soviet Union and another for those from China.
A State Department official familiar with Miss Hu's case said it had touched off prolonged wrangling between the China desk, which opposed the request, and the Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, which favored it. 
The Human Rights Bureau won the argument and made a favorable recommendation to the Immigration and Naturalization Service last November. 
But some officers on the China desk have continued to lobby out of channels with the Immigration Service, the official said. 
By law, the Immigration Service makes the final determination on requests for asylum, though it usually follows the recommendation of the State Department.
Mr. Lau said the Immigration Service had repeatedly assured him since early January that a decision on Miss Hu's request was imminent. 
But last week, Mr. Lau said, the Immigration Service submitted further questions to the State Department about Miss Hu, and the State Department official said the Immigration Service itself was now divided over what to do.
 
Other Requests Pending
The Immigration Service appears to be worried that granting Miss Hu asylum would set a precedent that could affect the more than 1,000 pending applications from other Chinese citizens now in this country. 
That figure is about 10 percent of the 10,000 or so Chinese on extended visits here, mostly students and scholars. 
So far fewer that than a dozen of these requests have been approved.
Last July, at a hearing before an Immigration Service judge in San Francisco for a Chinese meteorologist, Xia Yuren, a State Department official advised the judge that the Chinese scientist would not be in danger of persecution if he was deported to China. 
Mr. Xia, who had come to the United States to conduct research at the New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology, had applied for asylum after jumping out of a window at the Chinese Consulate in San Francisco, where he had been taken by the Chinese authorities.
The State Department official, Lawrence L. Arthur, chief of the Asylum Division of the Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, said in written testimony that he was sure Mr. Xia was in no danger because the State Department had checked with the Chinese Embassy in Washington.
In response, Chalmers Johnson, a professor of political science at the University of California at Berkeley and a specialist on China, told the judge that if a Foreign Service officer gave similar assurances about a Soviet defector after getting in touch with the Soviet Embassy he would probably be ''fired on the spot.''
