
While diplomats negotiate and nations go to war over international boundaries, stamp collectors remain unaffected by the winds of change. 
Nowhere is that better found than in the treatment of China. 
In stamp catalogues there are two Chinas.
The Scott Standard Postage Stamp Catalogue begins its China listings with the 1878 issues of the Imperial Maritime Customs Post. 
The large and small dragon issues have been the subject of intensive study and award-winning exhibits. 
The Imperial Chinese Post issues of 1898 were overprinted in 1912 to serve as the first issues at the time of the Chinese revolution.
The Communist revolution led by Mao Tse-tung changed the political geography of China in 1949. 
But in the catalogue, the China listings are the ''Republic of China (Taiwan)'' including the provincial issues and a separate section for ''China (People's Republic).''
Pre-Communist China listings end with Scott number 1006. 
The first Taiwan stamp is assigned N1007, while the first People's Republic stamp is assigned N1, the treatment normally accorded the issue of a new nation.
This arrangement reflects philatelic reality. 
While the issues of China have taken on increasing popularity, most serious collectors emphasize the early issues and continue their collections with the stamps of Taiwan and China.
The China Stamp Society is the major specialist group in this country devoted to the stamps and postal history of China. 
The society's quarterly journal is entitled ''China'', emphasizing the unified collecting approach. 
Information on the society can be obtained from Mr. Frederick deRidder, Secretary, The China Stamp Society, 100 Font Boulevard, San Francisco, Calif. 
94132.
Much of the challenge and the frustration encountered by collectors of Chinese stamps and covers stems from complexity of Chinese characters. 
The identification of Chinese stamps and cancellations is the subject of a new study by Michael Rogers of Winter Park, Fla. 
''The English-Chinese Philatelic Dictionary & Identification Key'' is a 59-page, 8 1/2 by 11-inch publication that unravels much of the mystery in understanding these characters.
The guide includes a dictionary that translates 300 philatelic terms, dates and colors, a section that translates Chinese characters and another that identifies and locates the towns and provinces.
Guides to the two Chinese systems of year numbering - essential in dating covers - and conversions of Chinese names using the three major translation systems plus an index for character identification and a locator map complete this comprehensive work. 
It is available for $11 from Michael Rogers, Inc., 340 Park Avenue North, Winter Park, Fla. 
32789.
Also available is a copy of the catalogue for their latest specialized Asia and worldwide airpost postal auction and their all-China Price List. 
Each is offered for $1 or will be sent free of charge with the Dictionary & Identifier.
The China area offers new issue collectors the dual advantages of some of the loveliest issues found anywhere and the existence of two postal entities to maintain a steady flow of new material. 
Despite their political differences, the historical, cultural and social similarities of China and Nationalist China are evident in their new issues.
China does lean more towards industrial and political themes, while Nationalist China emphasizes the great traditions of Chinese culture. 
But there are common themes, such as the 1984 Summer Olympics and the veneration of Sun Yat-sen.
The latest releases from Nationalist China are highlighted by four colorful stamps issued Feb. 
20 that depict Chinese flower arrangements. 
A yearbook picturing all issues of 1985 also was released on that date. 
March 20 saw the release of a souvenir sheet and four singles celebrating the 90th anniversary of the postal service.
On March 26 a single commemorative honoring the revolutionary martyr Chen Tien-hua was issued. 
Recent issues from China include March releases for Chinese heroes Dong Biwu, Lin Biwu and He Long. 
These stamps are available from local dealers and mail order new issue specialists.
 
Hospitals Issue
A United States commemorative stamp honoring this nation's public hospitals was issued Friday by the United States Postal Service. 
Peter E. Voss, vice-chairman of the Postal Service Board of Governors, was the principal speaker at the first day of issue ceremony conducted at New York's Bellevue Hospital Center which is celebrating its 250th anniversary this year.
The history of public hospitals dates back to the almshouses in 16th century England. 
The closing of religious institutions in the 1530's by Henry VIII made care of the sick a public responsibility. 
Acts of Parliament subsequently placed on local communities the responsibility for physically and mentally ill, aged and homeless.
The almshouses and workhouses brought together the poor, the sick and the petty criminals. 
The able-bodied were forced to earn their keep, while those who could not work were housed in cheap, often-unhealthy quarters.
By the 1700s, voluntary hospitals supported by charity and run by prominent citizens began to flourish in England. 
These institutions attracted distinguished physicians through the social contacts of board members. 
They also offered medical teaching facilities.
The American colonies adopted this dual system of hospitals. 
The earliest public almshouse to evolve into a hospital was opened in Philadelphia around 1731. 
It eventually became Philadelphia General Hospital. 
In New York City, the House of Correction, Workhouse and Poorhouse opened in 1736. 
That facility was the forerunner of today's Bellevue Hospital Center, a complex that is one of the largest hospitals in the country. 
With the closing of Philadelphia General in 1977, Bellevue became America's oldest active public hospital.
The Public Hospitals stamp follows a growing pattern caused by the need to limit the number of commemoratives issued each year while still recoginzing deserving institutions and organizations. 
The Postal Service's announcement and selection of a first day site singled out Bellevue on the occasion of an important anniversary, but the stamp is a generic salute to public hospitals.
In contrast, a 1964 commemorative singled out the Mayo brothers, who founded the Mayo Clinic in Minnesota. 
These are the only two United States stamps issued to honor health institutions in this country.
The sterile modern design by Uldis Purins of Newton, Mass. is an abstract presentation of a hospital with the familiar blue and white ''H'' road sign that leads motorists to hospitals. 
The artist demonstrates an ability to produce attractive traditional work in the 1985 Public Education issue.
Collectors desiring first day covers are encouraged to purchase the Public Hospital stamps and affix them to envelopes before sending for first day cancels. 
The stamps are on sale at local post offices. 
Deadline for placing orders is May 11. 
A return address should be placed in the lower right of each envelope submitted, with a peelable label suggested for this purpose. 
Such envelopes should be sent to Customer-Affixed Envelopes, Public Hospitals Stamp, Postmaster, New York, N.Y. 
10001-9991.
The address for covers without stamps affixed is Public Hospitals Stamp, Postmaster, New York, N.Y. 
10001-9992. Covers without stamps affixed should be accompanied by personal check or money order for 22 cents per stamp, to a maximum of 50 covers. 
Postage stamps are not acceptable as payment.
 
Spellman Museum
The Cardinal Spellman Philatelic Museum will conduct its annual Philatelic Literature Fair and stamp bourse next Saturday and Sunday. 
The museum is one of the few of its kind in the United States. 
It is located at 235 Wellesley Street, Weston, Mass.
The museum was founded in 1963 through a generous gift to Cardinal Spellman from the estate of Mrs. Mabel Gilman Corey. 
Cardinal Spellman was an avid philatelist who donated his collection to the Sisters of St. Joseph in Boston. 
The Sisters administer Regis College in Weston and it was on a grant of land from Regis that the museum was built. 
The collection of the National Philatelic Museum, formerly located in Philadelphia, also is housed in the Spellman Museum.
The museum's facilities and services includes meeting space for local clubs and national conventions, adult courses in philately, research and circulating libraries and a publications program. 
Information is available on membership privileges and the tax-deductibility of donations to the museum.
 
Opinions III
The Philatelic Foundation recently released ''Opinions III'', the latest volume in its highly-regarded series. 
The book is available for $29.50 from dealers who carry philatelic literature or from The Philatelic Foundation, 270 Madison Avenue, New York, N.Y. 
10016. The Opinions series was initiated in 1983. 
Each of the books issued to date contains articles by America's leading philatelic experts. 
They provide insights into the examination and evaluation of stamps and covers and information on how collectors can avoid costly purchases of misdescribed material and fakes.
Opinions III comprises 226 pages and 36 articles on some of the more challenging or revealing pieces to have been submitted to The Philatelic Foundation in its 40-year history. 
United States, British Commonwealth and general foreign material is covered. 
Because the same expertizing techniques and tools can be applied in a variety of situations, the Opinions books are useful to most collectors interested in the examination of stamps and covers and in the condition factors that affect their value. 
A liberal use of photographs, including high-magnification views, adds to the usefulness of the book.
 
Literature
Further information on the 1851-57 issue, and on stamps generally, can be found in the Scott Specialized Catalogue. 
It is available from stamp dealers and in many libraries. 
The ''Information for Collectors'' section is recommended reading.
Specialized books can be obtained from philatellic literature dealers. 
A few in the metropolitan area who publish philatelic literature price lists include William T. Crowe, Box 214, Danbury, Conn. 
06810; Subway Stamp Shop, 111 Nassau Street, New York, N.Y. 
10038 and Theo Van Dam, Box 26, Brewster, N.Y. 
15009. Auctions that include major literature sections are conducted by Robbins Auctions, Inc. 
19 West 44th Street, New York, N.Y. 
10036.
 
The Marshall Islands
On March 7 the Marshall Islands released two high-value definitives as the fourth section in its current maps and navigation series. 
A $2 issue depicts two atolls in the Radak Chain. 
A $5 stamp shows a map of Bikini atoll.
In addition to the atolls on the $2 issue, a depiction of Mercator's terrestrial globe is depicted. 
Mercator is credited with solving the problem of displaying the earth as a flat surface, using a cylindrical projection that is cut open. 
The navigational aid on the $5 is one-half of a stick chart, the first half having been shown on a previously-issued 20-cent issue.
Each stamp in the series illustrates a map of one or more atolls that make up this trust territory administered by the United States on behalf of the United Nations. 
By agreement with the United States Postal Service, the Marshall Islands began issuing its own stamps in 1984. 
The less than 100 stamps issued to date note the history of the region, as well as depicting native scenes, fish and birds. 
A complete collection of singles can be formed for less than $20.
 
Coming Auctions
April 15-17 - Harmers of New York: United States, British Commonwealth and Foreign including an extensive offering of collections and dealer stocks; catalogues from Harmers of New York, 14 East 33rd Street, New York, N.Y. 
10016. Free at the galleries, $3 by mail.
April 23 - Christie's Robson Lowe Stamp Department: Worldwide stamps and covers; catalogues from Christie's, 502 Park Avenue, New York, N.Y. 
10022. $3 at the galleries, $5 by mail.
May 3-4 - Richard C. Frajola, Inc.,: United States and Confederate States of America postal history including Colonial covers and the Robert Hunt collection of 1861-67 United States classics. 
Catalogues from Richard C. Frajola, Inc., 85 North Street, Danbury, Conn. 
06810. $5 at the gallery or by mail.
