
Stanford University's president, Donald Kennedy, has asked for more information from Steven W. Mosher, a graduate student who was expelled last year after a school investigation into charges of ''illegal and seriously unethical conduct'' while doing research in a Chinese village.
Mr. Mosher's expulsion, which followed pressure by the Chinese Government and some American China specialists, raised questions about academic freedom.
The decision to oust Mr. Mosher from Stanford's doctoral program in anthropology was earlier upheld after reviews by a special faculty committee and then by the dean of the graduate school. 
Mr. Mosher had threatened to sue Stanford for libel if he was not reinstated and made an appeal in January to Mr. Kennedy, his last resort under university policy.
Stanford University pres Donald Kennedy asks for more information from Steven W Mosher, graduate student who was expelled in 1983 after school investigation into charges of 'illegal and seriously unethical conduct' while doing research in Chinese village; some anthropology department members had asserted Mosher was involved in bribery or smuggling to obtain secret local Government documents for his research; illustration (M)'To Supplement the Record'
Mr. Mosher, who now lives in Fresno, Calif., said he had received a letter yesterday from the university president stating, ''I wish to give you the opportunity to supplement the record even at this final phase of proceedings.''
In the letter, Mr. Kennedy said he would also seek ''further clarification from others.''
Mr. Mosher said he was not sure what effect Mr. Kennedy's action would have, but called it a ''delaying tactic.''
A spokesman for Stanford, Robert Byers, confirmed the existence of the letter and suggested that Mr. Kennedy might have wanted to get more information from Mr. Mosher because he had not responded to some of the charges at the time of the original investigation.
In the letter Mr. Kennedy said that ''on the basis of the existing record'' he believed the original decision to expel Mr. Mosher was justified. 
But the letter, which is ambiguous in many passages, also said ''my current inclination would be to refer the matter back'' to the committee of the anthropology department that investigated Mr. Mosher.
 
He Asks 9 Questions
Mr. Mosher said the president's letter asked for futher information on nine questions relating to his activity in China, all of which he said he had answered before.
Neither Mr. Mosher nor Stanford has made public the charges against him, though some members of the anthropology department have asserted there was evidence Mr. Mosher had been involved in bribery or smuggling to obtain secret local Government documents for his research. 
After Mr. Mosher left China in 1980, Peking imposed a ban on futher field research by American scholars, an action that some academics have charged to Mr. Mosher.
Mr. Mosher upset the Chinese authorities by bringing a female research assistant into the village who was not his wife and making a trip in his imported van into a province closed to foreigners.
 
Article Published in Taiwan
When Mr. Mosher was first expelled in February 1983, he said publicly that one of the charges against him was that he had published in Taiwan an article with photographs of women undergoing forced abortions in the Chinese countryside where he had worked. 
Stanford has repeatedly denied that the article had anything to do with his ouster.
Mr. Mosher said yesterday that among the points on which Mr. Kennedy asked for further information was the whereabouts of his wife, Maggie So, while he was in China. 
Miss So, a Hong Kong Chinese from whom he is now divorced, provided much of the testimony against him, according to some Stanford professors.
