
The recent appearance of a first literary effort by a hitherto unknown writer has caused quite a sensation in China. 
Since its publication last spring, ''Blood-Red Sunset,'' which, according to the author, ''is neither an autobiography nor a novel'' but which is really a sort of journalist memoir, has already gone through several printings, totaling 400,000 copies. 
In a population of one billion, that number may not seem great, but in China, where the novel is in such decline that sometimes even a printing of a few thousand copies does not sell out, the success of a book like ''Blood-Red Sunset,'' which is devoid of lurid sex, sensationalism and tales of the supernatural, is of extraordinary significance.
The author, Lao Gui (Old Ghost), whose real name is Ma Bo, became a Red Guard at the beginning of the Cultural Revolution in 1966, when he was still a middle-school (junior high) student. 
He zealously answered the call of the ''Great Leader'' for ideological vigilance by attacking his own mother, Yang Mo, author of the novel ''The Song of Youth,'' denouncing her in public posters and participating in searches of his own home, from which he stole money to finance his trip to ''make revolution in Vietnam.''
Then in 1968, in response to another call by the Great Leader - to participate in the revolution by going up to the mountains and down to the countryside - he joined the Production and Construction Military Corps, which was under the leadership of the military, and went to Inner Mongolia to participate in the reclamation of hundreds of thousands of acres of grassland, ''seeking happiness from hard work.''
Through harsh, exhausting labor, he and his friends managed to destroy thousands of acres of grassland, turning them into a wasteland.
During this time Lao Gui responded to the ''call of the Party'' by criticizing some military officers, statements which others turned into an accusation against him of slandering Lin Biao and Jiang Qing, the new leaders of the Cultural Revolution. 
Once he was labeled an active counterrevolutionary, he became a pariah who was subjected to all sorts of insults and discrimination, and although he tried everything possible to have his case overturned, the label stuck for eight long years. 
Eventually, he was rehabilitated, and he now works as an editor of a political and literary journal. 
''Blood-Red Sunset'' is a chronicle of the author's and his friends' experiences in Inner Mongolia during the Cultural Revolution. 
It reflects the lives of hundreds of thousands of ''educated youth,'' how they were exploited by Mao and the Gang of Four, told to go out and make revolution, then abandoned. 
It is a tale of resistance, struggle, betrayal and, ultimately, the protagonist's awakening to the tragic consequences of his deeds. 
In the eyes of Chinese who lived through the Cultural Revolution, the author's experiences were decidedly unspectacular. 
He was never imprisoned, never subjected to physical torture, never saw his family broken up and scattered, never experienced the loss of kin. 
Vast numbers of people suffered far more grievously than he, many lived in far greater darkness. 
So why has ''Blood-Red Sunset'' captured the attention of so many?
The reaction among Chinese critical circles has been one of shock. 
They have applauded the wave of ''modernist writing'' in China since 1983 - writing which in its emphasis on formal experimentation tended to evade contemporary social reality. 
They have vilified works that confront life squarely, works that ''intervene in society'' - that is, address political and social issues. 
This trend reached its peak in 1985-86, when modernist works monopolized nearly every literary periodical in China, even though readers throughout the nation turned a cold shoulder to them. 
Now, suddenly, a book like ''Blood-Red Sunset'' has burst upon the scene, written in a journalistic style (much of it is historical fact), with no stream-of-consciousness, no flashbacks, no magic or mysticism; it is simple, straight narrative, with so few signs of technical sophistication that the writing sometimes appears rough around the edges. 
That a book like this could set the nation on fire and spark such spectacular reactions is quite amazing.
Some critics feel that ''Blood-Red Sunset'' represents a literary phenomenon whose success may derive from the author's honesty and candor. 
This may indeed be the first example of a work steeped in honesty and candor since as far back as 1949, or even earlier. 
In it the author has bared his soul for all to see: his naivete and lack of polish, his sincerity and ruthlessness, reveal someone who refuses to be humiliated, struggling alone in the darkness, a young man caught up in total isolation and despair, perched precariously on the thin line between man and beast, with an emptiness of spirit and the physical torment of thirst and hunger.
None of the countless man-made calamities that have devastated China over the past 30 years or more can be laid solely at the feet of Mao Zedong or the Gang of Four, so one can state categorically that many people in China have plenty of reasons to be ashamed of their behavior. 
And yet one will look in vain for a written record of that shame; even an occasional admission of error is a rarity. 
All the crimes have been laid at the feet of Mao, or Lin Biao, or the Gang of Four; none of their followers or supporters believe they share in the responsibility, and some proudly identify themselves as ''persecuted veteran cadres.''
That they were persecuted is indisputable; but if it hadn't been for their persecution of others, which depleted the freedoms of the Chinese people until they could no longer distinguish right from wrong or protect their own condition, China's dictatorship of the proletariat would never have evolved into a fascist dictatorship. 
If that weren't enough, not only are these veteran cadres who suffered a few days of persecution unrepentant once they return to power, but they are convinced that their behavior has been correct and feel free to take the same old paths.
But they are nobody's fools, which is why some party leaders announce, ''We must thoroughly renounce the Cultural Revolution'' while discouraging writers and historians from writing about it. 
In 1986, China's revered novelist Ba Jin, who is in his 80's, proposed the creation of a Cultural Revolution museum; his recommendation was vigorously opposed by self-proclaimed ''persecuted veteran cadres'' of the Cultural Revolution, who went so far as to attack him personally. 
Surely, they are aware of their own crimes, which is precisely why they oppose recalling or memorializing the Cultural Revolution.
In this political climate, a new form of ''false realism'' has emerged, which differs from the ''false realism'' which prevailed since the Liberation of 1949 through the Cultural Revolution and which had brazenly distorted and whitewashed reality. 
Whereas the literature of the new pseudo-realism superficially appears to deal with life's major contradictions, including the lives of political prisoners in party prisons, it also skirts historical reality. 
It depicts prison life in magnanimous and benevolent hues; the truly innocent victims, who participated in the Cultural Revolution out of ideological conviction, are portrayed either as criminals or misguided die-hard loyalists of the very political force that brought them to grief in the first place. 
This current form of ''false realism'' never asks why the real criminals, such as abusive and corrupt officials, are removed from public scrutiny and the truly innocent continue to be attacked. 
(This evasion echoes the 1957 anti-rightist campaign, which put hundreds of thousands of intellectuals into political limbo and turned China into a silent nation.) The ''veteran cadres'' in charge of one political campaign after another since 1949, all of which brought injury to vast numbers of innocent people and ultimately led to the Cultural Revolution, are treated in this brand of realism with kid gloves; their crimes are defended, while young people are castigated for being unforgiving and are urged to learn from these ''veteran cadres.''
''Blood-Red Sunset'' is a different sort of work altogether. 
It neither glosses over the true historical picture nor attempts to come to the defense of any individuals. 
It has been successful in echoing the realities of contemporary China because even though it provides only a glimpse of the Cultural Revolution, it is a genuine, no-holds-barred, unadorned piece of writing that reveals the nature of certain Chinese realities experienced by people who were born prior to the Cultural Revolution yet somehow managed to survive it.
It reveals, for instance, the hypocrisy of certain officials in the political hierarchy who enjoy special privileges: spouting revolutionary logic to the intellectual youth and masquerading as true gentlemen, they deceptively or, exercising their authority, seduce young women and seize huge amounts of public property to satisfy their greed. 
The late 1970's decision to revoke and disband the Production and Construction Military Corps described in ''Blood-Red Sunset'' led to massive appropriations of commodities like lumber, cooking oil and grain by military officers at every level. 
In reality, this situation was limited neither to Inner Mongolia nor to that particular time.
China's current predicament - a high rate of currency inflation and skyrocketing prices, even after 10 years of economic reforms - imperils the basic daily needs of large segments of the population. 
The causes can be laid at the feet of China's privileged classes and their political cronies, who have consistently obstructed and undermined the reforms. 
On the one hand, they oppose these economic reforms that threaten their very existence, and even more strongly oppose political reforms - specifically, democratization. 
Meanwhile, they exercise their special privileges to take advantage of opportunities created by the economic reforms and by the nationalized commodities, raw materials and enterprises that they control, brazenly dealing in graft, bribery, smuggling, profiteering and the commercial sale of national interests for their private benefit. 
The mistakes of Mao Zedong continue to be made, 13 years after the fall of the Gang of Four; the old political systems remain intact, inevitably resulting in the unrestrained and unsupervised authority of the privileged classes.
Chinese readers of ''Blood-Red Sunset'' can see the relatively small role this sort of dark power played on the eve of the Cultural Revolution and how it gradually turned the revolutionary zeal of tens of thousands of young intellectuals into dejection and demoralization. 
Over the past 12 years the people of China have been faced with unchecked corruption within a party organization that is once again turning hope into despair. 
The people's morale is now at an all-time low, a result of dissatisfaction with the present and a lack of confidence in the future. 
This crisis of spirit surely accounts for the large audience and the sympathetic reception of ''Blood-Red Sunset.''
The 10 bitter years of the Cultural Revolution have not been a wasted experience for the author of ''Blood-Red Sunset'' and his generation. 
China's hope lies principally in this generation of young intellectuals, for they are the survivors of the maelstrom of the Cultural Revolution; they have known passion, suffering and disillusionment, and these have been the source of their awakening. 
Having paid a higher price for Mao's mistakes than others, they are a more mature generation. 
They are the backbone of China's future progress.
I am convinced that many of the hundreds of thousands of Lao Gui's readers are members of his generation who underwent identical or similar ordeals. 
While they relive their bitter experiences through this work, it is inevitable that they ponder: What should we do now?
 
Translated by Howard Goldblatt.
