
China is fast developing into one of the world's leading exporters, chiefly to finance its growing demand for food imports, the Central Intelligence Agency reported today.
An intelligence study, prepared for the Joint Economic Committee of Congress, found that 10 years after the start of widespread political and economic changes, China is continuing to enjoy impressive growth with rising labor productivity and a declining trade deficit.
But the report warned that although China's economy grew 9.4 percent last year, there still were signs of deep-rooted economic difficulties that could put the brakes on further development.
The list of problems is long but among the chief concerns is lagging grain production caused by inadequate returns to farmers; high inflation; raw material shortages; ''bloated'' work forces; heavy subsidies; ''irrational'' pricing, and slow growth in urban incomes.
''That Chinese workers on the whole have benefited from reform is indisputable,'' said the report, citing, for example, improvements in workers' diets and an increase in ownership of durable goods such as bicycles and refrigerators.
 
Possibilities of Bankruptcies
Despite these improvements, the C.I.A. report said, ''urban residents complain about housing shortages, pollution, and inadequate services such as an overcrowded transportation system.''
In addition, the new system allows enterprises to go bankrupt, a prospect that has ''increased workers' concerns.''
The C.I.A. periodically assesses the economies of both China and the Soviet Union. 
In recent years the Joint Economic Committee has asked the agency to prepare special unclassified reports for wider circulation.
China's exports soared 25 percent last year to $40 billion, according to the intelligence estimates. 
The most striking gains were in exports of textiles and apparel, 40 percent of which came to the United States.
China's role as the No. 1 textile supplier of the United States - surpassing Hong Kong, South Korea and Taiwan - is one of the forces behind the push in the American industry for import quotas.
 
Trade Measures Advance
A bill that would limit annual import growth in textiles to 1 percent passed the House last September and heads for almost certain Senate passage in about four weeks. 
But its future is uncertain because of a promised Presidential veto.
This is separate from broader trade legislation that passed the Senate last week and the House two weeks ago. 
The President has vowed to veto that measure, also.
The study did not discuss China's arms sales, but according to another American Government agency, the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, Beijing was the world's sixth-largest arms supplier between 1982 and 1986.
Its arms sales in 1986 were estimated by the agency at $1.04 billion. 
Some nongovernmental experts say that China's weapons sales doubled in 1987.
 
Concerns About Currency
Officials and analysts here, including Senator William Proxmire, Democrat of Wisconsin, suggest that concerns over hard-currency shortages are pushing the Chinese to export more of both textiles and arms.
The arms sales pose problems for the United States, which has protested China's sales of Silkworm missiles to Iran. 
China has also sold missiles to Iraq and Saudi Arabia.
Some of China's export earnings finance grain imports from the United States. 
Still, China's exports to this country are rising faster than imports - 33 percent versus 12 percent. 
In 1986 China's trade surplus with the United States widened 60 percent, to $3.4 billion.
 
Trade With Russians Off
Meanwhile, China's trade with the Soviet Union has dipped, reflecting in part what the C.I.A. said was ''Chinese dissatisfaction with the quality and technical level of Soviet industrial equipment.''
The report also found a growing private sector in China, which includes 300,000 enterprises and an additional 20 million ''individual enterprises'' - mostly one-person or family-run operations.
''Although the private sector generally leads the country in growth in productivity and output, it employs less than 3 percent of China's industrial labor force and produces less than 1 percent of the country's industrial output,'' the C.I.A. report said.
