
THE stuffed dumpling, humble as it may seem, is a dish with a fascinating history, going back many centuries and interwoven into the cuisines of a number of countries.
The story has often been told of Marco Polo arriving in China during the 13th century and discovering with delight that the Chinese were producing a variety of stuffed noodles that included won ton. 
So impressed was he that he brought the secrets back to Italy. 
That tale is considered apocryphal by both the Chinese and Italians, but wouldn't it be fascinating to know how the two cuisines are related?
Similarly, what about the pelmeni of Russia?
These are delectable Siberian dumplings filled with meat or mushrooms or potatoes or cabbage. 
What cook traveled the roads from Canton, or wherever, to the Irtysh River in the cold plateaus of Siberia, bringing with him the goodness of filled pasta?
Craig Claiborne comment discusses recipes for fillings of variations of stuffed dumplings
Or consider the kreplach, the filled dumpling held in such high esteem in the Jewish kitchen. 
The migrations of the Jews, carrying with them a culinary heritage from various parts of the world, are well known, as is the fact that many Jewish specialties are borrowings from the Russian. 
At what point did the pelmeni turn into kreplach, with its economical use of ground cooked beef as the filling?
That use of cooked meat, probably from a soup or stew, is also characteristic of dumplings. 
The lack of kosher meat in medieval ghettos dictated that there be ways to stretch a meager supply from one meal to another.
The uses to which dumplings are put are intriguing as well. 
They are probably most often used in soups, and yet a wide array of sauces may also be served with them.
Won tons, for example, go deliciously with a blend of soy sauce, garlic, vinegar, grated ginger, hot chilies and the like, a combination that would seem odd to an Italian chef thinking of ravioli. 
For ravioli there is nothing like a tomato sauce with freshly grated cheese or alla panna - a reduction of heavy cream and cheese. 
Or (as they do in Rapallo when they serve pansotti, a form of ravioli) a salsa di noce made with walnuts and a form of ricotta cheese.
 
Curiously, however, the Siberians and those who prepare pelmeni arenot averse to serving them with a sauce somew hat akin to the Chinese soy sauce, vinegar and herb combination.
Pelmeni are often served with a mustard sauce, sour cream and chopped dill. 
Kreplach, like the Chinese dumplings, are often fried in fat (butter or chicken fat, for example) rather than served in soup.
What follow are our versions of these stuffed dumplings. 
It is difficult to pinpoint the exact yield of filled dumplings because it depends on the thickness to which the noodle dough is rolled out, the amount of filling allotted to each dumpling and the caution exercised by the cook in cutting out the dough to be filled.
 
Won Ton
From ''The Chinese Cookbook'' by Craig Claiborne and Virginia Lee (J.B. 
Lippincott,
 
1972).
 
1 pound lean pork, ground 1 bunch watercress 1 egg 2 tablespoons light soy sauce 1 tablespoon dry sherry or @Shaoxing wine 1/2 pound raw shrimp, peeled, deveined and chopped fine 1/2 teaspoon monosodium glutamate, optional 1 tablespoon cornstarch 2 tablespoons water Salt to taste, if desired Freshly ground pepper to taste 1 package won ton skins (see note) Chicken broth (1 cup per serving).
1. Place pork in mixing bowl. 
2. Pick over watercress to remove tough stems. 
Drop watercress into boiling water and let stand about 30 seconds. 
Drain immediately and run under cold water. 
Press to extract excess water. 
Chop until fine, then add to pork.
3. Add all remaining ingredients except pepper, won ton skins and chicken broth and stir. 
4. If thin won tons are desired, roll each skin with rolling pin or put through noodle machine, or they may be stuffed just as they are. 
Fill each skin with teaspoon of filling. 
Keep stack of won ton skins covered with damp cloth so they do not dry out.
5. To fold, bring up two sides of won ton skin and pinch all around to seal in filling. 
Dampen edges with a little water if necessary to make them stick. 
Pull two bottom edges together and pinch firmly to seal.
6. Continue until all filling is used. 
As you work, cover finished won tons with damp cloth to prevent drying out. 
7. Bring several quarts of water to boil in large kettle and add won tons. 
When water returns to boil, add half cup of cold water and let water come to boil again. 
Won tons are done when they float to top.
8. Heat chicken broth. 
Put a little salt and pepper into bottom of individual serving bowls and pour in hot broth. 
Ladle few cooked won tons into each bowl and serve immediately.
Yield: 90 to 100 won tons. 
NOTE: Won ton skins are available in Chinese markets.
 
Ravioli
 
Noodle dough made with 2 cups of flour (see recipe) 1 tablespoon butter 1 1/2 teaspoons finely minced garlic 3/4 pound ground beef Salt to taste, if desired Freshly ground pepper to taste 1/2 teaspoon dried basil 1/2 teaspoon dried marjoram 1 egg, lightly beaten 3 tablespoons heavy cream 3 tablespoons bread crumbs 3 tablespoons freshly grated Parmesan or Pecorina cheese 2 tablespoons finely chopped parsley Meat sauce (see recipe).
1. Prepare noodle dough and set aside. 
2. Heat butter in saucepan and add garlic. 
Cook briefly and add beef. 
Cook, stirring and chopping down with the side of a heavy metal spoon to break up lumps, about 5 minutes. 
Add salt and pepper and stir. 
Remove from heat. 
Let cool.
3. Add basil, marjoram, egg, cream, bread crumbs, cheese and parsley. 
Blend well. 
4. Roll out pasta. 
5. If a ra violi maker is used, cover utens il with thin sheet of pasta, add about 1 1/2 t easpoons of filling for each ravio li. 
Cover with second sheet of pasta and press between fillings to e xclude air.Use rolling pin to seal pasta and to cut them as you roll.
6. Remove ravioli to a rack. 
Let dry for 1 1/2 hours before cooking. 
To cook, drop ravioli into boiling water without crowding. 
Let boil about 7 minutes or to desired degree of doneness. 
Drain and serve with meat sauce (see recipe).
Yield: About 48 ravioli.
 
Siberian Pelmeni (Russian ravioli)
Adapted from ''The Russian Tea Room Cookbook'' by Faith Stewart-Gordon and Nika
 
Hazelton (Richard Marek, 1981).
 
Noodle dough made with 1 cup of flour (see recipe but divide ingredients in half) 1 tablespoon butter 1 cup finely chopped onion 1 teaspoon finely minced garlic 1/4 pound twice-ground beef, preferably top round 1/4 pound twice-ground lean veal Salt to taste, if desired Freshly ground pepper to taste Dash of Tabasco sauce 6 cups rich beef broth or consomme (see recipe), optional Melted butter, optional 1 cup sour cream 1/4 cup prepared mustard 1/2 cup vinegar, such as malt vinegar.
1. Prepare dough as directed. 
2. Heat tablespoon of butter in small skillet, add onion and garlic. 
Cook, stirring, until wilted and scrape into mixing bowl. 
3. Add ground beef and veal, salt, pepper and Tabasco sauce. 
Blend well by hand. 
4. Roll out dough and fill in desired fashion into 48 or more pelmeni. 
5. Drop pelmeni into rapidly boiling water and cook to desired degree of doneness, 5 minutes or longer. 
6. Serve pelmeni in soup bowls with hot consomme, or serve with melted butter with sour cream, mustard and vinegar on the side. 
The usual serving of pelmeni as a main course is 12 to 16.
Yield: About 48 pelmeni.
Kreplach
 
Noodle dough made with 2 cups of flour (see recipe) 1 pound boiled beef (see recipe) 2 tablespoons onion juice (see note) 1 egg, lightly beaten Salt to taste, if desired Freshly ground pepper to taste.
1. Prepare the dough as directed. 
2. Shred or chop the meat fine (may be done in food processor). 
There should be about two cups. 
3. Put meat into mixing bowl. 
Add onion juice, egg, salt and pepper. 
Blend by hand. 
4. Divide dough into quarters. 
Roll as thin as possible by hand or in pasta machine. 
A preferred method for filling kreplach is to cut the sheet of dough into 2 1/2- or 3-inch squares. 
Fold over and seal.
5. Drop kreplach into boiling water and cover. 
Cook 15 to 20 minutes. 
6. Serve kreplach in well-seasoned hot chicken broth - 4 to 8 kreplach apiece. 
Yield: About 36 kreplach.
 
Boiled Beef for Kreplach
 
1 pound lean chuck steak in one piece 1 small leek, trimmed and rinsed well 1/2 cup coarsely chopped onion 1/2 cup coarsely chopped celery 1/2 cup coarsely chopped carrot Salt to taste, if desired 12 peppercorns.
Combine ingredients in small kettle or large saucepan. 
Add water to cover and bring to simmer. 
Simmer 1 1/2 hours until fork tender. 
Drain.
Yield: 1 pound of beef.
 
Noodle Dough
 
2 cups flour Salt to taste , if desired 2 large eggs ( 1/2 cup) 1 to 2 tablespoons cold water.
1. This dough may be made with food processor or by hand. 
With processor, combine all ingredients in container and blend thoroughly. 
Shape dough into a ball.
2. If done by hand, put flour on flat surface and make well in center. 
Add salt, eggs and half the water. 
Knead well for 10 minutes or longer. 
Add more water as necessary to make smooth dough.
3. Place dough in clean cloth and wrap neatly to enclose. 
Let stand 30 minutes before using. 
Yield: Slightly less than 1 pound.
 
Sugo di Carne (Meat sauce)
 
1 ounce dried mushrooms, preferably Italian (funghi secchi or porcini) 1 tablespoon olive oil 2 tablespoons butter 3/4 cup finely chopped onion 1/4 cup finely chopped celery 1 teaspoon finely minced garlic 1/3 cup finely chopped carrot 1/4 pound ground lean pork 1/2 pound ground veal 2 cups dry red wine 2 cups imported canned tomatoes 3 tablespoons tomato paste Salt to taste, if desired Freshly ground pepper to taste 1 cup beef broth or consomme (see recipe).
1. Put mushrooms in bowl and add slightly hot water to cover. 
Let stand 30 minutes. 
2. Heat oil and butter in skillet. 
Add onion, celery, garlic and carrot. 
Cook, stirring, until wilted. 
3. Add pork and veal. 
Cook, stirring and chopping down with the side of a heavy metal spoon to break up lumps, until meats lose raw look.
4. Drain mushrooms and chop coarsely. 
Add mushrooms to meat mixture. 
Add wine, tomatoes, tomato paste, salt and pepper. 
Bring to boil and cook uncovered 1 hour.
5. Pour sauce into saucepan. 
Bring to boil and skim fat from surface. 
Add broth and continue cooking 1 hour. 
Yield: About 6 cups.
 
Consomme
 
8 pounds meaty beef bones 6 quarts water 40 black peppercorns 2 cups coarsely chopped carrots 4 cups coarsely chopped, well-rinsed leeks 2 cups coarsely chopped celery 2 whole cloves 4 sprigs parsley 2 sprigs fresh thyme or 1 teaspoon dried 2 bay leaves.
1. Put bones in kettle and add cold water to cover. 
Bring to boil and simmer 1 minute. 
Drain well. 
Rinse bones under cold water and when thoroughly chilled, return to clean kettle.
2. Add six quarts of water, peppercorns, carrots, leeks and celery. 
3. Tie cloves, parsley, thyme sprigs and bay leaves into bundle and add. 
Bring to boil and simmer uncovered for 5 hours. 
4. Strain, discard solids and skim off fat. 
Yield: About 10 cups. 
NOTE: Leftover consomme can be frozen.
