
LIFE AND DEATH IN SHANGHAI
By Nien Cheng. 
547 pp. 
New York: Grove Press. 
$19.95.
ONE night in August of 1966 the home of Mrs. Nien Cheng in Shanghai was broken into by some 40 young people wearing Red Guard armbands. 
Mrs. Cheng barred their way and asked for their search warrant. 
''The Constitution is abolished,'' they replied. 
''We recognize only the teachings of our Great Leader Chairman Mao.''
They then proceeded to vandalize the house, breaking furniture and porcelain, slashing paintings, burning books. 
Mrs. Cheng tried to save the more irreplaceable of her possessions by pleading that they were part of the great Chinese cultural heritage. 
''Shut up!'' she was told. 
''They are the useless toys of the feudal emperors and the modern capitalist class and have no significance to us, the proletarian class.''
The destruction went on.
During the weeks of harassment that followed, Mrs. Cheng did her best to understand what lay behind the mindless destructiveness and cold lack of humanity of her Red Guard persecutors. 
But in the end she was left feeling that they were ''alien creatures . . . with whom I had no common language.''
This conclusion would have disturbed the Red Guards not at all. 
As one of her interrogators instructed her, months later, in prison: ''Men are not equal. 
Men are divided into conflicting classes.''
As a wealthy bourgeois, she had nothing in common with proletarians, certainly not a common humanity. 
And indeed, as we read the debates between her and her interrogators, the antagonists do seem to be speaking different languages. 
On her side, speech is full of the twists and turns of argument; on their side, it is an even flow of sophisms and cliches punctuated with quotations from Mao's Little Red Book.
Nien Cheng spent six and a half years in detention, in a jail (''No. 
1 Detention House'') originally built by the Kuomintang for its Communist enemies (new regimes always find a use for the prisons their predecessors have built), in solitary confinement, on the sparsest of diets, subjected to relentless interrogation and finally to torture, all with the object of making her confess to spying for the West while employed by Shell Oil in Shanghai. 
The charge made no sense and was clearly trumped up. 
Why so much official time and energy was being invested in her case she could not understand; only years later, as the full extent of the intrigue and back-stabbing within the party and the army emerged, did it become clear that her confession was intended to be part of a power play put together by the faction supporting Defense Minister Lin Biao against Premier Zhou Enlai.
Being innocent, Mrs. Cheng refused to confess. 
On a human level, the greatest interest of her memoir lies in the account of her resistance to psychological and physical pressures that would have broken most people, resistance that culminates in a magnificent moment when, her hands maimed, her gums septic, hemorrhaging continually from suspected cervical cancer, she is informed that, as a consequence of ''proletarian magnanimity,'' she is free to leave and resume her interrupted life. 
Trembling with anger, she rejects liberty: she will stay in prison, she says, until the regime apologizes to her and publishes its apology in the Beijing and Shanghai newspapers; and she refuses to yield till she is dragged out into the street.
''Life and Death in Shanghai'' is an absorbing story of resourcefulness and courage, spoiled only by a touch of self-righteousness: Mrs. Cheng is always right, her persecutors always wrong. 
It also provides fascinating insights into thought reform in Mao's China. 
Though Mrs. Cheng was accused, at least nominally, of a specific offense, what her interrogators wanted from her is much more like what we would think of as a confession of sin or of sinfulness. 
As one of them explained to her, ''The first requisite to confession is an admission of guilt.
You must admit your guilt not only to the People's Government, but also to yourself. 
The admission of guilt is like the opening of the floodgates.
When you admit sincerely that you are indeed guilty . . . your confession will flow out easily.''
The logic of this process is not as back-to-front as it may seem. 
According to Mao's theory of the soul, as far as we can infer it (''soul'' is, of course, not a word Mao used), there exist in all human beings not only crudely selfish impulses like greed, but also more insidiously antisocial feelings like friendship or the longing for happiness, and antisocial loyalties like commitment to abstract truth. 
Even apparently unselfish acts like giving up one's private property or volunteering to do unpleasant work do not prove that one has overcome selfish feelings and loyalties, since they may not necessarily be performed with wholehearted sincerity (in the slang of the Cultural Revolution, one may merely be a ''radish'' - red outside, white inside). 
Everyone is probably, deep inside, to some degree guilty.
The sentiment of innocence, the sentiment that kept Mrs. Cheng alive and fighting, is therefore, to her interrogators, simply a deep-seated psychological resistance - a resistance, created by bourgeois education and fostered by bourgeois ideology, to the disclosure of a guilt that must be there. 
The sentiment of one's own innocence is, so to speak, a devil - a devil of pride - that has taken possession of the soul. 
It is the duty of the interrogator to struggle with the prisoner committed to his care till the prisoner's devil manifests itself and can be cast out. 
More significantly, it is the duty of society as a whole to struggle with the devils of individualism that possess people individually, and cast them out. 
At the height of the Cultural Revolution, so-called ''struggle meetings'' took place across the length and breadth of China at which capitalist-roaders, counterrevolutionaries, intellectuals and others suspected of sins against the people were paraded, reviled, beaten and humiliated till they confessed their inner guilt. 
The Cultural Revolution may have been set afoot for political reasons, but in its antirationality, its ecstatic cult of the prophetic leader and its anathematization and persecution of unbelievers, it clearly drew upon the darker religious passions.
WHAT happened to Nien Cheng, then, was only an extreme form of what happened to hundreds of thousands of Chinese born on the wrong side of the social and educational tracks. 
Indeed, Mrs. Cheng might count herself lucky to have escaped with her life (to say nothing of her Hong Kong bank account). 
Her daughter was not so fortunate. 
She was taken away in 1967 and later found dead, one of some 10,000 victims of the Cultural Revolution in Shanghai alone. 
Very likely she had been murdered. 
For years, however, the story was put out that she had committed suicide after a struggle meeting. 
''According to our Great Leader Chairman Mao,'' commented one official disapprovingly to Mrs. Cheng, ''committing suicide is an attempt to resist reeducation and reform. 
It's a crime against socialism. 
Those who commit suicide are really counterrevolutionaries.''
The last third of Nien Cheng's book is devoted to the period between her release from detention and her departure for the United States in 1980, during which she lived no longer in comfortable bourgeois circumstances but as one of ''the masses.''
Looking around her for the legacy of the Cultural Revolution, she found only cynicism and wariness: wariness about speaking one's mind to even the closest of friends, for fear that the pendulum might swing leftward again; cynicism about the party. 
Having been instructed from above during the Cultural Revolution that laws are nothing but ''tools of the 'capitalist-roaders' against the people,'' people have lost all respect for the law; whatever one can get away with is right.
In Mrs. Cheng's view, then, the Cultural Revolution, like the Great Leap Forward of the 1950's, was a disaster, a giant step backward into anarchy and obscurantism. 
On balance she is probably right. 
For the record, however, it is worth noting that some commentators argue that the Cultural Revolution did a great deal to bring participatory democracy to the remoter Chinese countryside. 
It was Mao's lifelong strategy to pit the country against the city. 
If there was a long-term winner in the Cultural Revolution, it was perhaps the peasantry; city-dwellers, particularly the citizens of Shanghai, the city in China most deeply penetrated by Western influence, were certainly the losers.
What induced the Chinese Communist Party to go along with this destructive assault upon itself, and upon the Chinese intelligentsia?
By and large Mrs. Cheng accepts the explanation that the Cultural Revolution began as a stratagem of the warped mind (the ''evil genius'') of Mao, that it spread by exploiting rivalries within the party and that it was used for their own ends by Mao's villainous wife, Jiang Qing, and her cronies. 
The virulence of the campaign against Shanghai's intellectuals is blamed squarely on Jiang Qing, in particular on her resentment against an artistic establishment that, holding her to be ''a woman of easy virtue and little talent,'' had refused her movie parts when she was younger.
Han Suyin, who interviewed Jiang Qing in 1969 and recalled it in her book ''Phoenix Harvest,'' certainly believed she saw evidence of mental derangement. 
But explanations that rely heavily on Mao's paranoia or Jiang's pathological vindictiveness, or on infighting within the party's upper hierarchy, do not do justice to the historical scale of the Cultural Revolution itself, which seemed to proclaim that a process of revolution without end was begun in China - with the youth of the country, and whoever else had least stake in the status quo, henceforth forever at war with whatever was stable in society. 
(''All old people are bourgeois,'' a young Red Guard told Han Suyin, no doubt meaning by ''old people'' everyone over 30.) DID Mao ever ask himself by what tokens his young inquistors would be able to sniff out China's secret enemies, or how they would know their job was completed while one brick yet stood upon another?
''We are Revolutionaries!
. . . We won't fear even the collapse of heaven,'' blared the loudspeakers of No. 1 Detention House. 
What really distinguished the Red Guards' chaos and killing - which the party later denounced as ''ultra-left anarchism'' -from the fascist rampages of Hitler's brown shirts?
Did Mao believe his little book would provide his disciples with sure enough guidance?
A man of some culture, had he not read that of interpretation there is no end, or that the Devil can quote Scripture to his own convenience?
Had he visited No. 1 Detention House, he might have overheard Mrs. Cheng confounding her interrogators by quoting the Little Red Book back at them. 
''I will obey our Great Leader Chairman Mao's teaching,'' she said. 
'' 'Firstly, do not fear hardship, and secondly, do not fear death.'
'' ''That quotation was not for the likes of you,'' they angrily replied.
 
'I AM NOT HELPLESS'
When Nien Cheng arrived in the United States from China in 1980, immigration officials told her the only way she could qualify for immediate settlement was by applying for political asylum. 
She refused. 
''I told myself, 'Political asylum, that sounds like somebody who is helpless.'
So I told them, 'I am not helpless, I am going to go and find somewhere else to live.'
''
Mrs. Cheng, then 65 years old, headed for Canada, remaining there until she was admitted as a United States immigrant in 1983. 
Then she loaded her suitcases into a car, drove to Washington and set about buying the two-room condominium near American University that has become her home.
In America, as in China, independence has been her strong suit. 
And just as she found a challenge in the solitary miseries of a prison in Shanghai, she has found new opportunities in the United States. 
''You know, I feel so fortunate,'' she said in a telephone interview as she prepared to set off on a cross-country tour to promote ''Life and Death in Shanghai.''
''There is so much for me to learn here in America, so much that is fascinating. 
It is a great honor to me in the evening of my life.''
What sustained Andrei Sakharov in Russia, or Nien Cheng in China, is endlessly debated among those who have experienced an edge of totalitarianism. 
The question amuses Mrs. Cheng, as though there was no choice to be made. 
''I've always been a fighter. 
When I'm confronted with a difficult situation, my first reaction is not to get frightened, it's 'Oh, wonderful, here's a situation that really calls on me to do something.'
''
But Mrs. Cheng insists that what separates her from others is not the privation she endured, nor her battle for truth, nor even her daughter's murder. 
''There were many Chinese who fought back, and many who suffered much more. 
Some of them have never recovered. 
But my privilege has been to write about it, and that's only been possible because I could leave.''
Mrs. Cheng had a lifeline in the money she and her husband, who died in 1957, had saved outside the country. 
It was enough to sustain a comfortable but not lavish life in Washington, where she has divided her time between voracious reading and college courses in American literature. 
She remains a close follower of Chinese politics. 
But her fascination with her homeland is balanced now by an absorption in the culture and politics of her adopted land. 
''I can become a U.S. citizen in 1988,'' she said, chuckling. 
''If I'm lucky and get my papers in time, I can even cast my first free vote.''
 
JOHN F. BURNS
