
Not since the 1930's have foreigners been able to think of China as a place for a beach holiday, and even then there were more comfortable and less risky places to go. 
Yet on Hainan Island, at the southernmost point of the old Chinese empire, there is something for seekers of sand and sea to ponder.
Sanya is a tumbledown town that looks out across the South China Sea on a line about 250 miles south of Hong Kong. 
It lacks the charm of Bali and the luxury of Thailand's Phuket, and nobody is about to give the island's tourist officials a gold medal for organization. 
But if you've already seen the major cities and feel like venturing elsewhere, a few days on Hainan can be rewarding.
Among Chinese, few of whom can contemplate a vacation beyond their own shores, the strongest recommendation for the island is the list of eminent visitors who have dallied there over the years. 
Chu Teh, commander of the Red Army in its victorious battles against Chiang Kaishek, used to come to Sanya most every winter, and Deng Xiaoping, the country's current leader, has been there more than once. 
But the most talked about patron was Madame Mao Zedong, or Jiang Qing as she is known to the Chinese.
For nearly six years Madame Mao has been imprisoned near the Ming Tombs, 25 miles north of Peking, serving a life sentence imposed by a tribunal convened by Mr. Deng. But in the days when her writ was law across much of the land, when her name struck fear among tens of millions of her fellow Chinese, she liked to slip away from the capital by special plane to fly 1,900 miles south to Haikou, the administrative capital on the island's northern coast, and thence by chauffeured limousine across the mountains to Sanya.
We ran across her trail almost as soon as we arrived in Haikou on a 50-minute flight from Canton, a daily service that offers a late-afternoon connection. 
At the Haikou Guesthouse, in a palm-shaded compound near the center of town, we were offered a range of rooms running all the way up to a suite at $64 a night, an unheard-of tariff for a hotel catering as much to Chinese as to foreigners. 
Intrigued, we chose the suite and were ushered into an ornate boudoir of a kind that my wife thought might have been lifted from the more pretentious sections of Beverly Hills.
Here, we were told, was where Madame Mao slept - in a four-poster with silken canopy trimmed with pink tassels, with piped music and dimmer lights at finger's reach and an ersatz Louis XIV writing table. 
Off the bedroom was the most exotic bathroom I have seen in China, with gilded taps and a sunken bath. 
Never mind that the mosquitoes had found their way in through an open window, or that the soap and towels were of a type one associates with Army barracks. 
We went to bed early, feeling like royalty, and had to be badgered into leaving the next day for Sanya.
Before heading out of town we took our bearings in the city, and caught something of the flavor. 
Along People's Street, center of life in the town for centuries, is architecture much like Canton's - two- and three-story buildings open to the street at ground level, with vine-encrusted verandas and balconies above. 
Sinewy old men pulling heavy-laden carts with ropes slung from their shoulders provided a measure of the island's poverty.
The most famous family to hail from Hainan in recent times was that of Charlie Soong, the freebooting millionaire whose footprints can be found across much of the country's 20th-century history. 
A daughter, Qing-Ling, married the founder of the republic, Sun Yat-sen, and became acting president under the Communists, and another daughter, Mei-Ling, married Chiang Kaishek. 
There was also a son, T. V. Soong, who was a wily prime minister who amassed a fortune under Chiang.
In Haikou harbor, riding at anchor in the forenoon of almost any day, a visitor can see examples of the traditional broad-waisted, high-fantailed Hainan junk that was the foundation of the Soong family fortunes in the days when Charlie's forebears carried Chinese wares westward to Thailand, the Malay states and Java or bridged slack times by engaging in occasional piracy.
These days, when the great canvas sails have been patched and the freeboard planking safely caulked, the junks stay closer to home, running across the straits to the mainland harbor at Zhanjiang, center of the burgeoning oil exploration in the South China Sea, or running inshore to collect harvests of coconut, papaya or coffee from the island's smaller ports. 
Doubtless, too, in an ocean still only sporadically patroled by the Chinese coast guard, the junks maintain at least something of their old tradition of smuggling. 
Though backward, the island has developed the same hunger as the rest of China for Japanese television sets and motorcycles, heavily dutiable when legally imported.
As much as for its pirates, Hainan is associated in the Chinese mind with its exiles. 
The island dates its inclusion in the empire to the beginning of the Han dynasty, a century before Christ, and by the time of the Tang dynasty, in the seventh century, it had become a Chinese Siberia, a place of banishment for poets, officials and others who displeased the emperor. 
The most famous exile was Hai Rui, a Ming dynasty mandarin who hailed, like Charlie Soong, from Qiongshan county, east of Haikou.
According to legend, Hai Rui was loved by the people for his efforts to curb poverty and injustice under the reign of the Jia Jing emperor, who had him arrested and sentenced to death. 
After the emperor's death in 1567, the official was rehabilitated, purged once more and this time exiled to Hainan. 
For centuries his tomb on the outskirts of Haikou was a place of pilgrimage, but in 1966 his memory became embroiled in court intrigues once more, this time as a victim of an emperor called Mao.
As often with Mao, the sequence was obscure, but the essence was that a play written about the mandarin, ''Hai Rui Dismissed From Office,'' was identified by some of Mao's backers as an allegorical attack on Mao for his purge in 1959 of the defense minister, Peng Dehuai. 
The attack on the play was the signal for the start of the Cultural Revolution, and Red Guards in Haikou vandalized the tomb.
Under Mr. Deng, with his own experience of banishment, Hai Rui's reputation and tomb have been restored. 
It sits in a scrubland to the west of town, hard by a stretch of brackish water and a dusty road busy with peasants wheel-barrowing pigs to market. 
In the museum, a eulogy to the mandarin reads like what one imagines Mr. Deng's followers would like to see bestowed on him: ''He was a good and just official. 
He redressed many wrong and unjust cases and was a savior of the oppressed and downtrodden. 
He always kept his word.''
There is nothing of the magnificence associated with the greatest of the mainland tombs about this walled enclosure, but restorers have done a creditable job of replacing what the Red Guards destroyed. 
Up a central pathway visitors reach a marble tortoise surmounted by a stele, or marble plaque, blackened by fire and inscribed with a tribute to the mandarin's virtues. 
Beyond the stele lies the tomb, a domed structure in gray granite, which was smashed by Mao's young vandals. 
The sarcophagus disappeared at the time of the assault, but the dome has the weathered look of the original.
Although second only to Taiwan in size among China's offshore islands, Hainan has sections that are still closed to foreigners, including most of the west coast, which faces Vietnam. 
The reason is that there is a concentration of naval and other military installations, dating back to the Japanese occupation in World War II. 
More recently, the bases were used to monitor United States forces during the Vietnam War and to mount the amphibious assault in 1974 by which China seized the Paracel Islands in the South China Sea from South Vietnam.
Most visitors drive from Haikou to Sanya on a cross-island road that winds into the hills between rubber estates, the island's biggest source of revenue. 
On either side of a pass that looks eastward to the 6,100-foot peak of Five Finger Mountain, travelers catch glimpses of the life of the Li and Miao people, who predominate in the uplands. 
Roadside stalls sell mangoes, passion fruit and watermelons, and in the villages dancing can often be seen. 
Arrangements to watch the dancers are best made through the local offices of the China International Travel Service, notably in the mid-island town of Tong Za, situated in an upland area with heavy concentrations of minority people.
The trip across the island normally takes five hours by car, a little longer by bus, but ours became an odyssey when a typhoon that swept through the southern half of the island washed away part of the road. 
Taking a western diversion that added several hours to the trip in our rented car, we drove down unpaved roads into some of the lushest and most primitive parts of the island, where buffalo carts with solid wooden wheels do most of the transporting. 
In many villages the only brick buildings were those of the former land-lords, some converted to schools, others lying in ruins.
Running eastward again along the coast, we finally reached Sanya. 
The town traces its origins back at least 1,000 years, but there is little evidence of development under the Communists. 
As in Haikou, the main street, Liberation Road, has a faded charm in its turn-of-the-century buildings, two- and three-story structures that are open to the street at ground level, with balconies on the upper floors and whitewashed facades streaked black by the typhoons that sweep through the area each fall. 
The heart of town lies on a sandbar set back from the sea.
In makeshift stalls that crowd for space along the lanes, peasant entrepreneurs compete with one another to sell fish, fruit, wickerwork and souvenirs fashioned from coral. 
Li women in black cotton outfits and conical hats sit on their haunches puffing away at massive bamboo water pipes, while others sit chewing plugs of betel nut, their teeth and lips stained red by its juice. 
Wandering among the stalls, we spotted a man with a shoulder-length growth of matted hair, naked save for a loincloth. 
Nobody but us paid him any mind. 
My wife bargained for a Li costume that cost about $5, while my eye fell on a piece of butcher block three inches thick and three feet across cut from one of the upland hardwoods that were once the emperor's preserve. 
It took a motorized rickshaw to lug it back to our car, but at $3 it was irresistible. 
Carried as hand luggage aboard the aircraft back to Peking, it caused ceaseless mirth. 
''Are you a butcher?'' one sober-faced man in a Mao suit asked me. 
The principal delight of Sanya for the visitor lies beyond the town, in the Luhuitou Guesthouse and nearby Daidonghai Beach. 
At the insistence of another visitor, the late Prime Minister Zhou Enlai, the guesthouse was built in the 1950's beneath a rocky headland that defines the eastern limits of the town. 
Recently modernized, it consists of a cluster of single-story villas set amid towering palms. 
For $27 a night, we slept in an air-conditioned room as good as many that we have found in the Mediterranean and the Caribbean.
The restaurants leave much to be desired so far as service and hygiene are concerned. 
But the platters of food were an invitation to gluttony. 
For less than $7 each for three daily meals, we could eat as much grilled crab and prawn as our appetites allowed. 
The ginger-based sauce that came to the table with lunch and supper made the shellfish as succulent as any we had ever tasted.
We made breakfast in our room with biscuits and a jar of instant coffee that we always travel with in China. 
The Luhuitou's attempt at a Western-style breakfast ran to watery fried eggs, rice porridge and execrable coffee.
The beach, five minutes' drive farther east, has a reputation as the best in China. 
Nearly two miles long, on a gently curving bay, it has fine white sand and, when no typhoon is blowing, a benign sea. 
Unlike their compatriots in the north, who have begun flocking to the beaches on the Bohai Gulf and the East China Sea, the people of Hainan have yet to be converted to daylong tanning and sea bathing, so even on a weekend we found the beach nearly deserted. 
From time to time, groups of soldiers or Young Pioneers would appear, splash about in shallow water for 10 minutes, then disappear as quickly as they came.
We spent hours strolling along the foreshore, collecting delicately colored shells and pieces of coral and watching fishermen mending their nets. 
Once in the sea, it was tempting to loll there all day. 
Heavily saline, it is warm throughout the year. 
The Chinese, a land-loving folk forever suspicious of the sea, have posted notices above the beach in English recommending the virtues of ''a seawater bath'' but cautioning against excess. 
''Please be well organized in your swimming,'' the notice read. 
''No company swimming strictly prohibited.''
Residents told us that the water stays warm enough to swim in throughout the year, with a year-round average temperature of 70 degrees. 
The favorite period for Chinese holidaymakers is December through March, a time when it is bitterly cold across much of the mainland. 
Our visit, in October, was fortuitously sandwiched between two typhoons. 
Our guides said that the typhoons arrive in September and blow away by the end of the year, a reason to visit in the early months of the year.
One morning, we drove back through Sanya to the west, to a spot called the Edge of the Sea and the Rim of the Sky. 
Celebrated among the Chinese for towering rock formations that run down to the beach, we found it, as we often have with so-called beauty spots in China, tacky in the extreme. 
But $5 paid to a fisherman bought us a ride out to sea to watch the fleet of flat-bottomed boats at work and to stroll along the shore of Xidao, a largely uninhabited island about two miles offshore.
Here, once more, we found ourselves following in the footsteps of Madame Mao, who liked to make day trips to the island to indulge her passion for photography. 
In the tropical heat, with no sound but the chattering of birds in the thickets behind the beach, we sat for a while and looked out to sea. 
At the edge of China, all but ignored by generations of rulers, we found tranquillity, one of the rarest pleasures this land can give.
