
Amid the tumultuous growth sweeping across this island, Bobo Wang is the kind of entrepreneur that the Government is hoping will become a symbol of the new Taiwan.
Born in Shanghai, Mr. Wang came to Taiwan when he was only three years old, when his family beat a hasty retreat here with Chiang Kai-shek's army. 
Like many of the most talented young Taiwan residents of his generation, a generation with virtually no memory of the mainland, he left as soon as he was old enough, getting a degree in computer science from the University of California at Los Angeles and then taking a job in the United States at Xerox.
But unlike the vast majority of Taiwan's ''overseas Chinese,'' Mr. Wang returned seven years ago, at the Government's behest. 
With four colleagues he founded a small computer company in the Government's high-tech industrial park in Hsinchu, an hour's drive from Taipei. 
In the next few weeks that company, Microtek, will go public and its founders and a few of its 400 employees will probably become overnight millionaires.
''When we came back there was almost nothing to come back for,'' Mr. Wang said this week. 
''Now, there's a lot.''
 
A Wave of Prosperity
Drawn by a wave of prosperity and the relaxation of 40 years of authoritarian rule, more and more of Taiwan's hottest talents are now returning. 
And the sudden prospect of democracy and the breakneck growth of the economy is slowing the brain drain that many here blame for crippling Taiwan's efforts to transform itself into a first-world nation.
''For the first time people feel that after they come back, they can be the masters of their own fate,'' said Morris Chang, the head of Taiwan's Industrial Technology Research Institute, a semi-governmental group that spends $250 million a year as seed money for enterprises that promise to transform Taiwan from a maker of cheap umbrellas and counterfeit Rolex watches to a producer of computer chips and robots. 
Looking over the grimy neighborhood of ramshackle houses that surrounds his office in Taipei's opulent new science and technology building, he added, ''People now think there is a chance to get rich in Taiwan.''
The evidence is all around. 
While Taiwan's streets are still clogged with motorcycles, a sprinkling of Mercedes-Benzes can be seen. 
Per capita income is expected to surpass $6,000 this year, and exports are near record levels.
But in a nation that for all other purposes compares itself with mainland China, in retaining native expertise the comparison is with Japan. 
When it comes to drawing back the nation's best minds, the comparison usually grates.
''It's the difference between the Chinese and the Japanese,'' said Irving Ho, who spent many years in the ''Silicon Valley'' in California and was brought back here to replicate it for Taiwan. 
''The Japanese are homing pigeons. 
They go abroad, study hard, and come back. 
The Chinese usually don't. 
They stay. 
That's only now changing.''
 
Big Ones That Got Away
Young people here say that Taiwan's heritage as a nation-in-exile, waiting for the chance to regain control over the mainland, is largely to blame. 
The Japanese, they say, go abroad yet retain their national identity and strong ties to home. 
Many people from Taiwan, in contrast, have been taught from their childhoods that they are only here temporarily.
As a result there is a shortage of top talent for managerial posts and, more critically, the kind of creative minds that can help change Taiwan's image as Asia's biggest plagiarizer of other country's products.
Within Taiwan's bureaucracy and academic community, there is frequent talk of the big names who slipped away. 
Among them are Samuel C. C. Ting, the winner of the 1976 Nobel Prize in physics and discoverer of the ''J particle.''
Another Taiwan native, Yuan T. Lee, now a professor at the University of California, won the 1986 Nobel in chemistry. 
Dr. Lee was educated at Taiwan universities but left for the United States to work on his Ph.D. and never returned.
Officials here make no secret of the fact that they would like to draw back two other, younger Taiwan natives. 
One is Paul Chu, the University of Houston researcher who has startled much of the scientific and industrial worlds with his discoveries in superconductivity, and who did his undergraduate work at Cheng Kung University in Taiwan before leaving for the United States. 
Another is Steve Chen, one of the world's leading designers of supercomputers.
 
More and More Return
In fact, Taiwan made an effort to lure Mr. Chen back to Taiwan last year, after the young computer scientist left Cray Research, the world's largest supercomputer maker, in a much-publicized dispute over the future of his research. 
''We talked for a while and the Government was willing to help set him up here,'' Mr. Chang recalled. 
But Mr. Chen had many competing offers, and in the end he decided to set up his own company in the United States, financed largely by I.B.M.
But with lesser names, Taiwan is having more success. 
Drawn by increasing salaries and often by a desire to take care of aging parents, more and more Taiwan residents are returning. 
The Ministry of Education reports that while the number of young people who decided to go abroad for higher education declined a bit last year - from a little over 7,000 in 1986 to about 6,600 in 1987 -the number who returned actually rose, from 1,600 in 1986 more than 1,900 last year.
Some, like Mr. Wang, are drawn by promises that their families can live in a quickly modernizing culture. 
Mr. Wang's two children attend a bilingual school that Taiwan has set up in Hsinchu, amid the factories and laboratories that have sprung up on what was recently farmland. 
''It means they can go back to the States if they have to,'' he said. 
As Taiwan experiments with democracy, by turns encouraging debate and then repressing it, that is an option no one here says they can afford to lose.
''Think of Taiwan this way,'' Mr. Wang said he told potential recruits to his company. 
''By air, it's only 10 hours from San Francisco.''
