
Patrick Lin presented the view apparently held by most Taiwanese on the agreement between Washington and Peking in which the Reagan Administration agreed to limit future arms sales to Taiwan.
''Nothing will change as a result of this communique,'' said Mr. Lin, who runs a small electronics plant in Hsinchu, 40 miles south of here. 
''And it was no surprise.''
Like many Taiwanese, Mr. Lin noted that the communique, which was released Tuesday, was simply further evidence of Taiwan's isolation from other governments, its need for self-reliance and the necessity of diversifying its arms supplies.
Taiwanese seem unmoved by US-China accord
The 18 million people on this island have become accustomed to being spurned by other nations, at least diplomatically and politically. 
In 1971 the People's Republic of China displaced Taiwan, formally known as the Republic of China, in the United Nations. 
In 1979 the United States withdrew its diplomatic recognition of Taiwan and recognized the mainland as the ''real'' China. 
Today only 23 nations maintain official diplomatic relations with Taiwan.
 
Living Standard Improved
Yet none of these political setbacks have had much effect on the day-to-day lives of the people of Taiwan. 
The nation's economy has recorded one of the highest growth rates in the world over the past two decades, greatly improving the Taiwanese standard of living.
''People here have lived through so many of these diplomatic events in the past that they are numb to them,'' observed Diane Ying, the editor of Tien Sia, an influential monthly magazine that covers economic and social affairs.
Public reaction to the joint communique was also softened by a barrage of advance warning in newspapers. 
Almost every day for three months the Taiwan papers carried reports on the coming communique and what it might contain.
The Taipei stock market index has advanced steadily in the two days since the communique was released, apparently because the American concession to China was less than had been feared.
 
Trade With 140 Countries
Taiwan's strength is its economy. 
It has trade relations with more than 140 nations, and Taiwan's rapid growth, political stabilityII and well-educated, diligent workers have made it an attractive place for foreign investment. 
''The communique should not alter the economic dynamism or the climate for investment here,'' said Carter Booth, general manager of the Chase Manhattan Bank in Taiwan and president of the local American Chamber of Commerce.
Though the immediate effects may be few, the Reagan Administration's agreement to gradually reduce arms sales to Taiwan is taken as a sign that the nation cannot rely on the United States for its security as much as it has in the past. 
''This is a reaffirmation of Reagan's hands-off policy toward Taiwan,'' said Charles H.C. 
Kao, an author and commentator. 
''Taiwan has no choice but to buy arms elsewhere.''
This is a course the Government has so far resisted. 
It has argued, for example, that buying fighter planes now from other countries would involve the costly maintenance of two logistics systems. 
In addition, given Taiwan's diplomatic isolation, that would be difficult politically, Government officials say.
 
'Fulfill Our National Policy'
For more than three decades Taiwan has been ruled with a firm hand, under martial law, by the Kuomintang, the Nationalist Party, which has the avowed aim of recovering the mainland. 
The ruling members of the party are mostly men in their late 60's and 70's who fled to Taiwan with Chiang Kai-shek when the Communists triumphed in 1949.
The joint communique predictably brought calls from President Chiang Ching-kuo, Mr. Chiang's son, for redoubled efforts to ''fulfill our national policy of anti-Communism and national recovery.''
Yet even Taiwanese who express little fondness for the Kuomintang, and who still resent the mainlanders' control of their island, believe that the threat from China is real and that Taiwan should maintain a strong defense. 
Moreover, they distrust recent overtures from the mainland for a ''reunification,'' despite assurances from the Communist leadership that Taiwan could retain its economic and social system.
 
Argument Against Reunification
On these issues there is little dissent, publicly or privately. 
Most people agree with the assessment of James C.Y. 
Soong, a senior Government official: ''Ultimately the issue here is way of life. 
If there is a reunification and the Communists take control, can we maintain our way of life?
Everyone here doubts that.''
The implicit argument against reunification anytime soon is Taiwan's relative prosperity compared with the mainland. 
In 1981, the per-capita income in Taiwan was nearly $2,400, compared with about $300 on the mainland. 
In addition to Taiwan, people point to the economic dynamism of the other offshore nations of East Asia that are predominantly Chinese, Singapore and Hong Kong. 
''Clearly the mainland has the wrong formula,'' one local banker said. 
''Taiwan may not be paradise, but why should we want to join with the Communist mainland?''
Taiwan and the mainland will, by all accounts, remain separate for the foreseeable future. 
But many Taiwanese do not rule out the eventual possibility of reunification. 
''If we could reunify under an economic system that is basically the one we have now,'' one Taipei lawyer said, ''it would be possible I think.''
He noted the mainland's recent experiments with capitalism, such as the so-called special economic zones in Guangdong and Fujian provinces, as evidence that ''the Communists are making concessions to reality.''
He added, ''They are slowly coming our way.''
