
Taiwan today denounced as a ''trick'' Peking's latest overtures for talks and its plans to celebrate on Oct. 
10 the 70th anniversary of the overthrow of the Manchu dynasty and founding of the Republic of China by Sun Yat-sen.
Sun Yun-suan, the Chinese Nationalist Prime Minister, said in an opening speech of the 68th session of the Legislative Yuan, which claims to represent the mainland, that Peking would have to renounce Communism before Taiwan would consider reunification talks. 
The speech was broadcast and was monitored here.
The Taiwanese response came after a flurry of interest among diplomats and journalists in comments made in July by Deng Xiaoping, senior deputy chairman of the Chinese Communist Party, to a Hong Kong editor about the possibility of the Nationalists' sharing power with the Communists in governing a unified China.
Taiwan denounces Peking's overtures for talks and Peking's plans to celebrate 70th anniversary of overthrow of Manchu dynasty
It also came after suggestions by Senator Mark O. Hatfield, Republican of Oregon, during a visit to Peking last month, that President Reagan use his influence with Nationalist leaders to get them to start talks with the mainland. 
The White House is said to be considering the idea.
 
Help of 'Friends' Welcomed
Peking, which used to insist that reunification be dealt with only among Chinese, responded to Mr. Hatfield's suggestion by saying that China welcomed the help of all Chinese and ''other friends'' to bring Taiwan back into the fold.
Mr. Deng's remark on sharing power was reportedly made on July 18 during an interview with Cha Leung Yung, president and chairman of the Hong Kong newspaper Ming Bao. 
The newspaper's monthly magazine supplement printed a text of the interview on Aug. 
25. In it, at one point, Mr. Deng stressed that ''upholding the leadership of the Communist Party is the most important.''
''Under the leadership of the Chinese Communist Party,'' he continued, ''the whole of China was unified, except for the Province of Taiwan. 
Has the Kuomintang unified China?
The K.M.T. ruled China for 22 or 23 years - let us say 22 years. 
However, it never unified China. 
The Chiangs - both father and son - failed to do so. 
The Chinese Communist Party has unified the mainland of Chi na.''
The two Chiangs he referred to are Chiang Kai-shek, the Nationalist leader, who died in 1975, and his son, Chiang Ching-kuo, who assumed the role of President of the Republic of China in 1978.
 
Past Cooperation Recalled
''Thus, the Chinese Communist Party wants to persist in its leadership and to be good in exercising leadership,'' Mr. Deng said. 
''It has not been good in exercising leadership in the past. 
In the past, the K.M.T. and the C.C.P. cooperated twice, once during the northern expedition and again during the war of resistance against Japanese aggression. 
The K.M.T. and the C.C.P. can cooperate for a third time. 
They can compete with each other. 
They can even lead together.''
Mr. Deng then went on to talk about the ''gross mistakes'' the Communists made in the past. 
But, he said, the party was capable of self-criticism, adding: ''It is meaningless to boast about oneself. 
If a woman is not beautiful and wants to pose as a great beauty, she will look ugly. 
It is important to know one's limitations, but it is not easy to do so.''
Chinese officials have in the past offered to allow Taiwan to remain autonomous, keep its capitalist economic system and keep its army. 
But some diplomats here could not recall any occasion when Mr. Deng or other Communist officials had used the phrase ''lead together.''
Because the comment was made to a Hong Kong Chinese, some diplomats here believed that it was a serious overture by Mr. Deng, since residents of Hong Kong have been used in the past not only as gobetweens for trade but also as transmission belts for messages.
