
A Taiwan air force pilot has defected to China with his reconnaissance aircraft, the New China News Agency reported today.
The pilot, identified as Maj. Li Dawei, flew his U-6A jet on Friday from Hwalien Airport in Taiwan and landed in Fujian Province on the mainland 3 hours and 35 minutes later, the agency said.
When he landed, the 33-year-old major reportedly implied that he had been influenced by the defection of Huang Zicheng, another Nationalist air force major, who flew his F-5 jet fighter to China in August 1981.
PEKING, April 23 - A Taiwan air force pilot has defected to China with his reconnaissance aircraft, the New China News Agency reported today.
Major Huang, who went by the name of Peter Z. Huang in Taiwan, received a reward equivalent to $360,000 and a commission in the Chinese Air Force, among other honors. 
He is now a deputy commander of an aviation academy on the mainland.
 
Peking Upset by Defections
Peking has been angered and embarrassed by recent defections of some of its citizens abroad, including Wu Yungkeng, a Chinese Air Force pilot who flew his MIG-19 jet fighter to South Korea last October. 
He has been received as a hero in Taiwan.
China also objected recently to the American decision to grant political asylum to a prominent tennis player, Hu Na, and in retaliation has suspended sports and cultural exchanges with the United States for the rest of this year.
The official New China News Agency reported that Major Li said he had left Taiwan because he was dissatisfied with what he called its social corruption and the rule of the Nationalist authorities. 
He said he had often listened to radio broadcasts from the mainland and had learned about Major Huang's flight to China.
''I decided to cross over, convinced that only the Government on the mainland can make our Chinese nation strong and prosperous,'' the press agency quoted Major Li as having said.
 
Born on the Mainland
Major Li was identified as having been the leader of the first flight of the observation squadron of Taiwan's First Air Force Group. 
The New China News Agency indicated that he had been trained in Taiwan and had been assigned to the island of Quemoy, among other posts.
The agency said that Major Li was born on the mainland in Fuyang County, Anhui Province, and that his wife and daughter, as well as his parents, lived in Taiwan. 
It did not say when his family left the mainland, but he appeared to have been born at least a year after the Communists took power.
When Major Li landed in Fujian on Friday, ''he was accorded a warm welcome by the local army men and people,'' the press agency quoted Chinese military sources in Fuzhou as saying. 
It gave no further details of his flight.
