
Prime Minister Yu Kuo-hwa of the Chinese Nationalist Government urged Hong Kong's Chinese residents today to resist the prospect of Chinese Communist rule and promised to help those wishing to move to Taiwan.
Mr. Yu made the remarks in a message to the people of Hong Kong coinciding with the initialing of an agreement between London and Peking under which the British colony is to be handed over to mainland government in 1997. 
The Chinese Nationalist Government has said that it will not recognize the accord.
''We urge the Chinese residents of Hong Kong and Kowloon more vigorously to pursue their struggle against Communism for freedom,'' Mr. Yu's message said. 
''We will assist and support this struggle using various methods and via different channels.''
The Kowloon Peninsula is part of the Territory of Hong Kong.
The message said that Hong Kong and Kowloon Chinese should take part in as many local elections as possible to increase their strength and enable them ''to deal with Chinese Communist ambitions for control, and thereby to help protect and secure freedom and democracy.''
Other than mentioning elections, Mr. Yu did now say how he thought the people of Hong Kong might wage a ''struggle against Communism.''
He also offered to help Hong Kong Chinese prepare to settle in Taiwan.
The message said the Taiwan authorities would grant would-be immigrants one-year multiple entry visas, the right to deposit funds in Taiwan's offshore bank and take them out again and make ''appropriate arrangements'' allowing their children to come to Taiwan to study.
He said even more benefits would accrue to ''dedicated anti-Communists'' or ''patriotic'' Chinese. 
He did not specify who would qualify, but a Government official said Mr. Yu was referring to people who risked persecution for past anti-Communist activities in Hong Kong.
Mr. Yu and a Foreign Ministry spokesman, Wang Chao-yuan said the Nationalist Chinese Government on Taiwan considered the Hong Kong agreement invalid on the ground that the Peking Government was illegal.
