
People
Taiwan's population is estimated at 19.4 million, of which 3.7 million are concentrated in two major cities, Taipei, the capital, and Kaohsiung.
The ethnic composition is predominantly Taiwanese (84 percent). 
The relatively small number of mainland Chinese (14 percent), however, have exerted disproportionate influence. 
These are the refugees who fled the mainland in 1949 with the Nationalist Government of Chiang Kai-shek, after being routed by the Communist forces of Mao Zedong.
A tiny minority is aboriginal. 
The aborigines, of Malayan descent, dominated Taiwan until mainland Chinese began settling the island in the 12th century.
More than 95 percent of the people practice Buddhism, Taoism or Confucianism. 
About 5 percent are Christian.
Mandarin is the official language; Taiwanese and Hakka dialects are also spoken.
 
Geography
Taiwan lies at the juncture of the East and South China Seas about 100 miles from mainland China. 
The country consists of a large island, Taiwan, the islands of Quemoy and Matsu, and the islets of the Pescadores chain, which lie between Taiwan and the mainland.
Taiwan is bisected by a north-south mountain range. 
Its total area is 13,968 square miles, slightly larger than Maryland and Delaware combined.
The climate is tropical with heat and heavy rainfall in the summer and cooler conditions from November to March.
 
History
Portuguese navigators explored Taiwan in 1590, calling it Formosa, or ''beautiful.''
China controlled Taiwan until 1895, when it was ceded to Japan. 
After World War II, Taiwan was restored to China, then under the Nationalist Government of Chiang Kai-shek.
After Chiang Kai-shek fled to Taiwan in December 1949, his loyalists constituted less than a fifth of the population, but they quickly dominated the country, building a 600,000-man army with the aim of recapturing the mainland.
Chiang Kai-shek became president on March 1, 1950. 
The Government on Taiwan has maintained that it is the rightful government of mainland China.
Chiang Kai-shek died on April 5, 1975. 
His eldest son, Chiang Ching-kuo, then prime minister, became the dominant political force. 
The younger Chiang became president in 1978 and was elected to a second term in 1984.
Although the United States pledged to protect Taiwan against Communist takeover in the 1950's and 1960's, support waned after President Nixon moved to forge links with mainland China in 1972. 
The United States severed formal diplomatic relations with Taiwan in January 1979 but still maintains quasi-diplomatic links.
Martial law, in effect since 1949, was dropped last year, which meant that opposition political parties could be formed legally for the first time.
 
Economy
Aided by the United States, Taiwan has developed one of most thriving economies in Asia. 
Major industries include electronics, textiles, clothing and footwear. 
Much of the production is exported.
The gross national product in 1986 was $72.6 billion. 
It recorded a record trade surplus of $19 billion last year.
