
For Antonio Chiang, editor and publisher of The Eighties, advertising is not a concern. 
''We have never had an advertisement in our magazine,'' Mr. Chiang explains. 
''No one would dare.''
Most of his writers use pseudonyms. 
Some are so wary of being identified with the magazine that they will not meet editors at its offices, up five flights of stairs in an apartment building here.
Attention is being focused on small group of dissident magazines in Taiwan, one of which is The Eighties, because of case of Henry Liu, Chinese-American dissident writer who was slain in California in October 1984; Liu wrote for some opposition magazines and similar publications in Hong Kong and US; Antonio Chiang, editor and publisher of The Eighties, comments; photo (M)
The Government licenses and controls the newspapers in Taiwan. 
So about a dozen dissident magazines like The Eighties provide ''the sole window for the opposition to present its ideas to the public,'' one Western official said.
Attention is now being focused on this small band of defiant publications because of the case of Henry Liu, a Chinese-American dissident writer who was slain in California last October. 
Two weeks ago, the Taipei Government announced that two members of a Taiwan gang had confessed to the killing. 
More significant, though, was the disclosure that senior officials in the Defense Ministry's intelligence bureau were also implicated. 
One of them has been arrested.
 
Extensive Accounts of Case
Mr. Liu wrote for some of the opposition magazines in Taiwan, including The Eighties, and for similar Chinese- language publications in Hong Kong and the United States. 
The opposition magazines are printing the most extensive accounts of the Liu case available in Taiwan.
Last week, for instance, Mr. Chiang's magazine published three reports dealing with the activities of Taiwan gangs, contacts between the intelligence agencies and organized crime, and American press reports on the Liu case.
The Government banned the issue. 
The Taiwan Garrison Command, the internal security force, confiscated 10,000 copies of the magazine, two thirds of its circulation. 
The authorities never say precisely why they ban a specific issue, figuring that to do so amounts to free advertising. 
Mr. Chiang suspects it was because of the three Liu articles.
An outlawed issue of The Eighties is hardly novel. 
In fact, Mr. Chiang's main distribution problem is how to outsmart the police. 
Since The Eighties, the first of the dissident magazines in Taiwan, was first published in June 1979, nearly a third of its issues have been banned. 
The Government has also ordered the magazine to suspend publication for one-year stretches five different times.
 
'Cat-and-Mouse Game'
The latter circumstance explains why Mr. Chiang's magazine uses three names, the other two being Asian and Current. 
If the magazine is outlawed for a year in one name, he changes the name and continues publishing. 
''We play a constant cat-and-mouse game with the authorities,'' he said.
The situation is much the same for the other opposition magazines. 
For example, 30 of the last 93 issues of Progress, a popular weekly, have been banned. 
Among the magazines, a circulation of 15,000 or more is considered impressive; with Taiwan's population of 19 million, that is like a circulation of 175,000 in the United States.
The Eighties is widely regarded as the most professional and least polemical of the group. 
It says it has a diverse readership, mainly middle-class intellectuals, including some younger Western-educated members of the ruling Kuomintang.
''The Eighties is rather moderate,'' said Hu Fu, a professor of political science at National Taiwan University. 
''It is more rational and reasoned than the others.''
 
Editor Given Credit
The magazine's reputation is attributed largely to its editor. 
''Antonio Chiang is just head and shoulders above everyone else in the opposition press,'' a foreign diplomat said.
Mr. Chiang, 40 years old, is the dean of the dissident editors. 
He says he is all too familiar with Government harassment, shoestring budgets and a work regimen that finds him sleeping on an office cot two nights a week.
''I see my family only on weekends, usually,'' he said. 
''To my two children, I am a voice over the telephone.''
Unlike several of his peers, Mr. Chiang has a journalistic, not political, background, having spent 10 years as a political reporter for China Times, a newspaper with a circulation of more than a million. 
Mr. Chiang said he had been frustrated there because as a native Taiwanese, as are 85 percent of the island's people, he felt his opportunities for advancement were limited. 
The former mainlanders, who took control of Taiwan in 1949, still hold most of the top jobs in business and Government.
Besides, Mr. Chiang said, ''It is almost impossible to work for press freedom within the party-controlled newspapers.''
 
The Press as Propaganda
The publishers of the major dailies, such as China Times and the United Daily News, are typically senior members of the ruling party. 
Although there has been a gradual relaxation of censorship in recent years, the Government still views the press as a vehicle for its propaganda.
Government officials say the grounds for banning are fairly clear. 
The main ones concern positions regarded as subversive, including publicly advocating Communism or the overthrowing the Government, and ''agitation,'' especially if it is designed to ''drive a wedge between native Taiwanese and former mainlanders.''
Dissident editors contend that the guidelines are vague, and often point to one banning reports that will ''confuse the opinion of the public.''
And the list of items deemed subversive has included pictures of Chinese Olympic athletes.
Anything that might be considered embarrassing to senior members of the Kuomintang is also off-limits. 
The last issue of Mr. Chiang's magazine printed excerpts from the diary of President Chiang Ching-Kuo about his experiences in Russia during his youthful infatuation with Communism. 
Any reference to the President's early Communist-adoring days tends to bring the Garrison Command running, Mr. Chiang says.
 
Censorship Is Defended
The Government says its censorship powers are justified because the dissident magazines are often irresponsible. 
''They print things that are just completely made up,'' said James C. Y. Soong, director of the cultural affairs department of the Kuomintang Central Committee.
One magazine wrote that he and two other fast-rising young men in the ruling party had been invited to President Reagan's inauguration in Washington, but that the invitations were withdrawn because of the Liu death. 
Mr. Soong says, and American officials confirm, that the three were never invited in the first place.
Mr. Chiang and other editors point out that Taiwan does have libel laws, which is how democratic governments usually protect citizens from irresponsible journalism.
In the last several months, Government harassment of the opposition magazines has increased and a handful have folded.
Even so, the editor of The Eighties is guardedly optimistic that the Government may ease a bit after the slaying of Mr. Liu.
''The Government has to do something to improve our international image, ''Mr. 
Chiang says. 
''Things may loosen up now. 
I hope so.''
