
After 37 years of banning all contact with mainland China, Taiwan seems close to allowing some of its citizens to visit their ancestral cities and villages on the mainland.
Before the end of the year, aged veterans of China's civil war, who fled to the island of Taiwan after the Communist victory in 1949, may be able to visit relatives on the mainland they have not seen for nearly four decades.
Officially, Taiwan's chief spokesman, Shaw Yuming, has announced only that the Government is considering an end to the ban on visits to the mainland. 
But other Government officials and the Government-controlled press say the basic decision has already been made and only details remain to be worked out.
Announcement This Month
''The Government is now trying to work out the details of travel to the mainland, with Hong Kong as the intermediary,'' one official said today. 
An announcement could come later this month, he said.
The possibility of allowing visits to the mainland reflects the growing realization on Taiwan that its policy of forbidding any contact with China becomes less tenable as China gains influence and respectability throughout Asia. 
Taiwan officials also acknowledge that without a change of policy they would have to cut off relations with Hong Kong, which now is Taiwan's third largest trading partner, after the British colony returns to China in 1997.
In addition, there has been domestic political pressure for a more relaxed policy toward the mainland. 
Both the main opposition group, the Democratic Progressive Party, and a new political party, the Anti-Communist Patriotic Union, have pressed the Government to allow informal contacts with the mainland.
 
Direct Visits to Hong Kong
Already this summer, Taiwan relaxed its travel rules by allowing its citizens to visit Hong Kong directly. 
In the past, Taiwan citizens were generally allowed only to stop over in Hong Kong on their way to or from other destinations. 
Even so, 220,000 Taiwan citizens visited Hong Kong last year.
The Government allowed its citizens to visit Hong Kong even though it is an open secret that once in the territory many people from Taiwan arrange surreptitious visits to the mainland.
China encourages such visits, because of its desire to woo Taiwan into accepting some kind of reunion with the mainland. 
Representatives from China in Hong Kong facilitate visits to home villages for people from Taiwan, and they do not mark their passports.
Hong Kong trade statistics also show that some $955 million in trade between Taiwan and China passed through the territory last year. 
So far this year, such trade is running at 60 percent higher than last year's rate.
 
Age to Be a Factor
It is not clear who would be allowed to visit the mainland under the rules that apparently are now being drafted. 
Some newspaper articles in Taiwan have suggested that anyone would be allowed to make the trip who was not employed by the Government or military. 
But a Government official said today that permission would probably be restricted to those at least 55 years old, who have relatives on the mainland.
The pressure for change comes not so much from the youthful opposition to the Government as from elderly refugees from the mainland.
When Chiang Kai-shek fled the mainland in 1949, he took with him some two million people, including 600,000 soldiers. 
Many had to leave their families behind in the turmoil and want to see their relatives before they die.
