
The visit of Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang of China to the United States has aroused unease in Taiwan that it may portend new setbacks when President Reagan visits Peking in April.
Officials and newspaper editorials have expressed satisfaction that Mr. Reagan reaffirmed United States commitments to the island when he met with Mr. Zhao. But worries remain that Mr. Reagan will be maneuvered by Peking into giving ground later.
James C. Y. Soong, the Taiwan Government's chief spokesman, said: ''We in the Republic of China have confidence in the Reagan Administration. 
President Reagan has, on many occasions, assured us that he will not betray his old friends and allies.''
But Mr. Soong conceded in an interview that Prime Minister Zhao's trip ''has caused serious concern'' in Taiwan.
 
'Moving Closer and Closer'
Other officials have taken note of the new momentum in Chinese-American relations marked by Prime Minister Zhao's visit. 
''In the short term, I don't think that Zhao's visit will hurt relations between Washington and Taipei greatly,'' said Chang Hsiao-yan, the Foreign Ministry's ranking specialist on American affairs, ''but in the long term, it will hurt us. 
It gives more of an impression that the United States and mainland China are moving closer and closer.''
Even Mr. Zhao's low-key approach has caused some trepidation in a capital that scrutinizes every contact between Peking and Washington for potential damage. 
The United States severed diplomatic ties with the Nationalist Government on Taiwan five years ago in order to establish full diplomatic relations with Peking.
''I think Zhao has become smart in taking a different approach,'' said Mr. Chang, who observed that Mr. Zhao muted Peking's usual complaint about United States arms sales to Taiwan. 
''He understands that if he takes a high profile in dealing with the United States, he will not get what he wants.''
Officials in Taipei said they did not expect any particular Chinese-American breakthrough during the visit, and Mr. Chang emphasized a common view that ''we will attach more importance to Reagan's trip in April.''
 
Flurry of Local Activity
The Nationalist Government has tried to offset the attention given Mr. Zhao's visit to the White House with a flurry of local activity intended to reinforce an image of continuing American support. 
Four United States senators and more than 20 members of Congress are being accorded red-carpet treatment in visits to Taiwan this month.
The semiofficial Institute of International Affairs opened a four-day conference on Tuesday that focused on the Taiwan Relations Act, which Congress passed in 1979 to guarantee that unofficial American relations with Taiwan would continue.
Chang King-yuh, the institute's president, insisted that the conference was not meant to coincide with Mr. Zhao's visit to the United States, despite widespread speculation to the contrary. 
But a Government official confirmed that the invitations to the visiting American members of Congress were deliberately scheduled.
''We had the timing in our mind,'' the official said. 
''When we learned Zhao Ziyang was visiting in January, and it was recess time in Congress, we invited some people from Congress at the same time.''
Taiwan's President, Chiang Ching- kuo, and Prime Minister Sun Yun-suan have been among the top officials entertaining the visiting Americans. 
The visitors have included Senator Arlen Specter, Republican of Pennsylvania; Senator Mark O. Hatfield, Republican of Oregon; Senator Thomas F. Eagleton, Democrat of Missouri, and Senator Frank H. Murkowski, Republican of Alaska.
 
Senators Offer Assurances
The four senators were quoted as offering various assurances that the United States commitment to Taiwan would not diminish. 
Mr. Murkowski said that the United States should provide Taiwan with better combat jets if Peking deployed more advanced jets. 
Taiwan officials express bitterness that the United States has been unwilling to sell sophisticated FX jet fighters because it would offend Peking.
The conference on United States Congressional-executive relations and the Taiwan Relations Act was attended by 40 ''renowned scholars,'' as the local press describes the local and American participants. 
The conference featured speeches by Senator Murkowski, Representative Tom G. Loeffler, Republican of Texas, and Representative Thomas A. Daschle, Democrat of South Dakota.
Mr. Chang, the institute's director, told the session he hoped the Congress would ''ultimately enhance relations between the United States and Taiwan, regardless of the nonexistence of diplomatic relations.''
The China Times, one of Taiwan's largest newspapers, summed up the reaction to Mr. Zhao's visit in an editorial on Wednesday. 
''We do not believe that President Reagan and his Administration will consciously betray or do things that harm the Republic of China,'' it said.
It then went on to caution that the Chinese Communists ''are the most treacherous group in the world.''
''Any gentleman will fall into their trap,'' the editorial said, ''if he is careless while negotiating with them and makes irrecoverable mistakes.''
