
The Chinese Nationalists in Taiwan said today that a Communist offer to begin talks on reunification aimed at sharing power in China was a propaganda ploy.
 
A spokesman for the Nationalist Government said the offer contained not hing new and was intended to subjugate the people on Taiwan.
''The only way to bring about national reunification is to abandon the Communist system,'' James Soong, a Foreign Ministry spokesman, said in Taipei.
The Communist offer had been put forward here by Ye Jianying, who as chairman of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress (Parliament) is China's nominal head of state. 
Stressing nationalism and patriotism, he urged the ruling Nationalist Party in Taiwan to ''forget previous ill will and join hands.''
Chinese nationalists in Taiwan call Communist reunification offer "propaganda plug"
It was the first time that the Communists had offered publicly to share power in a reunified China with the Nationalists, who took refuge in Taiwan when they lost control over the mainland to the Communists in 1949.
 
Offer Made Through Press Agency
Mr. Ye made the offer in an interview with the New China News Agency, the Government's press service. 
He said: ''People in authority and representative personalities of various circles in Taiwan may take up posts of leadership in national political bodies and participate in running the state.''
He repeated earlier offers to allow Taiwan to maintain its autonomy as a special administrative region, keep its prosperous economic system, and continue its economic and cultural ties abroad. 
He said Taiwan could also retain its own armed forces.
Mr. Ye did not say how much power the Communists would allow the Nationalists to share. 
At a reception today, marking the 32d anniversary of China's Communist regime, senior officials said the details could be the subject of preliminary talks preceding formal negotiations. 
They said they were ready to entertain a counteroffer from Taiwan.
Western and Eastern diplomats here viewed the Communist proposal as a sincere but politically calculated offer designed to isolate the Nationalists in international eyes in general and in United States public opinion in particular if they rejected the offer.
 
Toast by Prime Minister
In a toast at the National Day reception, given for foreign diplomats in the Great Hall of the People, Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang said Mr. Ye's proposal ''fully reflects the common desire and fundamental interests of the Chinese people of all nationalities, including our compatriots in Taiwan.''
He added:
''We are pleased that a relaxed atmosphere has set in across the Taiwan Strait. 
We hope that all our compatriots in Taiwan will, in a spirit of patriotism, make contributions to an early realization of the great unity of the whole nation.''
According to the New China News Agency, an editorial in tomorrow's issue of The People's Daily, the official party newspaper, will say, ''We hope men of insight among the Taiwan authorities and also Chiang Ching-kuo will actively respond.''
Chiang Ching-kuo is President of the Republic of China, the state established by the Chinese Nationalists in Taiwan, and the son of Chiang Kai-shek, who ruled China from 1926 until the Communist takeover in 1949 and then headed the Nationalist regime in Taiwan until his death in 1975.
 
Concern Over 'Two Chinas'
The Communist offer of talks implied concern that sentiment on Taiwan was moving toward the creation of an independent nation that could result in two Chinas. 
Mr. Ye said:
''We hope that the Nationalist authorities will maintain their one-China position and their opposition to 'two Chinas' and that they will put national interests above everything else, forget previous ill will and join hands with us in accomplishing the great cause of national reunification and the great goal of making China prosperous and strong, so as to win glory for our ancestors, bring benefit to our posterity and write a new and glorious page in the history of the Chinese nation.''
Mr. Ye said that any Communist-Nationalist accord coming out of Peking's offer would be the third rapprochement between the parties. 
The first was from 1923 and 1927 when the two parties formed a united front against regional warlords and the period from 1937 to 1945 when they united to counter the Japanese who had invaded and occupied large parts of China. 
B oth periods dissolved into civil war.
An army general at today's reception here said that, in offering to allow Taiwan maintain its 400,000-member army, Peking was giving the Nationalists insurance against any worries they might have about betrayal. 
After 32 years of propaganda, the Nationalists are afraid of contact with the mainland, he said.
 
Downgrading of U.S. 
Ties Possible
Other Chinese officials have told diplomats in the last two days that no new arms aid from the United States to Taiwan would be tolerated. 
One senior official was reported by Western diplomats to have said that Mr. Ye's message had been designed, in part, to prepare Chinese public opinion to accept, if necessary, a downgrading of relations with the United States if it decided to supply more arms to Taiwan, especially advanced fighter planes.
Mr. Ye's offer of reunification talks reiterated and expanded on conciliatory gestures made on Jan. 
1, 1979, when the United States recognized the Communist Government here as the sole legitimate government of China and abrogated a defense treaty with Taiwan.
Mr. Ye, in calling for a free exchange of mail and visits by relatives and tourists, scholars and athletes, said Taiwan's socioeconomic system would remain unchanged, as would its way of life and its economic and cultural relations with other countries. 
He added:
''There will be no encroachment on the proprietary rights and lawful right of inheritance over private property, houses, land and enterprises, or on foreign investment.''
