
THE China News, a Taipei newspaper, published a long editorial this month with a stark headline lamenting the ''Worrisome Financial Situation.''
It captured the concern throughout the island over Taiwan's grave economic distress.
The problem?
Taiwan's economy is mired in success, generating so much wealth from exports - mostly to America - that no one knows what to do with the cash. 
That is creating financial and political difficulties that might seem humorous from afar but that are taken very seriously here. 
So seriously that the Government is loosening its strict currency controls to allow the private sector access to some of its foreign-cash hoard.
The nation's huge foreign-exchange reserves, accumulating at a rate of more than $1 billion a month, are at the center of the Worrisome Financial Situation.
At last count, those reserves topped $44 billion. 
That means that this little island of 19 million people, with a per-capita income one-fourth of America's, has more foreign exchange reserves than the United States ($36 billion), Japan ($41.7 billion), Britain ($18 billion), Canada ($2.9 billion) -or indeed any country other than West Germany, which sits upon a $52.9 billion reserve.
''The buildup has been extraordinary,'' said Frederick C. Copeland Jr., Citicorp's top officer in Taiwan. 
''Before you know, it'll be $50 billion or $60 billion.''
The growing pile of foreign funds has has been an embarrassment to Taipei as it negotiates with the United States in an attempt to keep American goods and financial services out of Taiwanese markets. 
''They give the U.S. this song and dance about how poor little Taiwan can't afford more imports - then it produces these monstrous foreign exchange reserves,'' said a Western analyst here.
But the huge reserves carry other political liabilities, too. 
The Taiwanese read of the huge accumulation and wonder why their own streets have not been resurfaced and why more money is not spent on the nation's social welfare system. 
And while Taiwan's economic growth of about 11 percent this year has created new jobs - the island reports an unemployment rate of only 2 percent, though economists say it may be a bit higher - and raised the standard of living, an opposition politician running in the legislative elections this month touched a raw nerve in the Government by proposing that the billions in foreign exchange be divided among the inhabitants of Taiwan: $2,200 per person.
Then there are the economic drawbacks. 
Because Taiwan's central bank generally requires exporters and other private parties to turn in foreign currency in exchange for local currency, there has been an explosion in the money supply. 
It is growing at a 44 percent annual rate (compared with 14 percent in the United States). 
''We have too much foreign exchange, and it creates the potential for inflation,'' said Steven H.C. 
Wu, an official in the Government's Industrial Development and Investment Center.
The local currency glut exacerbates a broader problem: Taiwanese people save more money than they can reasonably invest. 
They salt away about 32 cents of every dollar, but invest only 16 cents. 
There are few productive investments on Taiwan - building vacancy rates are high, for example, and there is no need for new offices or hotels. 
Private investment fell 8.8 percent last year, and is up only a little this year.
So Taiwan overflows with cash. 
Some banks even turn down big deposits, for lack of adequate lending or investment opportunities.
It is this mix of international and domestic difficulties that has prompted the Government to move part of its foreign currency stockpile into private hands. 
The process is delighting American and other foreign banks here. 
They hope to get some lucrative business in recycling the export dollars, just as Western banks recycled petrodollars earned by oil-exporting nations a dozen years ago. 
But that may not happen soon. 
So far, Taipei has taken only these steps:
* Corporations and individuals can now hold $5,000 in foreign currency each year. 
An investor simply takes Taiwanese currency worth $5,000 to the bank and receives the foreign currency, which can be kept under a mattress or invested overseas. 
But most foreign investments still must be arranged through a Taiwan bank and are limited to a small number of highly reliable instruments, such as United States Government bonds.
* The capital requirement for a Taiwanese company planning to invest abroad has been cut by 60 percent, from the equivalent of $1.39 million to $555,000. 
This allows smaller companies to get the foreign exchange necessary to open a branch or build a plant overseas.
* Companies no longer need to turn over all foreign income as it is received, but can balance foreign receipts and expenses and turn in net foreign receipts each quarter. 
This reduces the paperwork for both the company and the central bank, and allows businesses to manage foreign exchange for short periods.
* A ban on the sale of gold has been lifted. 
As gold is imported for sale, foreign-cash reserves and local currency liquidity are sopped up.
In general, the private sector will probably use the currency in the same way the Government has: It will invest in foreign securities, mostly Government bonds and notes. 
Some of the money will also be used for investments in plants and equipment abroad, officials say.
With all this, the Government has also come up with another ploy to reduce official foreign currency reserve figures. 
It is asking private banks to hold on to foreign exchange instead of immediately sending it to the central bank. 
As a result, several billion dollars appears to be in the hands of the banks - on top of the $44 billion in official reserves. 
The banks are far from happy about this, because the new Taiwan dollar is rising, causing big losses for those who hold American currency. 
(Taipei acceded to the rising exchange rate because of American pressure, but analysts doubt that the rise will be enough to choke off Taiwan's exports.) THE relaxation of controls reverses nearly four decades of strict currency rules - regulations that have been in effect since the Nationalist Chinese forces led by Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek fled mainland China and took refuge on the island of Taiwan.
According to Mark Mobius, a Taipei investment manager, Taiwan's tendency to keep a tight grip on its foreign cash originates with the experience of Chinese Nationalists in the late 1940's in Shanghai. 
The stock market there, then the biggest in East Asia, collapsed as the Communists captured more and more of China, and eventually the Communist Government seized financial and physical assets. 
Capital fled the country, and many investors lost all.
Now many American investors are eager to buy Taiwanese securities -they are relatively cheap and Taiwan's growth is expected to continue at a brisk pace. 
But Taipei still keeps foreign investors at arm's length because of the memory of the 1940's. 
''When you go to an official who lived through that, and say that if you lift capital controls you'll get more money coming in than going out, they'll reply, 'Not in my experience,' '' said Mr. Mobius.
The tight controls only became a major problem this year, as the export-generated reserves swelled. 
Just a year ago, Taiwan - and Singapore, Hong Kong and South Korea, the other newly industrialized Asian countries variously known as the Four Tigers or the Gang of Four -were facing what for them were severe economic difficulties. 
Taiwan's economic growth rate tumbled from 10.9 percent in 1984 to 4.7 percent in 1985, while Singapore suffered its first recession in 20 years. 
South Korea and Hong Kong also experienced tough times.
But with the exception of Singapore, which is slowly emerging from recession, they are now booming. 
The reason: exports, mainly to the United States. 
The tonic this year was the rise in the Japanese yen and in European currencies. 
That has allowed the Four Tigers to snatch export business from Japan and Europe all over the world - everything from toys to cars.
Today, Taiwan, the 40th-biggest economy by population, is the world's 10th-biggest exporter. 
The nation generates 58 percent of its economic output for exports, 47 percent of which go to America. 
WHILE American manufacturers are appalled by these trade successes, some American financial houses are attracted by what they see as a new opportunity, as capital controls are eased. 
If Taiwan does not know what to do with all of its cash, they have a few ideas.
Bond salesmen and financial advisers have been streaming into Taipei, making visits to the central bank and commercial banks. 
They are getting some business, but for the most part they are working at building relationships. 
Though the controls are only being relaxed at this point, there is the firm prospect that they will be lifted entirely over the next few years. 
That could create significant opportunities for foreign fund managers who have hitherto found Taiwan largely a closed market.
''It's a question of keeping your ear to the ground and keeping up with regulations,'' said Kwok Lap-chiu, general manager of the Security Pacific National Bank in Taiwan.
American banks would like to act as fund managers, offering international investment services to Taiwanese clients in the private sector, but that is not yet permitted. 
So far, foreign banks are still limited to buying and selling securities for the central banks, at very thin margins.
The central bank has been so conservative in its investment policy that its returns have been low. 
More than 80 percent of the reserves are invested in United States dollar-denominated instruments, overwhelmingly Treasuries.
As the dollar sank over the last 22 months, the central bank did not do nearly as well as it would have had it invested in yen or Deutsche marks. 
The central bank reports that it earned 7.84 percent on reserves between July 1985 and June 1986, down from 9.39 percent a year earlier.
The lackluster performance has not gone unnoticed. 
Taiwan's normally cozy political system has recently allowed some criticism of the central bank's handling of its foreign funds: The Control Yuan, a Government agency that is supposed to function as a watchdog, has discussed the matter on several occasions, according to minutes of the meetings.
So besides alleviating inflationary and international trade pressures, the Government's move to ease currency controls may deflect these criticisms.
Still, the issue remains a ticklish one in Taipei. 
An interview on the subject with the central bank was canceled an hour before it was to take place. 
The Finance Ministry - after inquiring about the topic - refused to arrange an interview.
American banks may get more of an opportunity to manage some of Taiwan's hoard. 
But the pace will be measured. 
''We want to go step by step,'' said Wang Chien-shien, vice minister of economic affairs. 
''We want things to go smoothly.''
