
Waggling a 10-foot bamboo pole, Huang Renhe shooed his ducks into a newly plowed paddy field, a pebble's toss from the house that stands on the site where Liu Shaoqi was born 88 years ago.
''He was a good man,'' Mr. Huang said, holding the rod of weathered bamboo behind his back.
''Vicious,'' ''pernicious,'' ''a scab,'' is what Mao Zedong called Liu Shaoqi more than 20 years ago before ordering him dismissed as China's first President and banished to political oblivion and death.
In the violent decade of the Cultural Revolution that ended in 1976, Mr. Liu's birthplace was sacked and destroyed by rampaging young people called Red Guards, their zealotry spurred by Mao's attacks against China's ''No. 
1 capitalist roader.''
Today, a new house built in ocher-colored mud with rough thatched roofing stands on the site of the Liu birthplace. 
The structure is gradually becoming a political shrine.
 
The Buses Still Come
There is, to the south across a clump of round hills, another shrine at Shaoshan, the native village of Mao and the most hallowed political site in China. 
Twenty years ago, tens of thousands of Red Guards, crimson banners flapping, trooped daily to Shaoshan, many on foot, to pay homage to the leader of the Chinese revolution.
The Red Guards are gone now; they no longer exist. 
The daily train from Hunan's capital, Changsha, is not quite full. 
But on the village common, a patch of pavement ringed with souvenir stands and tiny eateries with names like Patriotic Restaurant, buses still arrive, disgorging Chinese and Western tourists alike.
Despite Mao's torment and ultimate destruction of Mr. Liu after decades of tension between the two men, an accommodation of political purpose unhindered by history has settled on this small swath of central Hunan that links these two villages. 
The bitterness of that time has been covered over by the current orthodoxy that decrees that the two men were, after all, comrades and friends.
For Mr. Huang, who lives with his ducks, his wife and three sons in Lojiatang village across the paddy fields from Mr. Liu's old house, the past is not so clear.
''When the Cultural Revolution came, Comrade Liu was criticized,'' said Mr. Huang, 60 years old. 
''We thought he worked for the revolution for most of his life. 
Why for this time was he not good?''
''In 1961, Liu came back here,'' Mr. Huang said. 
''At that time it was very difficult economically. 
We did not have enough to eat. 
Those were the worst years we ever had. 
Even before liberation we could get enough rice to eat. 
When Liu Shaoqi came back, he investigated. 
He saw the peasants eating grass and eating rice husks and he cried. 
If he had not come back in 1961, many people would have died.''
''We only knew Liu Shaoqi was dead in 1980,'' Mr. Huang continued. 
''There were rumors he was dead before that. 
Some people believed those rumors. 
I myself thought he was dead.''
 
Death Comes in Prison
In 1969, 11 years before any public announcement, Mr. Liu died alone in a special prison in Kaifeng. 
''The party Central Committee,'' Mr. Huang said, ''they killed him.''
At the new Liu house, there is no mention of Mao's persecution of Mr. Liu, no mention of his denunciation by the Red Guards, of his wife's humiliation in a show trial for political crimes. 
A plastic sign in the entryway puts the blame for Mr. Liu's death on Jiang Qing, Mao's wife, and Lin Biao, once designated as Mao's heir, both now labeled ''counterrevolutionary elements.''
But the memory of Mr. Liu as a victim of Maoist excess remains. 
In cars and minibuses, an increasing number of people journey here, said Peng Ying, a guide at the house. 
''Yesterday,'' she said, ''I sold 1,100 tickets.''
A short walk away, a sprawling complex of whitewashed buildings, their roof corners flipped up in a traditional Chinese manner, is nearing completion. 
Some time next year, photographs, documents and whatever personal effects remain from Mr. Liu's life will be scattered through these buildings as a memorial to China's President. 
The cluster of buildings is larger than a similar memorial hall built for Mao over the hills in Shaoshan.
Twenty years ago, Shaoshan was thick with the passion of revolution, Wen Huikang said, ''I was a guide in Mao's house during the Cultural Revolution,'' Mr. Wen said. 
''I worked all day except to eat and sleep. 
I worked eight hours a day. 
You had to carry a thermos of water, and it was difficult to go to the restroom. 
We were open 24 hours a day. 
At the height, there were 56,000 people a day. 
The Red Guards would line up for four or five hours.
''I said very simple things, like: 'Here is Mao's bedroom. 
This photograph was taken in 1914.'
If you spoke too slowly the Red Guards would complain and say you didn't like Mao Zedong.''
#600,000 Visitors in a Year After 1967, Mr. Wen said, the number of visitors began to decline slowly, and by 1979, three years after Mao's death and the re-ordering of China's economic and political policies, the number of visitors had fallen to a mere 200,000 a year.
Since then, however, there has been a steady growth in the number of visitors to Shaoshan. 
Wu Dawei, the head of the Communist Party propaganda unit in Shaoshan, said that about 600,000 people trod the cement floors of Mao's childhood home last year and that he expected the number to rise this year.
Despite a re-evaluation of Mao in 1980 that decreed that he had made serious mistakes in his later life, there is little in Shaoshan to suggest that the Communist Party chairman led his country to the brink of starvation and chaos for nearly two decades until his death in 1976.
Those years are but scantily covered in the rambling memorial hall filled with photographs and writings of Mao. 
It is an unsullied past on view, absent the political tumult of his later years. 
Even Jiang Qing, the movie actress whom Mao married in 1939 and who became one of China's most powerful figures during the Cultural Revolution, is not visible.
''This museum is dedicated to Mao's life, so pictures relevant to Mao's life have been put up,'' Mr. Wu said. 
''Pictures of Jiang Qing were not put up because they are not relevant to Mao's life.''
And almost gone from Shaoshan too are the once ubiquitous Mao buttons, disks of plastic and bamboo emblazoned with Mao's image that were once produced in the hundreds of millions. 
The nearby factory that manufactured the badges says that there are only a few hundred remaining in storage and that there are no plans to make more.
In Tanzichong, surrounded by freshly plowed rice paddies, a solitary souvenir seller peddles yellow and white hand towels. 
A strip of red Chinese ideograms read simply, ''Visit to Comrade Liu Shaoqi's house.''
