
An American teacher who was expelled from China after being accused of spying said today she had undergone a ''nightmare'' experience. 
She arrived home Friday night to a greeting of tears, flags and flowers.
Lisa Wichser, exhausted from a 36-hour journey that began with a flight from Peking, looked pale and her voice quavered as she greeted her parents, brother and sister at Indianapolis International Airport.
Miss Wichser, who proclaims her innocence, told reporters today that her week-long detention in China had been ''a nightmare, something I don't understand.''
She had been in China two years collecting material for a thesis on agricultural changes in China since 1969. 
She is working on a doctorate in economics at the University of Denver.
INDIANAPOLIS, June 5 (AP) - An American teacher who was expelled from China after being accused of spying said today she had undergone a ''nightmare'' experience.Awakened by Telephone Call
She said she was awakened around 1:30 A.M. on May 28 by a telephone call from one of the attendants in the hotel where she lived, saying there was an urgent cable from the family.
A few minutes later, she said, she answered a knock on her door and found five or six uniformed members of the Chinese Public Security Bureau, accompanied by the bright lights of several television cameras.
''I had no idea what was going on,'' she said. 
''They came in and searched my room. 
I asked them what was going on. 
They alternated between saying, 'You know what you've done' and 'You'll know in a while.'
''
Miss Wischer said she had been taken to a cement room in a detention center with a barred window, where her requests to to get in touch with United States Embassy officials or her friends were repeatedly denied.
Miss Wischer, a 29-year-old teacher of English and economics, was accused of stealing secret documents and spying. 
She was held until Thursday, spending three days in solitary cofinement, and then was released and ordered to leave within 48 hours.
In Washington, a State Department spokesman, Alan Romberg, said the department had voiced ''serious concern'' to China over its handling of the case.
In San Francisco, on her way home, Miss Wichser said, ''I am not a spy. 
I have never been a spy. 
That's ridiculous.''
Asked if she still hoped to marry Yi Shigong, 31, an economics student who had tutored her, Miss Wichser said, ''I certainly hope so; I sincerely hope so. 
The Chinese have not foreclosed that possibility.''
Chinese sources familiar with the case say Mr. Yi is now in jail. 
As Miss Wichser came off the plane members of her family held aloft small American flags. 
Her brother, Eric, brought roses from his garden.
Miss Wichser said earlier she had not been mistreated by Chinese officials, and that despite her recent experiences, ''I have very strong and positive feelings toward the Chinese people.''
She said that while she was a prisoner she had been interrogated three times a day for about two hours at a time. 
Miss Wichser said she had a roommate at one point, and that she spent much of her time composing a ''confession'' requested by the Chinese.
''They called it a confession, which meant I was to title it 'My Confession,' '' she said, adding that the document consisted of her name and background, a history of her studies in China and a detailed identification of papers taken from her hotel room.
''They weren't state secrets,'' she said. 
Miss Wichser told a reporter on the flight from Peking to Tokyo that she did not know she had violated any laws until the Chinese explained them at her interrogations. 
''The Chinese never clearly publicize their laws,'' she said. 
''Now I know and I would not do it again.''
