
Only in Newport, where the social arts function with the force of great money, could the event planned for today transpire: at the behest of the First National Bank of Chicago, China's Ambassador to the United States has consented to come here to honor the restoration of a teahouse built almost 70 years ago for Alva Vanderbilt Belmont.
As the teahouse glows in stained and lacquered shades of jade green and red in the afternoon light, a United States Navy band is to play, with Deputy Secretary of State Walter J. Stoessel Jr. and Claiborne Pell, the senior United States Senator from Rhode Island, in attendance. 
A uniformed squadron of the Newport Artillery Company will aim its cannon to sea and fire 19 times from the lawn of Marble House, the Vanderbilt mansion built for $11 million in 1892. 
His Excellency Chai Zemin, the Chinese Ambassador, is to cut a ribbon opening the teahouse to the public. 
And a troupe of balloons will float off on the ocean breeze.
NEWPORT, R.I. 
- Only in Newport, where the social arts function with the force of great money, could the event planned for today transpire: at the behest of the First National Bank of Chicago, China's Ambassador to the United States has consented to come here to honor the restoration of a teahouse built almost 70 years ago for Alva Vanderbilt Belmont.
Thus is an extraordinary restoration of a singular little building to come to its official end. 
It is thought to be the only structure of its kind east of San Francisco. 
Almost $500,000 and a year and a half of work by craftsmen in 15 specialties has gone into the restoration by the Preservation Society of Newport County.
A sad and coincidental footnote is that the society's director, Paul E. Molitor Jr., will not be on hand to celebrate the completion of the project he supervised. 
After an interview at the site on Sunday and a dinner party that night at Bailey's Beach, the 36-yearold Mr. Molitor apparently drove to the top of the Newport Bridge over Narragansett Bay. 
His car was found there just before midnight with its lights on, according to Detective Sgt. William E. Eckert Jr. of the Rhode Island State Police. 
Mr. Molitor's body was pulled from the bay on Monday afternoon, Sergeant Eckert said.
''I think he was just despondent,'' said John G. Winslow, president of the society. 
''It was a personal thing. 
He was very enthusiastic about the teahouse. 
He devoted most of his time the last two or three years to it.''
Compared with the piles of brick, stone and marble that the money barons of the 19th century built here as summer ''cottages,'' the teahouse is as bright and fanciful as a cut jewel. 
Mrs. Belmont, who was divorced from William K. Vanderbilt and married O.H.P. 
Belmont, may, in fact, have intended it as a temporary adornment for the lawn of Marble House, which became hers by the divorce.
The architects and researchers in the restoration project cannot be sure of her intent in the year 1913. 
But in the same way that mansions such as Marble House have been saved for the public by donations from the rich, a fond memory has interceded to preserve the teahouse, which had been boarded up and left to the vandals and the salt air for decades.
It happened this way, Mr. Winslow said: The late Frederick H. Prince of Chicago, whose fortune came from railroads and Armour & Company, owned the Marble House after the Vanderbilts did. 
When Harold S. Vanderbilt, a son of Mrs. Belmont, provided the funds for the preservation society to purchase the estate from the Prince family in 1963, the society restored the mansion but had no money for the teahouse.
But William Wood-Prince, Mr. Prince's stepson and heir and a director of the First National Bank of Chicago, remembered courting his wife in the teahouse. 
He gave $50,000 toward restoring it. 
Other money was raised. 
And when the project neared completion, the First National Bank of Chicago, which has business interests in China, prevailed on Mr. Chai to lend his office to the occasion.
That is how things work on that level in Newport. 
But on another level, at the teahouse, the work of restoring the obliterated Chinese calligraphy, the paintings of 12th- and 15th-century Chinese garden scenes, the chopped-off copper figures of dragons, lions and dogs on the roof, the broken terra-cotta roof tiles, the crumbled plaster of paris moldings, all proceeded by hand, tediously and inch by inch.
The teahouse had been designed for Mrs. Belmont by the New York architectural firm of Richard Howland Hunt and Joseph Howland Hunt. 
Documents in the firm's archives indicate that someone from the firm went to China to study and sketch pavilions there, and the resulting design, according to Mark Weber, a consultant hired by the society to research the history of the teahouse, ''is a composite image,'' and perhaps ''the most significant example of American chinoiserie architecture in America.''
''The French term chinoiserie,'' Mr. Weber added, ''can only properly be used to mean European decoration whimsically applied in the Chinese manner, not to Oriental work or strict copies of it.''
Mrs. Belmont called her little building ''the Teahouse,'' he said, but it was actually an imitation of Chinese temple architecture.
Many of the original architectural drawings, along with records of the pavilion's cost and the number and identity of the original craftsmen, were lost. 
The restoration had to proceed from old photographs, from intuition, from copying existing parts to reproduce missing pieces.
Jeffrey L. Staats, the supervising architect for Donal Simpson Associates of Newport, discovered that Mrs. Belmont had cut corners. 
Spruce and pine had been used instead of the mahogany and teak called for in the original specifications. 
Instead of elaborate lacquer work and varnish, only a single coat of paint was used. 
The teahouse was built with ungalvanized nails. 
And the paintings inside were done on plywood.
Before restoring the paintings, Christy Cunningham, who specializes in frescoes on wooden panels, had to restore the surface of the vandalized and peeling plywood. 
She had to make such carved inscriptions as ''L.S.D.'' and ''Joey Loves Sarah'' disappear. 
It took her a year.
Arnold Cyr, the coppersmith who hand-hammered a new dragon's head and parts for a lion and a dog for the roof, discovered to his amazement that the coppersmith who had originally done such beautiful work had not scratched his name inside the copper sheeting. 
On the new work, Mr. Cyr said, ''I put my name inside.''
Only one defect now remains in the teahouse. 
Should the Chinese Ambassador look up, he will see that the characters on the bottom of the bronze lanterns tell of the reign of the emperor in which the lanterns were made. 
But the characters are Japanese, as was the emperor. 
The lanterns were made in Japan.
