
The Western allies and Japan have agreed to a major relaxation of the rules under which they export high-technology products to China. 
Such sales totaled $6 billion in the year ended Sept. 
30, up from $1 billion in the fiscal year 1984.
The move to expand and expedite exports will add new categories of goods eligible for transfer to the Chinese, who have long chafed under rules that have been applied without distinction to Eastern Europe, the Soviet Union and China.
The regulations are those of the 15-member Coordinating Committee, consisting of the NATO allies and Japan but excluding Iceland, that screens exports to prevent the transfer of technology with military applications.
 
Categories Not Specified
The decision was announced today in China in a brief statement by Vice President Bush, just before he left Peking for Chengdu. 
Mr. Bush did not say what categories of goods are newly authorized for shipment to China and a Commerce Department official here said the department could ''not get into specifics.''
It was understood, however, that the decision permits the export of 27 categories of computers and medical equipment, but no military hardware. 
It was unclear today whether the decision would permit the export of minicomputers and semiconductor manufacturing equipment.
''We feel it is an improvement,'' a spokesman for the International Business Machines Corporation said in a statement. 
''We don't know the details yet, but we are confident that it will improve our ability to market to China.''
I.B.M. has the largest presence of any American computer maker in China and stands to be the biggest beneficiary of relaxed guidelines. 
It already has a Chinese subsidiary.
Mr. Bush said that about 80 percent of the committee's work involves China and that about half the high-technology items requiring the group's licenses would be affected by the relaxation.
 
Easing a Trade Backlog
He said the move would ease a major backlog in United States-China trade, a source of increasing frustration among the Chinese. 
China has complained repeatedly about its inability to buy American and other Western technology for its modernization program.
The Vice President said the decision, made a month ago in Paris, where the Coordinating Committee is based, required a 30-day waiting period that has just ended. 
The multinational liberalization takes effect immediately.
The United States has also taken its own steps to speed up the processing of licensing applications for China, including the formation in July of a China Team Center.
The Acting Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Trade Administration, William T. Archey, told Congress last week that by the end of September the department had reduced processing times for Chinese sales to 1983 levels even though the caseload had risen by 162 percent.
In 1983, 2,800 export licenses were approved for China with the total rising to more than 8,000 in the 12 months ended Sept. 
30.
