
The Senate tonight defied threats of a Presidential veto and approved legislation that would place stringent quotas on textile imports from 12 countries, most of them in Asia.
The vote was 60 to 39. 
A similar version was passed last month by the House, and now a conference will have to reconcile the two measures.
Senator Daniel J. Evans, a Washington Republican who led the fight against the bill, said he was ''absolutely convinced'' that President Reagan would veto whatever bill comes out of the conference and that Congress will sustain the veto. 
A two-thirds vote is needed to override a veto, and supporters of the bill failed to get that much in either chamber.
'Fruitless' Debate Is Seen
''The debate has been interesting, worthwhile and useful,'' Mr. Evans told reporters, ''but it will turn out to be fruitless.''
Sponsors of the measure maintain, however, that Mr. Reagan will ultimately decide to sign the legislation because a veto would hurt Republicans in key Southeastern states in next year's elections.
''The textile industry in this country is in crisis,'' argued Senator Strom Thurmond, a South Carolina Republican. 
''Unless something is done to stop these massive imports, we won't have a textile industry in a few years.''
The textile bill is the first trade measure to pass Congress since the lawmakers returned from their summer recess alarmed by the loss of jobs to foreign competition.
 
Other Legislation Afoot
Many other bills are working their way through the legislative process, partly because Democrats believe they can use the trade issue against the Republicans in Congressional elections a year from now.
The bill adopted today would slash textile imports by 30 percent from the two largest sources, South Korea and Taiwan. 
Products from Hong Kong would be cut 14 percent. 
Imports from nine other countries would be frozen at their 1984 levels; these countries are China, Japan, Pakistan, Indonesia, India, the Philippines, Thailand, Brazil and Singapore.
Under pressure from the State Department, the Senate altered its original bill to be less restrictive toward China. 
The Administration is concerned that a sharp cut in Chinese imports would harm relations between the two countries and provoke retaliation against American manufacturers trying to sell their goods in China.
The House bill is harsher toward China than the Senate version.
Other industries are also looking for help against imports. 
The bill passed today, unlike the House bill, includes a clause protecting the domestic shoe industry from foreign competition. 
Under that provision, imports would be limited to 60 percent of the American market.
Senators from copper-producing states added an amendment today that would direct the Administration to initiate trade talks with copper-exporting countries in an attempt to limit their share of the American market. 
That amendment won the votes of Pete V. Domenici, Republican of New Mexico, and Jake Garn, Republican of Utah, for the final bill.
Today's debate reflected long-standing, strongly held views on the textile issue that frequently divided along regional lines. 
Lawmakers representing states that make cloth, such as the Carolinas, and produce apparel, such as New York, supported the legislation.
But legislators from states that could lose exports if there is foreign retaliation, primarily agricultural states, tended to oppose the bill. 
They were joined by West Coast Senators who fear that a decline in trade with Asia would harm their region's ports and transportation industry.
Sponsors of the measure argued that the textile and apparel industries have lost 200,000 jobs since 1980.
''Families are being deprived of a living,'' Mr. Thurmond said. 
''We've got to turn it around.''
The lobbying coalition behind the bill was particularly effective because it combined labor and management forces that have fought each other in bitter organizing battles throughout the textile industry.
Opponents of the bill said the loss of textile jobs reflected automation and productivity as much as foreign competition. 
And protectionism, they said, would be ''counterproductive,'' in Senator Evans's words, because it would cause the loss of jobs in other sectors of the economy.
Some of the strongest fears were voiced by farm state lawmakers, whose constituents depend heavily on exporting grain. 
Max Baucus, a Montana Democrat, made a typical comment when he said that the bill ''says to agriculture that we're going to kiss you good-bye, it's all over, we're going to send you down the drain.''
