
Following is the text of the official English translation of China's reunification proposal to Taiwan, which was made public here today by the Foreign Ministry:
PEKING, Sept. 
30 (AP) - Following is the text of the official English translation of China's reunification proposal to Taiwan, which was made public here today by the Foreign Ministry:
1. In order to bring an end to the unfortunate separation of the Chinese nation as early as possible, we propose that talks be held between the Communist Party of China and the Kuomintang of China on a reciprocal basis so that the two parties will cooperate for the third time to accomplish the great cause of national reunification. 
The two sides may first send people to meet for an exhaustive exchange of views.
Official text of China's reunification proposal to Taiwan
2. It is the urgent desire of the people of all nationalities of both sides of the straits to communicate with each other, reunite with their relatives, develop trade and increase mutual understanding.
We propose that the two sides make arrangements to facilitate the exchange of mail, trade, air and shipping services and visits by relatives and tourists as well as academic, cultural and sports exchanges and reach an agreement thereupon.
3. After the country is reunified, Taiwan can enjoy a high degree of autonomy as a special administrative region and it can retain its armed forces. 
The central Government will not interfere with local affairs on Taiwan.
4. Taiwan's current socioeconomic system will remain unchanged, so will its way of life and its economic and cultural relations with foreign countries. 
There will be no encroachment on proprietary rights and lawful right of inheritance over private property, houses, land and enterprises or on foreign investments.
5. People in authority and representative personages of various circles in Taiwan may take up posts of leadership in national political bodies and participate in running the state.
6. When Taiwan's local finance is in difficulty, the central Government may subsidize it as is fit for the circumstances. 
7. For people of all nationalities and public figures of various circles in Taiwan who wish to come and settle on the mainland, it is guaranteed that proper arrangments will be made for them, that there will be no discrimination against them and that they will have the freedom of entry and exit.
8. Industrialists and businessmen in Taiwan are welcome to invest and engage in various economic undertakings on the mainland, and their legal rights, interests and profits are guaranteed.
9. The reunificiation of the motherland is the responsibility of all Chinese. 
We sincerely welcome people of all nationalities, public figures of all circles and all mass organizations in Taiwan to make proposals and suggestions regarding affairs of state through various channels and in various ways.
We hope our compatriots in Taiwan will give full play to their patriotism and work energetically for the early realization of the great unity of our nation and share the honor of it.
