
Thanksgiving, in our house, is a changeable feast. 
It is American to the extent that it is observed on the day set aside for it, occasionally Italian in flavor simply because that is the ancestry of my husband and old feasts die hard, and quite often Chinese in taste because that is what I know and what I cook.
It wasn't always so. 
Thanksgiving, American Thanksgiving, came upon me in 1959, the year we were married and I came to New York to live. 
That November my husband told me we were going to his mother's for Thanksgiving dinner and I asked what Thanksgiving was.
Eileen Yin-Fei Lo discusses meeting of Italian and Chinese cuisines for Thanksgiving feast
He told me about the pilgrims and the Indians and corn and turkeys and how the day originally had been a day of thanks on the part of the pilgrims for their continued well-being.
''Oh,'' I remember saying, ''that is like the 24th day of the 12th month in China, when my mother used to say thank you to Tsao Chun.''
''Oh?''
I remember him answering. 
That day, the culmination of the New Year celebration, which is China's most important holiday, was our traditional day of thanksgiving for a year enjoyed, for harvests that were successful. 
During the year a picture of Tsao Chun, also known as the Kitchen God, drawn on rice paper, was tacked above our kitchen stove, a vantage point from which he observed our family at table, which as we all know is when truth comes out. 
At any rate, on that 24th day of the 12th month his job is to report to the Jade Emperor on the family he has been living with.
So we would smear honey on Tsao Chun's lips and put him on a tiny bamboo throne, then join him in a thanksgiving feast of sweet cakes, candied fruit and sweetened glutinous rice before setting fire to his picture so that, through the wisps of smoke, he would rise upward and say only sweet things about us. 
That was our thanksgiving.
''Ours is a bit different,'' said my husband, and as he described it I thought to myself that it certainly was. 
He mentioned that we would certainly have turkey, but that there would be important Italian additions to the feast. 
To wit, an antipasto of such things as freshly smoked salami, peppers that had been roasted atop the oven that morning and dressed with olive oil, and chunks of hard cheese called locatelli; a thick chicken broth with chicken; a green salad; followed by the roast turkey and everything that would go with it, including dressing; followed by cold celery and fennel to cool the palate, then dates and nuts. 
Dessert would come a few hours later, after Uncle Frank's accordion music and the penny poker game.
That, I thought, was certainly more elaborate than what we did for the Kitchen God. 
My goodness!
It was also the first turkey I had ever eaten. 
I had never even seen a turkey until I went to Hong Kong from Canton, where I was born, and those that had been imported for the Christmas holidays of the British in the crown colony always looked so skinny and stringy that I refused even to taste them. 
Did I wish white meat or dark?
I was asked. 
Well, everybody knew that white meat is essentially tasteless, so I chose dark. 
And it was pleasant, I remember, but not at all special, and frankly I guess I couldn't understand what all the fuss was about.
The roasted peppers were, however, utterly wonderful, and I told my mother-in-law so, which made her feel a little better than she had when I suggested that turkey was dull. 
She also liked it when I told her I liked the chicken broth.
We did make the Thanksgiving Day dinners for years later, watching it move from in-law to in-law. 
And then my husband's family scattered and soon Thanksgiving Day was a day for my immediate family. 
We had turkey for a couple of years mainly because I enjoyed figuring out ways to creatively use the leftover turkey meat. 
I curried it, made Shanghai-style pastries with turkey as the filling, stir-fried it with celery, carrots, scallions and onions, all of which tasted better than the roasted turkey, I thought.
Thanksgiving kept meaning turkey because my husband and my three children said that at Thanksgiving you had to have turkey. 
That of course was nonsense and one year I listened to them ask for a turkey as they always did but I gave them a duck.
And a very special duck it was, a classical Chinese preparation called Tea-Smoked Duck. 
First I steamed it whole with ginger, eightstar anise and cinnamon sticks, then I smoked it with Dragon Well tea, that magnificent green tea from Hangzhou, roasted it briefly in the oven, then deep-fried it, whole, to give the skin the texture of parchment. 
Instant success!
And from then on there was no longer talk of Thanksgiving turkeys simply because tea-smoked duck tasted better.
After that came a couple of years of roasted fresh ham, a huge ham into which I slipped slices of garlic and basted with soy sauce and sugar for about nine hours, and with which I served snow peas and black mushrooms. 
It was also successful and wonderful as a leftover stir-fried with vegetables. 
Then, a couple of years ago, we started going to the home of our friends, the Perlines, for Thanksgiving. 
And the culinary character of our Thanksgiving changed still again. 
It was back to turkey, but before the turkey there was always a matzoh ball soup, and later on a flan, because Irving makes the best there is, and a wonderful chocolate sponge, cherries and whipped cream Black Forest Cake made by Frieda, the lady from Germany who came in to help the Perlines out. 
Now what sort of traditional Thanksgiving Day feast is that?
We do enjoy it very much, however, as much for the company as for the food, because Thanksgiving for the Perlines is sort of an open house and each year, it seems, there are others joining the regulars for dinner - students, relatives, friends who have dropped by. 
And that is a fine Thanksgiving too. 
Do I contribute?
Not really, except to say a few quiet and private words to Tsao Chun about the Perlines' very nice kitchen, so he can mention it upstairs.
Eileen Yin-Fei Lo teaches Chinese cooking and nutrition at the China Institute in America, in New York, and is the author of the forthcoming, ''The Dim Sum Book: Art of the Chinese Teahouse,'' Crown Publishers.
