
Gymnastics can be pretty and figure skating can be elegant, but for many people, no sport matches the esthetic and athletic beauty of diving. 
A good dive is easy to recognize, and television's slow-motion replays make a good dive even more enjoyable.
For years, the best divers were Americans. 
Now the best, or most of the best, are Chinese. 
They should dominate the four Olympic events, the men's and women's 3-meter springboard and 10-meter platform.
Of the 12 medals in the 1984 Los Angeles Olympics, the United States won 8 and China 3. 
Of the 12 in the 1986 world championships in Madrid, China won 7 and the United States 4. 
Ron O'Brien, the United States Olympic coach, said he would be happy if his team won five medals in Seoul. 
Look for the Chinese to win seven or eight medals, the United Sates three or four and the Soviet Union one.
Of those American medals, two (probably gold) should come from Grey Louganis, who won both men's events in 1984. 
Now, at the age of 28, he is no longer unbeatable and his motivation and physical soundness have wavered, but he usually dives well when it counts and he remains the best diver in history. 
His main opposition will come from the Chinese: Tan Liangde on the springboard and 14-year-old Xiong Ni off the platform.
In the women's springboard, Kelly McCormick, the American silver medalist in 1984, must face 18-year-old Gao Min and Li Qing of China. 
In the women's platform, Michele Mitchell, the 1984 silver medalist, and Wendy Lian Williams, the other American, will contend for medals with Xu Yanmei of China and Elena Miroshina of the Soviet Union.
In springobard, the men do 11 dives, the women 10. 
In platform, the med do 10, the women 8. 
About half the dives are more or less basic and required.
Each diver does all his dives in the preliminaries. 
Then the 12 leaders in each event advance to the final, where preliminary scores are thrown out and all dives are repeated.
The diver tries to fill all requirements of his dive (somersaults, twists, body position, etc.) and finish with a vertical entry and minimal splash. 
Scoring is done by seven judges from different nations. 
After watching a diver's approach, takeoff, action in the air and entry, they give him from 0 points to 10 (for a perfect dive).
To minimize prejudicial scoring, the high and low score on each dive are thrown out. 
The five remaining scores are added, then divided by three-fifths, then multiplied by that dive's degree of difficulty.
The dives are clustered into six groups: forward, back, reverse, inward, twisting and (from the platform only) armstand. 
Four body positions are used; straight (body not bent, like a swan dive), pike (body bent only at the waist, like a jackknife), tuck (knees tight against the chest) and free (no restrictions).
