
IN 1967, factions of zealous Red Guards fashioned a monstrous statue of their idol, Mao Zedong, and mounted it on a pedestal in front of the Beijing University library. 
Last month, in the dark of the night, the statue was toppled and carted off by workmen.
While statues of Mao have been demolished in many towns and cities, the removal of the statue at Beida, as the university is called, seemed to carry a broader message. 
In the weeks before the statue's fall, China's officials had engaged in more public discussion than China has heard since Mao Zedong proclaimed the People's Republic from atop the Gate of Heavenly Peace in 1949. 
Tearing down the monument to Mao at the university suggested to some professors a release from intellectual bondage, just as China's officials were gingerly testing the once-dangerous waters of public debate.
Even though the scope of discussion has widened considerably in the past year, criticism of Government and Communist Party policies is elliptical at best. 
In private conversations, some Chinese people, intellectuals more than others, are more candid in their appraisal of their Government. 
Still, nowhere in China can one find the stringent critiques that have become commonplace in the Soviet press.
At Beijing's universities in recent weeks, though, there was undisguised enthusiasm over a speech given by a non-Communist economist several weeks ago at a national political forum that serves - theoretically, at least - as a consultative body to China's Parliament. 
The address was never published in China, but a copy was circulated hand to hand.
What was so special about an unpublished speech?
Is it another example of how the Chinese Government carefully controls the sparks of free expression?
Not exactly. 
Many people here said they could not recall a public forum being used to etch so sharply and frankly the serious problems that preoccupy so many Chinese.
The speaker, Qian Jiaju, a 79-year-old member of one of China's minuscule non-Communist parties, hammered on serious problems many Chinese feel are being ignored by the Government: official corruption, the decline of education, the relentless surge in consumer prices and inequities in the justice system.
''Some party members and state cadres have abused the power in their hands by engaging in malpractices for selfish ends, embezzling public funds and receiving bribes,'' Mr. Qian told the delegates.
Periodically the official press reports cases of corruption, but these cases are always portrayed as deviations from a general climate of official probity. 
A Beijing University professor who read Mr. Qian's speech said the debunking of this official line was important.
Mr. Qian called for the dispassionate enforcement of law and pointed to the disparity in justice dispensed in China's courts. 
''A certain governor of Jiangxi Province was sentenced to two years in prison for wasting several hundred thousand dollars in public funds on his mistress,'' he said. 
''A criminal was sentenced to life in prison for stealing watermelons. 
Can we say that laws are strictly enforced?''
Mr. Qian also called for changes in China's education policies, which, he declared, have essentially failed. 
''Instead of decreasing, the number of illiterates has increased somewhat,'' he said. 
''The status of China's primary school teachers and their remuneration are still among the lowest among all professions. 
In real terms, the wages of both university and primary school teachers are less than one-tenth of what they were in old China before the anti-Japanese war.''
Inflation is encouraged by the chaotic mixture of controlled and free-market pricing, Mr. Qian said. 
He argued that as harsh as it seems, all price controls should be lifted. 
''This means a major surgical operation on China's economic structural system,'' he said. 
''However, this operation is inevitable if China is to lead its economy toward handling its affairs literally in accordance with objective economic laws.''
The Beijing University professor said that he was troubled by Mr. Qian's economic proposals, but that it was time such things were said. 
''Of course, they couldn't publish this sort of speech,'' he said, acknowledging that the fact that it was given at a public forum was significant, but certainly not an indication that freedom of expression was imminent. 
''But he said it, and we've all read it,'' the professor said. 
''Some things are changing. 
Look, they've pulled down Mao.''
Drawing
