
A GENERATION gap has formed in diving; the age of world-class talent has been dropping precipitously, so that suddenly veterans with two decades of training - and the maturity and grace that come with it - are finding themselves upset by tiny acrobats barely half their age.
The authors of this innovation are the Chinese, who in the last two years have loosed a childrens' brigade of spinning, grinning - and winning - divers.
They include 14-year-old Chen Xiaodan, who in May at the McDonald's International meet in Boca Raton, Fla., upset the defending Olympic silver medalist, Michele Mitchell of the United States. 
The year before at the same meet, Mitchell had just barely held off two other 14-year-olds.
''When I saw these little girls for the first time I said, 'What is this?''' said Mitchell, who is 26 and on the 1988 American Olympic team. 
''Every meet we go to they send different teams.''
Diving is one of the sports in which China has made dramatic progress since returning to international sports in the late 1970's. 
The three medals - I gold, I silver and I bronze - that Chinese divers pocketed at the Los Angeles Games contributed to the 32 medals over all the nation wona fter a three-decade absence from the Olympics. 
Since 1984, Chinese divers have only grown stronger. 
The program that produces them offers a paradigm of Beijing's emergence as the newest sports power.
In the four Olympic events (men's and women's 3-meter springboard and 10-meter platform), Chinese are favorites to sweep both women's gold medals; to strongly contend for both men's golds, and to take home the majority of silvers.
When people ask how have they done it, they are usually asking, What is their secret?
As far as any one factor has made the difference, it is the sports system that Beijing has put in place since the close of the Cultural Revolution, which is similar to that in many Communist nations.
The Chinese sports system is wide-cast and elitist, designed to net promising athletes from the largest talent pool on earth - a population of more than one billion - then measure progress in training, promoting the best and rejecting the average.
In the United States, if a youngster wants to learn an ''amateur'' Olympic sport like diving, his or her parents seek out a private program, like Ron O'Brien's Mission Bay club in Boca Raton, Fla. 
As long as parents can pay, O'Brien, who is the Olympic diving coach this year, and his staff presumably continue to train a youngster.
In China, diving coaches fan out from 3,400 part-time sports schools to recruit their charges. 
It is a rigorous meritocracy, beginning with strength and flexibility tests to detect aptitude in kids who have probably never seen a swimming pool. 
There is also some preselection based on the body type coaches believe makes good divers; short, compact, perhaps with hyperextended elbows, that is, elbows that touch when the arms are raised above the head, making for a less splashly entry in the water.
''We have set up selection criteria for most sports: the average height, weight, ratio of upper body to lower body, and circumference of various limbs,'' said Dr. Gao Chongxuan of the National Research Institute of Sports Science in Beijing. 
''In the West, your primary schools have pools, a gymnasium, even their own tennis courts. 
We don't have enough facilities, so we have to select athletes who've never played sports before.''
The ultimate sign of success is that there are fresh faces among the Chinese at nearly every meet. 
It's hard to highlight the country's top candidates for Seoul (who will be chosen by coaches rather than at trials) because there's no guarantee last year's world champion hasn't been shocked in training by a youngster who only began climbing the diving tower a few season ago, Tong Hui, who won the men's 10-meter World Cup in 1987, witnessed the same year as 13-year-old named Xiong Ni move up from the provinces to joint the national team in Beijing. 
That year, Xiong finished sixth in the McDonald's International. 
This year at the same meet he upstaged American Matt Scoggin for first.
Xiong, whose dives have nearly the same degree of difficulty as those of Greg Louganis, is one of a crew of Chinese putting pressure on the double-gold medal-winner of 1984. 
Early this year, China's top springboarder, Tan Liangde, ended a six-year victory streak Louganis had enjoyed. 
And he has since beaten Louganis again.
It takes one's breath away to see 5-foot-3-inch, 105-pound Xiong in a handstand at the very lip of the 33-foot platform, as tall as a three-story building, before the plummets into a blue abyss. 
This does not seem like a sport for kids. 
In the United States it is unheard of for divers of such tender age to perform the complex somersaults and twists of top-notch dives. 
Wendy Lian Williams, a 20-year-old University of Miami junior who finished fifth on platform at the McDonald's meet and will compete in the event at Seoul, said, ''I'm young for American diving, but I get to these meets and I feel old.''
Much of the credit for introducing extreme youth to the sport belongs to Xu Yiming, the head national coach in China, whose system emphasizes fast spinning and clean entries. 
Small bodies seem to have an advantage in both areas, and small means young. 
The Chinese are masters of the ripped entry, an almost splashless finale that sounds like fabric being torn, which is created when a diver locks his wrists and hits the water with hands flat, drilling a hole through which the entire body follows.
In the late 1970's, Xu, who had been a national champion in the arly 1960's before his career was idled by the Cultural Revolution, became a fixture at international competitions, along with his video camera. 
He focused the camera on the world's top divers, as well as on modern pools, weight training gear, even locker rooms. 
Back in Beijing, Xu, an authorization, nuts-and-bolts coach, had his athletes analyze and imitate the techniques of the world's best divers.
But at big international competitions the Chinese for years did not live up to their potential. 
They lacked mental intensity, or just the confidence that comes from international experience.
The Chinese have learned from their competitive misfires. 
Beginning at the 1986 world championships, the current crop of female prodigies began maturing. 
Gao Min, then 16, won the springboard title and has remained the world's best ever since. 
In the 1987 Xu Yanmei, 16, won the World Cup platform title. 
Both World Cup women's silver medals went to Chinese.
Photos of Tan Liangde with Greg Louganis; Gao Min celebrating a victory (John Zich)
