
The down business is up. 
Thanks to the bitter Canadian winter weather blowing south to the United States, Canada's makers of down winterwear, major suppliers for the American market, are reporting surprisingly good sales despite the recession and record high world prices for the little puffs of feathers.
''Given inflation, people are looking for real value at today's high prices,'' said Russill H. Morin, president of the Canadian Down and Feather Products Association. 
''And they are finding it in down.''
Andrew Malcolm comment discusses how cold weather conditions have helped sales of down products
They are also finding a radically different, more fashionable and costlier product than consumers knew not so many years back when down was something worn only by geese, ducks and a few hunters in reversible red and green vests.
Now it has become a $100 million-a-year industry in Canada alone, has started a lucrative surge in international sales and has seen several Asian countries begin their own down industries to serve the exploding market in North America and Japan.
 
2 Million to the Ounce
Down, whose tiny resilient filaments number 2 million to the ounce, has long been popular as a pillow-filler and, in Europe, for bed comforters. 
It was warm and lightweight. 
But its bulk and perceived image as masculine, ''outdoorsy'' and unfashionable confined sales to the sporting goods sections of most North American stores.
There is considerable dispute about which one of Canada's many private clothing companies first combined new colors, better design and a stylish stitching pattern to make the first women's down coat. 
But there is no dispute that it happened about five years ago here in Winnipeg, the old prairie riverboat town that has the lowest mean temperature of any Canadian city.
''You don't care what you look like in Winnipeg in the winter,'' said Mr. Morin, who lives in Toronto, ''you just want to be warm.''
Consumers can now buy a complete line of down-filled products, from coats, mittens and parkas to comforters, sleeping bags, lounging slippers and the high-priced down skiwear made by Mr. Morin's company, Russill H. Morin Ltd.
Winnipeg's down manufacturers, such as Victoria Squire and Miami Fashions, cite many reasons for down's sudden success without largescale advertising. 
They include inflation, changing tastes toward more outdoor activities, acceptance of more pragmatic clothing, down's impressive insulation power and the strength of a fad that first introduced many to the comfort, practicality, light weight and warmth of some slightly used feathers.
 
'It Lasts a Lifetime'
''You use down one time,'' Mr. Morin said, ''you'll never go back to anything else. 
And it lasts a lifetime, too.''
The basic quality of down, however, owes nothing to man. 
Its many water-resistant filaments, naturally arrayed in clusters like a ripe dandelion pod, trap warm air next to the body yet allow the garments to ''breathe.''
The best down comes from the breasts of geese. 
One mature, 10-pound goose might produce eight ounces of feathers. 
But that includes only two ounces of down. 
The down, however, costs $54 a pound in December, which is a lot more than the entire rest of the bird is worth.
The problem is that feathers and down are a byproduct of the meat industry and there has never been that overwhelming a demand for goose and ducks in North America. 
So, according to Mr. Morin, a number of Canadian farmers are raising geese, selling the meat frozen to European outlets at little more than cost, and making money off the byproduct.
Still, the farmers are far from meeting the market's demands. 
For many years, the world's major feather supplier has been the Orient, primarily China, whose birds produce half the world's supply. 
Last year Canada imported some 2 million pounds of feathers, or 80 percent of its needs.
 
Prices Have Soared
But three years ago, China realized that it could create some domestic jobs and reap more foreign exchange benefits by founding its own down clothing industry. 
So it slashed down exports by half, sending down's price up. 
In 1970 down cost $4.25 a pound. 
In 1975 it cost $7.10. 
In 1978 the price tripled to $24, and it has doubled again since.
The feathers arrive at Canadian processors in burlap-wrapped bales in 40,000-pound container loads. 
They are washed, blown dry and blown sorted for shipment to Canad ian clothiers, who have been scrambling to provide th e best designed, most fashionable fabrics to wrap aroundthe feathers.
''There is a wider array of colors now than ever before,'' said Jeff Black, vice president of merchandising for Victoria Squire Inc., where 250 workers are already sewing next winter's down jackets. 
''The U.S. demand is growing all the time. 
''We've been increasing our production 25 percent a year since 1977.''
''We're pushing the more tailored look,'' said Murray Waldman of Miami Fashions Ltd., known in New York as the Canadian Garments Company. 
''Down is becoming more fashionable all the time.''
'People Will Remember the Cold'
''We've had two mild winters,'' Mr. Waldman noted, ''and people forget about the cold. 
Then, wham, comes this winter and our sales are way up. 
The boost will carry over to next year, too. 
People will remember the cold.''
The problem for Canadian and American down clothiers is competition from Asia, primarily Korea and China, where wages are but a fraction of North America's.
''I just came back from China,'' Mr. Waldman said. 
''They make a coat for half our costs. 
They're paying about 25 cents an hour. 
We pay $5.''
Thus, a domestic down coat might cost $250 to $300 at retail today, while Chinese coats, he said, might sell for $150 to $180 and cost the stores only $75 wholesale.
''Our challenge is to make our coats look that much more expensive than the imports,'' he said.
