
AS a young Chinese man sat on a sunny deck and described his plan to continue his father's effort to form a theater troupe of deaf performers in China, a dozen American actors - most of them deaf - climbed and swung over a section of metal scaffolding in a shady yard nearby, exercising before a rehearsal.
Those activities were all in a day's work at the National Theater of the Deaf in Chester, where a company that was established to produce lively and unusual theater has also increased opportunities for deaf people and helped give hearing people a new view of the deaf, in this country and abroad.
''Our profession is theater, but the theater is so strong, it can create social change,'' said David Hays, who founded the theater in 1967 and is its artistic director.
The National Theater for the Deaf operates from a big renovated mill and a small office building, both on the banks of Pattaconk Brook. 
The 12-member acting company includes only two members who can hear; they speak aloud during the company's performances, which blend spoken language with signing. 
Audiences are composed mainly of hearing people.
On its annual tours, the company has given nearly 5,000 performances, in 50 states and 26 countries, in small towns and big cities. 
''We have not missed a gig,'' said Mr. Hays, who recalled that a couple of times blizzards caused cancellations, because the audiences were unable to reach the theaters, but that the company never canceled first.
 
'King of Hearts' Tour
The company members limbering up on the scaffolding were preparing to rehearse ''King of Hearts,'' with which the company will tour 22 states during the 1988-89 season, with four performances in Connecticut. 
The company has performed works ranging from tragedies to farces; ''King of Hearts'' is based on the French film of the same name, directed by Philippe DeBroca.
The company also splits up at times into two Little Theaters of the Deaf, which perform mainly for children. 
It performs in Chester at Christmastime; conducts free storytelling sessions every June on the Chester green, and each summer conducts a four-week professional school for deaf theater personnel from America and abroad.
Wang Ling, an ambitious 20-year-old from Beijing, came to the school this year for help in carrying on his father's dream. 
All over America and in other places as well - including Australia, England, India, Japan and Sweden - are theaters of the deaf that were formed with help and instruction from the company.
The company is financed through its performance fees, private donations and the Federal Government. 
''We took on Federal support with the idea that we were theater people first,'' said Mr. Hays. ''We are not social workers here, but we are proud of the power of our profession.''
For one thing, said Mr. Hays, company performances have removed the stigma from signing and have shown it to be a rich, expressive language. 
''We brought sign language out of the closet,'' he said.
The company also brought sign language to Chester, which became the troupe's permanent home - it was originally part of the Eugene O'Neill Theater Center in Waterford - in 1983. 
Since then, many shopkeepers and other residents have learned to sign.
 
'Total Communication'
Mr. Hays also said that the company's use of sign language has brought about a change in educational methods. 
Until recently, many schools for the deaf discouraged their students from signing, but now more schools use what is called total communication, which includes both signing and speech. 
And, Mr. Hays said, ''The N.T.D. helped blow open the job market.''
''When we started this company, there were few job opportunities for deaf people, but the understanding of deaf people's abilities has opened up jobs for the deaf,'' he said, adding that now, young deaf people are ''growing up aware'' that they can pursue various careers.
He said role models like the company's performers helped produce the recent successful protests at Gallaudet College in Washington, D.C., the world's only liberal arts college for the deaf. 
This spring, Gallaudet students staged protests when Dr. Elisabeth Ann Zinser, a hearing woman who did not know sign language, was appointed president of the school. 
The protests brought the resignation of Dr. Zinser and the appointment of Dr. I. King Jordan, Gallaudet's first deaf president.
Now, Mr. Hays said, he hopes the N.T.D. can help lead deaf people in China - where they are often shunted into factory jobs - ''up and out.''
He is lending a hand to Wang Ling, who seeks to continue the project his father, who is now dead, began after working with the company in China.
In 1986, the N.T.D. became the first American theater company to tour China. 
Accompanying the company performers in Beijing and six other cities was Wang Ling's father, Wang Zhen-Tai, a Chinese actor who spoke in Mandarin as the company signed on stage. 
He was so impressed with the company that he decided to start a theater of the deaf in China. 
He visited factories where groups of deaf employees had amateur theatrical groups and auditioned the performers.
Last summer, he brought four young Chinese performers to the N.T.D.'s professional school for training. 
Mr. Wang died of heart disease soon after he returned to China, but his son vowed to carry on, and wrote Mr. Hays to tell him of his plan. 
Mr. Hays wrote back, cautioning Wang Ling - then a business student at Beijing International Business College - -against devoting himself to an endeavor for which he might not be suited. 
But Wang Ling persisted, working his way through the Chinese bureaucracy in search of money and support. 
''He's up against old, experienced bureaucrats, but he can swim upstream,'' said Mr. Hays.
Wang Ling said he was starting the Chinese theater partly out of respect for his father. 
Also, he said, ''It's a very meaningful thing to do. 
China needs an organization like that.''
On his return to China, Wang Ling will try to arrange for a young deaf actress to be released from her factory job for two weeks so that she can join the National Theater of the Deaf at the International Theater Festival in Tokyo, Aug. 
14-18. Mr. Hays and Wang Ling feel that her participation will spur support for a Chinese theater of the deaf.
The National Theater for the Deaf will perform at the festival with the Japanese theater of the deaf - a troupe that the N.T.D. helped to start. 
The American company has toured Japan several times, often staying with teachers and performers in the Japanese troupe. 
''I feel like we're neighbors,'' signed Sandi Inches, an N.T.D. performer who is deaf, as she explained through a sign language interpreter how much she looked forward to the August event.
N.T.D. performers said they were also looking forward to working on ''King of Hearts,'' which will open this fall in Denver and reach Connecticut next winter, with performances Jan. 
20 (Kingswood Oxford School, West Hartford), Feb. 
16 (University of Connecticut, Storrs), Feb. 
19 (Southern Connecticut State University, New Haven), and Feb. 
24 (University of Bridgeport, Bridgeport).
The plot deals with a World War I soldier who finds himself in a town whose inhabitants have all escaped from a mental hospital. 
''But it's not an insane asylum story,'' said John Eisner, a hearing actor with the company. 
''The story is about love, and the importance of people to other people.''
Mr. Hays is looking beyond a Chinese theater of the deaf, a Japanese festival and another successful tour. 
He said he wanted the company to do a feature film and to build a television series around a pilot show, ''The Light Princess,'' which it performed for Connecticut Public Television last year. 
He noted that the company plans to perform at a festival in Jerusalem this year and also to tour South America.
And, he said, he would like the N.T.D. to tour South Africa. 
''South Africa is now cut off to American artists, but I wish artists were free to travel in both directions,'' he said, noting that South African artists performing in America have been effective in drawing attention to South Africa's apartheid policies.
