
Ten years ago today, I stood on the floodlit tarmac of Tan Son Nhut air base and watched as a group of 27 American prisoners of war were delivered to freedom by United States Army helicopters. 
The men had been picked up from a Communistcontrolled rubber plantation near the Cambodian border, and their arrival was the first tangible benefit for Americans of the Paris peace accords, signed in late January.
It was an emotional moment. 
Gen. Frederick C. Weyand, the last commander of United States forces in Vietnam, draped his arm around an Air Force colleague and confided, in tones just loud enough for me to hear, ''It's the greatest day we've ever had in Vietnam.''
There was a kind of resignation and finality about the remark, like a losing football team salvaging a share of its pride with a meaningless touchdown in the final moments of the game. 
So it was with Vietnam. 
With the signing of the Paris agreement and the return of our P.O.W.'s, we withdrew not only the last American combat forces from Vietnam, but also our slender remaining interest in the country.
The war itself, of course, sputtered on for another two years, until Saigon's stunning collapse in April 1975. 
But Americans went into a trance of collective amnesia. 
The Vietnam War was such an agonizing, divisive and baffling experience that we somehow resolved simply to forget it. 
Unlike the fall of Nationalist China to Mao Zedong in 1949, there were no postwar recriminations, no blame for who lost Vietnam. 
The shock had been so great that nobody wanted to know. 
As a result, Vietnam became not only the longest war in our history and the first war the United States had lost - it was also the most misunderstood war.
The big questions went unasked and unanswered: How did we get involved in Vietnam?
Why did 57,939 Americans die there?
Why did the Communists win?
What were the lessons of the war?
But now, a decade after the last American troops left Saigon, Vietnam is sparking renewed interest - though without the explosive rancor of the 1960's and early 70's. 
The hottest star on television is Tom Selleck, who plays Magnum, an amiable private eye and Vietnam veteran whose exploits often involve flashbacks to his combat days in ''Nam.''
Public Television is planning an ambitious 13-hour series on the war, which it will show within a year. 
The dedication of the polished black granite Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington last November finally gave Vietnam veterans a respected if ambiguous place alongside the monuments to Jefferson, Lincoln and Washington.
Ultimately, the most important development may be the emergence of a small group of scholars, journalists and military specialists who have started to look afresh at the war. 
Drawing on new disclosures from Hanoi, the opening of documents in the Presidential libraries, the Pentagon Papers (which are still the best published source material on the war) and memoirs of some of the participants in the war, these writers have worked quietly, with the general public largely unaware of their research. 
For most of these scholars, their re-examination is not to prove whether Vietnam was or was not a ''noble cause,'' in President Reagan's phrase, but to find out what really happened and why. 
In the process, they are challenging some of the most cherished beliefs of both the right and the left.
Among the new findings are the following: As opposed to the public caricature of him as a warmonger, Lyndon Johnson was actually reluctant to become more deeply involved in Vietnam. 
He sent American troops to Vietnam not out of machismo, but out of fear that if he ''lost'' South Vietnam, Congress would not pass his Great Society programs.
Contrary to the American popular assumption that we could easily win, American Presidents from John Kennedy to Richard Nixon were never confident about our chances and, in fact, never had a plan to win in Vietnam. 
Instead, they did only the minimum necessary not to lose Vietnam during their own tenure in the White House. 
They tried to fight a war on the cheap against a foe, North Vietnam, whose commitment was total. 
Under the restrictions imposed by the Presidents, some American generals knew almost from the start that they could not win the war. 
Without permission to cut off Hanoi's use of Laos and Cambodia, they realized, the critical strategic initiative remained in Hanoi's hands. 
Many officers now believe the Joint Chiefs of Staff should have resigned in protest. 
Both hawks and liberals were wrong about the Communists in Vietnam. 
While successive Administrations did not understand that the Communists' appeal had its roots in centuries of Vietnamese xenophobia, many antiwar critics - like Frances FitzGerald in her bestselling ''Fire in the Lake'' - over-glamorized the Vietcong, the Southern insurgents, and underestimated the role that North Vietnam played in leading the war in the South. 
The 1968 Tet offensive was a disastrous military defeat for the Communists, as Gen. William C. Westmoreland claimed, though most Americans regarded it as a setback for the United States. 
It was particularly brutal for the Vietcong, who bore the brunt of the fighting and who suffered such losses that thereafter they had to be replaced by North Vietnamese regulars, turning the conflict into a war between North and South.
After Tet - though most Americans at home had given up on the war -the cumulative weight of American firepower and spending in Vietnam dramatically undercut support for the Communists. 
As a result, the United States was probably in a stronger position in Vietnam in 1972, just before the Paris peace accords, than at any previous point in the war. 
The antiwar movement did not have as much impact on American policy as is popularly thought. 
Lyndon Johnson's decision in March 1968 to de-escalate the war was not so much a response to the peace movement as a result of disaffection within his Administration over the disastrous costs of the war. 
The protesters' main contribution, in fact, may have been to help elect Richard Nixon twice - in 1968 over Hubert Humphrey and in 1972 over George McGovern.
 
A NEW GENERATION DECRIES SCHOLARLY ARROGANCE
The picture of the Vietnam conflict that is emerging from the new research shows a war that was more complex, more morally ambiguous, than either the doves or the hawks had maintained. 
Of the war's many ironical twists, few match the postwar predicament of Communist Vietnam.
''It was a war nobody won,'' says Stanley Karnow, a syndicated columnist, who covered Vietnam for several national publications. 
''North Vietnam won, of course, but it also lost.''
Mr. Karnow - who is chief correspondent for Public Television's series on Vietnam and who is writing a book to accompany it - was in Hanoi in 1981 to film some interviews for the series. 
He remembers asking Prime Minister Pham Van Dong what Vietnam's main problem now is. 
''He laughed,'' recalls Mr. Karnow. '' 'That's a stupid question. 
Look around, you can see for yourself what problems we're having.'
''
Hanoi's grim postwar record has raised a serious problem for scholars. 
How much should it be taken into account when the war is analyzed?
Can events during the war be interpreted in the light of the Communists' postwar detention of 50,000 to 100,000 former supporters of the Saigon regime in ''re-education'' camps, the corruption and economic mismanagement by Communist officials, the invasion of Cambodia, the persecution of Vietnam's large Chinese ethnic minority and the flight of the boat people?
David W.P. 
Elliott, an assistant professor of political science at Pomona College in California, believes that Vietnam's postwar record is irrelevant to understanding the war. 
''We shouldn't commit the historicist fallacy of reading the present into the past,'' says Mr. Elliott. ''In 1975, the people wanted peace.''
Like many of the new scholars, Mr. Elliott's interest in Vietnam goes back to the 1960's. 
He learned Vietnamese in the Army and later did research on the Vietcong for the Rand Corporation, a private research organization working mostly for the Defense Department.
One of the few Vietnamese now teaching in the United States, Hue-Tam Ho Tai, an assistant professor of history at Harvard, agrees that the Communists' postwar failures ''do not vindicate America's crusade in Vietnam.''
For a part of Vietnam's troubles today were caused by the dislocations of the war. 
But Mrs. Tai, who came to the United States as a student at Brandeis, maintains that what has happened since 1975 offers an important perspective.
''During the war,'' she says, ''people looked at the Communists and said they were dedicated, driven and omnicompetent. 
Now we see them as corrupt and incompetent.''
Did the Communists change so much after 1975 or were Americans grossly mistaken in their earlier impressions?
Mrs. Tai believes that many Americans allowed their political passions to cloud their intellect. 
At the time of the war, she says, ''it was fashionable to think that a guerrilla movement needed popular support to succeed, and that if the Vietcong survived, therefore they must have popular support.''
But that, Mrs. Tai contends, was a fallacious argument. 
''You can see how wrong it was now, because the Communists certainly aren't popular in the South.''
Or, she suggests, look at Cambodia. 
''Pol Pot came to power as a guerrilla, but looking at what he did to his country, you'd think twice before saying he was popular.''
Mrs. Tai herself cannot be accused of being an inveterate anti-Communist. 
Her father was a founder of the Trotskyite party in Vietnam; an aunt was a senior official in the Vietcong's Provisional Revolutionary Government. 
But she has long had reservations about those antiwar protesters who were too ready to turn the Vietnamese Communists into paragons of virtue and who refused to accept a view of the war that was not black and white.
At Brandeis, she remembers, a professor asked her in class what the Vietnamese thought of the war. 
When she said that it was a difficult question to answer, since the view of an intellectual was probably very different from that of a peasant, the professor became angry. 
''Later,'' she says, ''a student told me that my views didn't count because I was a bourgeois. 
I said, 'I'm sorry; I'm a human being. 
There are several hundred thousand members of the middle class in Vietnam.'
 
''
This kind of academic narrow-mindedness, in Mrs. Tai's view, contributed to American misunderstanding of Vietnam just as much as ignorance in the White House and the State Department.
Until quite recently, Vietnam has been a giant black hole in American academia. 
A survey by The New York Times in 1970 found that there was no scholar in the United States who devoted most of his or her time to studying North Vietnam; there was no American university with a tenured professorship in Vietnamese studies, and there were fewer than 30 students in the country studying the Vietnamese language. 
By comparison, there were three times that many studying Thai. 
According to the Social Science Research Council in New York, from 1951 to 1981 a total of 820 Americans applied to it for financial aid to work on Ph.D. dissertations in Southeast Asia. 
Of these, only 33 were for Vietnam, almost the same number as for Burma.
John K. Fairbank, professor emeritus of history at Harvard and the man generally recognized as the founder of modern Chinese studies in the United States, refers to this lack of expertise on Vietnam as an academic Pearl Harbor. 
One reason for this blind spot, he suggests, was that the French excluded American missionaries and businessmen from Vietnam, and Americans therefore did not have a personal stake in Vietnam.
However, by the time the United States became militarily involved, many academics considered the war so immoral that dispassionate analysis of the conflict became almost impossible. 
Only a handful of scholars actually went to Vietnam to do research there.
One of them was Samuel L. Popkin, now an associate professor of political science at the University of California at San Diego. 
After he spent time in 1966 conducting interviews in Vietnamese villages, he was treated as a pariah when he returned to Harvard, where he was then an assistant professor.
His problem: He had returned from Vietnam with a complex view. 
He did not approve of the way the Americans were fighting the war - ''this crazy chasing around in the villages with our massive firepower looking for body counts'' - but he did not find that the Communists were the popular good guys of American antiwar mythology.
Mr. Popkin's friends in Cambridge didn't want to hear about this. 
He got back in his colleagues' good graces only after he was jailed in 1972 for refusing to testify before a special grand jury set up by the White House to find out who leaked the Pentagon Papers - the Pentagon's massive top-secret study of American involvement in Indochina from World War II to May 1968 - to The New York Times.
Douglas Pike, who throughout the war years was the resident expert in the United States Embassy in Saigon on the Vietnamese Communists, remembers a similar encounter with academic close-mindedness when he was on leave in Cambridge, Mass., in 1964 to write a book about the Vietcong. 
He had been invited to take part in an antiwar teach-in and found himself debating with a professor from the Harvard Dental School. 
''The professor really didn't have his facts straight, so I asked him if he had ever been to Vietnam,'' Mr. Pike recalls.
'' 'No, that's not necessary,' the professor replied. 
''So I said, 'I've never been to dental school, but suppose I give you a root canal.'
'' 'That's different,' he said. 
''I replied, 'How at Harvard, of all places, can you say knowledge is not important?'
'' Mr. Pike has now retired from the Government and is the first director of the Indochina studies program at the University of California at Berkeley -an appointment that would have been unthinkable a decade ago at a campus that was in the vanguard of the antiwar movement. 
Mr. Pike has just completed a book on the North Vietnamese Army, which he wrote after discovering to his amazement that there was no comparable study. 
''We never even knew the names of North Vietnam's generals or what their strategic thinking was,'' he says. 
''It shows how ignorant and arrogant we were. 
We just assumed we would win.''
Mr. Pike's presence at Berkeley, where he is setting up a two-million-page archive on Indochina, is testament to Vietnam's having quietly made the transition from controversial public issue to history. 
Was victory by the Communists inevitable?
Since the end of the war, some of the best new scholarship has focused on the origins of the Communist movement in Vietnam and its reasons for success. 
According to one school of thought, the Communists' early capture of the nationalist issue made their eventual victory a foregone conclusion. 
David G. Marr - a visiting professor at Cornell last fall who is now teaching at the Australian National University in Canberra - has shown how the Communists under Ho Chi Minh were able to build their strength in the 1930's and 40's by appealing to the centuriesold tradition of Vietnamese nationalism. 
Mr. Marr's two books, ''Vietnamese Anti-Colonialism, 1885-1925'' (1971) and ''Vietnamese Tradition on Trial, 1920-1945'' (1981), are widely regarded as models of scholarly research.
In his view, ''the most important development of the entire conflict was the August 1945 revolution,'' when the Vietminh (the Communist-led guerrillas who had fought against the French) under Ho Chi Minh seized Hanoi and proclaimed an independent Vietnam before the French could re-establish their presence at the end of World War II.
''Everything done after that by the French and the Americans was an attempt to turn back the clock, but they couldn't succeed,'' adds Mr. Marr, a former leading antiwar activist who is one of the few professors with military experience in Vietnam; he learned Vietnamese in the Marines. 
''The outcome was predetermined. 
For the Communists were able to gain and hold legitimacy as a patriotic front.''
Says Professor Elliott of Pomona College, ''In 1945, the Vietminh clearly had overwhelming popular support - even the United States at first recognized this'' (an O.S.S. team had worked with Ho at the time). 
''The Vietminh,'' he continues, ''won the war again in 1954 at Dien Bien Phu, and the Communists won it a third time in early 1965, before Johnson's commitment of U.S. ground forces.''
Mr. Popkin, among others, disagrees with this kind of deterministic interpretation. 
''It's anti-intellectual; it doesn't allow for the normal process of change which occurs in history,'' he counters. 
''If you argue that the Communists should have won the war in 1975 because they were the most popular group in 1945, does that mean that we should have a Democratic President today because Roosevelt was elected in 1944?''
Mr. Popkin himself is a liberal Democrat.
A very different view of the relations between Peking and Hanoi is also emerging. 
Early in the war, some Administration officials, like then Secretary of State Dean Rusk, contended that American commitment was necessary because North Vietnam was acting as an agent of Chinese Communist aggression. 
But if American diplomacy was able to salvage anything of value from the war, it was improved relations with China. 
The split between Hanoi and Peking grew out of centuries of enmity between the two countries and China's growing concern that the Vietnamese Communists were aligning themselves with the Soviet Union, China's erstwhile ally.
The break between North Vietnam and China has produced intriguing new evidence about another long-disputed topic: Who was responsible for failing to hold the 1956 elections, which, under the terms of the 1954 Geneva Conference that ended the French Indochina war, would have reunified North and South Vietnam?
In the past, many liberal antiwar critics blamed the Eisenhower Administration for encouraging President Ngo Dinh Diem of South Vietnam to ignore the elections. 
They argued that it was only because of the provision for the elections that Ho Chi Minh had agreed to the temporary division of Vietnam at Geneva, and that when the elections were not held, the Communists had little choice but to resume the war. 
But Vietnam's leaders now claim that the Chinese actually cut off military aid to them in 1954 to compel them to negotiate with the French and accept the division of the country. 
Pham Van Dong, Vietnam's Prime Minister, told Mr. Karnow that he had said at the time: ''The Chinese have betrayed us.''
And several scholars have found records indicating that Zhou Enlai, China's Prime Minister, expected the separation of Vietnam to be long lasting and turned down Ho's request in 1956 for help in arranging the elections. 
This does not exonerate Washington for its role in discouraging the elections, says Professor Tai, but it shows that the United States was not alone.
Disclosures from Hanoi since 1975 are also making possible a reexamination of the Vietcong's growth. 
During the war, the most influential academic account of the origins of the National Liberation Front (N.L.F.), the formal name for the Vietcong, was in a book by two Cornell professors, George McT. 
Kahin and John W. Lewis, ''The United States in Vietnam.''
The authors argued forcefully that the Vietcong was ''Southern rooted.''
After the Geneva settlement, the authors contended, the Communists withdrew all their armed troops to the newly created North Vietnam, leaving behind only political cadres. 
Hanoi favored only political, not armed, resistance to Ngo Dinh Diem. 
But given the ''harshness and heavy-handedness of Diem's Government'' these Southerners ''lost patience with the Communist North'' and organized an insurgency led by the N.L.F. 
''Hanoi, despite its reluctance, was then obliged to sanction the Southerners' actions.''
Professors Kahin and Lewis also asserted that there was no evidence that Hanoi encouraged ''militant tactics by the Southerners'' until as late as September 1960, or, contrary to United States Government claims, that Hanoi directed the formation of the N.L.F., which was a broad united front of Communist and non-Communist organizations.
Scholars still agree that most of the early Vietcong were Southerners and that there were factional disputes in Hanoi over how to pursue the insurgency during the 1950's. 
But a history published by the People's Army of Vietnam in 1980, titled ''The Anti-U.S. 
Resistance War for National Salvation, 1954-1975: Military Events,'' contends that Hanoi played a large role in the development of the Vietcong. 
The history records, for example, that as early as 1957 ''cadres and men who remained behind'' in the South were able to form ''37 armed companies.''
Moreover, the history also admits that in a secret directive by the North Vietnamese Politburo in May 1959, Hanoi ordered its Southern supporters to switch from political action to armed struggle. 
To provide help for the new fighting, Hanoi established a special task force, code named Group 559, which set up infiltration routes and moved ''people, weapons and supplies'' through Laos into South Vietnam.
When the N.L.F. was proclaimed in December 1960, this official Communist history goes on, it was done at the order of the party in Hanoi, and the Front's program ''followed the line delineated by our party.''
These actions marked a critical turning point in the war, leading to the formation of bigger Vietcong units and an increase in attacks on South Vietnamese Government posts. 
It was this stepped-up activity that confronted President Kennedy when he took office in 1961 and led him to increase the number of American advisers in South Vietnam.
On another critical question, too, the Communists have been more candid since the end of the war: When did they begin sending regular North Vietnamese troops into the South?
Washington had long maintained that Hanoi started infiltrating its regular army units in the fall of 1964, prompting President Johnson's decision to begin bombing North Vietnam and then to dispatch American ground forces to South Vietnam a few months later. 
Hanoi denied it had troops in the South until virtually the end of the war. 
When I visited North Vietnam in 1969, Prime Minister Pham Van Dong said with a straight face that there were no Northern troops in the South. 
And antiwar activists dismissed State Department white papers on Northern infiltration. 
But when Mr. Karnow interviewed officials in Hanoi in 1981, they talked about enlarging the Ho Chi Minh Trail as early as 1964.
All this leads to another question raised by the new scholarship: Were Americans, grown suspicious of their own Government, too eager to accept as truth whatever the Vietnamese Communists said?
Throughout the war, there was heated debate over the degree of autonomy the N.L.F. enjoyed. 
Was it merely a puppet of North Vietnam, as many American officials insisted, or was it an independent organization, as the Communists claimed?
The argument was important, because if the N.L.F. was independent, there might had been a chance for a negotiated settlement in the South.
Harrison E. Salisbury, who was among the first correspondents allowed to visit Hanoi in late 1966, made a strong case for the independence of the N.L.F. in his book ''Behind the Lines - Hanoi.''
The N.L.F., Mr. Salisbury wrote, ''had a government. 
It had a cabinet … its own troops, its own generals, its own petty officials … .''
From talks with an N.L.F. official in Hanoi, Mr. Salisbury said, he learned that the Front got its weapons directly from the Soviet Union and China and did not ''utilize Hanoi as a middleman.''
''All military decisions in the South were the responsibility of the South.''
When Mr. Salisbury quizzed Prime Minister Dong on what would happen when the war was over, the Prime Minister assured him that the North would not annex the South: ''Reunification would only be by mutual agreement.''
Mr. Salisbury came away convinced that American officials who derided the N.L.F. were missing ''genuine possibilities'' for peace.
Asked recently if he might have been misled by the Communists, Mr. Salisbury said, ''I'll stand by my reporting of the time.''
But, he added, he had been in Hanoi in early 1967 and ''by the time the war finally ended the situation was so vastly different that whatever had been said by myself, or Hanoi, or L.B.J. or anybody in the N.L.F. really had very little validity.''
Since the war, some members of the N.L.F. have contended they themselves had been deceived by Hanoi. 
Writing last fall in The New York Review of Books, Truong Nhu Tang, the former Minister of Justice in the N.L.F.'s government and a French-educated ''independent socialist,'' indicated that he joined the Vietcong because he believed the Communists' promises that they would work for an autonomous, democratic South. 
At the end of the war, Hanoi annexed the South and the N.L.F. was disbanded.
At ''the simple farewell dinner'' held to disband the N.L.F. in 1976, Mr. Tang recalled, neither the party nor the Government bothered to send a representative. 
''I was tragically wrong'' about the Communists, he wrote. 
''The North Vietnamese Communists, survivors of protracted, blood-drenched campaigns against colonialism, interventionism and human oppression, became in their turn colonialists, interventionists and architects of one of the world's most rigid re-gimes.''
For the first time in Vietnam's history, Mr. Tang went on, people risked their lives to flee the country -something they had not done under the French or the Americans. 
Mr. Tang himself escaped by boat in 1979 and now lives in Paris.
American antiwar writers had envisioned a far happier future for Vietnam. 
One such writer was Frances FitzGerald, who wrote ''Fire in the Lake,'' a book that was both the most widely read and most highly acclaimed volume to come out of the war. 
(It won the Pulitzer Prize, the National Book Award and the Bancroft Prize in history in 1973.) In the lyrical closing passage, Miss FitzGerald prophesied: ''Pressure is building towards one of those sudden historical shifts when 'individualism' and its attendant corruption gives way to the discipline of the revolutionary community. 
When this shift takes place … it will simply mean that the moment has arrived for the narrow flame of revolution to cleanse the lake of Vietnamese society from the corruption and disorder of the American war.''
''Fire in the Lake'' had its critics from the start. 
Mr. Marr, the authority on Vietnamese nationalism, pointed out in a scholarly review at the time of the book's publication that Miss FitzGerald did not know Vietnamese and charged that her depiction of Vietnamese national character was ''little short of disastrous.''
Mr. Popkin at San Diego suspects she was ''swept away by a love affair with the N.L.F.'' and that her belief that the Vietnamese would be happier under the Communists was ''racist and condescending.''
Miss FitzGerald rejects the charge that she was too romantic about the Communists. 
''I'd stick with it,'' she says. 
''I think it's written in a rather romantic style; one chooses rhetorical modes to make people understand certain things.''
As for Vietnam's terrible postwar troubles, she insists they are the result of the damage caused by the war, though she concedes the Communists have proved inept at running the economy.
 
POLITICAL COMPROMISES
What went wrong on the American side?
Today, the one common note sounded by virtually all scholars is the need to start searching for the answer with President Truman's decision in 1945 to reverse Washington's earlier support for Ho Chi Minh. 
It was a choice made out of concern for bolstering France in Europe against the looming Soviet menace.
''In class,'' says Robert A. Scalapino, director of the Institute of East Asian Studies at the University of California at Berkeley, ''I always stress that the history of American involvement in Vietnam was a series of decisions which cumulatively narrowed the choices for each succeeding President. 
No President was able to begin afresh with Vietnam.''
Professor Scalapino had a reputation as a conservative during the war, but Professor George Kahin, who was an outspoken critic of the war, and was until recently director of Cornell's Southeast Asia program, shares his view. 
In a new study of American involvement in Vietnam from 1945 to 1967 -which he says is based on trips to Vietnam in the 60's and extensive original research in Government files - Professor Kahin claims he will prove that Washington actually began giving secret military aid to the French for Vietnam in the late 1940's.
''This aid was officially shown in the records as going to Europe, but it was subverted to Vietnam by the French with U.S. understanding,'' says Professor Kahin. 
Most history books date the origin of American involvement in Vietnam from a decision by President Truman's National Security Council in 1950 to provide military aid for the French war in Indochina.
Another key turning point whose significance was not appreciated at the time, historians now believe, was the 1963 coup against President Diem. 
Because the Kennedy Administration sanctioned the coup, Washington became morally and politically responsible for all the regimes that succeeded it, wrote Larry Berman in a new book, ''Planning a Tragedy: The Americanization of the War in Vietnam'' (1982).
Mr. Berman, an associate professor of political science at the University of California at Davis, is one of several writers now offering a more sympathetic portrait of Lyndon Johnson's role in the war. 
His book focuses on the decision-making process that led up to President Johnson's announcement on July 28, 1965, that he was increasing the number of American troops in Vietnam from 75,000 to 125,000, with additional forces to be deployed as necessary. 
This move is generally regarded as the critical decision that led to open-ended escalation.
Like a number of the new scholars, Mr. Berman was not trained in Vietnamese studies but is a specialist on the American Presidency. 
His book is based on recently declassified White House documents he found while doing other research in the Johnson Library in Austin, Tex.
Nowhere in the documents was there evidence that President Johnson had a plan either for winning the war or for getting out. 
The reason for the absence of any coherent strategic plan is that President Johnson was trying to save his Great Society, not Vietnam. 
By an accident of history, in July 1965 both Medicare and the Civil Rights Act of 1965 were at crucial stages in Congressional committees; the Model Cities Act and the Higher Education Act were soon to follow. 
Lyndon Johnson was caught in a dilemma. 
''He didn't want to do anything to jeopardize them,'' Mr. Berman wrote. 
''He really wanted to be the next face on Mount Rushmore.''
But the Communists were close to victory in Vietnam in early 1965, and President Johnson could not leave himself open to a charge by conservatives that he lost the war. 
On the other hand, if he took the steps the Pentagon urged - mobilizing the Reserves, for instance - Congressional liberals might have retaliated by withdrawing support for his Great Society programs.
''So Johnson chose a middle course, to fight the war at the lowest possible cost, on the cheap,'' Mr. Berman went on. 
''And he lied about what he was doing. 
He staged a debate to create a war climate, so that when he announced the number of troops was only going up from 75,000 to 125,000, he looked like a moderate. 
But he knew there would be 300,000 troops in Vietnam in 1966.''
''We get a tragic historical figure who had to choose between guns and butter and couldn't,'' Mr. Berman continued. 
''In the end, he neither settled the war nor got his Great Society, since as he fought in Vietnam, it drained the money needed for his domestic programs.''
Mr. Berman's thesis is similar to that in a book widely regarded by scholars as a seminal study of America's role in Vietnam - ''The Irony of Vietnam: The System Worked'' (1979), by Leslie H. Gelb, now a correspondent for The New York Times, and Richard K. Betts, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution. 
For this work, the authors drew heavily on the Pentagon Papers, which provided critical new groundwork for analyzing Washington's decision-making process. 
Mr. Gelb himself was director of the Pentagon Papers project within the Defense Department.
Mr. Gelb and Mr. Betts challenge the old liberal view put forward in books, such as David Halberstam's best seller ''The Best and the Brightest,'' that the United States stumbled into a quagmire in Vietnam through hubris and miscalculation.
Instead, they argue, Washington's planning machinery worked well, providing facts and options for the President. 
Rarely were the policy makers deluded that the odds for success in Vietnam were high. 
The trouble was that the Presidents, from Harry Truman to Richard Nixon, were afraid both to risk losing Vietnam to the Communists and to accept the decisive recommendations of their military advisers, which could lead to war with China or a domestic backlash. 
So they chose the in-between option, doing only what was necessary to stave off a Communist takeover at the time. 
This prevented a Communist victory till 1975. 
But their policies of gradual escalation played into the hands of the North Vietnamese, whose strategy was to drag out the war and make it increasingly costly to the United States.
In effect, the Presidents chose to ''nibble the bullet rather than bite it,'' Mr. Betts said at a conference on ''The U.S. 
Experience in Vietnam'' held last month at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars in Washington.
Another factor in Washington's decision making, scholars now say, was that in the 1960's American political scientists were fascinated by theories of how the United States could effectively fight limited wars, as opposed to all-out conventional or nuclear wars. 
Theorists explored the question of how a nation could use force or the threat of force to compel its adversary to back down. 
Implicit in their theories was the idea that it was possible to signal your opponent by gradually increasing threats.
In another new study, ''When Governments Collide: Coercion and Diplomacy in the Vietnam Conflict, 1964-1968'' (1980), Wallace J. Thies has shown how President Johnson and his advisers believed they could ''fine-tune'' the bombing and their peace offers to ''signal'' Hanoi to abandon its support for the Vietcong. 
But President Johnson's program suffered from two serious flaws, argues Mr. Thies, a professor of political science at Berkeley.
First of all, in a bureaucracy as large as the American Government, it proved impossible to ''orchestrate'' our bombing and diplomacy. 
For example, the selection and timing of bombing targets often depended on extraneous factors like the weather; coordination between the Air Force and diplomats was difficult. 
As a result, what Washington intended to be a show of firmness often appeared to Hanoi to be vacillation or weakness.
Second, Mr. Thies contends, Washington had little understanding of politics in Hanoi and did not realize that the dominant group in the leadership, headed by Le Duan, the party First Secretary, had staked their careers on victory in the South after prolonged factional debate. 
By 1965, these men had already worked at infiltration and organizing the war in the South for many years. 
Like their American counterparts, they could not afford to be charged with losing South Vietnam.
Compared with the numerous new studies on the origins of American involvement in Vietnam, there has been little written on the war after 1966, and especially after the Tet offensive in 1968, largely because of the unavailability of materials. 
At the Johnson Library, relatively few documents have been declassified for the period after 1965, and given Federal budget cutbacks and the Reagan Administration's tightened procedures for declassification, library officials say further progress will be slow.
The situation is even worse for the Nixon years. 
There is no equivalent of the Pentagon Papers for Mr. Nixon's Presidency and there is no Nixon Presidential library yet. 
So scholars are heavily dependent on the memoirs of Mr. Nixon and his Secretary of State Henry Kissinger.
One of the best accounts, however, has been pieced together by George C. Herring, a professor of American history at the University of Kentucky and author of ''America's Longest War: The United States and Vietnam, 1950-1975'' (1979). 
Mr. Herring believes that President Nixon, like his predecessors, early on rejected calls for withdrawal - which he saw as dishonorable - and appeals for sharply increased escalation, feeling that he could solve a riddle that had baffled earlier Presidents.
Mr. Nixon's eventual strategy - Vietnamization -emerged on an improvised basis without a thorough policy review, Mr. Herring contends. 
In a paper written for the recent conference on Vietnam in Washington, Mr. Herring charged that during the first year of his Administration Mr. Nixon's policy may have been ''a classic case of the President appeasing various bureaucratic constituencies by giving them a bit of what they wanted.''
The military got to bomb North Vietnam's sanctuaries in Cambodia; Secretary of Defense Melvin Laird got a speeded-up pull-out of American troops from Vietnam to appease American opinion (with Vietnamization, the war was turned over to the South Vietnamese Army - ARVN -which was given new training and improved weapons) and the State Department got negotiations with Hanoi. 
But Mr. Herring concludes that President Nixon's plan did not provide either enough force to compel North Vietnam to negotiate or sufficient concessions to entice Hanoi to the table. 
Like the improvised strategies of the Johnson era, ''it offered only extended stalemate.''
That there could be a negotiated end to the fighting was, throughout the war, one of the most consistent beliefs of both policy makers in Washington and their critics. 
But Allan E. Goodman, a professor at Georgetown University, believes this was naive. 
In another of the new books, ''The Lost Peace: America's Search for a Negotiated Settlement of the Vietnam War'' (1978), he argues that ''The real obstacle to a negotiated settlement was probably not Washington's diplomacy,'' but ''as Hanoi maintained ever since its first direct conversation with Washington in 1962, the liberation of South Vietnam was an absolutely indispensable prerequisite'' for a settlement.
In other words, North Vietnam was not prepared to compromise. 
Hanoi was further encouraged when American spokesmen assured it that American bombing of North Vietnam was not intended to destroy the country. 
The North Vietnamese were aware that the longer the war went on the more painful it was for the United States. 
So Hanoi waited for Washington to make the concessions.
In the end, this was what happened. 
''Nearly every time Washington made a negotiating offer to Hanoi, the U.S. terms softened,'' Mr. Goodman wrote, until finally, in the Paris talks in 1972, Mr. Kissinger agreed that the United States would withdraw from Vietnam without obtaining a comparable pledge from Hanoi.
Without access to more documents from the period, it is impossible to judge if President Nixon and Mr. Kissinger believed the Paris accords gave South Vietnam a real chance to survive or whether they felt the agreement was merely a face-saving ''decent interval'' during which the United States could disentangle itself from Vietnam. 
Either way, America's exit from Vietnam proved as stumbling as its entry.
 
THE MILITARY CONFUSION
A conundrum that has baffled a generation of American military officers is this: The Army won every battle it fought against the Vietcong and the North Vietnamese, inflicting terrible losses on them. 
Yet Hanoi emerged the victor. 
When Col. Harry G. Summers Jr. was in Hanoi in 1975 as part of the American military delegation overseeing the Peace Accords, he mentioned to a North Vietnamese officer that the Communists had never defeated the Americans on the battlefield. 
The North Vietnamese colonel replied: ''That may be so, but it is also irrelevant.''
In the years since, Colonel Summers, an instructor at the Army War College at Carlisle, Pa., has found that, despite the welter of writing about Vietnam, few scholars have re-examined the military side of the war. 
To try to fill this void, Colonel Summers, who fought in Korea and served two tours in Vietnam, has turned out one of the most thoughtful and provocative military studies of the war, titled ''On Strategy: A Critical Analysis of the Vietnam War'' (1982).
Unlike some senior American commanders, Colonel Summers does not blame the politicians, the protesters or the press for America's defeat. 
Instead, he finds flaws in the military's own approach. 
Most important, the Army simply lacked a strategy - an unforgivable sin for a soldier.
Instead of having a strategy, Colonel Summers argues, military and policy planners got carried away by the mystique of fighting a counterinsurgency war. 
In Colonel Summers's view, North Vietnam was the real opponent, but because Hanoi hid its involvement behind a smokescreen of guerrillas, the United States got tied down in fighting those insurgents. 
''We were like a bull charging the toreador's cape,'' he comments.
The result was that the Army got caught up in General Westmoreland's search-and-destroy operations, which cost the lives of many American soldiers, outraged public opinion and did not deal with the real source of Communist strength - North Vietnam. 
Because of their helicopters and firepower, American forces may have had the tactical initiative, but they confused that with the strategic initiative, which Hanoi had all along.
Operating from their sanctuaries in Laos and Cambodia, the Communists controlled the tempo of the fighting, and no matter how many Communists the Americans killed, success depended on the number of men Hanoi started down the Ho Chi Minh Trail. 
In this war of attrition, North Vietnam could not be beaten as long as it was willing to pay the price.
Where most critics of American military policy in Vietnam have argued that the United States tried to fight a guerrilla war using conventional tactics, Colonel Summers contends - in one of his most controversial points -that it had always been a conventional war. 
The French in Indochina fought against a guerrilla army, he admits, but Hanoi's use of the Vietcong as proxies obfuscated the issue.
The United States could have had a strategy, Colonel Summers maintains. 
Since our goal was much the same as it had been in Korea, he believes, to stop the expansion of a Communist state, we could have pursued a Korean solution - cutting off North Vietnam from the South.
Quoting a plan first advanced by retired Gen. Bruce Palmer Jr., a former deputy commander of the American Army in Vietnam, Colonel Summers suggests that, with an expanded naval blockade, the army should have driven across the Demilitarized Zone between the two Vietnams and then cut through Laos to the Thai border, setting up defensive positions.
''This would have had a number of advantages,'' says Colonel Summers. 
It would have required far fewer American troops. 
We could have fought on the defensive, making maximum use of our best asset, our firepower, and reducing our casualties. 
And it would have left rooting out the guerrillas to the South Vietnamese Army, which was best equipped to do it, and would have kept Americans out of the villages.
Colonel Summers rejects the argument that this strategy would have violated the neutrality of Laos and Cambodia, which he thinks was a fiction. 
''The North Vietnamese never made a secret they were fighting an Indochina war,'' he says, and, in fact, the new North Vietnamese history of the war admits that Hanoi had ''volunteers'' in Laos as early as 1959. 
''Neutrality was a myth we inflicted on ourselves,'' says Colonel Summers. 
He also quotes from the Hague Convention of 1907: ''A neutral country has the obligation not to allow its territory to be used by a belligerent. 
If the neutral country is unwilling or unable to prevent this, the other belligerent has the right to take appropriate counteraction.''
Colonel Summers also contends that the generals should have insisted that President Johnson get a Congressional declaration of war before committing American troops to Vietnam. 
President Johnson's attempt to fight the war on the cheap, without telling the public about its real costs, led to the credibility gap and helped spread the antiwar movement.
It was this lack of popular support for the war which also fostered the idea that the Vietnam War was more immoral than other wars, Colonel Summers believes. 
''People talk about the picture of the little girl running down the road who got napalmed,'' he says. 
''But tens of thousands of little girls got incinerated in the fire-bomb raids on Dresden and Tokyo in World War II and we don't remember. 
The difference is we believed World War II was legitimate.''
To underscore this point, Colonel Summers quotes from an article by General Weyand, the last American commander in Vietnam: ''As military professionals we must speak out, we must counsel our political leaders and alert the American public that there is no such thing as a 'splendid little war.'
… War is death and destruction. 
The American way of war is particularly violent, deadly and dreadful. 
We believe in using 'things' - artillery, bombs, massive firepower -in order to conserve our soldiers' lives. 
… The Army must make the price of involvement clear before we get involved, so that America can weigh the probable costs of involvement against the dangers of noninvolvement. 
For there are worse things than war.''
Like a number of officers, Colonel Summers raises the question of why some members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff did not resign in protest when they sensed the lack of a coherent strategy and President Johnson's attempt to fight the war with limited means.
At the recent conference on Vietnam in Washington, retired Brig. Gen. Edwin H. Simmons, the director of Marine Corps History and Museums, said that he had asked some of the Chiefs the question himself. 
''The inevitable answer is: They could work better from within,'' said General Simmons, who served two tours in Vietnam with the Marines. 
It was one of the distortions of the Vietnam War, he said, that some officers allowed the honored principle of civilian control of the military to come to mean civilian leadership and management of the military on the combat level in the field. 
Officers at all levels of command ''used civilian control as an exoneration from moral responsibility,'' he charged.
General Simmons is currently supervising a 10-volume official history of the Marines in Vietnam, one of a series of such projects by each of the armed services. 
Taken together, they consti-tute the most ambitious and detailed work now being done on the war. 
The largest in scope is a planned 20-volume series by the Army's Center of Military History in Washington.
The Army's earlier 80-volume history of World War II has received high marks from scholars for its integrity. 
But Vincent H. Demma -one of 10 historians selected to help write the Vietnam volumes and who has been working on the project since the mid-1960's - admits that victory is easier to record than defeat. 
Moreover, the writers face another problem, a wealth of documentation left over from a conflict that was not only the first television war, but also the first Xerox and computer war. 
In Suitland, Md., outside Washington, in a warehouse the size of three football fields, repose more than 60,000 cubic feet of records shipped home by the Army, mostly uncatalogued.
Mr. Demma hopes this material and other archives, including taperecorded interviews with officers as they left Vietnam, will someday furnish what is now missing - ''an understanding of the war from the foxhole up rather than from the policy makers down.''
Aside from some novels by ex-soldiers, very little has been written on the actual conduct of the war, says Mr. Demma. But he feels that the special access he and his fellow authors have to still-classified material, including that in the Presidential libraries and other Government organizations like the Central Intelligence Agency, should eventually provide a more accurate picture of Vietnam.
 
THE VIETNAM IGNORANCE
Despite all the blunders, a number of historians and military specialists are coming to conclude that the American military effort in Vietnam was more successful than was recognized at the time. 
When Mr. Popkin, for instance, returned to Vietnam in 1969 and 1970 to check on the villages he had studied in 1966, he was surprised to find that the balance of power in the countryside had shifted dramatically in the South Vietnamese Government's favor.
This was, in part, the result of the huge Communist mistake in the 1968 Tet offensive, when the best Vietcong units, which had long preserved their strength by operating clandestinely, exposed themselves in open attacks. 
They were decimated by American and South Vietnamese counterat-tacks. 
American officials estimated the Communists lost 40,000 killed in the Tet fighting, the bulk of them Southern guerrillas rather than North Vietnamese.
Mr. Tang, the former N.L.F. 
Minister of Justice, has described Tet as ''catastrophic''; he calculated the Vietcong lost half their forces and new recruits could not be found lo-cally to replace them. 
As a result, by the early 70's, 90 percent of the fighting was being done by North Vietnamese troops and the war turned more and more into a conventional conflict between North and South. 
(Mr. Pike and some other specialists have speculated that Hanoi may have deliberately allowed the Vietcong to be massacred at Tet to assure North Vietnam's control over the Communist movement in the South, much as the advancing Russian Army stood by during the Warsaw uprising in 1944.) But at the time, most Americans, shocked by the daring Vietcong attack on the United States Embassy in Saigon and the weeks of street fighting in Hue, felt Tet was a defeat for the United States. 
It led to President Johnson's announcement that he would not run again, his proclamation of a bombing halt over North Vietnam and his decision to stop the escalation of American ground forces. 
For most Americans, Tet was the beginning of the end of our involvement.
Even those American officials and journalists who claimed in 1968 that Tet was a military defeat for the Communists still tended to credit Hanoi with a masterful strategy -sacrificing troops to deal Washington a psychological blow. 
But that view, too, was wrong.
When he was in Vietnam for his television series, Mr. Karnow interviewed Tran Do, one of the Communist generals in charge of the Tet attacks. 
The general denied that Tet was designed to have a political impact in the United States; instead, he said, the Communists fully believed there would be popular uprisings and that they could ''annihilate the U.S. and Saigon troops.''
The political impact ''was an accidental byproduct,'' the general said. 
Major popular uprisings never took place.
Tet, in fact, ''totally destroyed the idea of the inevitability of an N.L.F. victory in the villages,'' says Mr. Popkin. ''When the villagers saw the stacks of Vietcong bodies in Saigon on their local TV sets, they rushed to get their sons into local defense forces'' so that they would not be drafted by the Vietcong.
At the same time, the sheer weight of American military spending and aid programs began to be felt. 
Many peasants rushed to work for the Americans, building roads, bridges, runways and schools. 
Typically, Mr. Popkin found, in the 18 villages he studied, the peasants used their earnings to buy a baby piglet, raised it, sold it, and with the profits invested in a diesel water pump to irrigate their rice fields. 
With these mechanized pumps the farmers in the Mekong Delta could at last get two rice crops a year, and the standard of living in the countryside started to take off.
In the early and mid-1960's, the peasants had had an economic incentive to live in a ''liberated'' or Communist village, Mr. Popkin found, because the Vietcong taxes were lower than the rent peasants had to pay landlords in Government-held areas. 
But by the time of Tet, the incentive was reversed. 
As the Vietcong's military situation grew more desperate, their taxes increased. 
And now that the peasants had pigs, chickens and rice they could sell in Government markets, they got angry when the Communists cut a road. 
''The Vietcong may have been more honest than the Government, but they couldn't compete with water pumps, chemical fertilizer and Hondas,'' says Mr. Popkin. He has developed some of his ideas about the farmers' material interests in a book widely used in college courses, titled ''The Rational Peasant: The Political Economy of Rural Society in Vietnam'' (1979).
In the light of Hanoi's postwar revelations, specialists are revising even their views of the Phoenix program, the scheme sponsored by the C.I.A. to destroy the Vietcong apparatus in the villages by arresting or killing local Communist cadres. 
''The conven tional liberal wisdom at the time was that it was a terrible thing,'' says Mr. Karnow. ''It killed people indiscriminately and was subject to corruption by the South Vietnamese who turned in people for the reward money. 
But the people I talked to on my trip in Vietnam said it had wiped out many Southern cadres and helped cripple the N.L.F.''
Overall, by 1970 nearly 90 percent of the countryside was officially ''pacified,'' compared with only 33 percent in 1965, a crude though significant index of change.
Professor Herring at the University of Kentucky has suggested that ''the ultimate irony'' of the war may be that the American position in South Vietnam was stronger at the end of 1972, just before the Paris peace agreement, than at any previous point in the war. 
Mr. Popkin concurs and adds, ''There's no doubt that if Nixon had kept up U.S. aid after 1973, South Vietnam might have survived.''
But that is one of the great historical ifs. 
American patience had run out.
What, then, went wrong after the Paris accords?
Why did South Vietnam collapse in 1975 under a North Vietnamese attack that was designed only to prepare for a bigger, final offensive in 1976?
(According to Douglas Pike, Gen. Vo Nguyen Giap, the North Vietnamese commander, was so startled by the rapidity of the South Vietnamese retreat that he cautioned his officers in the field by radio against falling into a trap.) Clearly one problem was the poor leadership and corruption that bedeviled the Saigon Government throughout the war. 
But Professor Tai believes that in fairness we should recognize that Saigon faced problems Hanoi did not have. 
North Vietnam could forge a more disciplined state because its society was more homogeneous than that of the South. 
Most anti-Communists in the North moved to the South in 1954, and the North never had to deal with the South's fractious babble of sects like the Buddhists, the Hoa Hao and the Cao Dai.
Mrs. Tai also believes that the American peace movement misunderstood how the South Vietnamese people felt. 
''There were many people like me who did not support Thieu but who didn't like the Communists either,'' she says. 
Indeed, she represented the kind of third force that American officials in Saigon hoped would somehow emerge. 
''I didn't think a Communist victory would lead to any improvement for the middle class, or even for the peasants, in whose name the revolution was fought,'' she says. 
In 1977, her father, despite his Communist background, was arrested for protesting the human-rights situation in Vietnam; he died of starvation in a ''reeducation'' camp in 1981.
On the basis of his village interviews, Mr. Popkin also came to a conclusion that the American left overrated the popularity of the Communists. 
With his training in polling, Mr. Popkin noticed a number of ''unobtrusive indicators.''
''When you want to know what radio stations people are listening to,'' he says, ''you don't ask them. 
You just look in their cars at a parking lot to see where the dials are set.''
One sign was that while many South Vietnamese soldiers deserted to go home -just as Union troops did in the American Civil War - they did not defect in large units to the Communists. 
This was in sharp contrast to China, where during the 1940's whole Nationalist divisions defected to Mao Zedong's Communist guerrillas. 
Mr. Popkin noted, too, that in the Tet offensive, when the Communists' surprise attacks trapped many Americans in Vietnamese residential areas, very few were betrayed to the Communists.
''It tells you,'' says Mr. Popkin, ''that the problem in Vietnam was not too much support for the Communists, or lack of support for the Saigon Government. 
It was just a rotten government. 
You can't fight something with nothing.''
Another reason for Saigon's collapse in 1975, South Vietnamese and American officials have long insisted, was the cutback in American aid mandated by a Congress which lost interest in the war after the G.I.'s had left in 1973.
American military aid to South Vietnam and Laos dropped from about $2.5 billion in 1973 to $1.6 billion in 1974 and then plunged further to a projected $700 million in 1975, half of it covering shipping costs. 
When Hanoi's attack came, South Vietnam's armed forces were receiving only 2 percent of the funds and supplies American soldiers had gotten in 1968 or 1969, according to retired Maj. Gen. John E. Murray, the chief American military administrator in Saigon in 1974. 
In other words, said Gen. Van Tien Dung, North Vietnam's field commander, in his memoir on the final offensive, the Thieu regime was compelled ''to fight a poor man's war,'' a fact that Hanoi took carefully into account.
''You know what Napoleon said,'' General Murray pointed out at the conference on Vietnam in Washington. 
''God is on the side of the biggest battalions. 
And right about then, God was on the side of the Communists. 
They were bigger, they were stronger. 
That's why ARVN lost the war.''
But there was something else at work. 
The huge American investment in Vietnam, Mr. Karnow points out, had ''lulled the South Vietnamese into believing that the United States would never leave. 
Nobody in his right mind would spend billions to build the complex at Cam Ranh Bay and then depart. 
The Americans must be crazy. 
They were crazy. 
The South Vietnamese were left holding the bag.''
Professor Elliott at Pomona College thinks this dependence is the key to understanding the war. 
''It seems to me,'' he says, ''that the Communists had an appeal that prevented the South Vietnamese from coalescing around a non-Communist government. 
Because the Saigon regimes were always dependent on the United States, in the eyes of the nationalistic Vietnamese, this created a moral paralysis.''
Mr. Elliott says he could see this in interviews he conducted with Vietcong defectors in the Mekong Delta during the war. 
''However much they had come to dislike the Communists, they acknowledged the Front had a moral appeal which undermined the Government.''
So the South Vietnamese faced an insoluble contradiction. 
''They couldn't win without us, but they couldn't win with us either.''
 
THE ANTI WAR MOVEMENT
One group whose influence on Vietnam has been downgraded by the new scholars is the antiwar movement. 
From studying public-opinion polls, John E. Mueller, a professor of political science at the University of Rochester, has found that the Vietnam War was no more unpopular than the Korean War - until American casualties in Vietnam surpassed those in Korea. 
That line was crossed, coincidentally, during the Tet offensive. 
Professor Mueller believes that the tactics of some of the protesters, with flag burnings and anti-American slogans, actually undercut their credibility with the public. 
''The antiwar movement picked up negative popularity ratings in an almost unprecedented degree,'' he says.
Washington was certainly aware of the protests, says Mr. Mueller, who has written about the subject in ''War, Presidents and Public Opinion'' (1973). 
But the Johnson Administration's about-faces in 1968 - stopping the bombing of North Vietnam and ending our troop escalation -had more to do with disaffection within the Government itself over how badly the war was going and its high costs, he asserts.
Another little-known reason for the Government's shift in 1968, Mr. Mueller has found, is that within the Government ''the value of saving Vietnam from Communism had gone down since we got committed in 1965.''
China, formerly seen as a threat, had become engulfed in the Cultural Revolution, and Indonesia, which had appeared on the brink of a Communist takeover, massacred its Communist Party.
Mr. Mueller also points out that President Johnson's near defeat by Senator Eugene McCarthy in the New Hampshire Democratic primary, which influenced President Johnson's decision not to run again, was caused more by angry hawks than by doves. 
At the ballot box, anti-Johnson hawks outnumbered anti-Johnson doves by 3 to 2.
The protesters did have an effect on the Presidential elections. 
Their attacks on Vice President Humphrey ''probably gave Nixon the slim margin of votes necessary to win in 1968,'' says Mr. Mueller. Then, in 1972, with the Democratic convention controlled by opponents of the war, ''they picked George McGovern, arguably the worst choice as a Democratic candidate in modern times.''
But Mr. Mueller discounts the charge by hawks that the protest movement strengthened Hanoi's resolve and helped the United States lose Vietnam. 
''Hanoi may have been encouraged by the peace movement,'' he says, ''but the North Vietnamese were fanatics who would have continued the war for as long as necessary to win.''
In another of his studies, Mr. Mueller estimated that the North Vietnamese and Vietcong suffered 500,000 to 600,000 battle deaths - about 2.5 percent to 3 percent of their prewar population. 
By comparison, the United States lost only three-tenths of 1 percent of its population in battle during World War II, and the Japanese, whom Americans regarded as true fanatics, 1.4 percent. 
''The crucial mistake the U.S. made was to underestimate how much punishment North Vietnam would take,'' he says.
 
THE LESSON OF VIETNAM
Are there lessons Americans can learn from Vietnam?
The question is important, because it was one of the supposed lessons of World War II -not to appease aggression - that helped get the United States into Vietnam. 
There is little consensus, however, on what can be gleaned from Vietnam. 
James C. Thomson Jr., curator at the Nieman Foundation at Harvard, who was a member of President Johnson's National Security Council staff and who opposed American involvement in Vietnam, has proposed that the ''central lesson'' is that we should never again ''take on the job of trying to defeat a nationalist anticolonial movement under indigenous Communist control in former French Indochina.''
This is, notes Mr. Thomson wryly, ''a lesson of less than universal significance.''
But Robert E. Osgood, a professor of American foreign policy at the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies, believes Americans have learned the danger of intervening in a revolutionary war where the local government is weak. 
In such cases, the United States must commit so many troops to compensate for the regime's shortcomings that it ends up only undermining the government. 
El Salvador is an example, says Professor Osgood, who was one of the most important theorists on limited war in the 1960's.
''But this is not necessarily a lesson you can apply in every revolutionary war,'' he adds. 
In the Philippines after World War II, American aid provided a critical ''missing component'' that stopped a Communist insurgency. 
So to exclude American intervention in every contingency ''is probably overdrawing the lesson,'' he says.
The problem, in Professor Osgood's view, is that there are many variables for Washington to ponder: the strength of the local regime, the resolve of its adversary, the possibilities for getting out if American intervention proves unsuccessful.
The real issue is the magnitude of American interests and the threat to them. 
''That was a mistake in Vietnam -our greatly inflated rhetoric about falling dominoes turned out to be wrong,'' Professor Osgood points out. 
But American foreign policy is still wedded to containment, and questions may arise again about combating a Communist-led revolution or takeover in the Middle East or Central America, he notes.
If that prospect arises, says Mr. Betts, we have not really learned what to do except that the United States can fight only if the war is kept short. 
''We know more now,'' he believes, but we do not know how to avoid a disastrous war except at the possible price that Presidents Kennedy and Johnson foresaw -disastrous acceptance of defeat.
Another lesson is the need for better leadership, says Ernest R. May, a professor of history at Harvard. 
At the Washington conference on Vietnam, he recalled that in 1948 George C. Marshall, then Secretary of State, opposed a military proposal to send 10,000 American advisers to aid the Chinese Nationalists because it involved a commitment of uncertain magnitude and indefinite duration. 
''What we did not have in 1965 was an individual of Marshall's stature and independent judgment,'' Mr. May said.
There are also lessons for small states that might look to the United States for help. 
At the Washington meeting, Bui Diem, who served as South Vietnam's Ambassador to the United States, issued a warning. 
''My advice to small nations considering U.S. aid is that they should be wary of the United States,'' he said. 
''They should pay very close attention to the American domestic political system, because U.S. policies can change quickly. 
We small nations can end up losing higher stakes than the United States itself because, for the American, you can turn the page and say, 'Well, it is an unhappy chapter for U.S. history.'
But that is not the same now for the South Vietnamese.''
And there are lessons for the military. 
The most important, Colonel Summers believes, is that ''we must relearn that public support is critical to American military strategy.''
To make his point, Colonel Summers quotes from General Weyand, the man who welcomed the P.O.W.'s to Saigon in 1973. 
''The American Army really is a people's army in the sense that it belongs to the American people,'' the general said. 
''When the American people lose their commitment, it is futile to try to keep the Army committed. 
In the final analysis, the American Army is not so much an arm of the executive branch as it is an arm of the American people.''
 
TEACHING THE WAR
UP at the blackboard, a teaching assistant had chalked in the Names to be discussed in the day's lecture at the University of Iowa. 
There, in large letters, were Robert McNamara, and McGeorge Bundy, and Ngo Dinh Diem and the Green Berets.
Fifteen years ago, when Vietnam first invaded the American campus, they would all have been household words, objects of heated debate and perhaps derision. 
But to the 300 students in the large classroom, they were like something from an arcane novel, to be carefully copied down.
''For the students, history begins about 1980,'' says Stephen Vlastos, a professor of history at the University of Iowa who is in charge of the course, ''The Vietnam War in Historical Perspective.''
Indeed, most of them were not even born at the time of the Americansupported coup against President Diem. 
Katharyn Bine, a freshman from Beaman, Iowa, a farming town of 209 people, was only 1 year old when Lyndon Johnson dispatched the first American ground forces to Vietnam in 1965. 
Before taking the course, she had heard the name Ho Chi Minh, but she had not known who Diem or McNamara or Bundy was.
Yet Miss Bine and the course at Iowa represent another development - a quiet revival of interest in Vietnam on campus 10 years after the last American troops were withdrawn. 
More than two dozen colleges this year are offering courses on the war or Vietnamese history, ranging from Harvard to Thomas More College in northern Kentucky. 
Almost all the classes have drawn more students than their professors expected.
What are the students learning?
It seems to depend on the professor, his own view of Vietnam and the books he assigns. 
Not surprisingly, a majority of the professors were strongly influenced by the antiwar movement. 
Mr. Vlastos, for instance, helped organize a demonstration against President Johnson while he was an undergraduate at Princeton in 1966. 
He is candid about his antiwar sentiments. 
''It's the reason I'm teaching the course,'' he says. 
''At the beginning of the course, I told the students I believe the war was a terrible mistake.''
Professor Vlastos is also an example of another heritage of academic feeling about the war. 
Distaste for the war was so widespread that few academics specialized in Vietnam, and so today most of the new courses on Vietnam are being taught by professors who were trained in subjects like American history or Chinese studies. 
Mr. Vlastos got his Ph.D. from Berkeley in Japanese history.
Even more striking, though nearly three million Americans served in Vietnam, very few of the professors teaching about Vietnam were ever there. 
At a conference last fall on ''Vietnam and the Classroom'' in Kentucky, sponsored by the Kentucky Association of Teachers of History, only one of the 11 speakers and only three of the 75 participating teachers had been in Vietnam.
''If we were talking about World War II, this room would be full of veterans,'' observed T. Wayne Beasley, a professor at Murray State University in western Kentucky. 
But, Mr. Beasley complained, ''with Vietnam you people who are teaching about it are the same people who were protesting it as students in the 1960's.''
At the Newark campus of Rutgers University, H. Bruce Franklin is worried about a different problem. 
Mr. Franklin, a professor of English, says he was distressed when he polled the students in his course, ''America and Vietnam,'' and found the majority believed the United States lost the war because ''we didn't try hard enough.''
''This illusion has to be dispelled immediately,'' Mr. Franklin adds. 
So he stresses the damage the United States did to Vietnam, like bombing it between 1964 and 1969 with more than nine times the tonnage of high explosives dropped in the entire Pacific theater during World War II. 
Mr. Franklin rejects a suggestion that such figures may be misleading because many of the bombs dropped on Vietnam landed in the jungle, not on civilian villages.
Despite the prevalence of antiwar views among most professors, some teachers have begun to incorporate the more complex and dispassionate new scholarship into their curriculum. 
One of the most imaginative new classes is at the University of Louisville, taught by an unlikely duo: a hawkish former artillery officer in Vietnam, Richard N. Pfeiffer, and a confirmed antiwar activist with a Ph.D. in East Asian history, Andrea McElderry. 
Miss McElderry is an associate professor of history; Mr. Pfeiffer is a vice president of an industrial-supply company who teaches in his spare time.
''The idea of the class is to give the students as many different points of view as we can about the war, because we don't think anyone has solved Vietnam,'' says Miss McElderry. 
''We don't let our students say things like 'This side won the war.'
''
To broaden the course, the two teachers invite guest speakers from the Louisville area, including a former Green Beret, a retired Army general, a one-time high official in the Saigon Government, a peacemovement activist and a psychiatrist from a Veterans' Administration hospital who treats troubled veterans. 
Miss McElderry feels the unusual chemistry between her and Mr. Pfeiffer has been beneficial. 
''Until I met Richard, I was sure of my views about Vietnam. 
He has made me rethink them, and I have influenced him, too. 
I couldn't have taught the course the same way with my Asian specialist colleagues, because all of them were getting 2-S student deferments during Vietnam.''
- F.B.
 
A BRIEF BIBLIOGRAPHY
Perhaps no event in American history has inspired such a torrent of writing as the Vietnam War. 
Among the more than 200 books already written, the following include some of those most widely used in college courses or most respected by specialists. 
GENERAL George C. Herring, ''America's Longest War,'' John Wiley & Sons, 1979. 
The most balanced overview of the war, though sketchy in parts, by a liberal antiwar critic.
 
ORIGINS OF THE CONFLICT
William J. Duiker, ''The Communist Road to Power in Vietnam,'' Westview Press, 1981. 
The best concise account of the growth and tactics of the Communist movement.
David G. Marr, ''Vietnamese Anti-Colonialism,'' University of California Press, 1971. 
A brilliant study of the origins of nationalism in Vietnam that shows how the Communists emerged from a traditional context.
Frances FitzGerald, ''Fire in the Lake,'' Little, Brown & Co., 1972. 
A best seller that attributed American failure to cultural shortsightedness. 
Its findings are now disputed by some scholars.
Jeffrey Race, ''War Comes to Long An,'' University of California Press, 1972. 
A perceptive analysis of Vietcong success in one province that suggests the Communists were shrewder about political power and economic grievances than were South Vietnamese officials. 
Many of the conclusions have been invalidated by the events after Tet. 
THE AMERICAN SIDE David Halberstam, ''The Best and the Brightest,'' Random House, 1972. 
This wartime best seller traced our descent into the Vietnam quagmire to the cold-war mentality shared by our superachiever Presidents and their advisers.
Leslie H. Gelb and Richard K. Betts, ''The Irony of Vietnam: The System Worked,'' The Brookings Institution, 1979. 
A challenge to Mr. Halberstam's thesis. 
The authors argue that Washington's policy machinery worked well, but that the Presidents erred in seeking only to do the minimal necessary not to lose during their own terms.
Larry Berman, ''Planning a Tragedy: The Americanization of the War in Vietnam,'' W.W. 
Norton, 1982. 
A detailed look at President Johnson's fateful decision to begin the buildup of American troops in Vietnam; it suggests that L.B.J. was more concerned with preserving his Great Society than with a careful consideration of the war.
Wallace J. Thies, ''When Governments Collide: Coercion and Diplomacy in the Vietnam Conflict, 1964-68,'' University of California Press, 1980. 
A study of why L.B.J.'s bombing campaign against North Vietnam failed. 
It indicates that Washington had scant understanding of politics in Hanoi and that American bureaucracy was incapable of orchestrating bombing and diplomacy simultaneously.
The Pentagon Papers. 
Now in several editions, with the longclassified segment - ''The Secret Diplomacy of the Vietnam War: The Negotiating Volumes of the Pentagon Papers,'' edited by George C. Herring - to be published in July by the University of Texas Press.
 
THE MILITARY SIDE
Don Oberdorfer, ''Tet!''
Doubleday & Co., 1971. 
A first-rate dramatic account of the war's biggest battle.
Col. Harry G. Summers Jr., ''On Strategy: A Critical Analysis of the Vietnam War,'' Presidio Press, 1982. 
A thoughtful look at why the American Army won every battle in Vietnam but lost the war.
Stuart A. Herrington, ''Silence Was a Weapon: The Vietnam War in the Villages,'' Presidio Press, 1982. 
A poignant, personal account by an Army district adviser who discovered the Vietcong to be a formidable opponent.
Gen. Van Tien Dung, ''Our Great Spring Victory: An Account of the Liberation of South Vietnam,'' translated by John Spragens Jr., Monthly Review, 1977. 
How North Vietnam planned and won the final offensive in 1975, by the Chief of Staff of North Vietnam's People's Army. 
VIETNAM IN LITERATURE Graham Greene, ''The Quiet American,'' Viking, 1956. 
The quintessential story of the liberal American whose anti-Communist idealism leads him astray in the tropical, complex world of Vietnam.
Philip Caputo,''A Rumor of War,'' Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1977. 
A Marine lieutenant's sad, angry memoir of a year in combat. 
Michael Herr, ''Dispatches,'' Knopf, 1977. 
Compelling, sympathetic sketches of grunts, written in their lingo of fear, camaraderie and bitterness. 
- F.B.
