
IF not capitalism, at least a capitalist ethic is seeping into the marrow of China.
Everything Western, everything from the capitalist world outside, is copied, studied and worried about. 
In those areas of Guangdong province near Hong Kong, it is impossible to find a television station tuned to Chinese broadcasts. 
The slam-bang frivolity of Hong Kong TV blares from urban homes and farmers' huts. 
In Beijing, the city seems to lurch to a halt at six o'clock on Sunday night when Mickey Mouse cartoons are shown for 30 minutes. 
''It's done in a way even adults can appreciate,'' an older Chinese man said somewhat solemnly.
Spurring this has been the Government's increasing tolerance of freer economic activity. 
Last week, Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang said that his countrymen would have to embrace even greater economic changes if China's general backwardness was to be overcome. 
Indeed, the China that Prime Minister Zhao described in his opening address to the 13th Communist Party Congress is the China that Mao Zedong loathed and sought to prevent from materializing: a China that permits private enterprise at home, on the farm and in the cities. 
And far from stifling rich peasants, closing down small private industries, suppressing individual entrepreneurs, as Mao deemed essential if China was to truly become a socialist country, Mr. Zhao said they should flourish.
In short, the Prime Minister called for the further introduction and expansion of a vast array of economic practices that smacked more of capitalism than socialism, or at least socialism along the lines practiced in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. 
Across China, farmers, managers of small workshops and factories, restaurant owners, even physicians who have small private practices have eagerly grabbed the chance to improve their lives by making as much money as they possibly can.
Mr. Zhao talked of stocks and bonds, of commercializing the housing market, of stimulating private industry and leasing state enterprises to individuals. 
He urged regulating China's money supply through credit policies in the manner of the Federal Reserve Bank in the United States. 
He called for a sweeping reform of tax policies, piece-rate wages, free market pricing and free competition among enterprises.
But burdened by a legacy of revolution and socialism, Mr. Zhao hastened to disavow the apparently capitalist aura of his program, instead fashioning a schema that sought to preserve ideological rectitude without stifling his policy objectives. 
His solution, widely hailed in the Chinese press, was simply to say that China was in the primary stages of socialism where just about anything in the economic realm is acceptable.
Still, Mr. Zhao's championing of Western economic practices hardly means that China is on the verge of shucking off its socialist manacles in favor of fast, freewheeling capitalism. 
Indeed, the most severe critics of the Chinese regime are inclined to view the economic reform program created by the country's senior leader, Deng Xiaoping, and pursued now by Mr. Zhao, as doomed. 
The core of the problem, these critics contend, is that the Communist Party, which intrudes into virtually every cranny of Chinese life, is unlikely to willingly relinquish its control of society and the economy.
Fang Lizhi, an astrophysicist who headed the country's prestigious University of Science and Technology in Hefei until he was summarily fired last winter for supporting college students' calls for greater democracy, explained the problem in an interview published in the West German news magazine Der Spiegel.
''In China, the party does not want to manage only politics,'' he said. 
''It wants to control everything, including the way of life and the thoughts of the people. 
Today, factories are being managed by managers, but the party cadres keep wielding the power. 
Peasants enjoy the free-market system, but the cadres tell them: 'You still need our rubber stamp, you still have to buy us off!'
There lies the root of the new corruption. 
In order to create a true economic democracy in China, one ought to abolish political controls. 
That is exactly what the party fears most.''
Yet it is far from clear how successful Mr. Zhao will be in encouraging his fellow Communists to extricate themselves from the management of day-to-day affairs in favor of technocratic managers, profit-oriented bankers and bottom-line manufacturers. 
Many western observers believe that the economic reforms of Mr. Deng and Mr. Zhao are at a critical juncture. 
They can move forward, away from socialism and toward a more Western economy, if the party gives up substantial amounts of its power. 
Or, their reforms can flounder in the hands of a party that holds power and refuses to let go.
