
There are nearly 20,000 restaurants in Hong Kong, a city where it may seem that every resident is a self-styled gourmet and that everyone eats out as often as possible. 
The result is some of the very best cooking in the world, be it French, Italian or Vietnamese.
But why go to Hong Kong to eat foreign dishes when the territory's five million Chinese are mostly from Canton (Guangdong)?
Although Americans associate Cantonese food with thick, saccharine, orange-red sauces, it is considered by many the best Chinese food in the world. 
The key culinary words are harmony and simplicity: the subtle and the delicate play off the rich and spicy.
Hong Kong chefs, however, do equally well with food from other Chinese regions, so whether you choose to sample their talents in the hundreds of simple restaurants throughout the city or in the hotel dining rooms that you will love despite their amazing pretentiousness, you will be forever spoiled for most Chinese food in the United States, particularly what passes here for Cantonese.
From the jade and silver of Lai Ching Heen in the Regent Hotel, to the glazed tile walls and tile floors of the Hoi Tin Garden Restaurant in the fishing village of Lei Yue Mun, from the red lacquer and gold at the Shang Palace in the Shangri-La Hotel to the less than spotless tablecloths in the second floor Tin Fat Restaurant, Hong Kong food will astonish your senses.
Some of the most expensive meals are in restaurant hotels, but unlike the United States, most of the diners in them are local people. 
Hong Kong is a rich territory and, as the promotional literature for it says: ''Money is something of which most Chinese are proud and much of it is spent on lavish dining and entertaining.''
Meals in some of the most elaborate settings are easily more expensive than the costliest meals in New York. 
The great delicacy is anything made with sharks' fin and it is not unusual for a single dish to cost $200.
First-time visitors should not be put off by tales of dinner checks fit for an emperor. 
On a four-day eating tour that covered eight restaurants, there were meals that cost only $10 a person as well as one that was $60.
If, however, you are put off by less than impeccable linens you may have to confine yourself to the most expensive restaurants, where Western fastidiousness is practiced. 
But be prepared to pay for the jade and silver serving pieces.
A few words of practical advice: napkins are offered in some restaurants, but damp terrycloth washcloths before the meal are more common. 
A 10 percent service charge is added to bills; if the service warrants it, add another 3 to 5 percent. 
Don't hesitate to ask your waiter for advice. 
By the same token don't let him intimidate you into ordering dishes that cost more than you want to spend. 
But be sure to let him know that you don't want ''safe'' choices like sweet and sour pork. 
Chinese beer, particularly Tsing Tao, is usually the most appropriate accompaniment to the food. 
Most restaurants are open every day for lunch and dinner, closed only for Chinese New Year and public holidays.
 
SHANG PALACE
It is difficult to say where we ate the best food: different restaurants excelled at different dishes. 
And certainly if price is no object and conspicuous consumption is your cup of tea, you cannot go wrong at the aptly named Shang Palace.
Don't let the ornate decoration fool you. 
Despite copious quantities of imperial red lacquer and 22-carat gold leaf, carved lacquered elephants, gold tableware, impeccable linens and personalized matches for all who have made reservations, the food is exceptionally well prepared.
The meal began with a small whole suckling pig, the most succulent I have ever eaten. 
The usual maraschino cherry eyes were replaced by tiny lighted red bulbs. 
Served in the style of moo shi pork, scallop-edged steamed breads are used instead of wraplings, each to be spread with a delightful sweet and slightly spicy plum sauce, the scallion bundles wrapped with strips of hot red pepper.
Every dish was a picture, all of it served under silver domes in the French fashion.
A dish of crab and bamboo fungus, which has a texture not unlike a mushroom, had that subtle, delicate flavor for which Cantonese food is famous.
Pan-fried chicken with soybean and chili, though a simple mixture of green pepper, scallions, garlic and chicken, rose above the ordinary with a bit of hot red chili and black bean paste. 
Cantonese food has its own hot peppers.
Seasonal vegetables were an exotic mixture of hairy seaweed, black fungus with the rich taste of earthy wild mushrooms served in soybean skin. 
I am an unabashed fan of Chinese sweets and I thought the coconut cream soup with tapioca was delightfully refreshing.
For two, this superb dinner cost $75. 
The restaurant also offers a dim sum lunch.
 
(Shang Palace, Shangri-La Hotel, 64 Mody Road, Kowloon, Hong Kong; telephone 3-7212111. 
Lunch and dinner seven days. 
American Express, Diners, MasterCard, VISA.)
 
LAI CHING HEEN
If Shang Palace is exuberantly ostentatious, Lai Ching Heen is subtly ostentatious. 
Instead of imperial red and gold, it is jade and silver. 
The chopsticks are ivory and silver. 
The setting spells money. 
Like the Shang Palace, the service is flawless and instantaneous.
This was our first meal in Hong Kong and thus my first encounter with the much touted and very expensive sharks' fin soup. 
Although it is adored by the Chinese because of its texture, Westerners are not always taken with it, because it is bland and slippery. 
But if, like me, you are wild about the tapioca pudding you will love the soup with its extremely delicate flavor.
Topping off the well-prepared food is a glorious view of the harbor. 
Dinner for two is about $100.
 
9Lai Ching Heen, the Regent, Salisbury Road, Hong Kong; 3-7211211. 
Open for lunch and dinner seven days. 
Visa, American Express, Diners.)
 
FOOK LAM MOON
To veteran visitors the name Fook Lam Moon conjures up expensive meals, and if you insist on having abalone you can ring up a bill that will make the Four Seasons or the Quilted Giraffe in New York look like bargain basements. 
One abalone dish is more than $300; there is an entire page of abalone. 
There's another page of shark's fin dishes, which start at $180. 
But there is also exquisite golden deep-fried chicken for $18.
Garoupa, a fish with pristine white flesh that is extremely popular in Hong Kong, had just come out of the pond. 
Served with spring onions, it was very moist and delicate, as was the lobster in garlic sauce.
The food at Fook Lam Moon is quite sophisticated and while the setting is not as glamorous as the hotel restaurants it is attractive with a newly redone pale pink and green color scheme. 
As in so many Chinese restaurants, the lighting is far brighter than you would expect.
Dinner for two was $120.
 
(Fook Lam Moon, 31 Mody Road, Shop A Tsimshatsui, Kowloon, Hong Kong; 3-688755. 
Open seven days for lunch and dinner.
 
American Express, Visa, Diners
Club, MasterCard.)
 
YUNG KEE
If you want to see what restaurants were like in Hong Kong 40 years ago, a trip to Yung Kee is a must. 
Crowded and noisy, done up in gold and red, with less than spotless tablecloths, it is still an especially good choice for lunch, though there is less of a crush before noon or after 2.
The specialty is thousand-year-old eggs, exceedingly good with pickled ginger. 
But all the Cantonese food is an example of how light such cooking can be, even when it is as rich as golden-skinned roast goose with a delicate plum sauce. 
Here is the place to try fried rice as it should taste, flavored with salted fish rather than barbecued pork.
Judging from what we tried, you probably cannot go wrong with anything you order. 
Lunch for two wasIt was enough for a dinner.
 
(Yung Kee Restaurant, Yung Kee Building, 32 Wellington Street, Hong Kong; 5-221624.
Open seven days for lunch and dinner. 
Visa, American Express, Diners.)
 
HOI TIN GARDEN
If really fresh fish is your passion, be sure to take a trip to Lei Yue Mun, a tiny fishing village just a four- or five-minute ferry ride from Hong Kong. 
About 30 fish stalls line your route to about 14 restaurants. 
You choose from a vast assortment of exotic fin fish and shellfish and they are delivered to the restaurant of your choice, where your order is cooked in the simplest fashion in the plainest surroundings.
The preparation of the food is sublime: abalone steamed with soy sauce and ginger; clams steamed with spring onions, soy and oil; scallops with their roe in black bean sauce. 
Dinner for two was $45.
 
(Hoi Tin Garden Restaurant, 53-59 Praya Road, Lei Yue Mun.
Open seven days for lunch and dinner. 
No credit cards.)
 
TIN FAT
After hearing so much about Chiu Chow cooking, I had to taste it before leaving Hong Kong. 
In this country it is the least known of all Chinese food. 
Chiu Chow is in Guangdong Province, but the food is much gutsier than Cantonese. 
It is distinguished by its use of large quantitites of garlic and oil, and fish sauce in place of soy sauce.
The Chiu Chow restaurant I visited is nothing to look at. 
The menus are in Chinese. 
The staff speaks no English. 
Find someone who speaks Chinese to take you. 
It's worth it.
Sharks' fin soup was much richer and thicker than the Cantonese version and was served with dark vinegar that provided an appealing tang. 
Steamed lobster with Mandarin-flavored honey, stir-fried whelk with garlic, chili and black beans were very savory. 
Rice congee instead of steamed rice was served with the meal. 
Dinner for two was about $45. 
Menus do not show prices.
 
(Tin Fat Restaurant, 9 Des Voeux Road, West, Hong Kong; 5-481739. 
Open seven days for lunch and dinner. 
No credit cards.)
 
LUK YU
Everyone who has been to Hong Kong will tell you to go to Luk Yu for dim sum. 
People who live there will tell you not to bother. 
But because we were tourists we went.
We made sure, however, to go when the regulars were not around because we had been told that when the restaurant is busy no one pays attention to strangers.
Luk Yu, which opened in 1925, looks like an old English restaurant in the colonies with its overhead fans and highly varnished wood wainscotting, its wooden-backed booths, enormous stained-glass windows, marble floors and spitoons at each booth. 
There are glass tops on each white tablecloth. 
The present location is not the original.
This is a place where you are expected to wash out your cup and the tips of your chopsticks in a basin of tea, just as they still do in China for sanitary reasons. 
It is a place where the waiters shuffle along on slippered feet, and the women who carry the dim sum dishes sing out their wares as they pass.
Dim sum are not much different from what you will find in a good dim sum parlor in the United States: pork buns, sui mai filled with pork, har gao with shrimp, steamed beef rolls made with rice flour.
You don't have to speak Chinese to come here in the morning because you can motion to the women carrying the food and look at what is being served. 
In the afternoon, however, you must order from a menu, which is in Chinese without translations. 
Dim sum are $1 or less apiece.
 
(Luk Yu, 24 Stanley Street, Central Hong Kong; 5-232973.)
