
He had just plopped down on the grass, wrapped the line around his big toe and popped the cap off a cool bottle of Peking Five Star beer, when the fish hit.
Lao Li grabbed for his pole, but it was too late. 
The fish jerked him, toe first, into the lake. 
For six hours, the fish pulled him through the water, almost drowning him several times. 
It was dark before he crawled back on shore, wrapped the line around a big tree and began coaxing the fish to the bank.
James Sterba's describes fishing for sport in China; notes Chinese fish stories match scope of foreign anglers' tales
When he saw it, Lao Li almost fainted. 
It must have weighed 900 pounds. 
It was a grass carp so big, well, it was big enough to saddle up and ride home. 
When it saw Lao Li, the giant carp winked, as if to an old friend. 
Then, with a whoosh of its tail, the carp surged into the deep, tearing the tree out by its roots just before the line broke.
Of course, it's a fish story. 
It was told by a Mr. Wei, not Mr. Hemingway, in China, not America. 
Fishing is as honorable a way of enduring the 20th century in China as it is anywhere. 
And the ones that get away in China are as cunning as the ones that bellyflop off the hooks of fishermen in any lake or stream the world over.
Fishing is one of the few forms of recreation a man here can engage in once table tennis elbow sets in. 
While China maintains recreation centers for young people, workers generally live in cramped housing in crowded cities in which leisure time pursuits are limited to exercise in parks, comparing songbirds, playing cards or Chinese chess, talking with relatives or neighbors, or preparing for the next day's work.
Here in Peking, a day license to fish in the lake at the Summer Palace costs less than a dollar. 
The government grows fish there to sell to restaurants. 
It harvests them in late autumn with nets, but fishermen are allowed to catch them in the meantime and are charged less than the market price per pound for the fish they catch and choose to take home.
Legend has it, of course, that the big ones are too smart to be landed. 
There is said to be a bass out there so big that it eats water buffalo for breakfast. 
There are also said to be fish in that lake tagged by emperors of the Manchu dynasty.
A young computer scientist who fishes there regularly says that the way to catch grass carp is to use grass as bait. 
The problem with grass as bait is that it tends to come off the hook too easily. 
But one retired official in town secretly cultivates a kind of grass that stays on the hook. 
He is the envy of all the younger fishermen at the Summer Palace lake.
In America, that kind of grass is known as crabgrass. 
It has a solid, flat stem that stays on the hook. 
In short, it has body. 
For the Chinese bass that inhabit the lake and nearby reservoirs, crickets, worms and frogs are the preferred bait.
Chinese fishermen do not mount their fish. 
That is too expensive. 
Instead, they make fish prints. 
What they do is rinse their prized catches off in vinegar to remove the slime. 
Then they paint one side of the fish with ink and press the fish onto a piece of rice paper. 
The result looks like a Chinese painting of a fish. 
Then they wash off the fish and prepare it for the frying pan.
Peking's growing foreign community includes a substantial number of fishermen who find that they can make friends around the lake more easily than in working circumstances.
When Chinese and foreign anglers get together to compare gear, the conversation quickly evolves from techniques and locations into yarns about the big ones that got away. 
Any Chinese can match his foreign counterpart on this subject, fish for fish.
A young composer named Shao Lun, for example, swears that he caught a monster grass carp last summer, made a fish print of it for his collection, and then had second thoughts about eating the fish. 
It was still alive, and it seemed to look him in the eye. 
So he threw it back. 
Shao Lun insists that the fish was so grateful that it now allows him to catch it every Sunday.
