
Pertti Karppinen, the Finnish singles sculler who is a three-time Olympic champion, won his race in the consolation finals of Olympic rowing Friday. 
It placed him seventh in the competition.
The 35-year-old Karppinen was eliminated from medal consideration Thursday when he finished sixth and last in his heat of the semifinals.
He won the Olympic single-sculls gold at Monteal in 1976, at Moscow in 1980 and at Los Angeles in 1984.
Karppinen rowed past Iouri Iaanson of the Soviet Union to win the consolation finals by a half-second in the last 50 meters. 
His time, 7:34.37, was far off the pace of 7:03.25 for 2,000 meters turned in by the heat leader, East Germany's Thomas Lange, and Karppinen's repechage time of 7:14.91.
Karppinen said that rowing has been hard for him this year, but that he will continue to train for the world championships and the next Olympics if he can ''regain the gladness'' of sculling.
Karppinen finished last in a semifinal heat Thursday that was won by Peter-Michael Kolbe, a four-time world champion. 
Kolbe's time was 7 minutes 1.76 seconds.
The Finn's reclusive manner and the lack of a common language have killed most conversations in the past. 
But as Karppinen contemplated his future after the defeat, Kolbe dug deep into his weak Norwegian for words of consolation.
''I managed to get a message over in Norwegian,'' said Kolbe, also 35. 
''I felt very sorry for him finishing last. 
It really does feel like a tearful goodbye.''
In other the consolation finals, Kurt Bausback of San Diego, Calif., and Ed Ives of Hamilton, Mass., were ninth in men's coxless pair. 
Angie Herron of Alpena, Mich., Sherry Cassuto of Seattle, Wash., Jennie Marshall of Boston and Anne Martin of Cambridge, Mass., were ninth in women's quad sculls. 
Dan Lyons of Wayne, Pa.; Robert Espeseth of Philadelphia, and Jon Fish of Bellmore, L.I., the coxswain, were 11th in coxed pair.
 
Soccer
U.S. Eliminated By Soviet Union
TAEGU, South Korea, Sept. 
22 (AP) -The United States lost to the Soviet Union, 4-2, today and was eliminated from the tournament.
The Soviet Union and Argentina, which beat South Korea by 2-1, advanced from the Group C pool to the quarterfinals.
Lothar Osiander, the American coach, said he thought his team did quite well. 
The United States tied Argentina and South Korea before the loss today.
''We had weak moments here and there but we are getting better,'' he said. 
''We will rearrange our priorities and get ready for 1994.''
The World Cup will be played in the United States in 1994.
 
Water Polo
China Is Routed By U.S., 14-7
SEOUL, South Korea, Friday, Sept. 
23 (AP) - Terry Schroeder scored four goals and the American team overpowered China, 14-7, today.
''The Chinese aren't as strong physically as some of the other teams. 
We were able to move them around,'' said Schroeder, the team captain and a veteran of the silver medal-winning 1984 team.
He said the United States team was recovering emotionally from Thursday's loss to Spain.
The Americans (2-1) started slowly against the Chinese (0-3), showing flashes of brilliance and then allowing their opponents to score easy goals.
 
Wrestling
Hungarian Wins Gold by Default
SEOUL, South Korea, Sept. 
22 (AP) -The Soviet Union collected four gold medals in the five-day Greco-Roman tournament, which ended today.
Italy, Bulgaria, Norway, South Korea, Poland and Hungary each earned one gold. 
The United States had one bronze.
In the final matches at Sang Mu Gymnasium, Andras Sike of Hungary won the gold when Stoyan Balov of Bulgaria withdrew because of an injury with 2:22 remaining in the second period in the 126-pound class.
Balov took the silver. 
Charalambos Holidis of Greece won the bronze, beating Yang Changling of China, 6-1.
Levon Djoulfalakian of the Soviet Union led Kim Sung Moon of South Korea, 8-1, in the first period and scored a 9-3 triumph for the gold medal in the 150-pound class.
''I am glad to capture the gold medal as every athlete competing in the Olympics tried his best for the medal,'' Djoulfalakian said, Kim earned the silver. 
The bronze went to Tapio Sipila of Finland, who beat Petrica Carare of Rumania, 7-4.
The Soviet Union took the day's second gold when Mikhail Mamiachvili, unleashing quick and powerful throw techniques, easily beat Tibor Komaromi of Hungary, 10-1, in the 181-pound class. 
Komaromi won the silver. 
In the day's most fiercely fought match, Kim Sang Kyu of South Korea overcame a 0-5 first-period deficit to win 6-5 and earn the bronze.
Aleksandr Kareline took the the Soviet Union's fourth gold, the third of the day, when he defeated a Bulgarian, Ranguel Guerovski, 5-3, in the 286-pound class. 
Ranguel took a 3-0 lead with a quick throw and led by 3-2 after the first period.
Tomas Johansson of Sweden took the bronze with a 3-0 victory over Hassan Elhadad of Egypt.
 
Cycling
American Qualifies In Match Sprint
SEOUL, South Korea, Sept. 
22 (AP) -Connie Paraskevin-Young would just as soon not carry the hopes of the United States team on her shoulders. 
The expectations she has for herself are heavy enough.
The three-time world champion moved a step closer to earning a medal when she qualified tonight for the semifinals of the match sprint.
Standing between her and a shot at the gold is the 1987 world champion, Erika Salumiaee of the Soviet Union.
Paraskevin-Young and Salumiaee have been rivals for a long time but they have not faced each other since the world championships in 1986. 
She lost to Salumiaee, 2-0, in a two-of-three semifinal match.
Christa Rothenburger-Luding of East Germany, is in the running for the Olympic gold. 
The American lost to her, 2-0, in the world meet last year.
 
Tennis
Edberg and Mecir Advance in Singles
SEOUL, South Korea, Sept. 
22 (AP) -Stefan Edberg of Sweden and Miloslav Mecir of Czechoslovakia advanced to the third round today, edging closer to a repeat of their Wimbledon semifinal 10 weeks ago.
Edberg, the men's favorite in the first Olympic medal competition in tennis since 1924, swept Augustin Moreno of Mexico, 6-2, 7-6, 6-0. 
Mecir took four sets to beat Jeremy Bates of Great Britain, 6-3, 4-6, 6-1, 6-4.
Moreno took the Swede to a tiebreaker in the second set, but Edberg won it, 7-2, and blazed his way through the third set.
Mecir was his usual mixture of waywardness and brilliance against Bates, dropping the second set and almost letting the Briton back into the match in the fourth after taking a 4-1 lead.
 
Equestrian
New Zealander Wins 3-Day Event
SEOUL, South Korea, Sept. 
22 (Reuters) - Mark Todd of New Zealand retained his Olympic three-day event equestrian title today and said he would like to win a third Olympic gold.
He also announced that his 16-year-old mount, Charisma, would be retired.
Todd took a comfortable lead into the final round, jumping, and was able to afford 5 penalty points for dislodging a pole in the first jump of the triple, finishing with 42.60 points.
Ian Stark of Great Britain, riding Sir Wattie, finished with 52.80, capturing the silver. 
His teammate, Virginia Leng, won the bronze.
Leng was second going into the jumping and came 0.35 of a point from dropping out of the medals when she knocked down two fences. 
She had 62 points.
West Germany took the gold medal in the team event with 225.95 points, ahead of Britain with 256.80 and New Zealand with 271.20.
