
The Encyclopaedia Britannica said today that its new Chinese version preserved the reference work's objectivity despite disputes over Stalin, Taiwan and the Korean War.
The 10-volume edition, a joint project of Encyclopaedia Britannica and the state-run Encyclopedia of China, is going on sale in China this month.
''Everybody started out from different sides of the ideological fence, and we were able to find a common ground,'' Frank B. Gibney, vice chairman of Encyclopaedia Britannica Inc., said at a news conference today. 
''We don't feel the Encyclopaedia Britannica has been compromised at all.''
Earlier, the company's chairman, Robert Guinn, met with Hu Yaobang, the Communist Party General Secretary, at the Great Hall of the People. 
Mr. Hu praised the publishers of the two countries, saying the encyclopedia was a ''very good thing,'' the official New China News Agency reported. 
Mr. Hu gave Mr. Guinn an autographed copy of the encyclopedia.
Some 500 Chinese scholars worked with the Encyclopaedia Britannica staff to compile the encyclopedia, Mr. Gibney said. 
The project took six years.
Work began after Deng Xiaoping, the Chinese leader, heard about an encyclopedia from a smaller country and lamented that China did not have its own, Mr. Gibney said.
 
'The Inevitable Problems'
Encyclopedia of China was producing a 75-volume encyclopedia, and Encyclopaedia Britannica suggested its encyclopedia be published in Chinese as an interim measure, he said.
''To satisfy the inevitable problems of differences of opinion, we had an editorial review board'' of Americans and Chinese who discussed areas of controversy, he said.
For the encyclopedia, almost 2,500 new articles were written by Chinese scholars. 
Many adjectives were deleted from the articles to make them objective, Mr. Gibney said.
One difference arose over the Korean War, he said. 
The Chinese insisted that South Korea started the war, and the Americans maintained it was begun by North Korea. 
The experts agreed on an entry that reports on fighting, but does not address the question of who started the conflict, Mr. Gibney said.
He said the only disagreement that was not resolved concerned Stalin. 
An article about the Soviet leader's approach to Communism and his political and economic policies was cut, leaving only a bare biographical sketch.
 
Assessment of Mao
One factor in the Soviet-Chinese split in the late 1950s was disagreement over Stalin's role as an international Communist leader, especially as compared with Mao Zedong.
In the encyclopedia, Mao is portrayed as a great leader who made serious mistakes, a version that conforms with China's current political line.
In the encyclopedia, Taiwan, which is led by the Nationalist Government that fled China after losing the civil war to the Communists, is described as a Chinese province under separate administration by the Nationalists.
Both the Nationalists and Communists claim authority over all of China, including Taiwan.
Because the Chinese experts had access to Communist Party archives, their work was more complete than past Encyclopaedia Britannica entries on China. 
Some of the work has been incorporated into the English version of the encyclopedia, company officials said.
