
MORE than half a century ago and two decades before he became India's first Prime Minister, Jawaharlal Nehru had a dream. 
Friendship between China and India, he told a conference of anti-colonial parties in 1927, would form the core of a new pan-Asianism, a base on which to build a new order in the East.
But long before the dream died on a snowy Himalayan battlefield in 1962 in a short, sharp border war, Nehru and Mao Zedong had chosen separate roads. 
Nehru and Mohandas K. Gandhi took the difficult democratic path, robbing Indian Communists of their dream of capturing the independence movement, as Ho Chi Minh had done in Vietnam. 
Mao, on the other hand, was crafting a rigid brand of Marxism. 
Led in these separate directions, Asia's two giants strayed apart, and then the 1962 border war ended the era of amity with finality.
This week when Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi, Nehru's grandson, makes a trip to China - the first visit by an Indian Prime Minister in 34 years - no one in India expects a revival of Nehru's heady dreams of brotherhood. 
But there are cautious hopes that progress can be made on the still-unresolved border dispute and that cultural ties and improved air links will be initiated. 
More than anything, however, Indian officials and intellectuals want a better atmosphere and more contact to follow Mr. Gandhi's visit to Beijing, Shanghai and Xian.
India is tiptoeing toward East Asia, uncertain what its relationship should be with the world's most rapidly growing economies, or with China in transition. 
In New Delhi - unlike other Asian capitals, Moscow or Washington - there is little fascination with the Pacific Century. 
There is, instead, a continuing preoccupation with the West.
 
Appearing Too Friendly
''Despite Nehru's romanticism for Asia, and China in particular, our tradition in political terms has been Western,'' said S. Nihal Singh, an author and columnist. 
Mr. Singh added that Prime Minister Gandhi was making the trip to Beijing against the wishes of some of his advisers, and amid fears in his own party that no Indian leader can yet afford to appear too friendly to the Chinese.
''The feeling is still very strong in this country that we got a beating at the hands of the Chinese in 1962,'' said Nikhil Chakravartty, editor of the left-wing magazine Mainstream. 
He said that the Government has not done enough to educate Indians about the need for give and take in settling the border dispute. 
Instead, Mr. Gandhi is pushed by his own supporters into promising not to give away ''one square mile'' of Indian territory. 
The two border areas in question, in mountain terrain, are nearly impossible to demarcate accurately in any case, Indian scholars say. 
Both countries may have to settle for a rational compromise based on who is in control of what parts of ground.
When the Soviet leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, was in New Delhi last month, he pointedly remarked on several occasions that there was no problem in Indian-Soviet relations, even though no one had suggested publicly that there was. 
Mr. Gorbachev's comments were interpreted here as an assurance that Moscow's planned rapprochement with China, possibly involving a Sino-Soviet summit next year, would not affect the Moscow-Delhi link. 
But Mr. Gorbachev also made it clear that he would welcome warmer Indian-Chinese ties.
''If Gorbachev makes up to China,'' Mr. Chakravartty said, ''this is an important signal to India not to let itself be left out. 
India could be the only country in this part of the world not to have better relations with the Chinese.''
 
Comparing Two Giants
An Indian focus on China invites comparisons between the two Asian giants, the world's most populous nations: China with a billion people and India with 800 million.
In the days of Communist repression and the Cultural Revolution, India could feel more secure in the rightness of its chosen path. 
A free people and a free press have thrived here. 
A mixed economy has opened avenues to development policies of the left and right. 
Poverty and overpopulation were the curse and preoccupation of both nations.
But China has changed and in recent years it can point to many achievements - in agricultural development, rural industry, medical care and, despite criticism of Beijing's methods, population control. 
Now a Chinese citizen is healthier, lives longer and has access to as many or more consumer goods than does the average Indian. 
China is also working hard to integrate itself into the booming East Asian economies.
Lately, India has been close to Vietnam and almost alone outside the Soviet bloc in recognizing the Vietnamese-backed Government in Cambodia - a distinction that has cost it friends in the region but one that has given it a limited interest in Southeast Asian affairs.
Southeast Asia will be discussed on Mr. Gandhi's trip, Indian officials say, especially the problem of Cambodia, and how to get Vietnam's troops to leave. 
But will that whet India's appetite for more contact with the East?
''Not really,'' Mr. Singh said. 
''India has always been ambivalent to Southeast Asia.''
A more active interest in Southeast Asia, many Indians believe, can come only when India feels more comfortable with China - a relationship that will now have to be rebuilt step by step.
 
A HISTORY OF CONFRONTATION
In 1962, a dispute over a road built by the Chinese on territory claimed by India and a set of border clashes led Chinese to attack. 
Chinese routed the Indians in Arunachal Pradesh and seized territory in Ladakh. 
After a month of fighting, China declared a unilateral cease-fire.
Fighting broke out between Indian and Chinese troops in 1967 at the Nathu La Pass on the Sikkim-Tibet border. 
Two years later, Indians accused Chinese of firing on patrol in Lip Lekh.
In 1986, India asserted that Chinese troops entered valley of Sumdorong Chu in Arunachal Pradesh, where Indian intelligence post had been set up earlier without Chinese objections. 
Tens of thousands of Chinese and Indian troops confronted each other at height of crisis, which was defused after diplomatic contacts.
