
AS the outlines of an international settlement for Cambodia start to become clear, accelerated by the Chinese-Soviet talks last week in Moscow, there is suddenly a swell of anguished murmuring about the Khmer Rouge.
Having used their years in power to carry out barbarities and wholesale killings, the Khmer Rouge have been resuscitated by China with the assistance of the non-Communist countries of Southeast Asia and the acquiescence, at the very least, of the United States. 
Preoccupied elsewhere, Washington has been content to follow the Asian nations' lead.
When the aim was to punish the Vietnamese for their 1978 occupation of Cambodia, to tie them down and get them to withdraw, Pol Pot's soldiers were a convenient and efficient instrument. 
But now that the ideal seems close to reality - the Vietnamese are promising to pull out by March 1990 - this cat's-paw has, as in some grim fairy tale of moral retribution, put on gristle and flesh and become a tiger.
Americans estimate Khmer Rouge strength at between 28,000 and 60,000 hardened soldiers, lavishly equipped by China - the most powerful part of the Cambodian resistance, dwarfing the 16,000 of Prince Norodom Sihanouk and the 9,000 to 11,000 of the Khmer People's National Liberation Front of Son Sann. 
Appealing to nationalism, they can say they have fought most of the battle against the invader.
But they now spend almost as much time fighting their putative coalition partners as they do fighting the Vietnamese-backed Government of Hun Sen, repeating a pattern that preceded their defeat of an American-backed Government in 1975. 
The result then was mass murder and the deaths of an estimated 1.5 million, or 20 percent of the population.
So suddenly a lot of analysis in Washington and elsewhere is being based on a triumph of hope over experience - about how the Khmer Rouge may not be so strong or dedicated after all; about how much progress the non-Communist resistance has been making; about how nicely they will mesh with the soldiers of Mr. Hun Sen; about how Prince Sihanouk has matured and deepened and found his hour at last.
Ten years ago, the Khmer Rouge crumbled in the face of Vietnam's invasion. 
Most of the cadres fled toward Thailand, many trying to pass as refugees, in part to avoid being slain by those they had ruled. 
China, faced with the crushing of an ally by a Soviet-backed Vietnam, and Thailand, suddenly faced with Vietnamese troops on its border, refused to accept Hanoi's victory. 
With the help of the Association of South East Asian Nations, Beijing and Bangkok supported the Khmer Rouge as Cambodia's legal government and revived them with arms, food and cash as the best way to hound the Vietnamese.
 
A Decent Interval?
Now that the Vietnamese say they will leave, American policy is to work to keep the Khmer Rouge from returning to sole power. 
But senior officials say there is no clear or detailed idea of how to do it. 
Some Western and Asian diplomats believe the Chinese formula for a settlement - a four-party government and army, headed by Prince Sihanouk and made up of equal parts of his forces, Son Sann's, the current Government's and Pol Pot's - will only provide a decent interval before a collapse into a renewed civil war pitting the Khmer Rouge against the rest.
 
'A Sad Denouement'
A senior Western diplomat here described the Cambodia problem as an anachronism, the residue of a 10-year-old squabble among powers that are themselves changing rapidly. 
In the current talks, he said, ''one can see the outline of how this can be resolved as an international problem, and relations can be normalized all around'' among the outside powers. 
But whether such an agreement would prevent a new bloodletting in Cambodia is another question. 
''It could drag on and be a very bloody struggle, but a local one, like Africa,'' he said, in which the major powers are uninvolved and uninterested.
Does the world send 300,000 Cambodians in camps along the Thai border back home to that?
''That would be a sad denouement,'' the diplomat added. 
''At worst, there could be a complete return to power by the Khmer Rouge.''
There seems a parallel to the 1930's, when the European democracies decided to do business with Hitler despite what they knew or had read in his autobiography, because reasons of state seemed to demand it and because of a conviction that the realities of power would civilize or temper him. 
That was an error the world promised never to make again. 
In the case of the Khmer Rouge, this argument goes, the moral questions are even sharper, for there is the evidence of the killing fields, not just their promise.
In Bangkok in November, Senator Bob Dole, the minority leader, illustrated the quandary. 
Asked if the United States had done enough to beef up the non-Communist forces, he said a recent meeting between President Reagan and Prince Sihanouk ''again demonstrated our commitment.''
He added that he thinks American officials feel ''that the Khmer Rouge has forfeited any right because of the genocide they perpetrated on their own people.''
But why is it American policy to include the Khmer Rouge in a coalition government?
Could he talk about the contrast between historical experience and national interest?
The Senator sighed. 
''You have to recognize the fact that the Khmer Rouge are one of the four,'' he said. 
''But I don't believe, based on the conversations we've had, that they're going to emerge as the rallying point for the Cambodians.''
Senator Arlen Specter, a Pennsylvania Republican also on the trip, spelled out the contradictions. 
''To the extent there can be a force to compete with the Khmer Rouge we want to accomplish that objective,'' he said. 
''And if it were within our power to eliminate the Khmer Rouge we would certainly do that, but that's just not a reality. 
Our concern is that they will emerge as the dominant force, and if that were to happen, it would be very contrary to our ideas of human rights. 
So our efforts are to minimize their influence as much as possible.''
Yet Washington has done rather little, and that rather lately, to support the non-Khmer Rouge resistance. 
A senior American official said that for a long time he didn't believe there was a Vietnam syndrome, but that he had recently changed his mind. 
It is not simply reluctance to prosecute a sustained undeclared war, he said. 
It is an aversion to Indochina itself, a belief that any United States involvement there spells only trouble. 
Another Western diplomat said: ''Southeast Asia has not been a focus of concern among top-ranking U.S. officials for a very long time. 
I don't know what they imagined was going on here.''
