
The United States men's volleyball team kept its unbeaten string intact against Japan today as the Americans opened their quest for a second consecutive Olympic title.
The United States pulled away after a slow start for an easy 15-13, 15-2, 15-2 victory, the 38th consecutive victory over Japan since 1983, and the 28th in succession over that country since Marv Dunphy took over as coach in mid-1985.
''Streaks are made to be broken, but we didn't let it happen today,'' said the captain, Karch Kiraly, who ignited the team with his brilliant all-around play.
''Once we got over the jitters and setled down and won that first game,'' Kiraly said, ''they knew they were in for their 38th loss.''
The Japanese squad took leads of 4-0 and 10-6 in the first game, while the Americans had trouble adjusting to the setter Ricci Luyties, substituting for the injured Jeff Stork.
But the United States team fought back, taking the lead at 13-12 on a high-flying spike by Steve Timmons. 
A kill by Timmons ended the game 3 points later.
''I was kind of surprised we were as nervous as we were in the first game,'' Kiraly said. 
''After that, we played a lot better and the Japanese were visibly down. 
Once they didn't get the first game, it really let the air out of their sails.''
The Americans then went on to overpower Japan with a front line anchored by Craig Buck, a 6-foot-8-inch middle blocker. 
The Japanese defense wilted under the onslaught of spikes by Kiraly and Timmons.
On Monday, the United Staes team will face the Netherlands, which upset France, 15-8, 7-15, 15-11, 15-7, on Saturday.
In the only other game Saturday night, Sweden rallied to beat South Korea, 10-15, 5-15, 15-12, 17-15, 15-4.
 
Boxing
 
Johnson Wins 112-Pound Bout
SEOUL, South Korea, Sept. 
18 (AP) - Arthur Johnson of the United States defeated Andrea Mannai of Italy today in a 112-pound bout.
''I'm very happy to have it under my belt,'' said Johnson, of Minneapolis, the first American boxer to see action. 
''I wanted to get the first win for the team.''
With the majority of the crowd at the 7,500-seat Chamshil Students Gymnasium rooting against him, Johnson boxed his way to a 5-0 decision over Mannai in the three-round bout.
The 22-year-old Johnson, who was caught by a good left hook and backed up by a couple of flurries in the second round, was very effective with his left jab in the third round and also scored several hard head shots late in the round.
Johnson's second-round opponent in the 440-boxer, 428-bout tournament will be Bishnubahadur Singh of Nepal on Wednesday. 
Singh scored a 5-0 verdict over Sixto Vera Espenola of Paraguay.
In another of 12 112-pound bouts on the morning card, Kim Kwang-sun of South Korea, the gold medal favorite, stopped Tyeyen-oidov Tserennyam of Mongolia.
Kim forced the Mongolian to take two standing 8-counts with barrages of head punches in the second round. 
The bout was stopped when Kim sent Tserennyam reeling with a right to the head.
 
Taekwondo
 
South Korean Is the Winner
SEOUL, South Korea, Sept. 
17 (AP) - The first victory of the Summer Olympics went to a South Korean woman in the demonstration sport of taekwondo.
Choo Nan Yool outpointed Maria Angela Naranjo of Spain, 3 to 0.5, today to win the women's flyweight division.
Choo outpointed her three opponents by 6 to 0.5. 
Naranjo placed second and Pai Yun-yao of Taiwan and Mayumi Pejo of Binghamton, N.Y., tied for third.
 
Shooting
 
Soviets Win Gold, Bronze
SEOUL, South Korea, Sept. 
18 (AP) -Irina Chilova of the Soviet Union won the Games' first medal event, the women's air rifle today. 
Chilova had 498.5 points after 10 shots. 
Silvia Sperber of West Germany took the silver medal with 497.5 points, and Anna Maloukhina of the Soviet Union won the bronze with 495.8 points.
Launi Meili of Colorado Springs, Colo., was sixth with 493.3 points.
 
Cycling
 
East Germany Takes Trial
SEOUL, South Korea, Sept. 
18 (AP) - East Germany won the 100-kilometer team trial today.
Poland won the silver medal and Sweden the bronze.
 
Soccer
 
West Germany Tops China
SEOUL, South Korea, Sept. 
17 (AP) -West Germany took advantage of an inexperienced Chinese soccer team, and Italy scored four quick goals against Guatemala as the European teams posted first-round victories today.
In other matches on the opening day of the Summer Games, Tunisia played Sweden to a 2-2 draw and Zambia held on for a 2-2 tie with Iraq.
Hennes Loehr, the West German coach, took a tired team into the match against China in Pusan. 
Loehr's team finished league play on Tuesday and then departed Thursday for the long flight to South Korea.
''Taking everything into account, we played well and should be pleased with the result,'' Loehr said after the West Germans won, 3-0. 
''We wanted a fast breakthrough early in the match, which we got, and from then on we controlled the match. 
That was our main tactic.''
The breakthrough came in the 30th minute, when a midfielder, Wolfram Wuttke, capitalized on a defensive error by the Chinese side. 
He took a deep pass from Roland Grahammer and kicked a low curling shot out of reach of the goalie, Zhang Kuikang.
China rarely threatened after that in the Group A contest. 
This is the first time China has qualified for Olympic soccer competition.
The West Germans, led by veterans from the country's 1984 Olympic team, got two goals from a forward, Frank Mill, one capping a powerful run on the right in the 61st minute. 
The other came on a last-minute tap into the net off a pass from Jurgen Klinsmann, who is also a rising star on West Germany's regular national squad.
In the other Group A game at Taegu, Tunisia jumped to a surprising edge over favored Sweden and ultimately held for a 2-2 draw.
Tarek Dhiab put the North Africans ahead in the 15th minute, and Nabil Maaloul made the score 2-0 on a penalty kick in the 43d.
Sweden stormed back with two goals just before halftime. 
Jonas Thern connected in the 44th minute, and Jan Hellstrom evened the score a minute later.
In Kwangju, Ciro Ferraro scored in the 12th and 38th minutes to lead Italy to a 5-2 victory over Guatemala in Group B. Italy's other goals came from Andrea Carnevale in the 2nd minute, Pietro Paolo Virdis in the 34th and Stefano Desiderio in the 75th.
Carlos Castaneda scored for Guatemala in the 7th minute and Adan Paniagua added another goal in the 79th.
Iraq's hopes of advancing dimmed when it was held to a 2-2 draw by Zambia in the other Group B contest, in Taejon.
Iraq's Ahmed Radhi Amish opened the scoring with a goal in the 36th minute off a penalty kick.
Zambia tied the score on a goal by Stone Nyirenda in the 44th minute and went ahead in the 66th minute with a goal by Kalusha Bwalya. 
Karim M. Alawi saved Iraq from defeat with a 71st-minute strike.
Each team plays three matches in the first round, which consists of four groups with four countries each. 
The top two teams from each division advance to the quarterfinals.
