
TIM POLLAK and Alain de Pouzilhac represent the new breed of international ad executives.
Mr. Pollack is president and chief executive, and Mr. de Pouzilhac chairman worldwide, of HDM, a joint-venture agency with about $1.4 billion in billings and 53 offices in 23 countries in Europe, North America and Asia. 
The third man in their troika is Shinzo Ueno, senior executive vice president in Tokyo.
Mr. Pollak and Mr. de Pouzilhac were in New York yesterday for meeting after meeting - and even a meeting to plan a meeting of 56 managers later this month in Beijing. 
For Mr. Pollak, the trip will be his fifth to Asia this year.
The reasons for these meetings are not always major ones, perhaps just the celebration of a refurbished office that presents a good occasion to show the flag.
Indeed, Mr. Pollak said he had just returned from Beijing, where HDM is the only multinational full-service advertising agency.
''We're a new kind of venture and China is a new kind of adventure,'' he said. 
''Having an office in China is absolutely consistent with what HDM is all about.''
Mr. de Pouzilhac added: ''China is so big as a market you can't be important in that area without an office there. 
It's proof that we are a worldwide company.''
What brought Mr. Pollak to China most recently was to install Candy Wong as the new general manager. 
Ms. Wong, of Cedar Rapids, Iowa, is a Chinese-American who formerly worked for Young & Rubicam, the American partner in the HDM joint venture. 
Her staff of 18 is made up of one Singapore resident of Chinese descent and 17 Chinese.
The other two partner agencies in HDM are Eurocom, based in Paris, and Dentsu, in Tokyo. 
Like Y.&R., they are the biggest agencies in their main areas of operation.
HDM was formed last July by combining two joint ventures of Y.&R., one with the French and one with the Japanese. 
There were no duplicate offices except in Los Angeles, where they were merged. 
And if there were a place to expect friction to develop and productivity to decline, it would probably be this newly merged office.
Instead, the opposite happened. 
Two offices that had previously not experienced growth have since their merger grown 20 percent.
Mr. Pollak and Mr. de Pouzilhac had never met until after the merger. 
But they had several things in common besides their age. 
(Both are now 42 years old.) Both began their advertising careers with Doyle Dane Bernbach, one in New York, the other in Paris. 
They find an appreciation of creative work a common bond.
Mr. de Pouzilhac talked yesterday about the creative scene in Europe, where, he noted, over the last three years the copywriter has been replaced by the art director as the dominant creative force.
The reasons are simple enough. 
Satellite television, which crosses national borders, and language barriers now require advertising that emphasizes the visual rather than the vocal. 
Mr. de Pouzilhac said that many TV commercials were now being planned with voice-overs replacing dialogue, so that different languages could easily be dubbed in. 
The dubbing is done locally after the satellite transmission is received.
Europe is awaiting 1992, when the tariff barriers are scheduled to fall and, with few exceptions, the Continent is to become one big market. 
It will be a market with more than 330 million people and media spending is expected to boom in broadcasting, where advertising has been limited in a number of countries.
''Clients feel that if they're not in a number of countries by then, they'll be dead,'' Mr. de Pouzilhac said.
