
For more than five years, at a pace that has astonished people who knew Mao Zedong's China, the makers of the country's ''second revolution'' have proceeded to dismantle the rigid system imposed by Mao. 
Deng Xiaoping has established the elements of a society that takes man largely as is, instead of trying to remold him. 
Energies have been liberated that have placed one of the world's poorest nations on a fast track toward modernity.
In attempting this, the 80-year-old Mr. Deng has confronted complexities that would baffle a lesser politician. 
Not least has been the need to strike a balance between what he calls ''liveliness'' - freedom, in Western parlance - and social order. 
After 2,000 years of tight social and political constraints, any relaxation inevitably carries the risk of incipient chaos as people adjust to the idea of a society that encourages individual initiative.
Article on riot in Peking following China's elimination from World Cup soccer play by Hong Kong and concern it has raised about Deng Xiaoping policy of increasing personal freedom in China; photo (M)
Last week, the difficulty of maintaining that balance was clearly demonstrated. 
The occasion was a soccer match between China and Hong Kong, played at the 80,000-seat Workers' Stadium in Peking. 
A surliness grew in the crowd as Hong Kong won, 2 to 1, eliminating China from the 1986 World Cup playoffs in Mexico. 
After the final whistle blew, the visiting team was pelted with garbage and soda bottles and thousands of discontented fans took to the streets in an orgy of vandalism and menace.
Outside the stadium, buses were halted and taxis overturned. 
At least 30 policemen were injured; 127 rioters were arrested. 
But unlike soccer riots in Europe, South America and Africa, there was a distinctive element to this one: For an hour, any foreigner within reach of the mob was liable to assault.
Without regard to nationality, Russian, Canadian, Japanese and Rumanian passers-by were halted and their vehicles were pounded with rocks. 
Many were spat upon by tormentors who chanted ''Foreigners!
Foreigners!''
The Government reacted swiftly, and with rare candor. 
Newspapers, including the People's Daily, the principal Communist Party organ, ran full reports on the mayhem. 
Ambassadors who raised the matter at the Foreign Ministry received apologies. 
At an emergency meeting of the Peking party apparatus, officials described the rioters as ''ignorant and barbaric'' people who had brought shame on the country. 
''Due punishment'' was promised, for some at public trials.
But the official reaction went farther, indicating deep political resonance. 
Party officials were quoted as saying that the riot displayed ''serious weakness in the party's ideological work and in the work of educating people, particularly young people, in the necessity of abiding by the law.''
Mr. Deng kept silent, at least in public, but there was little doubt that he would insist on exemplary punishments, if only to protect the wider policy of relaxation. 
The Chinese leader has made it plain that he understands the link between the economic freedoms he has promoted and the broader social and even political flexibility that people demand as their prosperity increases. 
Already, the Chinese have far greater leeway in the conduct of their private lives and in the discussion of public policy than they ever had under Mao. 
At the same time, Mr. Deng has insisted that the ''stabilityI'' that enhances economic progress will remain primary, and that any ''liveliness'' that threatens progress will be suppressed.
In these terms, he explained the harsh retribution meted out in 1979 and 1980 to leaders of the ''democracy wall'' protests in Peking, the most prominent of whom, Wei Jingsheng, is serving a 15-year jail term. 
In Mr. Deng's view, the criticisms posted on the wall brought into question the party's right to rule, and thus raised the specter of chaos.
By contrast, when several hundred people known as ''re-settled youths'' occupied the steps of the Peking party headquarters last month, seeking the intervention of ''Comrade Xiaoping'' in a bid to regain the right to live in Peking, the protest was allowed to continue for a week, and ended in mediation and concessions.
The differing responses can in some respects be traced to the conclusions Mr. Deng drew while he was in political purgatory during the Cultural Revolution. 
Forced to wait on tables and run a lathe, he saw at first hand the unworkability of a system in which party doctrine and state decrees excluded individual thinking. 
But the mob frenzy he witnessed during the Maoist upheaval left him profoundly hesitant to relax social controls too rapidly. 
In the soccer riot, he may have seen evidence that his policies have already gone too far. 
Even Westerners are shocked by their first encounters with black-market money-changers, street-corner hooligans and other ''bad elements'' who have sprung up in the more benign climate of recent years.
Opponents of Deng policies have long argued that ''opening to the world'' in terms of investment and trade will inevitably expose the country to the more noxious aspects of Western culture. 
The soccer violence provided them with fresh grounds for dissent.
If the riot offered other material for reflection, it lay in the suddenness with which mass frustration can be turned against foreigners. 
This, too, seemed likely to provide fresh worries for Mr. Deng, who has labored hard to convince the West that the xenophobia that Maoist zealots stirred so viciously during the Cultural Revolution is a spent force.
Westerners who live in China or visit here would generally agree that in good times the Chinese are as pleasant a people to live among as any. 
But the mob outside the Workers' Stadium was a reminder of less benign passions that still persist.
