
THE TSAI FUNG DANCE COMPANY was founded in 1982 with the aim of expressing Chinese tradition in modern dance and music. 
Some of the dances performed by the company on April 25 at Pace College's Schimmel Center had the look of uneasy hybrids. 
But there was also authentic theater, much of which tended to occur when Jiang Qi was on the stage.
A former member of China's Central Song and Dance Company who is now dancing with the Joffrey II, Mr. Jiang moves with the kind of magnetic exuberance and strong, clear focus that one would expect from a dancer who has performed in such new Chinese dance operas as ''The Red Detachment of Women'' and ''The White-Haired Girl.''
But the neatness of his dancing and the quietness of his charm insured that the occasional acrobatics in Mr. Jiang's ''Yellow River'' never looked like audience-pleasing tricks. 
Instead, the solo impressively evoked the river in all its pounding grandeur and playfulness, as well as depicting the swimmers who live along its banks, as it was intended to do. 
Named after the waterway considered the cradle of Chinese civilization and the symbol of the nation, ''Yellow River'' is set to Ying Chong-Jong's comparably refined Yellow River Concerto.
Based on the legend of the origins of face-painting in the Peking Opera, Mai Mei-Jiun's ''Double Image'' tells the story of a king who is so handsome that he has to wear a ferocious mask when he goes to war. 
Miss Mai, artistic director of the company, works in bold, strong images that can be seen as vibrant, stylized abstractions and traditional narrative elements.
Lu Yu was superb as Lan Ling, the handsome king, projecting smiling serenity and a ritual fierceness. 
The cast was completed by Xue Wei-Xin, as his warrior spirit, David Foresman and Wayne Williams as his soldiers, and Tobi Arrington, Naoko Katakami, Dyane Neiman and Susan Richardson as his enemies. 
''Double Image'' is set to a score by Tan Dun.
Miss Mai's ''Awakening'' was a similar piece of narrative, though it had good performances from Miss Katakami, Mr. Lu and, in particular, Mr. Jiang. The program was completed by Miss Mai's ''The Cicada Speaks,'' set to an evocative score by William Bolcom, and ''Ocean Series,'' by Mr. Xue, the company's resident choreographer. 
Unlike ''Yellow River'' and ''Double Image,'' these interminable impressionistic group works seemed to have been choreographed out of a compulsion to create rather than to express.
