
Guan Guangmei, former peasant and former meat counter clerk, is a ''phenomenon'' to her fellow Chinese.
The determined 37-year-old woman has captivated the imagination of theorists of economic reform, infuriated defenders of Communist orthodoxy and become one of the most talked-about people in China - all because she succeeded in an enterprise where many had failed.
Over the last two years, Miss Guan, a member of the Communist Party, has leased eight bankrupt or financially shaky grocery stores from the city government here and transformed them into flourishing, profitable operations. 
Her markets now account for one-third of the non-staple food sales and one-half of all profits produced by food stores in this city of 1.4 million people in northeastern China.
 
'This Is Reform'
On the ground floor of the Dongming Shangchang, or Eastern Brightness Store, Miss Guan, efficient and brusque in a sober gray polyester pantsuit, drew the tips of her fingers along a gleaming white tile counter. 
Her barely perceptible nod of approval stirred smiles from the white-hatted women behind the counter, which was stacked with pyramids of cellophane-wrapped candies and jars of preserved apples and apricots.
''This is reform,'' Miss Guan said flatly. 
''I have the power to run this enterprise.''
For several weeks, newspapers around the country have broadcast the exploits of Miss Guan almost in storybook fashion. 
''Inside the Guan Guangmei phenomenon,'' promised a headline on page 1 of a national newspaper. 
Boasted another, ''Benxi produces Guan Guangmei!''
In the prestigious and influential Economic Daily, a two-week debate of sorts has raged over whether her success and methods are truly ''socialist'' or are, in fact, blatantly ''capitalist.''
 
A Rare Debate on Issues
And although anonymous commentators, editorialists and letter writers who support Miss Guan heavily outnumber her detractors, the extended discussion of the ''Guan Guangmei phenomenon'' is a rare instance of public exchange over issues that are at the very core of China's modernization effort. 
To be sure, the degree of official and public support for Miss Guan suggests strongly that her example is being used not only to champion the need for economic reform but also as a way of smoking out the ideological opposition.
Benxi's Communist Party branch has held a series of meetings over the last year to assess Miss Guan's endeavors. 
Her critics within the party, according to The Economic Daily, have attacked her for a variety of sins.
One party member who has worked for a quarter of a century in one of the stores now leased by Miss Guan accused her of ''disliking the supervision of the party and for being good at dancing.''
Another party member contended that Miss Guan ''plays down the role of political education,'' while a third charged: ''The leasing system of Guan Guangmei takes advantage of the situation to benefit herself. 
It has the character of exploitation.''
 
China's Current Dilemma
These criticisms, even the denigration of her ballroom talents, are fundamental to China's current dilemma: how to invigorate an economy that is resisting virtually all stimuli under a blanket of bureaucratic incompetence and corruption, while preserving a necessary patina of socialist ideology. 
That Miss Guan dances well raises the question of whether she is polluted with bourgeois values just as much as her high salary may imply she is a capitalist.
''They're not used to these things, so they oppose us,'' said Miss Guan of her critics. 
''Some workers are used to administration from above and the iron rice bowl. 
They think socialism means everyone should have rice to eat, whether they work or not. 
This kind of thinking is a real problem.''
Miss Guan, whose short black hair is beginning to show the first strands of gray, grew up in a rural area near this grimy town driven by steel mills. 
After graduating from high school in 1968 in the midst of the political hysteria of the Cultural Revolution, she worked on a commune near her home where she was eventually chosen as a production team leader in charge of 340 people. 
In 1971, she was transferred to Benxi, where she sold pork at the Xiaofang grocery store. 
Two and a half years later she was named head of the foodstuffs department and, shortly thereafter, became assistant manager of the entire store.
 
Seeks Better Standard of Living
''When we worked in the fields, life was very difficult,'' Miss Guan said, the words tumbling out at a speed rivaling the patter of a disk jockey. 
''So I thought, once we got enterprises going, we could make the country rich. 
I wanted to make it more successful but couldn't. 
Back then, I wanted to make the countryside rich.''
Her biggest disillusionment came, she said, when she was trying to turn the Xiaofang store around. 
''Even if you had talent you couldn't do well because the country didn't give you power,'' she said. 
''As assistant manger, I couldn't do anything because they wouldn't listen to me. 
We had no power.''
In 1984, the city of Benxi announced that private individuals could lease enterprises and run them as they wished. 
That decision, Miss Guan said, changed her life.
''I thought, by using this leasing method I could improve other enterprises,'' she explained. 
''I started looking at losing enterprises. 
I looked at the Guangming food store in 1986, which had consistently lost money for six years.''
 
Using Wage Incentives
''It lost money for lots of reasons,'' she said, ''Primarily because the managment was no good.''
In April of that year, Miss Guan leased the Guangming store. 
''The leaders were no good, so I demoted them,'' she said. 
''By the end of the year, the workers had bonuses.''
Her strategy at the Guangming store, she said, was typical of her management techniques at other stores. 
''There was a tremendous amount of waste,'' she said. 
''Internal management was terrible. 
Goods sat around. 
Nobody cared if they were sold or not. 
I set targets for every worker. 
If they didn't meet the target, their wages were cut.''
The combination of rising wages and tough discipline worked wonders on the work force. 
Jiang Xiu-e, a young clerk who confessed she had once had a notorious reputation for a quick tongue and nasty manner with customers, said that after Miss Guan leased the store, she ''told me that if I didn't change my behavior, I would be heavily penalized.''
She added, ''I didn't believe her at all.''
 
A Turning Point
But one day, after a raucus argument with a customer, Miss Guan cut 20 yuan, or about $5, from Miss Jiang's salary - about one-quarter of her monthly wage. 
''From that very day, I began to be more cautious with customers,'' Miss Jiang said. 
''Finally, I began to see that customers were actually reasonable. 
It's strange, isn't it?
Now I get the highest monthly bonus of the 220 workers in the store.''
The Economic Daily chronicled the transformation of one of Miss Guan's stores, as described by a frequent customer. 
''I live next to the Guangming grocery store,'' the customer was quoted as saying. 
''The store was dirty and disorderly. 
When you asked for something, no one would answer, and if they did you'd get a very cold response. 
One day, I went to the grocery store and found it had been whitewashed and the floor had been cleaned. 
A salesperson who had always quarreled with me in the past greeted me with a smile, saying, 'We have a new stock of bread, would you like some?'
''
Painfully aware that her success would breed both envy and criticism, Miss Guan canvassed the entire Communist Party hierarchy of Benxi looking for allies. 
In 1985, she stumbled on Li Ming, then the 35-year-old director of the political research office of the city's party branch and a fervent proponent of economic reform and experimentation. 
With the blessing of the city's party secretary, she wooed him away and installed him as the assistant general manager of her operation.
''I was looking at leasing and thought this was the way to promote reforms,'' Mr. Li said. 
''I said, 'If we go according to the Guan Guangmei model, profits will go up dramatically.'
I was interested in going to an enterprise and experimenting in a real environment. 
This was a way for me to be closer to real life.''
 
Burgeoning Success
With his help and the party's support, Miss Guan steamed ahead, leasing a total of eight stores and creating a holding company to oversee the venture. 
In two years, she earned more than 44,000 yuan, a sum equivalent to about $12,000 - 50 times what China's senior leader, Deng Xiaoping, earns. 
Much of her earnings she ploughed into Government-required ''risk funds,'' a rainy-day account in case her stores fail, and into extra bonuses and awards for workers. 
Still, she said, she is probably the wealthiest person in Benxi.
Despite her wealth, Miss Guan's achievements have earned her recognition as a national model worker, as well as the ''May 1 Labor Award'' and the ''March 3 National Woman's Award,'' both accolades usually conferred on exemplary factory workers. 
And just last week, she was elected by the Benxi Communist Party as a delegate to the 13th Party Congress to be held in Beijing this October.
''There are many outsiders who object to this,'' Miss Guan said. 
''They think I make too much money. 
Lots of people didn't understand me. 
'Why do you want this trouble?' they said. 
But I said I must do this to make the country better.''
