
-------------------------------------------------------------------- RICHARD F. SHEPARD is a reporter for The Times.
 
By RICHARD F. SHEPARD
Our 17-day tour of six cities in China left me with an incredible jumble of luggage in impressions of what I saw and sensed. 
Indeed, I have come to only one firm conclusion: Our most satisfying stopover was in the remote city of Kunming, a gracious metropolis 6,200 feet above sea level with such a temperate climate that it is known as ''the city of spring.''
Kunming?
Kunming the favorite place in a trip that included the imperial splendors of Peking, the fantastic antique treasures of Xian, the rejuvenating urban tempo of Shanghai, the resort loveliness of Hangzhou and the peculiar loveliness of Canton?
Absolutely.
Although the name Kunming meant little to many on our trip, it was familiar to my generation, the one whose war was the Big One of the early 1940's. 
Kunming is in southwest China, 1,900 miles by plane from Peking, several hundred miles south of Chongqing, which, under the spelling Chungking, was China's wartime capital.
Richard Shepard describes his visit to remote Chinese city of Kunming
Kunming was the terminus of the Burma Road over which American aid was sent for China's fight against the Japanese. 
It was there that Gen. Claire L. Chennault's Flying Tigers (later the American 14th Air Force) had their base, and it was there that Gen. Joseph W. Stilwell, the peppery and knowledgeable Vinegar Joe who was commander of the Chinese Army until his disagreements with Chiang Kai-shek led to his ouster, established the liaison headquarters between Americans and Chinese. 
The Japanese menaced Kunming but never captured it, and thousands of American G.I.'s passed through this city, then bulging with troops and refugees from Japanese occupation.
By the account of some of those who remember Kunming in those fighting days of their youth, Kunming was a city in a beautiful setting, but a place of crowded, poor hovels and narrow streets. 
The Burma Road still terminates at Kunming, but almost everything else, except the eternal countryside, has changed.
We landed at the airport, which the guide who met us there said was built in 1943 by the Americans, and went by bus into the city. 
Kunming today offers a delightful prospect to the newcomer, particularly after the flat and dry plains of Peking. 
Surrounded by gently rising mountains and pleasant hills, with a large lake on its southwestern quarter at the foot of the beautiful, wooded Western Hills, it has the flavor of a French provincial or colonial city, with broad avenues lined by low-lying buildings and trees and flowers.
In contrast with formal Peking, it immediately strikes one as being somehow more relaxed, although the bicycles and tooting buses and trucks are certainly not leisurely. 
The Gallic flavor is subtle, perhaps enhanced by the knowledge that until World War II there was a French influence in Kunming, which was linked to Indochina, only 500 miles away, by a railroad built by the French in 1910.
Kunming is not a city steeped in ancient Chinese history; although the past there is traceable for 2,000 years, the city grew as a late bloomer in the 19th century and particularly since 1948. 
It is nothing like San Francisco, yet, whether because of its equable climate or its great local pride in its very difference from other Chinese cities, a comparison with the city by the Golden Gate springs to mind. 
Kunming, the capital of Yunnan province, is home to more than a million people and is a commercial and manufacturing hub, but its aura is that of a provincial center, making its own way in the world.
We stayed in the Green Lake Hotel, a modern and efficient establishment in the city's northwestern area. 
Across the street was Green Lake Park, its charming lake lined with drooping willow trees and dappled in the bright spring tints of peach and plum trees. 
Early in the morning Green Lake Park is alive with people doing exercises, playing badminton, jogging and bicycling to work. 
As is the case with many Chinese parks, there is an entrance fee of a few cents that seems to keep no one out.
Just behind the hotel, across the street from the park, a quick turn from the main roads plunges the sightseer from Kunming's modern, spacious face into a tangle of streets lined with cramped and old houses teeming with residents who use public toilets and spend their leisure outdoors. 
In the morning, sidewalk stands sell dumplings and porridges from steaming pots. 
One wonders how such a cheerful, wellmannered, well-scrubbed, healthy-looking and neatly dressed population can issue from such homes, but it does.
The strains of ''Old MacDonald Had a Farm'' emanate from a temple building that is now a school. 
The words, in Chinese, drift over the dilapidated area from the lusty throats of youngsters, the same ones who greet you in English after school, giggling, with ''Hello, how are you, goodbye.''
English, in schools and in the thronged sections of bookstores where grammars are sold, is a popular language these days in Kunming, as it is in all of China.
Kunming is a stroller's city rather than one in which historic markers are found at each step. 
We visited Kunming University, where students of English in the Foreign Language Institute each took a tourist in tow and, with remarkable fluency, quizzed us about life in America and fielded the most touchy questions about China, such as evaluating Mao Zedong (early Mao was good, later Mao not so good, said one student), and speaking of their ignorance about what their future would be after graduation, since assignments to jobs in China are made by committees with which little bargaining may be done. 
They queried us about our ages, our incomes, the Central Intelligence Agency, American attitudes toward China and our abysmally scant knowledge of Chinese history. 
It was one of the most intellectually stimulating afternoons we enjoyed in China.
At night we went to the massive and older Kunming Hotel in the center of town for a lamb banquet. 
The hotel is built in the heavyset style called ''Socialist realism'' in which the idea is to present a profile of no-nonsense solidity rather than elegant grace. 
Every dish of the 40 or so served at the banquet was made of lamb, from the eyes rearward. 
There were hors d'oeuvres, soup, entrails, tail, tongue, all steamed, roasted or otherwise cooked. 
The lamb itself was not particularly succulent, but the flavor of a dish depended strongly on the sauce that accompanied it, prepared from such ingredients as ginger, garlic and other spices. 
The reaction of most of the diners was ''very interesting.''
Through friends in New York we visited two elderly members of the medical college's faculty, relatives of the New Yorkers, who cooked us a banquet-size dinner with such Yunnan specialties as potato-chiplike chips made with goat's milk, cucumbers stuffed with beef and duck eggs.
Our tour visited Kunming's center of traditional Chinese medicine and saw patients receiving acupuncture in rooms adorned with spittoons (spitting is an officially deplored but common Chinese habit), at the hands of doctors, most of them women. 
The surroundings were less than inspired, but the treatment seemed to please the patients. 
Another room found patients being treated by a ''breathing machine'' that involved an electric wire that barely touched the arm and has been in use since last August. 
It was difficult to get a translation of the details about its operation, but it seems to be designed to treat high blood pressure. 
A woman told us that since undergoing these treatments she has regained her health and no longer needs pills.
Kunming is merely the centerpiece of the treats for the eye and ear that surround it. 
Yunnan is the home of more than 20 of China's minority peoples, whose presence antedates the appearance of the ethnic Chinese. in this region. 
The minority peoples, among them the Hui, Yi, Bai, Hani and Miao, speak their own languages and wear colorful jackets and headdresses that bloom flower-like in the drab standard dress of the city's strollers. 
A museum in Kunming displays the costumes, farming implements, carriages, urns and bowls that illustrate the ancient ways of life of these minority nationalities.
The minority peoples were very much in evidence at Shi Lin, the Stone Forest, which lies 60 miles southeast of Kunming, in the general direction of Vietnam. 
The three-hour bus ride there immerses the visitor in a panorama of rare magnificent beauty, past brilliantly green rice paddies that contrast with the bright red of the clay hills under a sky that was sparkling blue, a spectacle that even the most deft Impressionist painter would be hard put to capture on canvas. 
The journey goes past the railroad, over which a steam engine chugged pulling a train of old coaches toward Vietnam, and through endless fields and paddies where the labor is all by hand and water buffalo and through several lively marketplaces in small towns.
The peasants represent China Immemorial: They are gnarled and workworn but not badly dressed, and their children look hearty and healthy in contrast to what old China hands recall of pockmarked, disease-ridden children of years ago. 
Their brick houses in this region seem to have been only half built, with the tile roofs rising from the entrance in a graceful curve but then ending suddenly at the back wall, which drops vertically to ground level.
The Stone Forest is one of the great natural wonders of the world, 12,000 acres of towering rock formations, thousands of craggy pillars formed millions of years ago by rain water that eroded the thick limestone by dissolving and splitting it. 
This veritable forest of stone resembles nothing so much as an abstract nightmare of downtown Manhattan, with pinnacles that tower as high as 99 feet. 
The rock assumes strange silhouettes to which the imaginative Chinese have attached names, such as Lotus Peak, Pavilion Commanding the Entire Scene of Stone Forest and Sword Peak. 
A path, about a mile long, wends through the forest, whose stony grayness is relieved by growths of trees and bushes and streams and ponds, and the visitor may take a long route or be satisfied with a shorter one.
We stayed at the Stone Forest Guesthouse, which caters mostly to foreign visitors, 20,000 of whom arrive annually (the largest contingents these days, in order, are Japanese, Americans, Australians and Overseas Chinese from Hong Kong, which is more than 500 miles to the east). 
The guesthouse is a rural affair, two or three two-story buildings with entrances from an outdoor walkway. 
It has only 97 rooms, each fitted with mosquito netting that must be unfurled at bedtime and can pose a minor problem to a stranger who had the feeling he would never be able to fight his way free of the skein should emergency arise. 
The rooms are moderately spacious and have private bathrooms with high-sided tubs but no showers. 
The travel season reaches its peak between March and October, and lodging, with meals, costs about $20 a day.
At night visitors can go to Shi Lin Village, a commune hamlet of rice and tobacco farmers who are members of the Hani minority people. 
The Hani, well aware that visitors mean income, sell shoulder handbags, vests, belts and embroidered items that they have made themselves. 
At night a company of 30 handsome young Hani men and women from the Five Trees Production Team visited the guesthouse, and staged a thrilling performance of folk dance and song for us, far better than the ponderous, overstuffed, over-refined folk-art performance we had seen in Peking. 
The oldest member of the troupe was 36 and the youngest 14, and they danced to the music of native instruments, strings with long handles and drum-like bottoms, flutes, cymbals and mouth organs, nothing that resembled anything we have in Western music.
The music was surprisingly sweet - one half-expected a cacophony of unpleasant squawking - and the short, dark and pretty dancers were smiling and loose-limbed as they did a rattlesnake dance, a weaving song and a harvest dance. 
The men did a tiger-hunting dance, ferocious yet humorous, with two of them confronting the audience under a tiger-like skin. 
At evening's end, each group of visitors was asked, almost commanded, by the home team of performers to retaliate with some song of their native lands. 
The French visitors rousingly launched into ''Frere Jacques'' and more recent and more romantic melodies. 
A band of Italians lustily sang of amore. 
Our small but staid group of Americans, taken by surprise, managed to croak a few verses of ''Old MacDonald Had a Farm,'' but with none of the style of the Kunming school children. 
Then everyone had tea or went to bed.
Closer to hand, only a half hour from Kunming, are the Western Hills, a picturesque range that stretches along the western bank of Dian Chi, or Shimmering Lake, a large (more than 100 square miles) body of water southwest of the city. 
The Western Hills are four hills, and as seen from the lake their contour resembles, to the vivid imagination that is a Chinese staple, a langorous sleeping beauty whose hair trails down to the water. 
Actually, the hills are increasingly high as one walks up them on steps and paths that stop at various temples along the way. 
The climb can take three hours, but our bus went farther up than most and left us at the foot of the last 300 steps.
As we walked, we passed small shrines, such as one with a large figure of Guanyin. 
Many Chinese still believe they are insured of fertility if a coin affixed to the wall of the shrine does not fall down. 
This is somewhat strange in light of the official policy that demands tight family control: one child per family. 
There are turtles that one touches for longevity and figures that will bring good health - longevity and good health are not necessarily in the same package. 
At the Dragon Gate, on the summit, there is an unparalleled view of the big lake and of Kunming in the distance.
There is much else to see at Kunming, from the Yuantong Mountain Park in the city with its zoo and gardens to the impressive Qiongzhusi temple built 600 years ago with its collection of 400 clay figures of disciples of Buddha made over a seven-year period by a Sichuan sculptor during the Manchu period (China's last dynasty). 
You can see the Burma Road, a prosaic thoroughfare that today does not give evidence of the times when it was a lifeline for China. 
But in Kunming and its environs, the sightseeing is not in works made by man, not in temples or museums or institutions. 
The sight to see is China itself, a China in which man makes his way between heaven and earth, bending to both in such awesomely attractive surroundings that one wonders how he can intrude his own affairs into it.
