
THE SOONG DYNASTY By Sterling Seagrave. 
Illustrated. 532 pp. 
New York: Harper & Row. 
$22.50.
No mater whether you love them or hate them, Charlie Soong's six children make good copy. 
There were three sons and three daughters, and between them they carved out a permanent niche in the steamy politics of the Chinese republic in the years from its founding in 1911 to its fall in 1949. 
The three sons were educated at universities in the United States, two at Harvard and one at Vanderbilt, and became vastly wealthy. 
The eldest, T. V. (Tse-ven) Soong (by common practice all three were referred to by the initials of their Chinese given names) became a major figure in Nationalist Chinese, Kuomintang Party politics, serving at intervals as Finance Minister, Foreign Minister and governor of the Central Bank of China; his younger brothers, T. L. (Tse-liang) and T. A. (Tse- an), were powerful as bankers, industrialists and company directors.
Charlie Soong's three daughters, all also American-educated, had even more dramatic fates through their marriages - the eldest, Ai-ling, started out as Sun Yat-sen's secretary and went on to marry H. H. Kung, a wealthy industrialist, Oberlin College and Yale University graduate, and lineal descendant of Confucius; the middle daughter, Ching- ling, married Sun Yat-sen, and after his death in 1925 became an influential exponent of the liberal-radical cause, and eventually a vice chairman of the People's Republic of China; the youngest daughter, May-ling, married Chiang Kai-shek.
Given the remarkable lives of these six siblings, and the presence of such strong American-Chinese connections, one would have assumed that the Soong family would long since have been the subjects of massive, popular biographies. 
Yet such has not been the case. 
There has been a scattering of biographical sketches of the three daughters, the best-known being Emily Hahn's ''Soong Sisters'' (1941); but there is virtually nothing authoritative on the three sons, nor on Ai-ling's husband, H. H. Kung, except for the biographical entries in Howard Boorman's ''Biographical Dictionary of Republican China,'' and the painfully acquired details of the family's financial manipulations collected by Parks Coble in his admirable 1980 study, ''The Shanghai Capitalists and the Nationalist Government, 1927-1937.''
Sterling Seagrave, in ''The Soong Dynasty,'' has boldly decided to fill in the gap and to tackle the whole family at once, including the founding father, Charles Jones (Chiao-shun) Soong. 
His book is vigorously polemical, sharply biased and engrossing to anyone who has ever attempted to filter through the mass of detail and conjecture, fact and rumor and bare-faced lying that fill the bewildering hodgepodge of sources we must draw on for studies of modern China.
Mr. Seagrave, who grew up on the China-Burma border and is the author of ''Yellow Rain,'' a book on acid rain, has a thesis, and he presents it clearly. 
He believes that the lives of the Soongs only make sense if they are studied in the context of their ''long involvement with and dependence upon the Shanghai gangster underworld,'' and adds that ''such a biography did not exist earlier because the Soongs did not want it to.''
Until the 1970's, he thinks, an ''unwholesome'' interest in the Soongs, or ''a less than religious attitude toward the Chiangs, in particular, was enough to jeopardize a journalist's livelihood.''
THERE may be some truth to this latter assertion, certainly during the 1950's, and some historians also felt obliged to keep away from politically dangerous ground in the same years. 
Even the current dangers of writing slightingly about Chiang Kai-shek were dramatically underlined in October by the murder of the Chinese-American journalist Henry Liu in California; members of a powerful criminal syndicate in Taiwan known as the Bamboo Gang are under indictment in the case. 
But more important, most historians kept away because there was such a paucity of available sources that they despaired of ever being able to reconstruct an accurate account. 
The records had been laundered too thoroughly in Taipei and Peking, and concealed or blurred in the United States. 
As to the connections of the Soongs and Chiang with the ''Shanghai gangster underworld,'' that record had been partially reconstructed by the careful researches of Y. C. Wang, Pichon Loh, Jonathan Marshall and Parks Coble. 
But by its very nature, the record was likely to remain impossible to document fully, as long as the financial dealings of the Soongs in the United States and elsewhere remained protected by discreet bankers, cautious bureaucrats and the danger of libel suits.
Mr. Seagrave refuses to be daunted by such worries and hurls himself into the fray with flags flying. 
His book is fast-paced and jammed with racy details and incident, for the Soongs, as he tells us, ''passed through life like a team of pickpockets through a carnival crowd, doing what they did best, while the rubes watched geeks bite heads off live chickens.''
Bluntly put, he is convinced that the Soong family defrauded both the Chinese people and the American taxpayers (who provided loans and lend-lease) out of hundreds of millions, perhaps billions, of dollars; and that they held onto a great deal of this money after Chiang's regime collapsed in 1949, since it was safely stored in American, Brazilian and other banks.
A lot of people have believed some variation of this, and the discreet language of the diplomats reinforces it. 
A member of the United States Embassy staff noted in 1936 that Ai-ling Soong received ''a moderate but invariable commission on all purchases of military planes,'' while the British ambassador wrote that Ai-ling's husband, H. H. Kung, had such a ''preference for his own interests over those of his country'' that he was ruining the economy. 
Gen. Joseph W. Stilwell was mystified and angry over the disappearance of huge amounts of lend-lease supplies in World War II; and immense American loans, many of which passed through the hands of T. V. Soong, his brothers or his brother-in-law, were never adequately accounted for. 
May-ling Soong's extravagance and demands became legendary. 
Only Ching-ling escaped this unflattering attention; she was blamed instead for being soft on communism.
When Mr. Seagrave links his story to the newly documented estimates of the Soong-Chiang connections with organized crime in Shanghai, he is at his most interesting but also in the greatest danger of overstating his case. 
He is right that there was a tight link between Chiang and the Shanghai Green Gang racketeers who controlled opium, prostitution and the labor force on the docks and in the factories; these criminals were protected by the foreign powers in China - the French simply made the head of the Green Gang the chief of detectives in the French Concession, so that all other criminals stayed away - and Chiang needed money from opium sales for his own militarization program.
The trouble is in estimating the importance of this in the history of Nationalist China as a whole. 
Here, Mr. Seagrave is confident: there was a ''grand strategy'' between Chiang and the criminals in both Canton and Shanghai during early 1927, and later that same year the revolution in Wuhan was ''subverted by the Green Gang until it collapsed from within.''
Still later, ''The Nanking government was quite simply a Trojan horse, painted in bright colors by the Soong clan.''
Inside this horse ''were hidden the generals, secret policemen and Green Gang leaders who actually yielded power in China.''
Similar forces, he believes, lay at the heart of the New Fourth Army Incident of 1941, when a Nationalist attack on Communist troops prompted the collapse of the United Front against the Japanese.
If this is in fact true, why has it not been better known by the public?
Mr. Seagrave has several explanations, among them the power of Henry Luce's pro- Soong news network, the public-relations skills and lobbying of the Soongs themselves, the obstinacy or lethargy of State Department veterans like Stanley Hornbeck, the incompetence and ignorance of Franklin D. Roosevelt, and Harry S. Truman's reluctance to act. 
Again, there is some truth in all these aspects of the case - the difficulty is in knowing how to evaluate the separate elements. 
Luce certainly backed the Soongs and Chiang with Time, Life and all the other resources at his command, but those resources were still finite, and there were other news media that could have carried different stories.
The Soongs also had their own coterie of influential friends in the Congress and among the Presidential advisers. 
But many sensible officials were suspicious of them and doubted their competence. 
Hornbeck may have been, in Mr. Seagrave's rather splendid encapsulation, ''one of those basking hamadryads of the State Department who, having reached a place in the sun, lie coiled in wait for any creature that might disturb its repose,'' but he was not in a position to muzzle all criticism. 
At the governmental level, Mr. Seagrave has been persevering and ingenious in getting what he could through the Freedom of Information Act from the Federal Bureau of Investigation and other files on the Soongs, but the inconclusiveness of these reports leaves open the question of whether there was systematic purging of material - for example, by the Treasury Department - and whether the Presidents were at fault in not following up certain leads as to the Soongs' wrongdoing.
Much of the drive of Mr. Seagrave's book comes from his assumption that the Soongs were at the center of things much of the time, and he sets the scene skillfully by depicting the founding father of the clan, Charlie Soong, as also being a founding father of the republic. 
Sun Yat-sen and Charlie Soong, writes Mr. Seagrave, were linked in ''one of history's great conspiracies. 
Together they bamboozled the Manchus and brought the Empire to the edge of collapse - when all that was needed was a final nudge.''
This, I fear, is just not true. 
Mr. Seagrave has done a fine job in ferreting out a great deal of detail about Charlie Soong's education in the United States, the development of his business empire through the printing of Bibles and the manufacture of noodles, his role as a fund-raiser for Sun Yat-sen's insurrections and probable connections with various secret societies such as the Red Gang. 
These sections of his book are fascinating. 
But it is too great a leap to conclude from this that Charlie Soong helped bring the Manchu dynasty to ''the edge of collapse,'' just as it is too much to conclude that it was the Soongs who brought down China's republic. 
In both cases, complex economic and social forces and hundreds of other major actors were what brought about long-term political change. 
Without the Soongs, one can be pretty sure, things would not have been very different.
NEVERTHELESS, Charlie Soong is the most rounded character in Mr. Seagrave's gallery - ''somewhere between pimp and patrician.''
''With Sunday school at one extreme, Red Gang at the other, Charlie led a tidy double life,'' and the chapters that analyze him make a valued addition to our knowledge of the Chinese experience in America and the rise of a modernizing Chinese business class in Shanghai. 
With the children, Mr. Seagrave is less successful, and he can never quite divorce them from stereotype. 
Ching-ling is just too good, Ai-ling too ruthless, May-ling too petulant, T. V. too bumbling, to command our full attention or win our belief. 
Mr. Seagrave warns us squarely at the outset that he had trouble with the family, since, ''like the Cheshire Cat, the Soongs were visible only when they wished to be. 
They hid by being obvious. 
They had a public plumage that was so praiseworthy it dazzled the eye. 
Once this image was established, it became practically impossible to observe their actual movements, to record their true habits and personalities, or other aspects of character easily discernible in ordinary people.''
If Mr. Seagrave has not been totally successful in recording those true habits and personalities, he has nonetheless ruffled the plumage most thoroughly, and the eye is no longer dazzled. 
The only way his more dramatic charges will be countered or substantiated is if more evidence is dug out or made available, and I think this book will stimulate many scholars to try just that. 
The process will be all to the good, for our understanding of both Chinese and American politics during the first half of this century.B
'Lying Low' Out of Prudence These days, Sterling Seagrave's life has almost as much intrigue as his study of the Soong clan. 
He, his wife and their twin 16-year-olds, are, as he put it, ''lying low'' in a country whose name they prefer to keep secret. 
''It's not fear, it's discretion,'' he says, recalling that a journalist who wrote a book critical of Chiang Kai-shek's family was shot to death last fall. 
''I thought it would be prudent for me to fade into the undergrowth for a few months and not go on the author's tour. 
If the true story of the Chiang regime became well known in America there might be radical changes in how the Government deals with Taipei. 
That gives me very good reason to be cautious.''
The book was conceived 15 years ago, but its roots stretch back to the author's childhood as the son of a surgeon on the China-Burma border. 
There, he says, ''I would hear lots of things about the Soongs and Chiangs which didn't jibe with what I saw in Life magazine.''
One bonus of writing the book was traveling again to Asia. 
''I like the people and I like the way it smells there,'' he said. 
''It makes me feel at home.''
Someday, he hopes to make a trip there in a 41-foot, ocean-going sloop he is building. 
- Joseph Berger
