
People with claustrophobia would not sleep soundly at the Rainbow Hotel, which is tucked 33 feet underground in the depths of Harbin's civil defense labyrinth.
Since 1978 the tunnels have accommodated as many as 180 guests in communal dormitories for 90 cents a night, or a bit more if they prefer a better mattress.
Such underground shelters exist in many Chinese cities. 
But Mao Zedong's dictum to ''dig tunnels deep, store grain everywhere and never seek hegemony'' was taken especially seriously in Harbin, the major city closest to the Soviet border, where fighting erupted between Soviet and Chinese troops 14 years ago.
Christopher Wren discusses history of Harbin, major Chinese city closest to Soviet border'Can Work as Originally Planned'
Yang Chengyu, who manages the Rainbow Hotel, said army officers periodically inspected its steel doors and concrete corridors. 
''Although it has been made into a hotel,'' he said, ''it can work as originally planned, as a defense against attack. 
This is not the biggest tunnel. 
There are others even bigger.''
Since it became a city, Harbin has been linked geographically and psychologically with the Soviet Union. 
It was a village - the Manchu name means a ''place for drying fishing nets'' - when Czarist Russia signed a treaty with the Manchu Dynasty of China in 1894 to construct a branch of the Trans-Siberian Railway across Manchuria.
Harbin developed as the center of not only the railway but also Russia's sphere of influence in China. 
The White Russians later made it a sanctuary from the Bolsheviks. 
By the early 1920's, Harbin had over 100,000 European residents.
Its chic shops sold Parisian fashions and perfume. 
At the railway officers' club and other plush restaurants, diners feasted on caviar, chicken Kiev and ice cream to the strains of an orchestra.
 
'Paris of the Orient'
''It was called the Paris of the Orient,'' said Seraphine Fuller, 78 years old, sighing. 
She was brought by her parents from the Ukraine in 1908. 
''It was a beautiful city.'' she said. 
''I don't remember this Harbin where I am living now.''
Harbin still looks Russian with its onion-domed churches and stucco buildings painted in yellow and white. 
Battered orange Russian trams ply the tree-lined boulevards. 
When a soft snow covers the cobblestone streets and wrought-iron balconies, Harbin resembles the Soviet Siberian city of Irkutsk with bicycles.
But its population of 2.2 million includes only 62 aging White Russians, nearly all retired on meager Chinese pensions. 
A half-dozen of them live in a home for foreigners with Mrs. Fuller, who married and divorced an American engineer before ending up back in Harbin. 
''I want to go back to Russia,'' Vera F. Sturkina, 72, who is crippled, confided in Russian. 
''But it is impossible.''
The city's facade was refurbished with a Soviet-style Palace of Culture, built in 1958 before relations soured. 
The riverfront promenade is still called Stalin Park. 
And the Russian inscription on a Soviet war memorial near the railway station makes no mention of China when it pledges ''Eternal glory to the heroes who fell in battle with the Japanese imperialists for the honor and victory of the Soviet Union.''
 
Russian Food Hard to Find
Yet nothing Russian remains behind the veneer. 
Harbin's only Western restaurant says it no longer prepares Russian food, though it produced a bowl of borscht on a recent evening. 
The old Russian cemetery has been uprooted to make room for urban spread.
The consultations undertaken last October between Moscow and Peking are being watched in Harbin, though a schoolteacher said ''it really doesn't affect our daily lives.''
Mr. Yang, at the Rainbow Hotel, said he thought ''the talks are a good thing.''
''It is a change from confrontation to friendship,'' he said. 
But old suspicions do not fade so quickly in Harbin, the capital of a province whose northern and eastern frontiers abut the Soviet Union. 
''The activities of the Soviet side have been much reduced following the desire of the Soviet Government to talk to the Chinese Government,'' said Zhang Bin, deputy director of foreign affairs for Heilongjiang Province. 
''So the border situation is quiet, but I must emphasize that this quiet is superficial.''
Mr. Zhang listed some reasons why tensions lingered. 
Last September, Soviet forces carried out maneuvers uncomfortably close to Heilongjiang's eastern frontier, he said.
 
All Kinds of Monitoring Devices
''They have installed all kinds of monitoring devices for reconnaissance,'' the foreign affairs official added. 
''They are still carrying out espionage by sending spies into China.''
The Soviet Union has closed down two local Chinese-language radio stations that beamed propaganda across the border. 
But officials in Harbin were upset when the station in the Soviet city of Khabarovsk relayed a Chinese-language broadcast of an article last month in the Soviet weekly Novoye Vremya accusing China of blocking normal relations by claiming extensive chunks of Soviet territory. 
China has responded that it is not true.
Mr. Zhang said that while people in Heilongjiang were prepared for a Soviet attack, ''generally speaking, they don't think it will happen soon.''
''It is true that we are threatened by one million troops along the border,'' Mr. Zhang said, ''but the time is not ripe to launch a large-scale military action.''
 
A New Agreement on Trade
One harbinger of more normal relations is a new agreement in principle, reached last October in Khabarovsk, to resume border trade that has been suspended since the fighting in 1969.
The Chinese want to barter pork, edible oil, alcohol, cotton textiles and furniture in return for timber, building materials and household goods, including refrigerators and washing machines, from the Soviet Union.
If the political climate improves, Heilongjiang officials also expect a good market for Manchurian grain and other produce. 
To handle the proposed commerce, a Heilongjiang Provincial Border Trade Corporation has been created.
