
China reacted with tempered praise today to the signing of a Soviet-American treaty to eliminate intermediate-range nuclear missiles.
But both editorial comment in the country's Communist Party newspaper and a statement by the Chinese Foreign Ministry stressed that the treaty made only a small dent in the nuclear inventories of the superpowers and has not reduced the threat of nuclear war. 
The Chinese made no reference to their own small strategic nuclear arsenal.
''We welcome the official signing of the I.N.F. treaty,'' said Li Jinhua, a spokesman for the Foreign Ministry, using the initials for intermediate nuclear forces. 
''The signing of the treaty is the first step toward nuclear disarmament.''
But, Mrs. Li said, China expects both nations to pursue talks that will lead to even greater cuts in nuclear weapons.
 
'Complete Prohibition' Urged
''We hope that the United States and the Soviet Union, the two countries with the largest amount of arms, will continue to hold serious negotiations on drastic nuclear arms reduction, reach agreements and truly implement them,'' she said. 
''China consistently stands for the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons, chemical weapons and biological weapons and for deep cuts in conventional armaments and is opposed to the extension of the arms race into outer space.''
A similar tone was adopted in a front-page editorial in this morning's People's Daily, the official Communist Party newspaper. 
There was no comment in other papers.
''Despite the fact that this treaty touches on only a fraction of the nuclear arsenals of the two countries,'' the editorial said, ''it is after all the first agreement made to reduce nuclear arms since nuclear weapons first appeared.''
But the newspaper went on to note that the number of weapons covered by the treaty did not substantially alleviate the threat of war.
''The signing of the I.N.F. agreement is far from reducing the risk of nuclear war and cannot fundamentally reduce international tensions,'' it said.
