
YING RUOCHENG IS FAMILIAR to American audiences as the prison warden in Bernardo Bertolucci's new film ''The Last Emperor.''
However, in China, he is now primarily known not for his acting ability, but as the nation's Vice Minister of Culture. 
In this powerful post he is presently at work on a broad reform of the performing arts.
Mr. Ying's ministry is putting into effect a new policy that grants autonomy to the state-run theater companies in the selection of repertories, the hiring of people and the management of finances. 
This ''structural reform'' is a departure from the controls which have been in force since the Communist Party took power in 1949.
At the Ministry of Culture compound Mr. Ying strode into the reception hall for a recent interview as if he was coming on stage. 
The walls of the hall were hung with traditional scrolls, but the minister was attired in a tailored blue blazer over a red cashmere sweater, gray slacks and a red tie. 
His strong Manchu features, resonant voice and fluency in English reminded one of his commanding performance as the Mongol Emperor Kublai Khan in ''Marco Polo,'' the 1982 NBC television mini-series.
As an actor, director and translator of Shakespeare, Sean O'Casey, Arthur Miller and Tennessee Williams, Mr. Ying looks to the adaptation of Western plays as a means of introducing Chinese audiences to modern theater.
Encouraged by the success of his Chinese productions of ''Death of a Salesman'' - in which he played Willy Loman - and ''Amadeus,'' Mr. Ying said he hoped to find time to stage ''Evita,'' which he thinks time to stage ''Evita,'' which he thinks ''would have a very strong message for the Chinese.''
He believes that ''Death of a Salesman,'' which played to capacity houses for three months, was a breakthrough. 
He said that Chinese audiences found they could relate to Willy Loman and his shattered dreams, having experienced the disappointments and pain of the Cultural Revolution.
Does he dare to present Tennessee Wilby traditional Chinese mores?
The 58-year-old minister, a founder of Beijing's People's Art Theater in 1950, nodded vigorously: ''Certainly 'Glass Menagerie' and another play which I think would go down very well in China, 'Cat on a Hot Tin Roof,' but I would think twice before putting on, say, 'Clothes for a Summer Hotel' '' (one of Williams's lesser plays about F. Scott Fitzgerald and his wife, Zelda, after she became schizophrenic).
Among foreign playwrights, Eugene O'Neill and Bertolt Brecht have exerted the greatest influence on the modern Chinese theater. 
Mr. Ying thinks that Chinese playwrights are becoming less interested in Brecht's Marxist ideology and more interested in his dramatic art. 
Recently they have been writing more plays that do not dwell on the familiar social concerns. 
One such work is ''A Dream of China,'' which is simply the love story of a Shanghai girl and a young American scholar.
Mr. Ying lit a cigarette and held it between thumb and forefinger as he fielded questions from a delegation of the Center for U.S.-China Arts Exchange about the campaign against ''bourgeois liberalization'' launched by the Communist Party last January. 
In the clamp-down on cultural life that followed, theater companies reacted by culling the more controversial plays from their repertories. 
The playwright Wu Zuguang was among the prominent intellectuals who were denounced and expelled from the party.
Mr. Ying was not sympathetic to the intellectuals accused of publicly criticizing the Socialist system, which he said could have caused a ''major upheaval.''
But he went on to insist that there had been significant progress in the last months toward a freer cultural life. 
The 13th party congress, which concluded in early November, reaffirmed the policy of ''openness,'' he said. 
''Very few people will now stand up and say 'I do not agree with the 13th congress,' that we should control the artists more. 
I don't think that is going to happen.''
''Old habits of thought die very hard,'' he said. 
''And since we have had a long history of state-directed propaganda in art, to break away from that tradition takes time on every level. 
I'm not saying this only about the ministry, or the politbureau, but on every level including the audience.''
Turning to the current theater scene, Mr. Ying said: ''We are now saying clear and loud that a work of art which arouses controversy is not a bad thing. 
Let's not shy away from controversy.''
He suggested that Americans will appreciate the change in policy when they see ''Uncle Doggy's Nirvana,'' the controversial play written by Liu Jinyuan, which is being taken to New York later this year for the International Festival of the Arts. 
The play tells of an old peasant who suffers through years of enforced collectivization, becomes disillusioned, burns his house and runs off, leaving to his children the task of building a new world. 
The play was performed in September at the first China Arts Festival, but only after being held out for a time by the complaints of conservative ideologues. 
It was first performed in Mr. Ying's own theater.
Mr. Ying said the ministry was now preoccupied with the structural reform of the performing-arts companies which number 380,000 and range from serious theater to acrobatic troupes. 
He said that most of these subsidized companies were overstaffed and overage, with people in their 70's occupying dressing rooms. 
There are 8,000 self-styled dramatists in the Theater Association. 
Mr. Ying said that the companies would be decoupled from the Government and made as autonomous as possible.
Under this new program the groups would be free to fire and hire as they please. 
Until now, anyone accepted into a group could expect a ''cast-iron rice bowl'' for life. 
The groups would continue to be subsidized but funds would be allocated according to merit rather than evenly, as now. 
They would be encouraged to run their own sideline enterprises, such as selling cassettes, and to seek private support. 
''With reform in the economic fields we now have quite a number of millionaires and some of them are willing to sponsor certain artistic efforts,'' Mr. Ying said.
''The theater groups should be able to chose their own plays,'' Mr. Ying said, but he added: ''That, of course, is a sensitive area. 
In a Communist country, ideology is always controlled by the party, by the propaganda department. 
In other words, censorship.''
He said that China did not have a Government body, as did the Russians, to censor productions. 
But in China, he observed carefully, people are understandably cautious, given the repressions of the past. 
During the Cultural Revolution Mr. Ying and his theater company of 250 were denounced and exiled to the countryside from 1968 to 1971 to plant rice while being ''re-educated.''
''There is a lot of self-censorship,'' Mr. Ying said. 
''A theater company is very cautious about putting on a controversial play and that is one area which we are determined to reform. 
We think there should be healthy criticism. 
But it should be limited to the literary and artistic merits of a work. 
We do not seek consensus.''
The ''model play'' - the propaganda revolutionary opera imposed as the sole model for the performing arts during the Cultural Revolution by Jiang Qing, Mao Zedong's wife - will no longer be required, Mr. Ying said. 
''We will not condemn a play and then persecute the writer.''
Earlier, however, Mr. Ying made it clear that the Government would be free under its new program to withdraw subsidies from a group if it was felt that it was not working properly.
At the Shanghai People's Arts Theater, one phase of Mr. Ying's program has already gone into effect. 
The director, Sha Yexin, said that for the first time in 40 years some of the untalented members of the company will be let go and new actors brought in. 
''We will break the cast-iron rice bowl,'' he said.
Mr. Sha's theater, one of the three major state theaters in Shanghai, stages six to eight plays a year, two of them foreign. 
Mr. Sha selects the plays for the company in consultation with a group of five members of the troupe and he says that none have been forbidden since he became director in 1985. 
The repertory for 1988 includes a new play ''Confucius, Jesus and John Lennon,'' written by Zong Fuxian, one of China's most talented playwrights; O'Neill's ''Marco Millions,'' to commemorate the playwright's 100th anniversary; ''Love Story of an Angel,'' a new play; ''Faust,'' and dutifully, a play that is being written reflecting on the reforms of the party congress.
Mr. Sha introduces his new plays discreetly. 
There is no advance newspaper advertising. 
Notice of a forthcoming performance is passed by word of mouth. 
The play is tried out in this manner to avoid that little danger that it might ''spark a fire,'' according to Mr. Sha. Presumably, the fire would come from party cadres who could raise political or other objections. 
In China, there are no professional critics who attend performances and review plays in the media soon after.
Audiences in the major state theaters in Shanghai and other cities tend to come from the elite. 
One evening in Shanghai, ''The China Dream'' was seen by this writer in a university auditorium before an appreciative capacity audience composed mainly of students. 
Xi Meijuan, the star of the People's Art Theater, played the lead role as the Shanghai girl, and Ye Mang wore a blond wig as the American scholar. 
The mass of the Chinese people witness the performing arts in smaller ''collective theaters'' in the cities and countryside.
During the last five years the growing popularity of movies and television has drawn audiences away from the theaters and almost halved the number of appearances by the performing-arts troupes. 
The companies most affected are those that stage the ancient traditional Peking Opera -which is described as being in crisis because young people will not attend - and also the provincial opera, folk dance and acrobatic troupes. 
In Guangzhou city proper, which neighbors Hong Kong, some 90 percent of the households have television sets, mostly color.
The mass audience for film has proven a mixed blessing for movie makers. 
Censorship of movies by the Film Bureau is tighter than the constraints imposed on the theater or publishing. 
The release of the popular film ''A Small Town Called Hibiscus'' was held up earlier this year until the ending was altered. 
In the original film a madman appears exclaiming that China will suffer another Cultural Revolution in six or seven years. 
The madman scene was retained but his prophecy was cut by the censor.
