
The fact is, the idea of a sister-state relationship between Oregon and Fujian Province in China had bad luck from the start, and the burglary of the Chinese cultural center and its historic displays here was just another hardship along the way.
''A couple of years ago, the Chinese we do business with asked us if we could do something like that,'' said William Mulholland, an engineer from Cult Creek, Ore., who says he proposed it to Gov. Victor G. Atiyeh of Oregon. 
''They heard about this sister-city thing between some places over here and some there, and they wanted something like it.''
The sisterly relationship has no diplomatic or legal status but is rather a device to promote trade. 
It has caused debates in several American Western cities and states over whether to establish such agreements with China or with Taiwan.
Article on Chinese Arts and Cultural Center in Oregon City, Ore, which has been suffering hardships, most recently burglary of its historic displays; center was opened in attempt to create sister state relationship between Oregon and Fujian Province; drawing (S)
The Governor, a conservative Republican, was cool right from the start of setting up shop with Peking, Mr. Mulholland said.
''He just didn't have any interest in it,'' Mr. Mulholland said. 
''So I went to the Legislature and they passed a resolution, 88 to 2. 
Then that same day, the Governor signed a proclamation saying he wanted to work with Taiwan.''
Both Taipei and Peking claim to be the legitimate Government of China, and both sides recognize Taiwan as a province.
 
Cultural Center Opened in July
The Taiwan proclamation was announced last June 16. 
Then, in July, without approaching anyone for help, Kafung Francis Yap of mainland China arrived in Oregon to open the Chinese Arts and Cultural Center.
He and his wife, Amy, came to this pulp and textile center in northwestern Oregon from London, where they had lived for 10 years. 
They have a 7-year- old girl and a 6-year-old boy.
Mrs. Yap, who said her husband was away on business for 10 days, described him as an authorized representative of the Fujian Advertising Corporation of Fuzhou, Fujian, and the Peking Advertising Corporation of Peking. 
She also said he was an agent for the Ka Fung Advertising Company, which sells television and print advertising in China.
The couple soon received from China a substantial amount of Chinese art, which was to be the display that would attract American visitors whom the Yaps said they hoped to meet, both to establish business contacts and to attract students to exchange programs.
 
Early American Settlement
The Yaps set up shop in Oregon City, which is 10 miles south of Portland, the state's largest city, because someone in China determined that Oregon City was the first major American settlement in the Pacific Northwest and thus should be the place for a Chinese cultural center.
Mr. Yap rented a store at 1015 Seventh Street here, two blocks from the old mansion on a bluff above the Willamette River from which Dr. John McLoughlin ran the Oregon Territory a century and a half ago. 
Dr. McLoughlin, who laid out Oregon City in 1842, was the chief agent of the Hudson's Bay Company and an influential figure in the early development of the Pacific Northwest.
The Chinese Arts and Cultural Center is surrounded by service stations and small stores on a heavily traveled street; no parking is allowed in front of it, and very few people pass on foot.
The first official notice of the center came on Oct. 
28, when Mr. Yap reported to the Oregon City police that the center was burglarized while he and his wife were in China.
 
176 Items Reported Stolen
The burglars entered through an unlocked bathroom window, bypassed a simple burglar alarm and carried off 176 items, including agate vases, statues, paintings and porcelain.
The items were covered by a $50,000 insurance policy, Mr. Yap told the police, but he said he doubted that this was enough.
When the burglary report was filed, Mr. Yap began to get public attention for the first time. 
Agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Customs Service visited him, as did Douglas V. Frengle, manager of the International Trade Division of the Oregon Department of Economic Development.
But the public did not visit the center, nor did representatives of the industrial concerns that Mr. Yap sought to attract. 
The burglary wiped out most of the artifacts on display, and the Oregon City police recommended that the others be stored in a more secure place. 
Now the former display rooms are vacant, except for office equipment.
