
COPYRIGHT c 1984 BY JOHN F. AVEDON
 
ATTENTION!
NOTE COPYRIGHT LINE ABOVE!!!
 
 
 
John F. Avedon is a writer with a longtime interest in Tibet. 
This article is excerpted from ''In Exile From the Land of Snows,'' an account of Tibet since the Chinese invasion, to be published by Alfred A. Knopf in April. 
By John F. Avedon Today the Dalai Lama is going to New Delhi. 
The journey will take him 250 miles to the southeast, down from the Indian hill town of Dharmsala, where he lives in exile. 
The temporal and religious head of the once-independent nation of Tibet has resided here for 24 years, since shortly after the Chinese annexed his homeland, high in the Himalayas to the east.
An alarm clock rings at 4 A.M. in the Dalai Lama's cottage, part of a compound of buildings crowning a hilltop and surrounded by a high fence. 
He wakes, washes and dresses himself. 
Outside, looming dark against the mountains, is the Central Cathedral, a yellow temple capped by two gold pinnacles. 
It was built by the Tibetans who have followed the Dalai Lama into exile. 
An Indian sentry, rifle by his side, guards the canopied gate of the compound. 
Attendants stir in the staff quarters. 
A kettle is put on the stove for the day's first pot of tea, which will be served the way Tibetans prefer it, with butter added.
In a large, windowless room in the center of the house, the Dalai Lama stands before a golden statue of Avalokiteshvara, the patron saint of Tibet. 
Folding his palms in prayer, he prostrates himself three times and then, sitting on a cushion to the left of the image, prays to the enlightened beings, or Buddhas, to alleviate the suffering of all sentient beings throughout the universe. 
At 6 A.M. sharp, he leans to his left, uncovers a large shortwave radio and tunes in the BBC World Service to catch the international news.
An hour later, the Dalai Lama descends the steep flight of stairs outside his cottage and enters an orange Range Rover. 
The cabinet of the Tibetan government-in-exile is lined up to see him off. 
He is driven past his office complex, through the compound's gate and down the surrounding hills. 
The Range Rover then begins the grueling drive across the state of Punjab to the airport at Amritsar.
In New Delhi, on this January day in 1983, the Dalai Lama is greeted in India's Parliament building by Indira Gandhi. 
She ushers him into a wood- paneled office overlooking the rose gardens and fountains of an interior court. 
Their talk is strictly confidential. 
It is plain, however, that matters of some significance are being discussed. 
Tibetans who know of the meeting surmise that there may have been a development in recent negotiations between the Dalai Lama and the Chinese authorities in Peking, a development critical enough, it would appear, to warrant a meeting with the Indian Prime Minister.
This is heady stuff for the refugees, but when the Dalai Lama leaves, an hour later, nothing is said. 
Not even a rumor slips out. 
The Tibetans in exile will have to wait a further week before learning anything. 
And then, in a sermon preached by the Dalai Lama in a sacred place called Bodh Gaya, with the ruler seated beneath the Bodhi tree, the very fig tree beneath which Siddhartha Gautama, the founder of Buddhism, first attained enlightenment, the Tibetans will hear the quiet announcement that will profoundly affect their lives.
The word ''dalai'' means ''ocean of wisdom.''
A lama is a monk especially noted for his learning. 
The Dalai Lama is the pre-eminent monk of Tibetan Buddhism. 
He is the 14th to bear the title and the 10th to act as both the country's religious and temporal ruler. 
He is the first to rule outside Tibet, a country which, until Communist China invaded it in 1950, had remained virtually hidden behind the Himalayas for more than 2,000 years.
The Dalai Lama did not inherit his office. 
Like his predecessors, he was found - when a vision of his birthplace appeared to the interim ruler of Tibet and after the three state oracles had prophesied where he might be located. 
The process by which he was identified is noteworthy, because, as the Dalai Lama himself has said, the tradition may never be practiced in the same manner again.
He was born in 1935 in the small farming village of Taktser. 
When he was 2 years old, a secret delegation of monks, having been directed by the oracles, arrived and subjected the boy to a battery of tests to determine whether he was a reincarnation of the former Dalai Lama.
The monks offered gifts to the child's family and asked to be left alone with him in the bedroom at the center of the house. 
On a low table, they placed a series of articles which had belonged to the 13th Dalai Lama. 
The objects were a black rosary, a yellow rosary, a walking stick and a small ivory hand drum. 
Alongside these, the monks placed exact duplicates.
Asked to choose one of the black rosaries, the child took the correct one without hesitating and placed it around his neck, a feat he repeated with the yellow rosaries a few moments later. 
Next, the walking sticks were presented. 
At first, the boy pulled gently at the wrong stick, but then let it go and took the correct one, holding it in front of him. 
This was considered particularly significant since the ''wrong'' stick had actually been used briefly by the 13th Dalai Lama before he gave it to a friend. 
The final items were the drums. 
The false drum was beautifully decorated with floral brocade; the genuine one was less inviting. 
Once more, though, the boy took the correct object.
A physical inspection was then undertaken. 
The boy was examined for eight bodily marks which traditionally distinguish the Dalai Lamas from all other men - among them: large ears, long eyes, eyebrows curving up at their ends, streaks like those of a tiger skin on the legs, and a print resembling a conch shell on the palm of one hand. 
Gently drawing back the child's clothing, the examiners found the indications they sought. 
As one of them, a monk named Sonam Wangdu, later recounted, they were overcome with ''deep devotion, joy and gaiety. 
Indeed, we were so moved that tears of happiness filled our eyes,'' he recalled. 
''Scarcely able to breathe, we could neither sit properly on the mat nor speak a word.''
There was no longer any doubt. 
Here, halfway through his third year of life, was the holy one himself, the 14th Dalai Lama of Tibet.
Inside the Potala, the hilltop palace outside the capital city of Lhasa, the Dalai Lama was raised to rule Tibet. 
On Oct. 
7, 1950, however, Communist China invaded Tibet, claiming it, on the basis of past relations with the imperial dynasties, as part of the People's Republic. 
The Dalai Lama assumed temporal power at the age of 15. 
Shortly afterward, he fled the Chinese Army to the town of Yatung on the border of India. 
With him went more than 1,000 pack animals, each secretly laden with 120 pounds of treasure. 
They were bound for neighboring Sikkim. 
The move was taken in case the Dalai Lama should be forced to endure a long stay away from Lhasa. 
Forty mules carried gold, 600 carried silver and the remaining animals had sacks of centuries-old coins. 
For almost a decade, this relatively small share of the Dalai Lama's household treasure remained hidden, guarded by a single unknowing sentry, in an abandoned stable beneath the royal palace in Gangtok, the capital city of Sikkim. 
Only after the treasure was safely deposited in the underground vault of a Calcutta bank did the truth emerge, spawning rampant speculation in India's press over the ''God-King's fabulous fortune.''
After its conversion into currency and subsequent investment, just under million materialized to form His Holiness the Dalai Lama's Charitable Trust. 
This was useful when the Tibetans fled into exile. 
It provided seed money as the refugees began to set up businesses and a government, although it was only a fraction of the resources that were needed.
Although the Dalai Lama's treasure was sent abroad, he himself returned to Lhasa. 
For nine years, he attempted to compromise with the Chinese rulers of Tibet, but then a nationwide revolt sprang up, protesting the Chinese occupation. 
It spread to the capital and Chinese reprisals against the Dalai Lama seemed likely. 
He fled.
While more than 10,000 Tibetans were killed in Lhasa alone in the following days, the Dalai Lama journeyed, guarded by Tibetan guerrillas, down toward India, where he hoped to seek asylum. 
Near the border, he came down with dysentery after spending the night in a badly leaking tent. 
He was moved to a nearby house, where he spent a feverish day in bed and a second sleepless night. 
In the morning, word arrived that Chinese troops were closing in. 
Despite his condition and, as he later described it, in ''a daze of sickness and weariness and unhappiness deeper than I can express,'' the Dalai Lama decided to cross the border immediately.
On the afternoon of March 31, 1959, he entered a large clearing. 
At its far end stood a newly built bamboo welcome gate, beside which waited six Gurkha soldiers in heavy British ammunition boots and floppy jungle hats. 
As the Gurkhas presented arms, their commander stepped forward to offer a white scarf in greeting. 
The Dalai Lama dismounted and slowly walked across the border into India and exile. 
In the months to come, 100,000 refugees managed to escape Tibet and follow him. 
''For the moment, Tibet's sun and moon have suffered an eclipse,'' the Dalai Lama told a gathering of refugees soon afterward. 
''But one day we will regain our country. 
You should not lose heart. 
The great job ahead of us now is to preserve our religion and culture.''
The Dalai Lama's vision of exile society took root in his new headquarters, the abandoned British hill station of Dharmsala, located northwest of New Delhi on the northern margin of the Punjab. 
As a first step, the government had to be reconstituted. 
The members of the cabinet who had arrived in India divided their tasks among six portfolios: home affairs, foreign affairs, religion and culture, education, finance, security. 
A bureau was established in New Delhi to serve as the Tibetan link with the Indian Government and the various international relief agencies that were coming to the refugees' aid. 
The United Nations passed three resolutions condemning violations of human rights by the Chinese in Tibet, and support poured in from all over the world. 
The Dalai Lama, assisted by Indian lawyers, set about drafting a democratic constitution upon which to found the first elected government in Tibet's history.
Rehabilitation, however, was the immediate task at hand. 
''At the beginning of our work,'' related the Dalai Lama, ''two factions existed among the community of our responsible people. 
One thought we Tibetans must concentrate in northern India; the other - including myself - felt that it didn't matter where we lived. 
The important thing was to find a place and settle properly so that we could preserve the Tibetan identity, culture and race.''
The Dalai Lama's view eventually won out. 
Northern India, despite its desirable proximity to Tibet's border, lacked large tracts of unused land. 
India's Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru canvassed the chief ministers of his nation's less populated southern states in a search for vacant countryside. 
The state of Karnataka offered an uninhabited stretch of jungle full of elephants and situated in gently rolling hills 52 miles west of Mysore. 
The wilderness was broken by a single road along which lay a few primitive villages. 
Whatever success the Tibetans managed to wrest from the land would be their own.
At first, a group of 666 refugees left the north to homestead the new settlement. 
Other groups of 500 were sent down at six-month intervals. 
Despite the fertile soil, farming was not easy. 
A crop of lentils, cotton, tobacco and coriander sown on 28 acres in 1961 did not do well. 
A second crop of cotton and tobacco was sown, and also failed dismally. 
The exiles, used to Tibet's unique high-altitude agronomy, were foundering in southern India. 
Hundreds died. 
Just as the Dalai Lama had fallen ill when he came down from the Himalayas, so most of his followers took sick. 
They were unused to the low altitude, and they lacked immunity to many diseases unknown in Tibet's high, dry atmosphere but prevalent in subtropical India. 
Slowly, the survivors began to bring about a small economic miracle. 
An agricultural adviser from a relief organization called Swiss Technical Co- operation arrived in the jungle to offer guidance. 
Conducting soil tests, he determined that maize should be planted, sustained by fertilizer and farmed by tractors rather than the bullock plows the Tibetans were using. 
The new methods and crop worked. 
Maize proved so successful that by 1966, six years after its founding, the settlement was self-supporting. 
Three years after that, with 77,000 fruit trees planted, a dairy and poultry farm and a second crop of ragi (a cereal grass) raised to diversify the harvest, the area was producing a substantial profit.
By then, 38 settlements, harboring almost 60,000 people, had sprung up throughout India, Nepal and Bhutan, all starting out on land too remote or inhospitable for the local people to care about. 
In many places, farming proved so recalcitrant that the settlers had to rely on traditional Tibetan handicrafts, such as carpet weaving, for their income. 
Thousands of refugees began to sell gaudy green, purple, yellow and red sweaters made by machine in Punjabi factories. 
Each winter, these exiles set up shop in bazaars and marketplaces all across India. 
Their success was such that by the latter half of the 1960's a Tibetan sweater fad had swept the subcontinent.
By the early 1980's some 44 settlements, linked by commercial, political and religious ties, looked to Dharmsala as their capital and housed almost all of the 100,000 exiles. 
Given a head start by the outpourings of international economic aid and propelled by their own determination, the survivors of the original refugees thrived.
With economic security, the refugees' cultural reconstruction was assured. 
The Dalai Lama had begun the work of preservation from his first days in India. 
''We divided our culture into two types,'' he explained. 
''In the first category we placed that which needed only to be retained in books as past history. 
The second category included whatever could bring actual benefit in the present. 
These things, we resolved, must be kept alive. 
Many of our old ceremonial traditions I discarded. 
No matter, I decided, let them go. 
However, our performing arts, our literature, science and religion, as well as those crafts from which we could earn a livelihood - painting, metalcraft, architecture, woodworking and carpet making - these we took special pains to safeguard. 
To achieve this, we employed modern methods although they were altogether new to us and posed many difficulties.''
Religion is the wellspring of Tibetan civilization, and it had first priority in the Dalai Lama's plans. 
Buddhism spread from India to many countries in the Orient, but only Tibet received the full panoply of its liturgy and literature, and only Tibet kept all its disciplines alive. 
(Buddhism was almost completely wiped out in India itself by Moslem invasions in the 11th century.) In 1959 there had been nearly 600,000 Buddhist monks in Tibet and 4,000 lamas. 
Only 7,000 monks and 200 or so of the lamas escaped after the the suppression of the nationwide revolt that year. 
Those left behind in Tibet were defrocked by the Chinese.
The monks in exile sought to preserve their heritage by initially organizing sessions of memorization, debate and tutorials with senior scholars. 
They collected as many scriptures as could be found and lithographed more than 200 volumes of major works - only a small fraction, however, of Tibet's 1,200 years of philosophic writing. 
Nevertheless, they gradually built more than 150 new monasteries, filling them with young monks and, in effect, bringing Buddhism back to India, the land where it had begun.
Other institutions were set up to aid the cultural preservation. 
Three months after the Dalai Lama's arrival in Dharmsala, the Tibetan Dance and Drama Society came into being. 
Its 74 members - only 24 of whom had been performing artists in Tibet - managed to conserve in their repertory four abridged operas (the often weeklong spectacles performed in Tibet's larger cities), two historical plays and numerous cham or monastic dances.
Tibet's unique medical science, which had developed indigenously over 2,000 years, was salvaged in a hospital and pharmacy with an astrology department. 
A medical school was set up, and, by the late 1970's, its graduates were serving in all the refugee settlements in India. 
The Library of Tibetan Works and Archives, started in November 1971 at Dharmsala, soon became a magnet for hundreds of Asian and Western scholars who previously had scant access to Tibetan culture. 
In New Delhi, Tibet House, founded in 1965, supplemented much of the library's work, while the Tibetan section of All-India Radio was enlarged and a number of refugee publications appeared.
But the most extensive and important of the cultural projects was the school system. 
Created by the Dalai Lama to preserve the Tibetan identity while introducing the ''exile-generation'' to the modern world, it was looked on by all the refugees as the most fundamental hope for their future. 
The children were the first in Tibet's history to see maps of the world and hear of other nations. 
As one of them, now a young man, remembered, ''When we were first taught geography, it was almost unbelievable. 
The teacher showed us a globe and pictures of different peoples, but until it was thoroughly explained, I found it hard to accept that the world was really so large. 
I just couldn't comprehend it. 
In Tibet, India had always been the end of the earth for us.''
A large foster home, the Tibetan Children's Village, was established in Dharmsala under the direction of the Dalai Lama's younger sister. 
At the close of the 1970's its citylike campus housed more than 1,000 destitute Tibetan children from six months to 18 years of age and was regarded by United Nations agencies and others as a paradigm for the rehabilitation of refugee children.
In 1976, a series of events in China signaled the start of a new era for Tibet. 
Within a nine-month period, three Chinese leaders died - Zhou Enlai, Zhu De and Mao Zedong himself. 
Mao's Cultural Revolution was swept aside. 
Moreover, it soon became apparent that the new leaders in Peking were prepared to rethink Chinese policy on Tibet. 
Early in 1977, Peking realized that it had a powder keg on its hands; Tibet had never ceased to be ridden with revolts, and the area continued, despite a quarter- century of harsh repression, to be the most volatile region in the People's Republic. 
Rather than pursuing a policy of continual mass arrest, as Mao Zedong had done, the new Government sent a secret message to the Dalai Lama. 
It set in motion a process of delicate negotiation which continues to this day. 
Whether the talks will finally result in restored independence for Tibet remains to be seen. 
But it was clear by Jan. 
24, 1983, the day the Dalai Lama met with Indira Gandhi, that a breakthrough was imminent.
Today the Dalai Lama speaks to 30,000 of his followers as he sits beneath the sacred Bodhi tree at Bodh Gaya, in the eastern state of Bihar. 
The crowd rises as he comes before them, palms pressed together at his chest, smiling broadly. 
The weather is bright and warm, the flowering gardens of Buddhism's holiest shrine are filled with birdsong. 
The Dalai Lama prostrates himself, dons his yellow teaching robe and mounts a throne draped in brocade beneath a red and blue cotton canopy. 
As he places his wristwatch, face upward, on the table to his right, the assembly completes its own prostrations - thousands of heads bobbing up for a final time before settling into a motionless sea as the crowd sits upon the ground. 
The preliminary prayers begin. 
At their conclusion, the Dalai Lama starts to speak. 
As always, he prefaces his teaching with informal remarks on the usefulness of religious practice in daily life. 
Today, however, he delivers a piece of news that - even more than explaining his meeting with Indira Gandhi - amounts to perhaps the most significant statements he has made since coming into exile.
''If conditions permit,'' he says matter-of-factly in the middle of his talk, ''I am thinking of paying a visit to Tibet sometime in 1985. 
I am not likely to fall into any traps,'' he quickly adds to reassure the crowd. 
''I've had 30 years' experience dealing with the Chinese.''
The Dalai Lama's announcement, which he has chosen to deliver on this religious occasion, signals a quantum leap to the Tibetan refugees. 
The Tibetan diaspora may be coming to an end.
Despite the torrent of speculation, however, the Dalai Lama seems almost unconcerned with the nuances of the present political maneuvering between himself and the Peking Government. 
Already, following his return from Bodh Gaya, he is thinking of the future, toward the day when Tibet once more will control its own destiny.
And for the distant future, the Dalai Lama reveals that he has long considered retiring - doing so though, in a manner which would radically alter the nature of his position and, with it, Tibet's government. 
''There are many prophecies which predict that I will be the last Dalai Lama,'' he says. 
''The world is changing so dramatically that there may no longer be a need for the lineage. 
Even if the institution of the Dalai Lama does remain, the method of choosing the new Dalai Lama may not be the old, traditional way. 
I may pick the next Dalai Lama myself. 
Theoretically, this is possible, and for practical reasons it may be more sound. 
Then, once I have chosen him, I can become an extra Dalai Lama. 
Just a simple Buddhist monk,'' he adds, laughing. 
''In any event, the future is very open, very large. 
Anything can happen. 
In general, if we handle our situation carefully and act in accordance with our beliefs, it is quite possible that things will turn out well for Tibet in the end. 
Many of the prophecies concerning Tibet's future make this point, and I myself have always been convinced of it.''
