
Communist officials from Tibet today accused the Dalai lama, its exiled spiritual leader, of fomenting the recent Tibetan rioting.
It was the first time since Tibetan Buddhist monks in Lhasa demonstrated for independence a month ago that officials from China's Government in Tibet talked about the protests to foreign reporters. 
The officials spoke at a news conference held in conjunction with the 13th Communist Party Congress being held in Beijing.
The Tibetans, who are attending the 13th party congress as party delegates also asserted that the Dalai Lama dispatched assassins and saboteurs to Lhasa in 1985 and 1986. 
They offered no evidence to support their charges.
Unrest Blamed on Dalai Lama
''In 1985, the Dalai Lama sent people to conduct explosions,'' said Doje Cering, the Chairman of the Government of the Tibet Autonomous Region. 
''In 1986, the Dalai Lama sent back people to engage in assassinations in Lhasa.''
Mr. Doje blamed the unrest in Lhasa on the Dalai Lama. 
''We have conclusive evidence to show that the Lhasa riot early this month was instigated and engineered by the Dalai Separatistk clique,'' said Mr. Doje. He did not offer proof of his assertion.
Earlier this month, the Dalai Lama said he favored civil disobedience against Chinese rule but not violence and asked his Tibetan supportrs to press their campaign peacefully.
 
Violence Is Disavowed
''Violence is not the proper way at all,'' the spiritual leader said at his headquarters near the Indian town of Dharamasala.
The Dalai Lama blamed the rioting on what he termed Chinese repression and Tibetan discontent.
China involved Tibet in 19550 and suppressed an independence rebellion in 1959. 
That year, the Dalai Lama fled to India with thousands of Tibetans and took up residence in Dharamsala. 
Beijing maintains that Tibet is an integral part of China.
Over the last two years, there have been fragmentary reports from Tibetans in India that armed Tibetan exiles had infiltrated back into Tibet for acts of sabotage. 
But there had been no confirmation of these reports and until now the Chinese Government did not comment on them.
In late September and early October, protests led by Buddhist monks turned violent when police attacked the demonstrators. 
A Chinese police station was burned and at least nine Tibetan protestors were killed when armed police fired into the crowd.
Today, the Tibetan officials attending the party congress denied that the police fired on protestors.
Despite reports from travelers that curfews have been imposed in Lhasa and that heavily armed Chinese police patrol the streets, Communist officials in Tibet said that Lhasa had returned to normal.
 
Foreign Journalists Expelled
During the disturbances a month ago, 15 foreign jounralists were expelled from tibet. 
Today, Mr. Doje said that Tibet was not closed to froeign reporters but that they had to apply for permission to go there. 
Many journalists based in Beiging have been rebuffed in such efforts.
The Tibetan Communists are among nearly 2,000 delegates to the party congress, which will announce the party's new Central Committee tomorrow. 
It is expected to be smaller and younger than the current Central Committee.
The new Central Committee, to be pared down from 208 to 172 members, will be missing many of the old Communist revolutionaries, including china's senior leader Deng Xiaoping and President Li Xiannian. 
Several Chinese have said that the committee has been reduced in size because it is expected to meet more often and will be less unwieldly.
On Monday, the newly constituted committee will gather to elect the party's ruling Politburo, currently made up of 20 members. 
And the following day, Tuesday, a new Standing Committee of the Politburo, the most powerful organ in the country, will be named.
Only Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang, who is expected to be named party head, is thought to retain his seat.
