
THE brick shells of scores of buildings cling to the steep mountain slopes here, 30 miles east of Lhasa, the Tibetan capital. 
Once the holiest monastery of the Gelukpa sect of Tibetan Buddhism, the temples were dynamited by the Chinese in the 1960's to extirpate religion from Tibet, both in retaliation for an armed uprising in 1959 and as part of the leftist hysteria of the Cultural Revolution. 
Today 300 monks are slowly rebuilding, determined to recreate the grandeur of the 15th-century monastery. 
In doing this, they are also erecting a monument to Tibetan resistance to Chinese rule.
''We are going to rebuild this monastery,'' said a gray-haired monk in a worn maroon robe. 
''We have to find sponsors. 
We have to find donations. 
It will take time, but we will find a way.''
He spoke hesitantly, warily. 
''The Chinese spy on us here,'' he said, leading a visitor into his chamber. 
''The army comes here. 
The Chinese guides spy on us. 
We have to be careful.''
Sweet-smelling yak-butter lamps flickered before a dark photograph of the Dalai Lama, the spiritual leader of Tibetan Buddhism and symbol of independence, who lives in exile in Dharmsala, India, about 900 miles to the west. 
Officially, Tibet is an autonomous region of China, with special tax benefits and a modicum of self-rule. 
In fact, Beijing maintains tight control.
Before the 1959 revolution, ''there were more than 3,000 monks here,'' the old monk said. 
''When the Dalai Lama came to Ganden, there were often 5,000 monks here. 
After the revolution, the Chinese put the monks in prison. 
Some were sent to villages. 
A lot of monks were killed. 
Others didn't want to be monks any more and got married. 
Even today there are 300 monks still in prison, including 38 from Ganden.
''I ran away when the Chinese came,'' he continued. 
''I was afraid. 
All the statues of Buddha they sent to Beijing. 
They burned all the scriptures. 
All the scriptures we have now are new. 
There is nothing old.''
There were 6,254 monasteries in independent Tibet when China invaded in 1951. 
All but a handful lie in ruins, dynamited, or destroyed by Tibetans who were forced at gunpoint to rip the buildings apart with their hands. 
The Chinese now dismiss the destruction of the 1960's and 1970's as ''leftist excesses.''
But cognizant of Tibetan hostility, they have spent tens of millions of dollars on roads, water systems and electrification. 
A small proportion has gone to rehabilitate some of the more prominent monasteries, not coincidentally the ones most frequently seen by foreign tourists.
Still, Ganden has emerged as a singular example of Tibetan pride and determination. 
This is partly because of the destruction here, far worse than at monasteries in Lhasa, and partly because Ganden is being rebuilt with only scant assistance from Beijing. 
''People come here to make donations,'' the monk said. 
''They also give gold necklaces.''
He led the way through the rubble, reminiscing. 
''When I walked along here, there were so many monks. 
Many, many.''
He pointed to a ragged wall of bricks surrounding a pile of stone and broken rock. 
''There were lots of statues in there. 
Also the monks had their chambers there, six or seven in a group.''
Farther on, he pointed to a spacious square of cement. 
''This was a chanting hall where 5,000 monks could chant. 
We will rebuild this. 
Maybe next year we will begin.''
Most Tibetan monasteries are strictly regulated by the Government's Bureau of Religious Affairs. 
''Before the revolution, before 1959,'' the old monk said, ''anyone who wanted to could come here to become a monk. 
Now it depends on the bureau to allow new students, maybe only 10 or 15 each year. 
The bureau gives permission for the monks to wear these robes,'' he added. 
''The bureau comes here to see if all the monks have permits. 
We ask for more monks but the bureau does not allow it.''
The monastery exerts a lure on Tibetans, drawn by Buddhism and by determination to see Ganden rise from the rubble. 
''My monastery was destroyed, too,'' another monk said. 
''I heard that rebuilding began in 1981, so I came here. 
I was not a monk from Ganden. 
I'm just an old monk from eastern Tibet. 
When I went to Sera monastery and Drepung monastery, I saw there was still something there. 
Here, there was nothing. 
I wept.''
Less than a dozen buildings have been rebuilt, some only partially. 
On a balcony of a new thick-walled, whitewashed building, young monks were painting baked white-clay images of the seated Buddha. 
Watching them, the old monk said there was some hope that the Chinese Government would gradually loosen the controls on Tibetan religious institutions, but only the faintest of hopes that China will ever give Tibet back its lost independence. 
''I don't know if it ever will happen,'' the old monk whispered. 
''Now, we just build.''
