
A march for independence by thousands of Tibetans turned violent Thursday, with demonstrators stoning the police and setting a police station afire, witnesses said today. 
Six people were reported killed.
The official New China News Agency said in addition to the 6 dead, 19 policemen had been seriously hurt. 
It said rioters snatched guns from policemen and shot at the officers, who ''strictly observed the orders of the higher authorities not to open fire.''
China accused the Dalai Lama, the Tibetan Buddhist spiritual leader, of instigating the protest.
 
Second Protest in a Week
''Yesterday's riot is regarded as a direct outcome of Dalai's activities to split the motherland as an exile engaged in political activities,'' the agency said in a broadcast monitored in Tokyo. 
The Dalai Lama has been visiting the United States, where he appeared before a Congressional panel and called for negotiations on Tibet's status.
The violence Thursday took place in central Lhasa when the police fired into a crowd in the square leading to Jokhang Temple, the holiest place in Tibetan Buddhism, according to tourists arriving today in Chengdu, in central China.
The protest on Thursday, China's National Day, was the second in a week in Lhasa. 
A clash Sunday was the first public report of violent protest by Tibetans against Chinese in more than 10 years.
 
Reports of Detained Americans
CBS News said it had received a message in its Hong Kong bureau that two Americans had been detained in Sunday's demonstration, but it could not be determined whether they were still in custody.
The two were identified as John Ackerly, 31 years old, of Cambridge, Mass., and Dr. Blake Kerr, also 31, of East Hampton, L.I. 
[In Washington, a State Department spokeswoman said officials were aware of the reports but had no independent knowledge of whether any Americans had been detained in Tibet. 
''Our embassy in Beijing and consulate in Chengdu have been notified,'' said the spokeswoman, Phyllis Oakley. 
''They're attempting to verify the reports and determine the welfare and whereabouts of the two individuals.''] Reporters from Agence France-Presse and The Associated Press in Chengdu, 750 miles east of Lhasa, interviewed dozens of tourists who left the Tibetan capital today, and their reports were made available here in Beijing.
 
Diplomats Caught by Surprise
''I saw one man lying on the ground with a piece of his skull blown off and blood pouring out of his head,'' Lars Pettersson, a Swedish tourist, told reporters in Chengdu, describing the clashes Thursday.
Western diplomats here were caught by surprise over the sudden violence and the scope of the protests. 
Late today, an official at the United States embassy said that it was clear that ''several'' people had been killed in the Lhasa demonstrations Thursday, including at least one Chinese.
An Asian diplomat who returned from Tibet a week ago said the protests in Lhasa were likely to strengthen the hands of more doctrinaire Marxists in the Communist Party who have resisted the country's current policy of increased openness to the outside world. 
The diplomat also said the upheaval would also have a profound effect on an upcoming Communist Party Congress by tempering any impulse within the party to accelerate policies of openness and reform.
Sunday's protest began early in the day when a group of lamas who appeared to be in their 40's arrived from Ganden, a monastery 40 miles east of Lhasa that was dynamited by the Chinese during the Cultural Revolution of the 1960's. 
They began parading through the square outside the Jokhang Temple, tourists on the scene reported.
The lamas were told by the police that they would be arrested if they continued their demonstration, the tourists said. 
Altogether, 27 lamas were eventually arrested, the foreigners said.
On Thursday morning, according to the tourists, who included Americans, Germans, Swedes and Australians, eight lamas began protesting Sunday's arrests in front of the Jokhang Temple. 
The crowd of Tibetans swelled rapidly and then attacked a police station just paces from the square, setting it afire. 
When fire trucks arrived and firefighters tried to extinguish the blaze, they were stoned by the crowd.
The Tibetans chanted slogans in Tibetan, according to the tourists who were there, including, ''Free Tibet!''
''Chinese Out of Tibet!'' and ''Dalai Lama, Come Back to Tibet!''
The red and blue flag of Tibet, emblazoned with two facing lions, a banner that the Chinese have decreed illegal, was unfurled during the protest, some tourists said.
''We heard a great number of rifle shots in the crowd,'' a tourist told Agence France-Presse.
Another tourist said he was told by a Tibetan, ''We are fighting the Chinese.''
The police barricaded the area, according to tourists, but the Tibetan protesters responded with stones they broke from the flagstones on the square.
There were conflicting reports among tourists over the number of foreigners detained during Sunday's and Thursday's protest.
According to a hand-delivered message received by the Hong Kong bureau of CBS News from Lhasa, two Americans were taken into custody Sunday.
At least one tourist in Chengdu said that he saw two Americans being issued expulsion orders, but it was unclear whether he was referring to Mr. Ackerly and Mr. Kerr.
Several foreign tourists said they were detained by police in the during the protest, held in a school nearby for a couple hours and had their film and notebooks confiscated.
 
PROTESTS TIED TO EXECUTIONS
WASHINGTON, Oct. 
2 (Special to The New York Times) - A lawyer who advises Tibetan exiles said today that the recent disturbances apparently began after the execution of three Tibetans by the Chinese authorities.
The lawyer, Michael VanWalt, said the executions were reported by the Government radio station in Lhasa on Sept. 
25 and 26.
Mr. VanWalt, the author of ''The Status of Tibet: History, Rights and Prospects in International Law,'' said this week's incidents were not without precedent but seemed to be lasting longer than those in the past. 
''There have probably been 50 revolts since '59, some very small,'' he said. 
''In 1972, 12,000 people were killed. 
The big difference between this one and the others is that this seems to be much more sustained.''
