
The Reagan Administration's publicized moves to enhance military relations with Pakistan and China have had the predictable consequence of further souring ties with India. 
American and Indian officials see no early improvement in the situation.
An American delegation headed by James L. Malone, Assistant Secretary of State for Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific Affairs, is due to go to New Delhi in a few days, but Mr. Malone's mission may only underline the downward trend. 
He is expected to negotiate the end to the 18-year nuclear cooperation agreement between the two countries, something brought on by India's refusal to sign the 1968 treaty designed to limit the spread of nuclear weapons.
 
India Is Uneasy Over U.S. 
Moves
The Government of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi sees the Administration's $3 billion economic and military aid package to Pakistan, its decision to sell the Pakistanis the F-16 fighter-bomber and its decision to make China eligible for arms purchases as ominous because it suggests a Pakistan-China-United States axis, something New Delhi has dreaded for a long time.
Bernard Gwertzman analysis discusses US-India relations
The Reagan Administration has tried unsuccessfully to assure India that stepped-up support for Pakistan is not directed against it but is designed to strengthen Pakistani resolve in facing 85,000 Soviet troops in neighboring Afghanistan. 
Indian officials note that in each of its conflicts with Pakistan, the Pakistanis fought with American arms that had been provided to defend Pakistan against a Communist attack and not against India.
For experts inside and outside the Administration who have advocated closer Indian-American relations, the developments had the taste of the inevitable, given Mrs. Gandhi's reluctance to criticize Moscow, and the Reagan Administration's policy of militarily supporting countries that appear threatened by the Soviet Union and to treat coolly those that seem to promote Soviet objectives.
In the diplomatic box score compiled by Washington, Pakistan and China are countries face-to-face with a Soviet threat and deserving of help. 
India, which like Afghanistan has a friendship treaty with the Soviet Union, is seen by this Administration, as it was by the Carter Administration, as too supportive of Moscow, even though it still pursues an independent policy.
Soon after taking office, Mrs. Gandhi irked the United States by recognizing not only the Palestine Liberation Organization but also the Vietnamese-backed regime of Heng Samrin as the Government of Cambodia. 
The recognition of Heng Samrin was particularly galling to Washington because it was seen as rewarding an invasion by Vietnam and as being done to satisfy Moscow.
The situation in recent weeks has become more complicated, the experts said, than simply one of bolstering American ties with Pakistan and China and downgrading those with India. 
That is because both Pakistan and China, which have close ties forged by mutual concerns about India and the Soviet Union, have also in recent weeks been engaged in at least a pro forma effort to improve relations with India.
 
Indian Aide Visits Pakistan
Foreign Minister Narasimha Rao of India visited Pakistan in early June after months of recriminations between the two countries over Pakistan's newly emerging military relationship with the United States and each country's fear that the other was planning to develop nuclear devices that might be used against the other.
At the end of that visit, Mr. Rao seemed exuberant about the talks he had had in Islamabad. 
He said he was ''absolutely certain that a new and fresh relationship is emerging between India and Pakistan based on objective reality and not on emotion.''
He promised the Pakistanis that India had no designs on them and that it would have full respect for ''the sovereignty, territorial integrity, stability and independence of Pakistan.''
Yet within days of Mr. Rao's departure, James L. Buckley, the Under Secretary of State for Security Assistance, arrived in Islamabad and reached a general agreement with the Pakistanis to provide them with the $3 billion aid package, and more significantly, to allow them to buy the advanced fighter-bomber, the F-16.
 
A Major Shock for the Indians
Because the Pakistan Air Force has been flying Korean War vintage aircraft, augmented with out-of-date MIG fighters from China and a few somewhat more sophisticated French planes, the promise of the F-16's came as a major shock to the Indians.
The Indians were aware of Washington's desire to build up Pakistan's military forces but apparently did not anticipate that it would get the F-16. 
More than that, many American officials believe that the Indians were upset that the Pakistanis were demonstrating their defiance of New Delhi by activating the old relationship with Washington that had so irritated India in the 1950's and 1960's when Pakistan was a member of the Southeast Asian Treaty Organization.
''India, in principle, would like to have good relations with Pakistan, but only on her terms,'' a State Department official said. 
''India wants Pakistan to accept her as the predominant power in the subcontinent and to take its lead from her.''
It was also something of a surprise for members of Congress; despite Pakistani requests for more than a year that they be allowed to receive the F-16, the Air Force had argued that the Pakistanis did not need anything more sophisticated than the F-5G, the prototype of the so-called FX fighter. 
However, the State Department wanted to make a political gesture of support to Pakistan and, in modern diplomacy, a measure of trust has become the sophistication of planes sold to another country.
 
Indians Criticize the Decision
The Indian Foreign Ministry said on June 16 that ''it noted with concern'' the announcement of the F-16 sale and the $3 billion package. 
It said that the decision to provide F-16's could undermine ''the serious effort'' under way to improve relations with Pakistan.
The reaction of the Reagan Administration officials was to dismiss Indian criticism as hypocritical since the Indians have a major arms supply relationship with the Soviet Union and are due to receive Mirage 2000 aircraft from France in the next five years. 
The Indians last year signed a $8 billion arms deal with Moscow and they have a significant arms industry of their own.
China's involvement in this complicated diplomacy was probably spurred by its desire to reduce border tensions with India and to encourage India to be less dependent on Moscow. 
At the same time, the Chinese made sure that they, like the Americans, reassured the Pakistanis of their support against Soviet moves from Afghanistan.
In early June, Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang visited Pakistan to renew China's backing against outside intervention. 
A week later, the announcement of the American military package for Pakistan was made while Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. was in Peking clearing the way for the Chinese to buy arms from the United States. 
In contrast to Pakistan, however, it is unlikely that the Chinese will make significant purchases from the United States.
A week after Mr. Haig left China, Foreign Minister Huang Hua of China arrived in India for talks. 
Although the Indians were known to be concerned about the announcement of the new arms relationship between Peking and Washington, they suppressed that feeling publicly to give Mr. Huang a friendly reception. 
The two sides agreed to hold negotiations on their frontier disputes.
The talks, however, did not reconcile sharp differences between China and India over Afghanistan and Cambodia in which the Chinese, like the Ameri-
