
On a quiet wooded hilltop high above the bustle and the politicking, a handful of experts and devoted amateurs toil at an exacting task that began half a world away and many lifetimes ago - nurturing the National Bonsai Collection.
Heedless of other worldly concerns, this group finds timeless satisfaction in miniature landscapes of living trees created as far back as the 17th century by Japanese and Chinese masters. 
With tiny rakes and pruning shears, they work to keep their charges faithful to an ancient vision.
''Our purpose on the main collection is to leave the design and proportion as it was given to us,'' said Robert Drechsler, curator of the Bonsai Collection, which is housed at the National Arboretum. 
''We don't want the former owner to say 'Is that my tree?'
''
To that end Mr. Drechsler, an assistant and four regular volunteers work as a surgical team, pruning and bending, or training, the trees.
 
Knee-High and Then Some
Mr. Drechsler took charge of the 53 bonsai that formed the nucleus of the collection when they arrived from Japan in 1975 as a Bicentennial gift to the American people. 
Although the public display will expand at the end of September with the addition of 31 penjing, or Chinese miniature trees, the Japanese bequest remains the heart and soul of the collection. 
A daily stream of visitors trickles through the open-roofed display pavilion, fascinated with the tiny forests, flowering trees and aged conifers that ''soar'' as high as four feet.
The collection includes a 360-year-old Japanese white pine that has been in training throughout its long life, and a 190-year-old Japanese red pine, a gift of the Emperor Hirohito that is believed to be the only bonsai ever to leave the Imperial Household's collection. 
The youngest trees are about 30 years old. 
While the age of the exhibit evokes a gee whiz response in many admirers, it is decidedly beside the point.
''The Japanese always say you should never ask how old a tree is because it's like asking a lady how old she is,'' said Ruth Lamanna, a retired microbiologist who helps care for the trees once a week.
Bonsai, which, loosely translated means potted tree, probably originated in China about 1,500 years ago. 
The idea was quickly picked up in Japan, and fit the Japanese philosophy of integrating the outdoors with the indoors. 
While bonsai trees look like house plants, they are meant to be grown outside, where they can experience the change of seasons.
 
'You Can't Be Gentle'
On a recent morning Mrs. Lamanna, Dr. Bill Orsinger, a retired physician who also volunteers once a week, and the assistant bonsai curator, Dan Chiplis, hauled worktables and plants into a shaded spot near the display pavilion for some routine maintenance. 
Mrs. Lamanna was working on a foot-tall white pine given to President Nixon on his 1972 visit to China.
Despite the age and historic significance of the tiny tree, Mrs. Lamanna handled it with practiced aplomb. 
She clipped deftly at branches and used copper wire to bend branches for the illusion of weight and age.
''You can't be gentle, but you have to know how to do it,'' she said, demonstrating the correct two-handed grip for bending a branch without breaking it.
There is typically much discussion among the workers about whether a tree should take a graft here or a pinch there. 
The talk is serious; a wrong move could ruin a plant's balance. 
While the group collaborates on these decisions, Mr. Drechsler said, the final call is his.
The Japanese citizens who donated trees for the United States collection remain quite attached to them, Mr. Drechsler said, and many have made the long journey to Washington to visit what Mr. Drechsler calls ''their children.''
He ruefully admitted that five of the original trees have died in his care.
''The Japanese were very understanding of it,'' he said. 
''They said, 'We have plants that die, too.'
''
 
Chinese Collection to Be Displayed
Mr. Drechsler is rushing to complete preparations for the opening of the Chinese penjing exhibit Sept. 
30. Mr. Chiplis, the assistant curator, said American viewers will find the Chinese collection somewhat different from the highly stylized Japanese creations most often seen in this country.
''Some think the Chinese style is freer and less formalized,'' Mr. Chiplis said. 
''Another person would say the Chinese style is too casual and relaxed. 
I think you'll find more bias toward the Japanese because that's what we've all learned from.''
Long-range plans call for the eventual construction of what Mrs. Lamanna terms a ''museum of bonsai'' at the arboretum site that will trace the art form from its Chinese origins, through the Japanese refinement to new forms being created in the United States today. 
Groundbreaking for the American pavilion is set for Nov. 
18.
Mrs. Lamanna and her fellow enthusiasts, meanwhile, continue giving the plants the meticulous daily care they need.
''Just think of all the people in 200 years who have worked on this,'' she said.
