
Before Dang Gatasai turned 14 years old, his family in Inner Mongolia, following a tradition that the fourth son become a Buddhist monk, wrote last year to ask if he could enter one of the venerable monasteries on Mount Wutai in neighboring Shanxi Province.
''I thought that he was too young,'' said Da Erji, 54, a senior monk who became a novice himself at age 7. 
''But without getting my permission, his parents sent him here because they believe in Buddhism.''
The boy traveled for 13 days to reach Mount Wutai. 
His name was changed to Sangdanjiacuo, and his head was shaved. 
Now, with three other teen-age novices at Xiantong monastery, he wears the lama's coarse brown robe and yellow sash.
Article on plans by Chinese Government, recognizing potential for tourism, to repair Buddhist temples atop Mount Wutai, carve out roads and build hotels in order to attract tourists; illustration; map (M)
Mount Wutai is really a cluster of five huge summits ranging in altitude up to 10,000 feet that is breached only by a few dirt roads twisting over the windswept passes of northern Shanxi. 
It is the most revered of the four mountains sacred to Chinese Buddhists, more than Mount Emei in Sichuan, Mount Putuo in Zhejiang or Mount Jihua in Anhui.
 
Zenith in 17th Century
The first temple on Mount Wutai was founded 19 centuries ago, before Buddhism fully took root in China. 
The site reached its zenith as a center of enlightened piety in the 17th century, when 2,000 monks, lamas and nuns inhabited the mountain's 360 monasteries and temples, and even emperors arrived from afar on pilgrimages.
War, revolution and Communist power shattered the tranquillity. 
During the Cultural Revolution, the monks were abused and dispersed and the monasteries were closed, but the buildings were protected from serious vandalism. 
Today, 360 monks and 20 nuns have reopened 31 of the monasteries.
The beauty of the main valley, tucked a mile high among the peaks, inspires contemplation. 
Groves of poplar and birch grow outside the red-walled monasteries, which have gracefully curved tile roofs. 
Bright wildflowers and reforested clusters of spruce trees enliven the otherwise barren slopes. 
The local peasants live out a more secular existence, growing corn, barley and hemp, raising bees or carving bowls from tree roots.
Until now, the biggest intrusion was a horse-trading fair that attracted thousands of herdsmen every summer. 
But the Government, realizing the exotic area's potential for tourism, plans to open Mount Wutai's monasteries to tourists next year.
 
$4 Million in Improvements
Deng Huailiang, a deputy director of the local administration bureau, said the Government and the province would spend more than $4 million by the end of this year, repairing temples, carving out roads and building hotels. 
Despite the hectic construction under way, Mr. Deng, who is not a Buddhist, assured some visiting journalists that religious activities are going smoothly.
By opening up Mount Wutai, the Government says it hopes not only to earn hard currency but also to create a showcase for its professed new tolerance of religious belief. 
The monks seem ready to endure public exposure in view of promises that the persecution of bygone years is over.
Jie Du, an elderly monk who came to Mount Wutai from Sichuan 44 years ago, recalled how he and his fellow monks were paraded in dunce caps through the streets of Taihuai, the local town, and harangued by Red Guards in the late 1960's. 
He survived the ordeal, but his old teacher, Neng Hai, did not.
''My master was persecuted to death during the Cultural Revolution,'' Jie Du said. 
''He was struggled against by the Red Guards. 
At that time, he was 83. 
How could he withstand that?''
 
Prayers in the Early Hours
The monks of Mount Wutai, who represent both the Lamaist and Chan sects of Mahayana Buddhism, rise several hours before dawn for long morning prayers in the cool, dark temples. 
As they go about their daily chores, the rhythm of worship is maintained by whirling green metal prayer cylinders with yellow Tibetan scripture. 
Noontime summons forth sutras, a scriptural narrative chanted to the accompaniment of pipes, cymbals and a big drum.
The vegetarian diet is partly subsidized by the Government, which Mr. Deng said paid $6 to $18 a month for each monk.
''We eat rice and wheat flour provided by the state and also some corn,'' said Yi Huan, a 66-year-old gray-robed monk. 
''Our life is better than before. 
The only difficulty is the shortage of vegetables in dry weather, but we do have potatoes.''
In return for the acquiescence of the monks in the looming commercialization of Mount Wutai, local authorities overlook some irregularities. 
Like other Chinese, the monks must live where they are legally registered to qualify for food-ration coupons. 
The abbot of Puhua monastery, Zang Ming, said that only 6 of his 37 monks had registration permits for Mount Wutai and that the rest were supported by the monastery.
 
Some Practices Persist
Some young monks at other temples undergo the painful ritual of having their heads tattooed with burning incense during the ordination ceremony, though Chinese law warns that religious activities must not be used to impair the health of citizens. 
Qing Fu, the senior monk at Mount Wutai, said the ritual, although not common, persisted. 
''It shows that a monk can withstand the pain and can sacrifice all he has for the happiness of others,'' he said.
The Communist Government does not like people to be exposed to religion before the age of 18, but some monks at Mount Wutai arrived earlier. 
Hua Ming, a novice at Xiantong monastery, said he was 16, though he looks younger. 
He had come from southern Shanxi with his divorced father, who was now living as a monk at Puhua monastery down the road.
Because many of the monks at Mount Wutai are elderly, the Communist authorities have let some young men join to keep the monasteries going. 
They do not add up to a revival of Buddhism in China; instead, their significance lies in their formal rejection of the official Marxist state ideology.
 
'It Is Our Duty'
Yuan Kai, 19, a former auto-repair worker, said he quit the Communist Youth League and became a Buddhist, though his father is an old revolutionary, because ''it is our duty to inherit Buddhism in China.''
The young Mongolian told some visitors to his cell at Bishan monastery that ''in my family, only I believe in Buddhism.''
''The others believe in Marxism,'' he said.
Mr. Yuan, who has impressed older monks with his diligent scholarship, said he believed Buddhists were not in conflict with the Communist regime because the goal of Buddhism is to set an example to be a good human being.
When a visitor reminded him that Marxism dismissed religion as mere superstition, Mr. Yuan agreed that some Buddhist ritual might strike outsiders as superstitious. 
''We can only say it is all part of the spiritual life of a Buddhist,'' he said. 
''If you say it is all superstition, why has it lasted until today?''
