
FROM Kunming in the far southwest to Beijing in the north, tens of thousands of college students have marched through the streets of China's cities in the last month, demanding more democracy.
They have done so even at the risk of diminished career opportunities, family disfavor and, in the case of students who belong to the Communist Party, expulsion from the one organization that can assure advancement.
''We are privileged,'' said a graduate student in Beijing who has not taken part in the demonstrations. 
''But that does not mean we don't want more say in our lives. 
Many students support the protests even if they did not join in.''
The State Commission of Education announced that fewer than 2 percent of college and university students in China took part in the wave of protests. 
A major reason more did not join in, according to many students, was an unwillingness to jeopardize their hard-earned status.
Nearly two million students attend 1,016 institutions of higher learning in China. 
Admission is difficult and the competition is fierce. 
Last year, only about 4 percent of the nation's 12.8 million high school seniors managed to pass stiff entrance examinations and find places in universities or colleges.
As for the most prestigious institutions - Beijing, Qinghua and People's universities in Beijing, Fudan University in Shanghai, Nankai University in Tianjin and Zhongshan University in Guangdong - only those students who excel have any hope of admission.
And Chinese college life is hardly easy. 
Dormitories are cold cinder-block structures, poorly heated in the north, unheated in the south. 
Hot water is rare and cafeteria food virtually inedible, students say. 
Many believe they are undernourished.
More important, college curriculums are closely wedded to the Soviet education formula introduced here in the early 1950's, a system that requires 25 or more class hours a week, a heavy emphasis on rote learning and little or no opportunity to take courses outside a student's major field.
In this system teaching is isolated from research. 
While the top scholars conduct research in the Academy of Sciences or the Academy of Social Sciences, university professors are largely limited to teaching.
 
'No Imagination'
''The consequence is a real degeneration in the quality of education,'' said a professor in Beijing who asked that his name not be used. 
''Teachers make no progress. 
Faculty in their 40's and 50's are stultified. 
They have no imagination. 
The people we are promoting to professor or associate professor are really not qualified. 
It's really very bleak.''
Beginning last year, some attempts have been made to change Chinese higher education, efforts that until now have been concentrated at the elite universities. 
A wider range of courses is available to students within their fields, and opportunities to work outside a major are slowly becoming available.
The liberal arts, which withered in favor of the hard sciences, engineering and economics, are making a minor comeback. 
Technology institutes, which lost their liberal arts departments in the 1950's, are fighting to get them back, and some have succeeded.
Nonetheless, many students say that considerable dissatisfaction remains over both curriculum and post-graduation job assignments. 
Compulsory courses in Marxism and Communist Party history are poorly attended.
And with the increasing infiltration of Western ideas and material goods, China's students are expressing greater independence and demanding more control over their futures.
A recent poll of 3,000 college students in Wuhan found that nearly half supported the idea that people should have individual attitudes on political issues. 
Only 10 percent said people should support the views of the Communist Party on every issue.
At the same time, however, there has been a decisive increase in college students' applications to join the Communist Party. 
A survey of campuses in southern China conducted by the Communist Youth League found that 50 percent of college students in their final two years seek party membership.
Although the Beijing Review recently attributed the increase in applications to a belief among students that ''the party's image has changed for the better in the past few years and that the reform led by the party is moving ahead vigorously,'' many students privately deny that it has anything to do with the party's image.
''You must be in the party,'' said one graduate student, adding that his membership application was pending. 
''You cannot advance without being in the party. 
It's a way to get ahead.''
