
Wai Fun Wong, a 15-year-old Chinatown resident who immigrated to the United States from Hong Kong eight years ago, was arrested last week and charged with attempted murder. 
The police say he shot seven people on a crowded sidewalk on East Broadway. 
A 4-year-old boy who was walking with his uncle was hit in the head. 
A man dining in a restaurant was struck in the chest. 
The police said that the five other victims, and the suspect himself, were members of youth gangs.
Chinatown, with its facade of restaurants, street stalls and gift shops, did not blink. 
Though crowds of shoppers and tourists scurried for cover when the gunfire erupted, they quickly returned after the ambulances hauled the victims away. 
So did the youth gangs who, the police say, serve as the enforcers for the criminal organizations that control gambling, drug dealing and extortion in New York's exploding Chinese community.
Social workers and business leaders in the 40 square blocks of Chinatown in lower Manhattan believe that no more than 500 young people out of a total population of more than 100,000 have been involved in gang violence. 
Their power and the power of Chinatown's criminal organizations for which they work have grown because of a dramatic shift in immigration patterns and a jump in the number of Chinese living here.
In 1960 most of Chinatown's 20,000 residents traced their origins to one county near Canton in Guangdong province. 
The Chinese community citywide today numbers 300,000, with 1,400 new legal arrivals each month coming from China and Taiwan, plus others from Chinese communities in Vietnam, Malaysia and Indonesia.
Almost everyone involved agrees that there are also thousands of illegal Chinese aliens here. 
At current rates of growth the population will reach 500,000 by 1990.
Though most immigrants establish their first American residence in Chinatown, housing is so scarce that many move to Queens as soon as they can afford to leave.
In Flushing, Jackson Heights, Elmhurst and Astoria, they have established new neighborhoods that are at least the size of Chinatown 25 years ago. 
Operating in all of them, according to everyone from shopowners to waiters, is a secretive and disciplined crime cartel. 
This coalition, still based in Chinatown, includes criminal organizations known as tongs and triads that trace their roots to patriotic groups organized more than a century ago to resist the Manchu emperors.
Because of the character of the new wave of immigration, the Cantonese dominance of the community's life has been eroding. 
The new arrivals from the Chinese mainland, Taiwan and Southeast Asia have set up their own groups. 
One new gang challenging the Cantonese Tong On (Eastern Peace) gang, which was implicated in last week's shooting, for control of the East Broadway area is made up of immigrants from Fujian province on the Chinese coast. 
Another consists mostly of youngsters whose families came from Burma.
 
Burgeoning Boundaries
Traditionally, the tongs have divided Chinatown into territories. 
As a reporter from one of New York's 10 Chinese-language daily newspapers put it last week, ''Everyone knows that Pell Street is Hip Sing turf, and no one would be crazy enough to try to challenge them there.''
However, the immigrants have pushed Chinatown's borders north to Houston Street and east toward the East River, and there is more to fight for.
''Economic conditions are a lot more dynamic now than in the old days,'' said Dr. Peter Kwong, author of ''Chinatown, N.Y.'' and a professor of politics at the State University of New York at Old Westbury. 
''Then, everyone was fighting for a pittance.''
Chinese investors have poured so much money so quickly into banks, real estate, trade and light manufacturing here that the Chinatown Planning Council cannot keep track of the new firms. 
Much of the new money comes from entrepreneurs from Hong Kong who want their families and their assets out of the colony before 1997, when control will pass from Great Britain to the Government in Peking. 
According to social workers and political activists in Chinatown, factory and restaurant owners have frequently called on the tongs to smash union efforts to organize their workers. 
Landlords have used them to silence or evict complaining tenants. 
''The toughs, the teen-agers, are being used as muscle,'' said David S. Chen, the director of youth and community programs for the Chinatown Planning Council.
The police speak of the situation with a mixture of exasperation and resignation. 
''You know Chinatown,'' said one officer. 
''You know you're not going to get the information you need.''
A special gang squad operates out of the 5th Precinct, in the heart of Chinatown, in conjunction with the District Attorney's office, but there are only 117 Asian-American officers on the force, and only 37 officers out of 26,300 speak Chinese.
The residents of Chinatown are reluctant to turn to the police or other public agencies. 
''Out of a fear of authority, people here don't want to have much to do with the police,'' said a prominent community leader. 
''The police represent tickets and fines, so they stay away.''
When disputes arise, people are more likely to turn to the tongs to resolve things. 
That, according to Dr. Kwong, creates ''a social milieu imposed by fear and violence.''
