
FOOD is an important part of the New Year festivities this week in Chinatown and throughout the city as Chinese, Vietnamese and other Asian families gather to celebrate the start of the Year of the Tiger on Sunday.
Many non-Asians will want to join in by preparing their own versions of holiday meals. 
A good way to start is to visit Chinatown. 
The scene on and near Canal, Mott and Mulberry Streets, where the sights, sounds and smells recall the street markets of Hong Kong, can be as informative as it is bewildering. 
It's a good idea to peruse the ingredients section of any good Chinese cookbook beforehand.
Several large general stores sell an array of kitchen and table wares along with an enormous variety of preserved and processed foods. 
These are excellent places to begin.
One such is Kam Man, 200 Canal Street, and its sister shop, Kam Kuo, 7 Mott Street. 
They have such items as woks, steamers, rice bowls, cleavers and, of course, chopsticks, as well as vast selections of canned and bottled goods and sweets for the New Year. 
Kam Man also has roast pork, duck and chicken; Kam Kuo has frozen fish, such as dace and yellowfish from Hong Kong, and a fresh selection of unusual produce, such as bamboo shoots and yellow chives.
Pearl River Emporium, 13-15 Elizabeth Street, sells Chinese kitchen implements and has a whole section of dried and canned foods from China, Taiwan and Hong Kong. 
From Wing Woh Leung, at the corner of Bayard and Mott Streets, come packaged sweets, including sugared red melon seeds, lotus seeds, lotus root, coconut and melon pieces, all part of the traditional New Year table. 
Sacks of red rice (for luck) and glutinous rice (for pastries) are stacked next to small packages of lemongrass, lemon leaves, sweet and salty tamarind snacks, minced pork to flavor congee (Chinese rice porridge) and dried, salted fish.
Along with the food and kitchen equipment at the Chinese-American Trading Company, 91 Mulberry Street, are shelves of amusing plastic dishes in the characteristic shapes and decorations of Chinese porcelain, a great idea for a Chinese-style picnic. 
Chinese earthenware cooking pots are a major offering here, along with teas and the roots and spices for preparing Chinese herbal medicines.
Fresh meat and fish is often top quality in Chinatown and prices are frequently lower than in other sections of Manhattan, although not necessarily at this time of the year.
The Yee Fat Trading Company, 28 Mott Street, and Hyfund Company Seafood Market, 75 Mulberry Street, like many Chinatown fish markets, have tanks full of live carp and buffalo fish. 
Yee Fat also carries fresh meat and produce, and Hyfund has vegetables. 
Many of these shops have exotic ingredients - frozen pangolin, which is akin to the armadillo, imported from China was available recently at Hyfund.
Fresh white Peking ducks from Long Island are at the butcher shop at 88 Mulberry Street. 
It is best to order them in advance. 
All come plucked and cleaned of intestines but with other innards intact.
Bayard Meat Market, 57 Bayard Street, has tripe and duck feet as well as less exotic cuts of meat. 
Like many Chinatown meat markets, this is also a good source for Smithfield hams, which take the place of Chinese Yunnan hams in many Asian recipes. 
Another notable butcher shop is Gin Ray, 55 Mott Street, where there is a particularly good selection of roast duck, barbecued spareribs and barbecued pork.
Many food shops offer similar selections of roast and barbecued meats. 
One of the best is Noodle Town, 28 1/2 Bowery, with luscious dark red chunks of barbecued pork, broad sides of roast pork, bright orange roasted squids, duck wings in soy sauce and wine sauce, stewed chitlings or pigs' intestines, and roast ducks, squabs and chickens.
Dried Beef King, 89 Bayard Street, is a new shop offering a favorite Chinese snack food - strips of dried meat in a variety of sweet and spicy flavors, including oyster and fruit.
The quality of Chinatown's fresh fruits and vegetables is generally very high. 
A particularly good source is Sun Kwong Lee, at 71 1/2 Mulberry Street, which has many of the specialty Chinese items that cannot be found in other parts of the city, such as silk and hairy squashes, bitter and winter melons, water chestnuts and lotus root.
Another good produce source is Johnny Yip, a farmer from Easton, Md., who sets up his van on Mulberry Street, halfway between Canal and Bayard, every weekend, to sell fruits and vegetables, many of which come from his own market garden.
A good introduction to Chinese sweets and pastries is available at Lung Fong Chinese Bakery, 41 Mott Street, with delightful cookies in the shapes of chickens, fish, lions and fat friendly-looking Buddhas. 
Sesame buns, fried sweets and a deliciously oily, sticky rice pancake stuffed with a layer of sweet bean paste are among the other offerings.
Rice noodles in various shapes and sizes are a treat at the Fong Inn Pastry Corporation, 46 Mott Street, and Sun Hop Hing, 4 Bowery, which also make fresh bean curd and tofu.
Ewa Import Inc., 24 Mott Street, which has porcelain and ceramic table items, also carries preserved and dried Chinese ingredients, such as dried bird's nests, dried shark's fins and the prized white jelly fungus. 
Although intended for medicinal teas and broths, many of these ingredients can be used in cooking.
The teas at Ten Ren Tea and Ginseng, 176 Canal Street, are not herbal, although the shop, as its name indicates, also sells ginseng root. 
Teas are the stars, however, ranging from a superb first-grade green oolong ($100 a pound) to teas for as little as $4 and $5 a pound.
While shopping in Chinatown, don't forget the other Asian cuisines. 
Wing Woh Leung, at the corner of Bayard and Mott Streets, has an excellent selection of ingredients for Thai, Vietnamese and Philippine preparations, in addition to its Chinese selection.
The Thai and Oriental Grocery, 81 Bayard Street, is a hole in the wall crammed with Thai foods and prepared takeout dishes. 
And Thuan-Nguyen (also called the Sun-Win Trading Company), 82 Mulberry Street, has a first-rate selection of Vietnamese ingredients.
In recent years, a significant Asian community has grown up in the Flushing section of Queens. 
Around Main Street, Roosevelt Avenue and Northern Boulevard, Chinese, Korean and Japanese food shops are mingled with restaurants serving the cuisines of those countries.
Nippan Daido U.S.A. 
Inc., 137-80 Northern Boulevard (Union Street), has a vast selection of mostly Japanese and Korean items, fresh fish, meat and vegetables as well as packaged, processed and preserved foods. 
Royal Oriental Food, 142-38 Roosevelt Avenue, and C & K Food Company, 135-21 Roosevelt Avenue, also have large selections of fresh and processed Asian foods.
At the Taiwan Supermarket Company, 37-17 Prince Street (38th Avenue), the emphasis is on Chinese foods, teas, beverages and some cookware, while Flushing Meat Market Inc., 135-07 Roosevelt Avenue, a branch of Jing Cheong Meat Market on Mott Street in Chinatown, is a pristine shop with butchers and clerks who are well-informed about a large assortment of meat and poultry and willing to butcher anything to Asian or Western specifications.
