
When C. W. Post's baseball team opened a six-game exhibition series with Chinese squads here last week, something happened that the American players didn't expect: They lost.
In fact, the Pioneers, the regular-season champions of the New York Metropolitan Conference, lost twice - by 6-4 on June 3 to Peking, and by 4-3 the next day to a Sichuan Province team.
Since then, Post has bounced back with three victories. 
The final game, against Peking, will be played here Tuesday.
C W Post College baseball team, playing exhibition series with teams in China, lost first three games but bounced back with three victories; final game is to be played on June 11; American team members comment on difficulties they have in using Chinese-made baseballs; photo (M)
Aside from the surprising skill shown by their hosts, especially in base-running, the Post players have advanced many reasons for their defeats in a country where baseball is hardly the national passtime. 
These range from jet lag and overconfidence to questionable umpiring and strange ball parks.
However, perhaps the most interesting problem cited by the Americans in their first two games was a bagful of slippery, lumpy, seamless spheres of varying sizes: Chinese baseballs.
''This is a weird feeling, especially if your hands are wet with sweat,'' said Rick Wohlmacher, a C. W. Post pitcher from New Hyde Park, L.I., squeezing one of the Chinese balls in his palm. 
''I couldn't grip it, I had no control.''
Wohlmacher, one of the team's top pitchers the past two seasons, walked five and gave up four hits and five runs in 5Y innings before being relieved in the first game against Peking.
 
American Baseballs Used
The Chinese approved a switch to American baseballs in the third game, at Tianjin. 
C. W. Post responded by scoring four runs in the first inning on back-to-back home runs by the captain, Mike Alfano, and Joe Cioffi. 
Post went on to punch 11 hits in the 7-4 victory at Tianjin, 137 kilometers east of Peking.
The second game at Tianjin was played with a Chinese ball, which Alfano, the third baseman, said ''doesn't really carry - it''s softer.''
Nevertheless, Alfano, who has been drafted by the Atlanta Braves, hit two home runs, and his team won, 10-6.
The next day Ron Lupo, a pitcher from Commack, L.I., got a return match against Sichuan. 
In his first outing against that team, with the Chinese ball, Lupo, noted for his control, walked nine. 
The second time, with an American ball, Lupo went the distance in an 8-3 victory, walking only three and throwing five strikeouts.
 
Chinese Aggressive Runners
Apart from the controversy over the Chinese balls, which clearly seems to have generated more humor than hostility here, the Post players say they are highly impressed with the Chinese style of play. 
In particular, their hosts are extremely aggressive on the basepaths, and appear to get their way. 
The Chinese teams have stolen 26 bases in 35 attempts over the 5 games played so far. 
Post has stolen only three bases in nine attempts. 
In the 8-3 loss to Lupo, they stole 12 bases in 13 attempts.
''They run no matter what the score is,'' said Coach Dick Vining of C. W. Post. 
''There''ll be a man on second with no outs and they'll try to steal third.''
Post's sports information director, Bill Huffman, noted that the Chinese ''love to build runs,'' and are fond of bunting and sacrifice hitting. 
''They think of their baserunner as a resource,'' Huffman said. 
''They think, 'We've got to get this guy across the plate.'
There are no ego trips.''
 
Hitting Is Limited
On the other hand, the Chinese are simply not long-ball hitters. 
They have not hit any home runs in the series; their American opponents have hit six.
The fences at Peking's all-dirt Fengtai Field, one of the few baseball diamonds in China, are a Ty-Cobb distance from home plate - about 400 feet down the line and 450 feet to a billboard in left-center field that reads in Chinese, ''Friendship first, competition second.''
The games at Peking have each drawn no more than a few hundred onlookers, but this appears to be because the field is in the southwest suburbs and is difficult to reach by public transportation. 
At the more centrally located stadium in Tianjin, last Thursday's game drew 2,000 spectators.
Baseball once enjoyed some popularity in this country, but was banned at the start of the cultural revolution in 1966. 
It is now being officially encouraged, and Liang Youde, an official with the Peking Institute of Sports research, said China has ambitions to turn out a good team for the 1986 Asian Games or 1988 Olympics at Seoul, or at least in time for the 1990 Asian Games, which are being hosted by Peking.
 
Kuhn Is Encouraged
''You can look at the Taiwanese, the Japanese and the Koreans, and you don't have to use your imagination to think that the Chinese will do sensationally at baseball if they just hang in there for a while,'' said the former major league commissioner, Bowie Kuhn, who was sitting in the stands last Saturday with the president of the Los Angeles Dodgers, Peter O'Malley.
Kuhn said his interest in promoting baseball in the world's most populous country dates back to 1974, when the head of the United States Mission in Peking, a former Yale baseball player by the name of George Bush, saw a game and contacted the commissioner.
''George called and said, ''They're playing baseball over here,'' Kuhn said of Bush, now the Vice President.
As C. W. Post prepares for its final match, team members have alluded to one other possible reason for their resurgence after such a slow start here. 
Two Pioneer pitchers who have had problems this past season with tendinitis, Lou Burmester and Mike Juman, have experimented with acupuncture treatments here and both say they are very pleased with the results.
''It was painless and pretty effective,'' said Juman, who is from Merrick, L.I. 
''After acupuncture, I pitched pretty well, as a matter of fact.''
