
THE QUESTION OF HU
By Jonathan D. Spence.
187 pp. 
New York:
Alfred A. Knopf. $18.95.
In the 1540's, St. Ignatius of Loyola, founder of the Society of Jesus, exhorted his followers to apply their senses to reading scripture. 
They were to begin by conjuring an image of the place in which a biblical event took place: the room in which Christ held his Last Supper, the garden where Judas gave his kiss, the house in which Mary waited after the Crucifixion. 
Once this image was fixed, the other senses - hearing, smell, touch, taste - were to be added one by one until the ''imaginative representation'' was complete.
Jonathan Spence cites this prescription in the most recent of his books on Chinese history, ''The Memory Palace of Matteo Ricci,'' to illustrate the tradition out of which Ricci, a 17th-century Jesuit missionary to China, created his ''memory system,'' but it might equally serve to describe the kind of attention Mr. Spence himself brings to the historical record. 
Even when his chosen avenue of approach is at its most abstract - using the ''memory palace,'' for example, as a way into the complex mind of Matteo Ricci - Mr. Spence never fails to anchor his subject securely in the material world. 
He applies his senses to the discovery of particulars of landscape, color or smell that allow him to evoke the past in all its diversity and bring it into the present.
In ''The Question of Hu'' his preoccupation with making history palpable seems to take on a new dimension. 
More than any other of Mr. Spence's historical works, the new book reads like a novel. 
As the footnotes amply attest, however, it is a narrative constructed scrupulously from what can be documented. 
Mr. Spence is careful to cite his authority for the least detail - even the source for the length of a ''truly magnificent beard'' sported by one of the chief characters is duly noted and dated.
The hero of the story is an exasperating little man named John Hu, a Chinese convert to Christianity whose life was unremarkable in nearly every respect save one: in 1722, at the age of 40, he traveled halfway around the world to Europe. 
Since the time of Matteo Ricci, many Western missionaries had visited China, but in 1722 only three Chinese were known to have visited France - and only one returned to tell the tale. 
Hu hoped to write an account of Europe and its customs for his own countrymen, but this ambition proved impracticable, since he spent most of his three-year sojourn abroad in an insane asylum.
Hu went to Europe as the copyist-assistant of Jean-Francois Foucquet, a Jesuit missionary returning home after 22 years in China. 
Father Foucquet had devoted a lifetime to proving that the ancient Chinese religious texts, such as ''The Book of Changes,'' were originally handed to the Chinese by ''the same true God that Christians worship.''
By giving the Chinese ''the key to their own classical writings,'' he hoped to open the way for the spread of Christianity in the East. 
Hu's task was to copy out quotations from the 4,000 volumes Father Foucquet had amassed in order to demonstrate his theory.
Hu did little copying, however; his exuberant response to the new world, added to his inability to speak the language or assimilate the culture and act accordingly, entangled him in repeated difficulties. 
To the Europeans, he appeared to be mad: on his first trip by coach, he leaped from the moving vehicle to stuff his mouth with blackberries growing at the roadside; he gave his new suit of fine coffee-colored cloth to a beggar; he marched through the streets of Paris beating a drum and waving a small flag with the message ''Men and women should be kept in their separate spheres'' written on it in Chinese characters. 
Hu was beaten and locked up to discourage him from pursuing these activities, but he repeatedly escaped and persisted. 
Finally, Father Foucquet requested that Hu be committed to the hospital for the insane at Charenton, outside of Paris.
The title of Mr. Spence's book refers to the first question Hu asked when, after more than two years' incarceration, he finally was able to speak to someone in his own language: ''Why have I been locked up?''
But ''The Question of Hu'' also addresses the larger question of how we define madness and to what degree the madhouse was an instrument of social control. 
''The Question of Hu'' must also be read as the question of ''who?''
- a subtle and complex evocation of the way in which identity is bound up in culture. 
Perhaps the most important question ''The Question of Hu'' asks, though, is: what does it mean to interpret another culture?
In the same way that he used Ricci's memory palace as a metaphor for the writing of history, Mr. Spence uses Hu's story to examine the act of ''translation.''
Mr. Spence's choice of a narrative style resembling that of fiction allows him to draw these questions from the material itself, without imposing answers. 
In so doing, he offers us an interpretation directly opposed to that Hu's employer, Father Foucquet, sought to apply in giving the Chinese the ''key to their own classical writings.''
Mr. Spence's delicate but nevertheless ambitious approach makes him one of the most original and exciting historians writing now.
