
Dear Director,
''The Music Man'' was intended to be a valentine and not a caricature. 
Please do not let the actors - particularly Zaneeta, Mayor Shinn and Mrs. Shinn, who takes herself quite seriously - mug or reach for comedy effect. 
The Del Sarte ladies also should be natural and sincere, never raucous, shrewish or comic per se. 
The humor of this piece depends upon its technical faithfulness to the real small-town Iowans of 1912 who certainly did not think they were funny at all.
 
Faithfully,
  Meredith Willson
WHEN MEREDITH WILLSON jotted this note to future directors of ''The Music Man'' in the mid-50's, he wasn't thinking of Wang Xingna, an exuberant operatic tenor who hides his bald spot under a lumpy blue beret, as the flimflam musical instrument peddler Harold Hill. 
And he wasn't thinking of Li Zhigang, a barrel-chested man of no uncertain presence, as the slightly pompous Mayor Shinn, who never quite gets around to delivering the Gettysburg Address to his farm-town constituents. 
Meredith Willson, it can be said, wasn't thinking of Chinese theatergoers.
''For an American audience, I know exactly what to do,'' said George C. White, the president of the Eugene O'Neill Theater Center in Waterbury, Conn.,, who is in Beijing to stage ''The Music Man,'' the first professional production of an American musical in China.
''I have to play this a lot more broadly for a Chinese audience because the subtlety is lost here,'' he explained, slouching in a cramped folding wooden seat as he scrutinized his cast gallivanting across the stage of the Central Opera Theater. 
''They don't have the context. 
They don't understand small-town Iowa in 1912.
''If we don't play it for laughs, it won't go,'' he continued. 
''Take Mayor Shinn. 
He's very big here. 
He shouldn't be so pompous. 
But here, we have to play it very broadly.''
Mr. White arrived in China last month with a choreographer, music director, costume designer, two producers, bolts of cloth, scores and scripts to transform a corps of Chinese opera singers and ballet dancers into a Broadway song-and-dance show that he hopes will span the cultural gulf between quintessential Americana and Chinese views of life and notions of entertainment.
He also brought with him Rodney Marriott, a tall, animated fellow with a thatch of blond hair and a beard a bit like an unraveling Brillo pad, to direct a production of ''The Fantasticks'' with players from the Central Opera Theater, which also supplied the singers for ''The Music Man.''
Unlike ''The Music Man,'' which will play only in Beijing, ''The Fantasticks'' will tour several cities in China in coming months.
''The Music Man'' grabs for middle-American values the way the Mississippi River reaches for the Gulf. 
It is the tale of Harold Hill, a smooth-talking, fast-walking seller of trombones, cornets and clarinets who arrives in River City, Iowa, intending to fleece yet another small town with grandiose promises of the new, the wonderful, the unexpected. 
The musical stirs provincial gullibility with down-home common sense, slick hucksterism with apple-pie earnestness. 
In the end, of course, the Music Man is sold the kettle of small-town virtues by a proper librarian, and River City learns to dream a little.
For China, where over the last 37 years Communist rule has ripped the countryside apart, forced millions of families from their homes, triggered widespread starvation and battered its people with rampaging, violent political campaigns, one would expect little lightheartedness left. 
But since 1979, when a dramatic series of economic reforms were introduced, life in the countryside has been reinvigorated and cities have begun to bustle with a growing sense of self-assurance.
Still, entertainment in China remains a very mixed duffle of didactic and maudlin films, traditional Peking and provincial operas playing to increasingly aged audiences and a small but growing number of Western operas and ballets of world-class quality. 
Hong Kong pop music blares from twin-speaker boom boxes in shops and markets while stately polkas played by dowdy orchestras pull couples onto the floors of dance halls across the country.
Into this cultural landscape parachuted Mr. White and his staff. 
And the question that hangs over the red brick rehearsal halls here is whether China is ready for the busy, boisterous ''Music Man'' and the slapstick, illusory, romantic ''Fantasticks.''
''After the Cultural Revolution, people like comedy and singing and light opera,'' said Zou Dehua, the director of the art committee for the Central Opera Theater and its leading soprano, referring to the Cultural Revolution, the decade of political upheaval and torment that ended in 1976. 
''I think audiences here will accept American musicals very well. 
Young people got on to pop music very quickly.''
Nonetheless, the politicized atmosphere that has pervaded the arts during the current upheaval in China's leadership has crept up on the production of the American musicals in recent days. 
Li Guangxi, a prominent opera star here and a member of a political body called the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, has urged the Chinese Opera Theater, the country's most prestigious operatic organization and the hosts for the American musical productions, to stage more Chinese operas and fewer Western productions.
China Daily, the country's English-language newspaper, quoted Mr. Li as complaining that theater directors did not appreciate Chinese opera and that the Central Opera Theater had not produced a Chinese opera in two years. 
''Although some established writers do not approve of the present situation,'' Mr. Li was quoted as saying, ''they are too old to create modern operas. 
For the young, who are fresh with new ideas, it is easier for them to look to the West for inspiration.''
Mr. Li, who is a candidate for the presidency of the Central Opera Theater, said he would require more Chinese operas to be performed. 
''Most of all I want to make the theater well known to the world by performing our own operas,'' he said.
The day Mr. Li's pronouncements appeared, a bit of glumness hung over the Americans here. 
Mr. White, who rarely refrains from opining on anything, said it was a time to be quiet. 
''Let's just go on,'' he said.
And go on they have. 
In the slightly dank rehearsal hall Rodney Marriott was running his troops through the abduction scene in ''The Fantasticks.''
An actor doing his best to whoop like an American Indian bundled a girl on his back and scooted off stage right.
''Stage left, stage left,'' hollered Mr. Marriott, his right hand jerking up to push at a brush of hair that wouldn't stay out of his eyes. 
''Stage left always means left facing the audience.''
A translator quickly explained the new terminology.
''This is the longest-running show in the history of American theater,'' Mr. Marriott said during a break in rehearsal. 
''This is about illusions about young love, the illusions children have about parents, illusions about the theater. 
It's amazing how universal this is.''
Still, he said, turning opera singers into players in a musical required not only imbuing an appreciation of American humor but breaking established operatic modes. 
''These are opera singers who've never really had to dance, act, sing,'' Mr. Marriott said. 
''They're having to learn how to dance, to move. 
They're really going hard, six, seven hours a day.''
For both ''The Fantasticks'' and ''The Music Man,'' translating American repartee, assumptions and humor into a recognizable Chinese form brought with it considerable obstacles.
'''We want this to be relentlessly American,'' Mr. White said, ''right down to blond and red wigs. 
If you're going to do it, do it all the way. 
But how do you translate, 'What is the sin in sincere'?''
Translating the script of ''The Music Man'' - which will be known in China as ''The Musical Instrument Peddler'' - into Chinese took six months, according to Li Shirong, the deputy director of the Central Opera Theater. 
Then the Chinese script was sent back to the United States, where it was retranslated word for word into literal English. 
''We wanted to see what we had,'' Mr. White said.
Every day, changes are made in the script - to make it more colloquial, to make it more accessible to the Chinese, to make it truer to Meredith Willson's original text. 
Where the Willson script reads, for example, ''Cubebs, tryin' out, tailor-mades like cigarette feends [slam] and braaagin,' '' (which even English speakers may find rather cryptic) the Chinese version read something like, ''foolishly making tricks, learning to take drugs, secretly smoking marijuana cigarettes and heroin, degenerating into a drug addict.''
''We changed that,'' Mr. White said flatly.
Elsewhere in the play, Mayor Shinn rises to address townspeople and attempts to recite the Gettysburg Address: ''Four score and seven years ago. 
. .''
In colloquial Chinese, there is no precise rendering of ''four score,'' so Li Zhigang solemnly intones in Chinese, ''On the Fourth of July, 1776. 
. .''
More importantly, however, the phrase ''four score and seven years ago'' summons up a welter of images in the American mind. 
In the Chinese mind, even the date is little more than one of 365 that year during the reign of Qianlong during the Qing Dynasty.
Yet another line quotes a townsman, Oliver Hix, as saying in the Chinese version, ''If the banking business was correct most of the time, you wouldn't be able to keep your rice bowl.''
But beyond these problems of language, Mr. White and his colleagues as well as his Chinese counterparts believe that the larger impact of the musical will hit home.
''It's so funny,'' said Mr. White, during an afternoon rehearsal, as actors and singers careened across the stage. 
''It's like the old Durante. 
Everybody wants to get into the act.''
Paulette Haupt-Nolen, the artistic director of the O'Neill, is the musical director of the production. 
A slim white baton with a battered handle seems never to leave her right hand.
''Is the boom, boom, boom added?'' she asked her Chinese counterpart, Gao Weiqun, the music director of the Central Opera Theater, during a run-through of the train scene, in which traveling salesmen heading for Iowa swap tales of the trade and of the legendary Music Man. 
In the Chinese translation, Ms. Haupt-Nolen said, ''There are more words than the beat, so the rhythm of the train is always changing.''
Suddenly the run-through collapses. 
A bewildered Ms. Haupt-Nolen looks about, finally lowering her baton. 
''What happened now?'' she asked.
Mr. White stood up quickly, his arms flailing, urging, ''Keep going, keep going.''
Frantically the Chinese translator, Liang Lili, tries to get the train scene moving.
''It always takes twice as long with the translation,'' Mr. White said. 
He sighed a bit and sat down.
Li Shirong, a rail-thin, soft-spoken man, said that the musical presented real difficulties for the opera singers.
''Frankly speaking,'' he said, ''the singers at the beginning are not accustomed to it. 
They have to get used to singing and acting and dancing at the same time. 
This is not like traditional opera, where you walk a few steps, sit down or stand up and then sing an aria.''
Wang Xingna, a 47-year-old operatic tenor, was chosen by Mr. White during casting last October to play Howard Hill, the Music Man. 
''I studied opera at the Central Conservatory of Music,'' he said, during a pause in a rehearsal. 
''I started singing professionally in 1958. 
During the Cultural Revolution there was no opera. 
We went to the countryside.''
When the Cultural Revolution ended, Mr. Wang was first assigned to a film studio as a musician and singer and did not come to the Central Opera Theater until 1979. 
Since then, he has played Alfredo in ''La Traviata'' and Don Jose in ''Carmen'' as well as parts in ''Madama Butterfly'' and ''I Pagliacci.''
''This is totally different,'' he said. 
''The style, to get the style, the music, the action. 
All Chinese actors have trouble playing and singing and jumping around.
''Originally, I'm a tenor,'' he continued. 
''Now I'm singing baritone. 
So it's a bit hard to sing. 
I have so many spoken lines I cannot use the technique I know. 
I have to find a new way to speak clearly and to project my voice further. 
In classical opera I only need to stand and sing. 
Here there is a lot of movement. 
Now I am moving into new areas.''
And how will the Chinese audience respond to the slickster Harold Hill pushing his instruments on an Iowa town?
''Maybe people will say I don't do the right thing,'' Mr. Wang said with a laugh. 
''But I dare say most people will like me. 
This is closer to the people, this kind of music.''
Onstage, Lynn Britt, the choreographer, was tugging dancers about, moving furniture. 
''Bom, bom, bom,'' she said, popping the beat. 
The dancers moved about her, bit by bit with more confidence.
''To think,'' observed Mr. White, clutching the railing of the pit and tugging the lapel of his ''lucky'' gray jacket in mock despair, ''we have to open in only six weeks.''
Replied Ms. Haupt-Nolen. ''Cross your fingers.''
Correction
An article in the Arts and Leisure section last Sunday about a Beijing production of ''The Music Man'' gave an incorrect location for the Eugene O'Neill Theater Center. 
It is in Waterford, Conn.
Correction-Date: April 26, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
