
When Jimuya, a herdsman in Inner Mongolia, sold the wool sheared from his 200 sheep last spring, half of the $320 that he earned went to buy a locally made Swan television set.
Mr. Jimuya, who like many Mongolians uses only one name, took the 12- inch black-and-white set back to his two-room house in the rolling grasslands of Siziwang Banner, or County. 
The herdsman rigged the television set to a windmill generator turned by the incessant wind that sweeps down from Mongolia.
At night, when his sheep, horses and cattle have been settled down, Mr. Jimuya joins his wife, four children and elderly parents on the family's kang, or heated-brick sleeping platform, to find out what is happening in the world outside.
Article on introduction of television to peasants living in Mongolia, many of whom make TV sets their first major purchase under new agricultural responsibility system which rewards them for working harder; illustration; map (M)
''I'll watch whatever programs the others watch - news, features, films,'' Mr. Jimuya told a journalist who had driven two hours across the prairie to find him. 
The family's favorite nights are Tuesday and Friday, Mr. Jimuya said, because the television station in Hohhot, the regional capital of Inner Mongolia, broadcasts in Mongolian then instead of Chinese.
 
A Reward of New System
Mr. Jimuya is one of many peasants across China who made a television set their first major purchase under the new agricultural responsibility system, which rewards them for working harder. 
Some fellow herdsmen bought color television sets, Mr. Jimuya said, but he frugally limited himself to a black-and-white set because he is saving to build a new house.
About 200 million Chinese watch television, the official New China News Agency reported last January, making them the world's largest television audience. 
The Ministry of Radio and Television said in September that television reached nearly 60 percent of China's population, which means 600 million people.
Whatever the audience, factories cannot turn out enough television sets. 
China plans to produce more than 4.6 million sets this year. 
In the first nine months, 823,400 color sets were manufactured, a jump of 160 percent over the comparable period last year, but this lagged behind consumer demand.
The impact has been most obvious in the countryside, where television antennas sprout from mud-brick houses on dirt roads. 
In Guangdong Province in southeastern China, many peasants have put up UHF ''fishbone'' antennas to bring in sassy television shows from Hong Kong, despite periodic campaigns by the authorities to pull them down as conduits of bourgeois pollution.
 
Prime-Time Physics
But elsewhere, peasants who once went to bed when the sun set now spend evenings mesmerized in front of prime- time physics lessons, reports on the harvest output, Chinese operas, teleplays that act out the Government's latest injunctions and sports events like the triumphs of China's abiding heroines, its female volleyball team.
The Communist Party recognized in a directive a year ago that radio and television were effective tools for keeping in touch with the masses. 
Last December, Wu Lengxi, the Radio and Television Minister, admitted that Chinese television should be livelier, though he made clear that it would eschew the violence and sex found on Western television. 
''While clearing away cultural contamination,'' he said, ''we should try our best to meet the people's cultural needs.''
Over a cup of Mongolian milk tea flavored with salt, Mr. Jimuya explained why a fifth of his income so far this year was spent on a television set. 
''Television has become a fashionable thing, and everybody wants to have one, even here,'' he said. 
''With television, I can see what's happening in the outside, how other areas of China are using the responsibility system.''
 
Hasn't Changed the Routine
The arrival of a television set has not changed the family routine much, he said, since herdsmen usually stayed up late. 
Before, his family gathered around a radio, which, like the overhead light, was powered by the windmill generator he acquired last year.
Mr. Jimuya said he set no viewing rules for his children, who rise early to walk several miles to primary school at the Sandan Production Brigade. 
His oldest daughter is boarding at a secondary school in Siziwang, 45 miles away.
''The children watch television every night,'' he said. 
''I let them watch it until the end of the program. 
They are interested in whatever there is on television.''
The local channel goes on at 6:45 P.M., with the news starting at 7 P.M. It stays on until 10:30 or 11 P.M. There are no programs in the daytime, when everyone should be working.
The signal comes in clear from a transmitter that was built on a hill about a mile away to relay the programming from Hohhot. 
Before he bought a television set, Mr. Jimuya said, he used to hike over to the relay station after dinner to watch its monitor with his friends. 
Now other herdsmen who still lack sets will drop in on his house at night, sometimes traveling by horseback.
 
A 69-Year-Old TV Fan
The most avid viewer may be Mr. Jimuya's father, Arenchinkache, 69 years old, a white-bearded herdsman whose weathered face and bandy legs show the years spent in the saddle. 
''I like to watch because every evening brings so many things that are fresh and new,'' Mr. Arenchinkache said.
On rare occasions when the wind drops, the television set runs on electricity stored by the generator. 
The Jimuyas forgo watching television in the summer, when the family lives in a yurt, or felt tent, to follow the livestock across the grasslands.
Except for television, their traditional life is mostly unchanged. 
They eat one large meal a day, with mutton and milk heated on a stove fueled by animal manure because the prairie has no firewood. 
The family sleeps on bedrolls thrown across the kang, which is warmed by pipes from the adjacent stove.
In television, Mr. Jimuya and other peasants in remote parts of China have discovered horizons that they never knew or, for that matter, thought much about.
''When I listen to the radio, I can only listen,'' Mr. Jimuya said. 
''But when I watch television, I can see with my own eyes how things are changing in the other parts of the country.''
