
''The Unruly Dragon'' flows along like its subject, the Yellow River in China. 
It's long and it's muddy, but it has lots of bright flashes of color. 
The Yellow River, or Huang Ho, starts in the Tibetan highlands and empties out in Bo Hai Bay off southeast China after twisting and turning 3,300 miles. 
Some 120 million Chinese, Tibetans, Mongols and Moslems live along its banks, a great many of them, one thinks, worried about disaster. 
In the last 50 years, ''The Unruly Dragon'' reports almost casually, floods, crop failure and starvation have taken the lives of more than 4 million. 
The figure of 4 million is hard to comprehend; we can't imagine misery that vast. 
The problem is, ''The Unruly Dragon'' can't quite imagine it, either.
The hourlong film, at 10 o'clock tonight, is presented by ABC News. 
Presumably, that means it's a news documentary. 
In fact, it's not a news documentary; it's a travelogue. 
The Yellow River moves endlessly through gorges and canyons, past ancient stone dwellings and giant Buddhas carved out of hillsides. 
Meanwhile, we hear a flute. 
Then the film returns to a studio, where Jim Laurie, the chief Asia correspondent for ABC News, attempts to put what we see in perspective. 
That's a tough job. 
Mr. Laurie, through no fault of his own, is reduced from reporter to tour guide. 
He points to a map: This is where we've been; here's where we're going. 
Then we return to the Yellow River.
''The Unruly Dragon'' is a hybrid - a cross between ''National Geographic'' and the evening news. 
It's pleasant and watchable, but it's also like the proverbial Chinese dinner: You've eaten but you don't feel full. 
The Japanese Broadcasting Corporation made the film as a co-production with China Central Television, and then, it seems, ABC became involved. 
The network, which recently disbanded its ''Close-Up'' documentary unit, is apparently searching for new cost-effective ways to present news.
Thus the film we see tonight: no questions, no answers, no interviews; Mr. Laurie is the narrator for a film made by someone else. 
The production almost certainly costs a lot less than a ''Close-Up'' documentary. 
That's fine; there's nothing wrong with a network saving money. 
Nevertheless, a different price is paid. 
''The Unruly Dragon'' slips into that vast, wishy-washy, though not necessarily unpleasant, area where we're not sure if we're watching entertainment or news. 
Tibetan monks beat gongs; Moslems celebrate a marriage (the sequence is charming); Mongols gallop on horseback. 
It's beguiling, but where are we?
The ''Close-Up'' unit would have told us. 
Mr. Laurie can't do it alone.
He does try, though. 
In one sequence, we see two rams butt heads while villagers stand and watch. 
Ram head-butting, apparently, is a traditional sport. 
''And the ramming of the rams might also be seen as symbolic of something else,'' Mr. Laurie says from the studio, ''the clash of cultures and the clash of ancient beliefs against the encroachment of modern life.''
How's that again?
What is the ramming of the rams supposed to mean?
One problem when a network news department uses someone else's film is that it's got to find meaning where none may exist. 
The ramming of the rams is just the ramming of the rams. 
It's not symbolic of anything except, perhaps, a headache. 
Mr. Laurie, however, is being forced to verbally connect all the random footage. 
Just after we see the rams (they're somewhere near the mouth of the river), we see Tibet. 
Nomads are tossing paper charms to the winds while they watch a horse race. 
Then there's a race on yaks. 
It's terrific footage. 
It's unlikely you've ever seen yaks thunder down the homestretch before. 
At the same time, the yak race, and most of the rest of the film, is so blatantly picturesque that we're sure the Japanese crew that made ''The Unruly Dragon'' was led on an official tour. 
That may be fine, too; it's one way of seeing China. 
On the other hand, this kind of production forces Mr. Laurie into a spoilsport role. 
The Tibetans on horseback seem to be having a wonderful time; they're wild and fierce and free. 
But then Mr. Laurie says that at least eight people were killed in rioting in Tibet last month, and that ''unrest has now spread to the Yellow River lands.''
Then we see yaks.
It doesn't add up. 
Mr. Laurie, who is properly performing his journalistic duty, is saying one thing, but the pictures say something else. 
''The Unruly Dragon'' has a fuzzy context. 
When it visits a Moslem area, we see a song festival that attracts some 100,000 people, many descended from Turkish tribes that settled long ago near the river. 
Singers sing, and Mr. Laurie says the songs indicate that ''a great pride is shown in the ethnic diversity of China.''
Then he adds, ''It should be noted, though, these Moslem singers sing in Mandarin Chinese.''
We don't know what to make of that. 
Does it mean something imporant or not?
One wishes Mr. Laurie had been at the song festival himself so that he might have told us.
''The Unruly Dragon'' often looks lovely and is never less than exotic, but it's like being on a boat ride where we keep seeing attractive vistas - it's great to see them for a while, but as the boat ride goes on they lose meaning. 
When we're back at the dock, we're not quite sure where we've been. 
ABC News is offering an excursion. 
It's nice, but you may wish that the folks from ''Close-Up'' were along.
