
SELDOM has East met West more constructively, instructively and wholesomely than on ''Peking Encounter,'' a clean-cut traveloguedrama that is one of the highlights of this weekend's television fare, if only by default. 
If you insist on watching television at this time of year, when programming is at its pokiest, you may have the disconcerting feeling that night is turning into day, and you will not be imagining things. 
Like ''Flash Gordon,'' a two-hour prime-time cartoon that is one of the weekend's other new shows, ''Peking Encounter'' feels very much like a morning or afternoon program that is staying up after its bedtime.
Certainly the upbeat, nicer-than-life attitude that illuminates ''Peking Encounter,'' which will be broadcast Sunday at 8 P.M. on WNEW-TV, Channel 5, has more of the feeling of an ''Afterschool Special'' than of grown-up fare. 
The program was filmed entirely in China, however, and the scenery alone is worth an hour's attention.
SELDOM has East met West more constructively, instructively and wholesomely than on ''Peking Encounter,'' a clean-cut travelogue-drama that is one of the highlights of this weekend's television fare, if only by default.
As written by Cecile Tang and Timothy Burns and directed by E.W. 
Swackhamer, ''Peking Encounter'' focuses on a group of American tourists. 
There is no one in China who is not thrilled to meet them, and the visitors, for their part, are as preternaturally polite and tireless and inquisitive as they can be. 
The group includes a famous gourmet (Mason Adams), a fan of the gourmet, who is knitting him a sweater (June Lockhart) and a young woman named Susan (Diana Canova), whose friendliness leads - this is a television drama, after all - to the Peking equivalent of a whirlwind romance.
The young woman who is the group's tour guide (a native Chinese actress, Chen Chong) likes Susan so much she tells her: ''You're different. 
You want to know what we think, what we do, and you don't see me in terms of sightseeing.''
That is certainly true. 
Susan is thrilled when, outside the Imperial Palace, a Chinese man watches her taking a picture and tells her, ''Excuse me, Miss, your lens cap is on.''
''I just communicated with a Chinese citizen for the first time this trip - an ordinary person, not just a tour guide!''
Susan cries excitedly. 
Then she goes off to see the Great Wall.
Wouldn't you know it, the ''ordinary person'' turns out to be a famous symphony conductor (Shi Yong), who is a friend of Susan's tour guide. 
And so the two, by chance, meet again. 
They become friendly. 
He asks Susan why the Beatles were so popular. 
She sings ''In My Life'' for him. 
The faint-hearted may want to tune out by now, but more scenery and more romance are still in store.
Despite scenes like the one in which the conductor takes Susan to meet his family and she declares, ''Oh, you are all so gifted!'' and a relative says, ''No, we are just simple folks,'' ''Peking Encounter'' holds a certain homey charm. 
The views of Peking remain fresh even when the dialogue turns hopelessly familiar. 
''I have come 11,000 miles to investigate a method of food preparation that predates the written word,'' the gourmet declares. 
''At breakfast this morning, they served me bacon and eggs!''
'Flash Gordon' Turns Up
 
In Cartoon Form
At least ''Peking Encounter'' is an attempt to present something new, if only in hackneyed terms. 
''Flash Gordon,'' which will be broadcast tomorrow night at 8 on WNBC-TV, Channel 4, was made in 1979 and shelved while the live-action feature film ''Flash Gordon'' came and went. 
Now the cartoon has arrived - and it is a cartoon. 
The animation is no more sophisticated than that of Saturday morning fare. 
Flash can barely blink and speak simultaneously, and the animation remains stiff throughout.
Subtitled ''The Greatest Adventure of All,'' the cartoon is set in 1939, when things are very, very bad on Earth. 
''Earth Doomed, Says Dr. Zarkov,'' says a headline on a newspaper that Flash is reading when he meets Dale Arden on board an airplane. 
Then there is a bit of adventure involving the plane and a storm of hot lava. 
''That guy sure saved our bacon!''
Flash says a few minutes later, and Dale replies, ''It may get fried yet -he's Dr. Zarkov.''
Sure enough, it is, and he leads them to the planet Mongo, to Ming the Merciless and to two hours' worth of harmless escapism.
 
Around the Dial
Elsewhere on the dial this weekend, WNET, Channel 13, offers an ''Evening With Bill Monroe and Friends'' at 11:30 tonight, and Bob Dylan turns up on a ''Saturday Night Live'' rerun on WPIX, Channel 11, also at 11:30 tonight. 
Tomorrow night at 7, WNET-TV, Channel 13 will broadcast a special on ''The Making of 'Superman,' the Movie.''
