
TAIWAN has rock music, Christian Dior and hamburgers and french fries; it also has a great many citizens who would love to visit China. 
They do not, of course, because Taipei and Peking have been almost hermetically sealed from each other since Chiang Kai-shek fled to Taiwan in 1949. 
Therefore, the Taiwanese have some towering misconceptions about the Chinese. 
''A Chinese Affair,'' a documentary on Channel 13, examines all this and other things about Taiwan at 8 o'clock tonight.
John Corry previews TV documentary, "A Chinese Affair".
The documentary, the newest in public television's ''Frontline'' series, has a kind of portentousness about it. 
A visit to Taiwan by Barry Goldwater, paid for by the local Chamber of Commerce, the narrator says with some asperity, is ''a soothing reassurance that some powerful people still support Nationalist China.''
There is a suggestion in this that we are still in the time of Senator William Knowland and the old ''China Lobby.''
The fact is that President Carter broke off diplomatic relations with Taiwan in 1978. 
President Reagan said last August that he was winding down arms shipments.
The documentary also visits Taiwan's island outpost of Quemoy, 2,000 yards from China, where a Taiwanese officer says of the Communists, ''We always defeat them.''
The narrator says that Quemoy is the most heavily fortified island in the world, and that its troops are trained ''to hate.''
That's a hard thing to substantiate, and since the narrator has already said the last Communist attack was in 1957, it's unclear in the film how immediate the danger really is.
And so it goes, a documentary that doesn't support its own weight. 
A Taiwanese writer agrees to speak, but only in a ''secure place.''
The place turns out to be the narrator's hotel room, where the writer is identified and interviewed on camera. 
What is the security against?
Curious crowds in the street?
''A Chinese Affair'' does say, however, that Taiwan suffers from cultural schizophrenia, East meeting West, mostly to the loss of the East. 
It suggests that this makes reconciliation between Taiwan and Peking, already difficult because of obdurate politicians on both sides, more difficult than ever. 
It says there is a human cost to this - the separation of some Taiwanese from their mainland families.
All this is presumably true, but since ''Frontline'' represents public television's foremost entries into the documentary genre, ''A Chinese Affair'' should not have such a hard time getting down to serious issues in a serious way.
Can diplomatically isolated Taiwan go it alone, relying on its strength as a trade partner?
The documentary seems to address this for a minute or two, but then the subject is dropped.
And a larger question: is there a new generation of politicians to replace the late Chiang Kai-shek's old veterans?
The documentary, citing Amnesty International, says there are more than 100 political prisoners on Taiwan, but never makes much of it one way or another. 
Taiwan, it says, has a repressive government, but not nearly so repressive as when Chiang was alive. 
The documentary suggests there is political ferment. 
One wishes it had said a good deal more to explain it.
