
''JOURNEY TO THE HEART OF CHINA'' does not necessarily explain China, and in a way it makes it more remote than ever. 
On the other hand, China possibly is beyond explanation, at least in conventional Western terms, and a recognition of the remoteness may be the first step toward any understanding. 
''Journey to the Heart of China,'' an NBC White Paper, will be seen on NBC-TV at 8 o'clock tonight.
The two-hour film documentary gives us China largely as mass, as order, as 1.8 billion people with a commonality of culture and purpose. 
Even as it points out incipient capitalism - a fast-food entrepreneur, for example - or fag ends of Western culture - an orchestra tooting away at ''My Heart Belongs to Daddy'' - and says that China is in flux, the larger message is that there is no flux at all. 
China is China is China.
John Corry reviews TV documentary film Journey to the Heart of China
Consider, for example, a sequence on a mental hospital in Harbin. 
Tom Brokaw, who narrates, says that 80 percent of the mentally ill in China are diagnosed as schizophrenics. 
Chinese doctors, he also says, reject Freud and even the notion of a subconscious, and turn instead to ''behavioral treatment'' and ''spiritual support.''
Only a country sure of itself and its traditions, one suspects, can practice this kind of medicine.
The documentary, as Mr. Brokaw says, is not showing us ''the China of postcards and Presidential tours.''
He says it is showing us ''the heart of the real China,'' and while it may not quite be showing us this, either, it is not because it isn't trying. 
''Journey to the Heart of China'' was filmed, for the most part, by a British company that seems to have had access to places never seen before, at least not on television.
Thus we see, among other things, a prison, a criminal court, even a committee that is adjudicating a divorce. 
Mr. Brokaw, who visited China with his own crew, tells us that family ties are at the soul of China, but that official policy calls for only one child for each family. 
The British crew, meanwhile, had filmed the trauma of a mother who gave birth to a daughter, and then feared that her husband might kill the infant because it was not a boy.
The mother asked for a divorce. 
The British crew filmed her as she pleaded her case before a committee. 
She is weeping; her husband is sullen. 
There is a shouting match. 
The committee agrees the woman has a right to a divorce, but that mediation should come first. 
There are two dozen meetings. 
In-laws from both families join in. 
Finally, there is reconciliation, formalized by official documents. 
''Now shake hands; don't be shy; shake hands,'' the chief mediator says when it is over.
A viewer is free to see in this any lesson he chooses - that Chinese women are repressed, that the family is important, that China is backward, or extraordinarily civilized. 
This viewer was pleased that Mr. Brokaw told us only that when ''last we checked,'' the husband and wife ''seemed to be getting along just fine.''
Meanwhile, the ostensible thread running through the documentary is China's slow recovery from the excesses of the Cultural Revolution. 
We are told that more than 800,000 Chinese either were killed or committed suicide then, and that perhaps 100 million more were punished in other ways. 
Institutions were toppled; barbarism ran wild.
What then can we make of an extraordinary sequence about a woman charged with petty thievery in post- Cultural Revolution China?
Mr. Brokaw, standing in front of the Chinese courthouse, jacket slung over one shoulder (NBC is insistent that he look like a foreign correspondent; it is a harmless conceit), says that 99 percent of all people charged with crimes in China are found guilty, but that the case we are about to see is unusual because it involves a woman; 99 of every 100 criminals, he says, are men.
The woman has been charged with stealing from her neighbors, petty thievery for which she could be sentenced to five years. 
Three judges hear the case. 
Meticulously, they reconstruct the crime. 
They interview members of her family. 
They ask about her past. 
They visit the brewery where she works.
At the public trial, she is flanked by female guards, with holstered pistols over their white tunics. 
''I suffered seriously from bourgeois ideology,'' the woman says. 
''I based my own happiness on other people's suffering.''
A judge, in turn, says that the woman, who is by now weeping, failed even to love her own child.
The woman is then put on probation, including sessions in which she must confess her guilt again and again, although her most severe punishment, Mr. Brokaw says, will be her sense of shame. 
In their shared sense of purpose and values, the documentary seems to suggest, even if inadvertently, that the Chinese are strong enough to inherit the earth.
