
Ten years after the defeat of South Vietnam, there is widespread agreement among policy analysts that the position of the United States in Asia is stronger now than at any time since the end of World War II. 
In April 1975, it was in shambles.
A decade ago, in victory, North Vietnam looked invincible. 
Now the economy of united Vietnam is stagnating and Hanoi is mired down in its own ''Vietnam'' in Cambodia.
In the span of 10 years, policy analysts say, Vietnam, the Soviet Union and most Communist movements in Asia tumbled from victory or ascendancy to decline, while the United States moved from defeat to a position of strength.
Policy analysts agree that, ten years after defeat of South Vietnam, US position in Asia is stronger now than at any time since end of World War II; decade ago, victory made North Vietnam look invincible, but now economy of united Vietnam is stagnating as it is mired down with involvement in Cambodia; analysts say in past decade Vietnam, Soviet Union and most Communist movements in Asia have weakened while US has moved from defeat to position of strength; photo (M)
The turnaround was due largely to a change in the politics of American policy-making toward Asia. 
For 40 years, no foreign-policy issue was more divisive than Asia - from what to do about China right after World War II, through the Korean War to Vietnam. 
But in the last 10 years, after the opening to China and the end of the Vietnam War, few policy issues have garnered more bipartisan support.
Yet the question of who lost Vietnam is still hotly disputed by the people who once struggled over policy and fought the war,
Among the issues raised are these:
Why did the defeat not lead Asian countries other than Cambodia and Laos to fall under Communist control like ''a row of dominoes,'' as President Eisenhower and his successors predicted?
Did America's stand in Vietnam delay or make possible America's current position of strength in Asia?
Why have Hanoi and Moscow been unable to capitalize on their victory?
Has the war irretrievably turned hawks and doves on Vietnam into policy adversaries?
And what parallels are to be drawn for Central America?
The questions and answers about the Vietnam experience slice deeply into virtually every central foreign-policy issue in the Reagan Administration, from Central America to Grenada, Lebanon and terrorism.
Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger has argued for any military intervention around the world only as ''a last resort,'' with full public backing, and ''with the clear intention of winning.''
Secretary of State George P. Shultz has maintained that ''there is no such thing as guaranteed public support in advance,'' and that a great power must be prepared to use doses of force to buttress diplomacy.
Asia Today
The belief that the United States position in Asia has never been stronger in 40 years is shared by Vietnam doves like Richard C. Holbrooke, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asia in the Carter Administration, and Vietnam hawks like Paul D. Wolfowitz.
''It is clear that the whole condition of East Asia is today far better than the most optimistic would have predicted 10 years ago,'' Mr. Wolfowitz said.
''Even compared to the end of World War II, it is far better because the countries of Asia are far more self-reliant, don't look to us as much as they did before; but when they do, we are there.''
These two men and other Asian experts - Robert A. Scalapino of the University of California at Berkeley, Donald S. Zagoria of Hunter College, and Winston Lord, president of the Council on Foreign Relations - produce an almost identical litany of examples to back up this optimistic picture.
 
China as U.S. 
Ally
China, instead of being the principal adversary, has become a strategic ally in many ways. 
It restrains North Korea, aids guerrillas in checking Vietnam in Cambodia, has called off support for Communist insurgents in Thailand and elsewhere, and ties down a third of the Soviet armed forces on its border.
With the notable exception of the Philippines, most Asian countries are enjoying political stabilityII almost unprecedented for this century. 
The stabilityII rests on a blend of authoritarianism, democracy and substantial economic growth.
According to State Department figures, the economies of the members of the Association of Southeast Asia Nations, or Asean - which include Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, the Philippines and Brunei - have each grown on the average of 7 percent a year over the last 10 years. 
This is about twice the global average growth after discounting for inflation. 
American trade with the Pacific Basin area now exceeds its trade with Europe.
Relations with Japan are generally deemed to be good, though marred by continuing friction over America's lopsided trade deficit with its most important Asian ally.
 
'A Pacific Destiny'
Soviet military power in the region has grown considerably over the decade. 
This includes substantial use by Russian ships, including submarines, and reconaissance aircraft of the former major American base at Cam Ranh Bay in Vietnam.
Nonetheless, Pentagon experts generally subscribe to the assessment of Robert O'Neill, an Asian scholar and director of the London-based International Institute for Strategic Studies. 
Given American military and naval power in the region and deployments under way, he said in a recent article, ''there is little prospect that the United States will be outclassed in power projection and other strategic capabilities in the Pacific'' provided there are no major crises elsewhere.
''Americans do have a Pacific destiny,'' said Michael H. Armacost, the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs. 
''All these factors tended to guarantee that the fatigue and frustration with Southeast Asia bred by the bitter outcome of the war was a transitory phenomenon.''
Vietnam's Troubles
Alone among those interviewed, former Secretary of State Dean Rusk sounded a note of caution. 
''I don't think we know yet the full consequences of the war,'' he said. 
''North Vietnam still has a lot of digesting to do in South Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia.''
Vietnam is now a country of 60 million people with an army of 1.2 million - the fourth largest in the world after China, the Soviet Union and the United States. 
Per capita income is estimated by the State Department to be about $125 a year, only about one-fourth that of its Asean neighbors.
The State Department also estimates that the Soviet Union supplies Vietnam with about $2 billion annually. 
This constitutes about one-seventh of Vietnam's gross national product. 
While the economies of every Asean country have more than doubled in the last decade, Vietnam's shows almost no growth.
Vietnam's real drain and quagmire is Cambodia. 
An estimated 160,000 Vietnamese troops are trying to hold the cities against and searching the jungles for several different guerrilla forces numbering, according to various estimates, anywhere from 40,000 to 80,000. 
''There is no end of this war in sight,'' noted Mr. Holbrooke and others.
 
'Clumsy' Soviet Diplomacy
Spurred by Congress, the Reagan Administration last week made known its willingness to aid the guerrillas as well.
The Soviet Union has tied its fortunes in Southeast Asia to Vietnam and Vietnam's war in Cambodia. 
This has set Moscow against the Asean countries, and left both Vietnam and the Soviet Union almost totally isolated on Cambodia, even in the United Nations.
In addition, as Mr. Lord pointed out, ''Soviet diplomacy in the area has been particularly clumsy, especially with Japan,'' thus further strengthening American standing. 
This includes Soviet threats to Japan about closer relations with Washington and the absence of any important diplomatic role on the Korean Peninsula.
The Domino Theory
In 1954, President Eisenhower evoked an image of American stakes in Vietnam that was in one form or another used by all of his successors through Richard M. Nixon.
''You have a row of dominoes set up,'' Mr. Eisenhower said. 
''You knock over the first one, and what will happen to the last one is the certainty that it will go over very quickly.''
To Eisenhower, this meant Laos, Cambodia, Thailand, Burma, the Malay peninsula, Indonesia and perhaps the rest of Asia as well.
Mr. Nixon globalized this domino theory during his Presidency, saying that the loss of Vietnam would reduce the United States to ''a pitiful, helpless giant'' and destroy United States credibility worldwide. 
Few dispute that credibility was lost, if not because of the loss of Vietnam then because the United States seemed deeply divided and turning inward.
 
'The Opening to China'
However, while Laos and Cambodia fell, as almost all predicted, the other Asian dominoes stood.
Mr. Lord argued that in this result ''the most crucial factor was the opening to China'' in 1971, two years before the Paris cease-fire agreement ending American participation in the Vietnam War and four years before the final debacle in Saigon. 
''This helped to put Indochina in perspective and ease the pain of our exit, and restrain Hanoi,'' he said.
Professor Scalapino stressed that the loss of Vietnam ''raised questions about American credibility, but it also raised the quotient of Asian self-reliance.''
That element of self-reliance is central to Professor Zagoria's analysis. 
''Revolutions,'' he said, ''though influenced by external factors, are largely determined by indigenous factors.''
Thailand and Indonesia, he argued, were able to get themselves together politically, economically and militarily to beat down Communist insurgencies.
 
A Crucial Question
''The Philippines proves the point,'' he continued. 
''Unlike the rest of Southeast Asia, they didn't have the economic dynamism, commitment to equity and leadership,'' and so their insurgency has gotten out of hand ''with no noticeable external support.''
But, and here is the nub of the debate, did American involvement in Vietnam delay the flowering of American-Chinese ties and Asian self-reliance and growth, or did it make those developments possible?
Did, for example, the war blind American leaders to the historical tensions and conflicts between China and the Soviet Union and China and Vietnam?
William P. Bundy, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian Affairs in the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations, said in an interview: ''No, I was aware of the splits.''
But the record shows that few other officials were.
 
Asian Nations Strengthened
In any event, Mr. Bundy maintained that the Asian countries ''were much stronger by the time the war ended, and all of that had some relationship to our being in Vietnam.''
They were ''not as jittery as they were in 1964.''
In other words, the war gave them time to get their houses in order.
Mr. Holbrooke countered that ''2,000 years of Chinese-Vietnamese enmity and hundreds of years of Chinese and Russian mutual suspicions were suspended when they united against us in Vietnam.''
''We could not improve relations with Japan, develop our relations with China or give impetus to Asean self- reliance until we ended our involvement in Vietnam,'' he added.
Those who made American policy, he said, ''put American prestige on the line in that place in the world where we had the least chance of success and in the name of strengthening America, they weakened it - the Vietnam boil had to be lanced before the rest was possible.''
Who Lost Vietnam?
All of this ties into the matter of responsibility for the defeat of South Vietnam and to the lessons learned, lessons that are applied variously to the current situation in Central America and elsewhere.
Most pronounced today are the accusations by Mr. Nixon and his former chief adviser, Henry A. Kissinger. They put the blame on Congress for ''irresponsibility,'' the press for ''misreporting'' and liberals, intellectuals, and antiwar activists for being virtually anti-American.
In his recent book, ''No More Vietnams,'' Mr. Nixon asserts that the war was won in 1974, until these groups pulled the rug out from under the victory by limiting American aid to Saigon and forbidding American military retaliation against Hanoi for breaches of the 1973 Paris accords.
Mr. Rusk, too, said he believed that the war was lost here, but not because of conspiracies of the left. 
''A lot of people at the grass roots came to the conclusion that we couldn't tell them when the war would end. 
So they said chuck it. 
War weariness was the cause of defeat. 
Just plain impatience, not misinformation. 
We could not honestly tell them when it was going to be over,'' said the former Secretary, who is now teaching at the University of Georgia.
 
'Ultimate Responsibility'
Other thoughts came through the Rusk retrospective. 
''After all, we did go half way around the world to meet our treaty commitments,'' he said. 
He added, ''I told President Kennedy he had to think about what there was in South Vietnam to support.''
Mr. Holbrooke placed ''the ultimate responsibility'' with the South Vietnamese.
''We aided them for 20 years, fought alongside them for 10, lost almost 60,000 Americans in combat, mortgaged our economy for the war,'' he said. 
''It is a travesty to say that after all this, we and not they lost the war.''
Was the American effort worth it?
William Bundy, one of the main architects of the war, offered this conclusion: ''When I say the war bought time for Asia to become stronger, I'm not saying in retrospect that this proves the war was wise. 
The price was too high even for that. 
Taking all the elements into account - the internal divisions, the human loss of life - it was a national tragedy.''
