
The United States is holding up a nuclear cooperation agreement with China because of suspicions that the Chinese are giving nuclear aid to Pakistan and other nations thought to be developing nuclear weapons, according to Government and industry officials.
The Government officials said they were disturbed by intelligence reports suggesting that China had helped Pakistan in trying to develop a capacity to enrich uranium for weapon use.
The officials said China was also believed to have sold lowenriched uranium to South Africa through private parties. 
They said Chinese sales of heavy water, required for reactors that use natural uranium, were believed to have been made to Argentina and possibly India.
WASHINGTON, Sept. 
18 - The United States is holding up a nuclear cooperation agreement with China because of suspicions that the Chinese are giving nuclear aid to Pakistan and other nations thought to be developing nuclear weapons, according to Government and industry officials.
Under a four-year-old United States law, none of these countries are permitted to purchase nuclear fuel and technology from the United States because they have refused to submit all their nuclear plants to international inspection or to sign the 1968 treaty to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons.
 
Talks Began in June
The start of United States talks with China on a nuclear accord was disclosed in June by Walter J. Stoessel Jr., then the Deputy Secretary of State, in a speech to the National Council on United States-China Trade. 
Such an accord is needed before American companies can sell nuclear technology to China.
State Department and company officials said the talks had been hampered by China's refusal to sign the treaty banning the spread of nuclear weapons or to join the International Atomic Energy Agency and abide by its inspection system or safeguards. 
The United States wants China to permit inspection to demonstrate that any help is being used strictly for power generation.
Moreover, the United States wants China to impose safeguards on its nuclear exports, especially to countries suspected of developing nuclear weapons, to insure that the equipment and material is used for purely peaceful purposes.
''China, thus far, gives little indication that it wants to play by the rules of the nuclear club,'' an American official said. 
''This poses a very sticky challenge for the international effort to curb the spread of atomic weapons.''
 
Walters Sought Assurances
Vernon A. Walters, Ambassador at Large, visited Chinese officials in August, seeking assurances they would place safeguards on nuclear exports. 
He did not succeed, officials said.
China has no nuclear power reactors, but is thinking of starting a program for which it would need Western technology and equipment. 
The most important project being considered is the construction of two 900-megawatt pressurized water reactors in Guangdong Province. 
The Chinese would like to sell some of the power produced to neighboring Hong Kong.
American company officials said China had already approached Britain about supplying the reactors and related technology. 
But the Chinese, officials said, have told the United States that they are interested in American technology. 
American companies estimate that hundreds of millions of dollars of exports could be at stake.
In addition, the Chinese are contemplating building a 300-megawatt station in Shanghai using their own technology, officials said.
 
Suspicions Disclosed in August
Suspicions about Chinese aid to Pakistan were disclosed last month by James L. Malone, Assistant Secretary of State for Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific Affairs. 
In an interview published Aug. 
19 he told Nucleonics Week, a trade newsletter, that China refused to accept international safeguards.
Mr. Malone added that another complicating problem was China's relationship with Pakistan. 
He declined to specify what kind of assistance China was providing to Pakistan. 
But he said that it was likely that Chinese low-enriched uranium had ended up in South Africa and heavy water in Argentina.
China has denied providing fuel to South Africa. 
But Mr. Malone raised the possibility that China might have been deceived by private dealers about which nation would ultimately be receiving the nuclear material.
 
Other Aides Doubt Deception
Some officials do not share Mr. Malone's view that China was being deceived by private brokers about the ultimate recipient of its nuclear exports. 
They noted that China faced a long-term shortage of hard currency, which could spur a drive to increase exports, including nuclear fuel and technology.
Other officials said there was evidence that China's aid to Pakistan was related to uranium enrichment efforts for use in weapons. 
Pakistan has been attempting to develop its own ability to produce highly enriched uranium as a fuel for research reactors that can also be converted for use in weapons.
The United States has a $3.2 billion secuirty assistance program, intended, in part, to dissuade Pakistan from developing a nuclear weapons program or testing a nuclear device.
