
A Federal judge in Alabama yesterday dismissed the claims of bondholders who held millions of dollars worth of old bearer bonds issued by the Qing dynasty that ruled China in 1911.
Three years ago, after the Chinese Government failed to appear in court to enter a defense against the claims, District Judge U.W. 
Clemon entered a $41.3 million default judgment for the bondholders. 
The Chinese, claiming sovereign immunity, felt this was unfair, and the case became what the State Department termed a ''major irritant'' in American-Chinese relations.
Federal District Court (Alabama) Judge U W Clemon dismisses claims of bond holders who held millions of dollars of old bearer bonds issued by Qing dynasty which ruled China in 1911 (S)
As a result, the Chinese Government for the first time hired an American lawyer, Eugene Theroux of Washington, to defend it in an American court. 
With the backing of the State Department, Mr. Theroux earlier this year convinced Judge Clemon to overturn the default judgment and grant a new hearing on the claims.
Yesterday, the judge dismissed the claims altogether, on the ground that he had no jurisdiction to hear them. 
The case had been brought under the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act of 1976, he said, which allows courts to hear cases against a foreign sovereign arising out of commercial transactions.
However, the judge ruled, the statute was not intended to apply retroactively, and since the bond transaction took place long before the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act was passed, the statute gave him no power to decide the claims.
China's victory in the Alabama case, involving Hukuang Railways Sinking Fund Gold Loan bonds that matured in 1951, may also help it in other litigation involving old bearer bonds. 
Similar cases, involving different bond issues, are pending in New York and Pittsburgh.
''The Alabama decision doesn't directly bind the other courts, but the rationale applies with equal force in all these cases, since all these bonds are from before the sovereign immunities act,'' Mr. Theroux said.
