
Trade between the United States and China in 1982 fell slightly, for the first time in six years, to $5.2 billion, according to figures issued today by the United States Embassy here. 
The total was down 5.5 percent from the record high of $5.5 billion in 1981.
The value of American exports to China declined 19 percent last year, to $2.9 billion. 
By contrast, Chinese exports to the United States rose 20.5 percent, to $2.3 billion, with the most significant gains being in petroleum products and clothing.
PEKING, Feb. 
2 - Trade between the United States and China in 1982 fell slightly, for the first time in six years, to $5.2 billion, according to figures issued today by the United States Embassy here.
China continued to run a deficit in trade with the United States. 
The gap was $628.4 million last year, but this was 63 percent less than 1981's $1.7 billion deficit. 
The last time China had a modest surplus in trade with America was in 1977.
China's Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations and Trade reported last Saturday that China achieved a record surplus of $4.6 billion last year in overall foreign trade. 
Chinese exports rose to $21.6 billion while imports remained virtually constant at $17 billion.
 
Statistics May Help Shultz
The United States, China's third-largest trading partner after Hong Kong and Japan, accounted for 13 percent of Chinese trade volume last year.
The trade figures, which the American Embassy released shortly before the arrival in Peking today of Secretary of State George P. Shultz, seemed likely to help him in his meetings with Chinese officials this week. 
China has complained about Washington's restrictions on the transfer of American technology and on the importing of Chinese textiles by the United States.
Following the failure of the two countries to reach a new agreement on Chinese textiles last month, Washington imposed unilateral curbs freezing the imports at previous levels. 
Peking had been holding out for a larger share of the American market.
The latest statistics show that Chinese exports of clothing and accessories jumped 49 percent last year, to $619.9 million, accounting for more than a quarter of total Chinese sales to the United States. 
Textile fibers and yarns and fabrics declined slightly. 
But China evidently expanded its textile exports far more than the previous agreement had envisioned.
 
Some U.S. 
Products Banned
China retaliated against the curbs by announcing last month that it would ban future imports of American cotton, soybeans and synthetic fibers. 
But these categories of American exports had already fallen sharply, according to the 1982 trade figures, because the Chinese no longer needed them after several record harvests. 
Thus Peking's ban was mainly a symbolic gesture.
The latest American statistics indicated some shifts in the pattern of China's commerce with the United States, which has climbed sixfold from the $97.5 million level of a decade ago, when the two countries resumed normal trade relations.
With its record harvests, China has cut back on buying some American farm products. 
But China has bought more of the technology that is wanted for its current modernization drive, as well as lumber and fertilizer, which are in limited supply in China.
Agricultural exports to China from the United States declined last year in all categories except corn, which tripled in value, reaching $189.4 million.
 
Wheat Value Shows Decline
Wheat sales to China, because of depressed prices, dropped by $222.3 million, although the tonnage of shipments increased. 
Wheat remains the largest American commodity sold to the Chinese, with a value last year of $1.05 billion.
China has agreed to buy at least 6 million tons of grain annually from the United States. 
In the fiscal year 1982, China purchased 9.2 million tons, up from 8.4 million tons the year before. 
Western agricultural experts expect China to buy 9 million more tons during the present fiscal year.
Last year, China earned $198 million by selling crude oil to the United States, compared with virtually nothing in 1981. 
China's sales of other petroleum products rose 36 percent, to nearly $400 million.
Chinese purchases of American coal-cutting, mining and welldrilling machinery jumped more than 53 percent, to $45 million. 
Office machines and computers rose even more sharply, by nearly 64 percent, to account for $36.2 million of China's imports. 
Scientific instruments from the United States also grew 18 percent, reaching $65 million.
