
The prospect of American military sales to Taiwan is producing a ''very delicate moment'' in relations between the United States and China, former Vice President Walter F. Mondale said today.
His assessment, Mr. Mondale said, was based upon private talks with Chinese leaders, principally Deputy Prime Ministers Deng Xiaopeng and Wan Li, over the last few days here.
Speaking to reporters at a news conference concluding his four-day visit as a guest of the Chinese Government, Mr. Mondale said: ''I cannot deny, based on my discussions, that the current disputes surrounding the potential arms sales to Taiwan - the potential advanced fighters and the rest - is creating a very delicate moment in our relationship.''
 
Delay in Delivering Computers
Mr. Mondale said that an additional, although ''not fundamental,'' irritant for the Chinese was continuing American delay in delivering several large computers that the Carter Administration had promised, including one that China wants for a census next year.
Prospect of American military sales to Taiwan produces "very delicate moment" in relations between US and China
The computer sale, arranged when Mr. Mondale made an official visit to China in 1979, remained ''seemingly tied up in red tape,'' he said. 
A member of Mr. Mondale's party here said privately that Mr. Deng had specifically asked what happened to the computers when he met with Mr. Mondale this morning.
Mr. Mondale's appraisal of Chinese-American relations was reminiscent of a statement by Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. a week ago that the arms sales issue had raised ''a very worrisome specter'' for Washington and Peking in their future relations.
Mr. Mondale indicated that prospective military sales to Taiwan came up in his meeting with Mr. Deng as well as with some other officials, but he declined to give any details of the Chinese remarks beyond saying that ''they were very general in nature and very similar to statements that have been made public on the issue.''
 
Arms Sales Called 'Litmus Test'
In several officially sanctioned press commentaries recently, the Chinese Government has called the military sales issue a ''litmus test'' of American respect for China's soveriegnty and has said that China would have to ''pull back'' from its developing relationship with the United States if the Reagan Administration went ahead with the sales to Taiwan.
But Peking has carefully avoided spelling out what the consequences would be, evidently to avoid limiting its options by its own public statements. 
Many diplomats here feel that Mr. Deng would have to retaliate in some fashion to protect his flanks from remaining political opponents in the bureaucracy and army, but the diplomats disagree on how serious the consequences might be.
Two senior officials of the Reagan Administration who visited China recently insisted that the Chinese did not bring up the Taiwan arms issue with them. 
Treasury Secretary Donald T. Regan said last week that his meetings here were purely economic. 
Under Secretary of State Walter J. Stoessel, Jr., told reporters two weeks ago that his talks with Chinese officials centered on general issues of world politics rather than specific issues like Taiwan.
But Mr. Mondale said today that the question of the sale of American advanced arms to Taiwan ''was discussed very seriously'' during his visit and that ''there is no question that the Chinese are very concerned about the issue.''
 
Report of Decision on Sale
News reports from Washington have said that the Reagan Administration has ruled out selling the highly advanced F-16 jet fighter-bomber to Taiwan and has decided instead to supply the F-5E Tiger with an improved electronics and weapons systems, as well as the F-5G Tigershark, a substantially newer high-performance aircraft that is still less potent than the F-16. 
The State Department has denied that any decision has been made.
Since Taiwan already assembles the basic F-5 fighter, some Pekingbased diplomats speculate that Washington might try to convince Peking that these newer versions are merely replacements for present aircraft and did not represent qualitatively new technology.
But after his talks here, Mr. Mondale said that ''the Chinese will be looking at the capability of the plane and not the number or the name described.''
