
United States aerospace companies are mounting their most concerted effort yet to secure a dominant position in China's growing aviation market, and Chinese officials are responding with a speed that has surprised and reassured the American businessmen involved in the effort.
An aerospace exhibition here this week by companies from 15 Western nations has drawn large crowds to the displays of the 41 United States exhibitors. 
The exhibition, first of its kind here since the Communist takeover in 1949, has offered an opportunity to promote sales of aircraft and aviation equipment in talks with Chinese officials who will place orders that could run into billions of dollars in the next decade.
Discussions with civilian and military officials among the 120,000 visitors at the exhibition have surprised many of the Americans, who have concluded that China may move more rapidly than previously thought to upgrade its patchy civil aviation network and the relatively backward technological capabilities of its armed forces.
 
Carriers to Be Competitive
The exhibition is being held at a time when China is embarking on a major restructuring of civil aviation that will see the breakup of the state- run airline monopoly and its replacement by state-owned but competitive regional carriers.
Chinese officials have said that the change, to take effect in mid-1985, would include the development of dozens of new airports, improvement of existing fields and the purchase of as much as $6 billion worth of new aircraft by 1990.
Potential military sales are harder to estimate. 
These are complicated by restrictions imposed by the United States and other weapons-producing nations in the West. 
There is also doubt as to how much the Chinese will be prepared to spend on their military at a time when priority is being given to improving the economy.
Nonetheless, at the old agricultural exhibition hall in Peking's northwestern suburbs videotapes, models and brochures have given prominent display to such items as the Boeing Company's airborne early-warning aircraft and Sikorsky Aircraft's line of military helicopters, as well as other examples of top-line Western military hardware.
 
U.S. Clearance Sought
A Boeing executive who asked that he not be named said that the company had sought clearance from Washington on what military equipment could be discussed here. 
Among the Americans, there was some feeling that the American restraints had conceded a competitive advantage to nations less particular about military sales, notably France.
Among the displays drawing the largest crowds is that of Aerospatiale, the state-owned French company, whose exhibit included models of the Exocet air-to-sea missile that sank a British frigate in the Falkland Islands fighting and that has been used more recently by Iraq to attack tankers in the Persian Gulf.
So far, Boeing has had the lion''s share of the civil aviation market here. 
After Britain sold 35 Trident jets here in the early 1970's, Boeing sold 10 707's, 10 737's and 5 747's. 
Now it is hoping to reach agreement on assembly in Shanghai of the 737, but the Chinese have been discussing a similar deal under which they would manufacture McDonnell Douglas MD- 80's from components.
Some American executives are concerned that the Chinese are more interested in acquiring technology than in long-term imports, and that they may value exhibitions such as the current one more for the technical data they can glean than for the promotion of trade.
But other exhibitors were enthusiastic about the prospects for early sales. 
Hans G. Hollander, president of American Aerospace Industries, said that the market potential had been underlined by Li Peng, a Chinese Deputy Prime Minister, who told a group of executives that China's airline capacity would have to increase tenfold to keep pace with economic growth.
