
The Reagan Administration said today that it had begun talks with China on the possibility of an agreement on nuclear cooperation that would enable American companies to help develop China's nuclear power industry.
Deputy Secretary of State Walter J. Stoessel Jr. made the disclosure in a policy speech on China in which he said that President Reagan valued United States relations with China ''highly'' and ''believes it is important to work together to expand the benefits to both countries.''
Contending that too much attention had been paid to Washington-Peking differences over Taiwan, Mr. Stoessel also revealed that in a recent directive Mr. Reagan reaffirmed a policy of ''substantial liberalization'' in the export of technology to China.
Mr. Reagan, according to Mr. Stoessel, declared that American export policy ''should support a secure, friendly and modernizing China.''
WASHINGTON, June 1 - The Reagan Administration said today that it had begun talks with China on the possibility of an agreement on nuclear cooperation that would enable American companies to help develop China's nuclear power industry.
On nuclear policy, Mr. Stoessel said the United States had been ''conducting discussions with the Chinese on the possibility of an agreement for peaceful nuclear cooperation, which would enable us to compete commercially in the development of China's nuclear power program.''
State Department officials said discussions on a possible agreement had been held privately with Chinese officials and had up to now been hampered by China's refusal to sign the treaty banning the spread of nuclear weapons or to join the International Atomic Energy Agency and abide by its safeguards. 
China already has nuclear weapons, but the Administration is insisting that China allow inspection to demonstrate that any help from the United States be used strictly for nuclear power.
China has no atomic power reactors, State Department officials said, but has indicated that it is thinking of starting a program for which it would need to import Western technology and equipment.
The Chinese, officials said, have told the United States that they were interested in American technology and American companies have estimated that hundreds of millions of dollars of exports could be at stake.
The most important project under consideration is for the construction of two 900-megawatt pressurized water reactors in Guangdong Province, which borders Hong Kong. 
The Chinese would like to sell some of the power produced to Hong Kong to gain foreign currency to offset imports.
In addition, the Chinese are contemplating building a smaller 300-megawatt station in Shanghai using their own technology, the officials said.
 
Re-export Not Allowed
The most extensive talks with the Chinese were held last fall, officials said today, when James L. Malone, Assistant Secretary of State for Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific Affairs, made an unpublicized trip to China. 
The Chinese were told that they must provide assurances on the peaceful use of the nuclear technology and the nuclear fuel that might be provided and guarantees against re-export.
The Chinese have told the Americans that they would use such technology only for power, but they have problems with allowing international inspection. 
They have also steadfastly refused to sign the treaty banning the spread of nuclear weapons that was negotiated by the United States, Britain and the Soviet Union in the early 1960's and that the Chinese viewed as an attempt to block China from having its own nuclear weapons.
Officials here said that the United States is searching for a way to make it easier for the Chinese to provide assurances, but that an additional round of high-level talks is probably needed.
In his speech to the National Council on United States-China Trade, Mr. Stoessel said that ''a strong United States-China relationship is one of the highest goals of President Reagan's foreign policy.''
 
Arms Sales to Taiwan
As to the problems raised by Peking's strong objections to continued American military sales to Taiwan, Mr. Stoessel said that ''so long as both sides demonstrate the statesmanship, vision, and good will that have characterized our relationship, we will be able to overcome our difficulties.''
''Indeed, anything other than a successful outcome would be a great misfortune for both sides,'' he said. 
''The only beneficiary would be our common adversaries.''
He said that public attention to the Taiwan issue ''has tended to obscure the continuing progress which this Administration has made in carrying out important China policy initiatives.''
