
Some senior Reagan Administration officials have concluded they may not have reacted strongly enough to China's crackdown on recent unrest in Tibet.
They say they are now trying to determine the most effective way to express the Administration's growing displeasure with China over Tibet.
These officials concede that, in trying to avoid irritating Chinese authorities, the United States did not stand firmly enough behind its policy of promoting human rights worldwide. 
China has accused the United States of interfering in its internal affairs and threatened that continued emphasis on Tibet would damage relations.
Senior State Department officials held what were described as ''serious discussions'' this week on the issue of rights in Tibet.
 
Crackdown Reported to Continue
The Chinese, according to some reports, are continuing their crackdown in Tibet against Buddhist monks and Tibetans who are seeking independence for the autonomous province.
The monks have led three major demonstrations since Sept. 
27, in which at least 14 people were killed. 
Foreign journalists have been expelled from Tibet.
In the last few days, tourists have reported dozens of arrests in nighttime raids by policemen carrying automatic weapons as they swept through the Tibetan capital, Lhasa, in trucks in a show of force.
Officials in Washington said they were seeking a way to express dipleasure that would not offend China unnecessarily and would assure it that the United States has no intention of upsetting China's security arrangements on its border.
 
Inconclusive Discussions
The discussions this week, which were inconclusive, were prompted in large part by sharp criticism from lawmakers of both parties. 
The lawmakers argued that the United States was slow to promote the cause of Tibetan independence and that official messages deploring the recent violence were ineffective, the officials said.
''We're talking about a lot of ways we can make our views crystal clear on what we believe in and stand for,'' a State Department official said. 
''Maybe our position wasn't understood as well as it should have been.''
Successive Chinese dynasties and governments have claimed Tibet over the centuries, and it was occupied by Communist soldiers in 1950. 
In 1959, Beijing put down a bloody rebellion by the Tibetans. 
It still maintains large garrisons of troops there.
China is universally recognized as having sovereignty over Tibet. 
Since 1978, the United States has taken the position that Tibet is part of China.
 
Congress on the Offensive
Because the State Department criticism of China up to now has been muted, one official said, Congress has ''run away'' with American policy, taking actions and making statements that run counter to United States position on Tibet.
To compensate, the State Department has made statements that give the appearance of siding with the Chinese. 
These statements have contributed to a sense in Congress that the State Department needs to aggresively pursue the human rights issue.
Officials said they failed to realize that world attention would be focused on Tibet over the unrest.
 
Moves on Fact-Finding Trip
As a first step toward strengthening its position on rights abuses, the State Department is expected to urge China to reverse its decision to prohibit a Congressional fact-finding mission from visiting Tibet.
China's Foreign Ministry said Friday that the trip would not be permitted because ''matters concerning Tibet are the internal affairs of China in which the U.S. 
Congress has not right to meddle.''
The State Department is considering whether to send a message protesting the decision through Winston Lord, the United States Ambassador to China, or a more senior official, officials said.
Officials are hoping to resolve the matter before the coming Communist Party congress in China, on the assumption that the Chinese will want to end the feud soon.
 
Administration to Press for Trip
In testimony before two House Foreign Affairs subcommittees on Wednesday, J. Stapleton Roy, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs and the department's leading China expert, said the Administration believed that Congressional trips were worthwhile and that it would help facilitate the visit.
The State Department, in criticizing Senate and House amendments that assail China's human rights record, has argued that they inaccurately reflect what little is known about Tibet and fail to take into account improvements in China's policy since 1980.
The department has also criticized support by leading lawmakers of a five-point peace plan issued last month to a group of Congressmen by the Dalai Lama, the Tibetan Buddhist spiritual and political leader in exile.
In addition, it criticized a move in Congress to give Tibet ''observer status'' at the United Nations, which the Palestine Liberation Organization has. 
The State Department has said these actions lend support to the cause of Tibetan independence.
The United States has strongly supported China's stated efforts in recent years to allow more freedoms in Tibet.
Mr. Roy appeared to go further than other officials in acknowledging the extent of human rights abuses in Tibet. 
He said, for example, that, contrary to China's claims, Tibetans do not enjoy full democratic rights and freedoms, including due process and freedom of speech and assembly.
