
Saudi Arabia is buying Chinese-made intermediate-range missiles, capable of hitting targets across much of the Middle East, the State Department said today. 
The missiles are similar to ones in the arsenal of Iran.
Charles E. Redman, the State Department spokesman, said, ''The United States believes that the acquisition of such a system is not in the interests of peace and stability in the region.''
Indeed, he said, the purchase is ''part of a disturbing regional trend in surface-to-surface missile proliferation that threatens the security of all states in the region.''
Mr. Redman said the Saudi Government ''has assured us categorically at the very highest level that Saudi Arabia does not have, nor does it intend to acquire, any nuclear capability.''
''The Government of China has stated categorically that it will not export nuclear weapons to any Government,'' Mr. Redman added. 
''We accept these assurances in both cases.''
Israel is believed to be the only nation in the Middle East that has nuclear weapons.
The Washington Post, which reported the missile sale in Friday's editions, said they are being installed and are not yet operational. 
The surface-to-surface missiles are said to have a range of more than 2,000 miles.
Such long-range missiles are not very accurate, so are of little use in destroying pinpoint targets - a bridge, for example. 
But they are speedy and hard to defend against, and thus can serve a purpose in psychological and political warfare.
The United States has tried to control the spread of such weapons.
With their long range, the Saudi missiles could hit practically any point in the Middle East. 
Iran and Iraq have been using missiles to bombard each other's capitals in recent days, inflicting heavy civilian casualties.
Missiles fired from the ground serve far different purposes than advanced jet fighters like the F-15's that Saudi Arabia has acquired from the United States. 
The fighters can be used to defend air space, ward off enemy aircraft and protect oil fields.
The Chinese have pledged to end deliveries of Silkworm antiship missiles to Iran, and American officials have expressed hopes that China will expand that cut-off to include sales of several other types of weapons.
China has also sent Iran a small number of surface-to-air missiles, American officials said. 
Iran is said to need many more of these missiles to improve its anti-aircraft defenses.
