
The leader of a group of American clergymen who recently returned from a two-week visit to China said yesterday that the delegation felt hopeful about the apparent relaxation of Government restrictions on religious freedom there.
Rabbi Arthur Schneier, senior rabbi of the Park East Synagogue and president of the Appeal of Conscience Foundation, which sponsored the interfaith visit, sounded the note of cautious optimism in a news conference about the trip.
''What we are witnessing,'' the four clergymen said in a joint statement, ''is not just a loosening up of some of the tight restrictions imposed on any public exercise of religion but an implementation of a decision to facilitate positively the public reemergence of religion in Chinese life.''
US interfaith group returns from China trip; Spokesman cites apparent easing of religious restrictions in China
The statement added that the policy change represented a ''pragmatic view that religious believers must feel satisfied with their status if they are to be energetic supporters of the party's program.''
Among signs of the change have been the restoration of churches that had been converted into factories and the re-opening of the Protestant Theological Seminary in Nanjing where 49 students, including 19 women, will soon begin studies. 
Many religious leaders have been allowed to return from exile to resume their roles and there has been a widespread revival of public worship.
The four major religions are Buddhism, Islam, Taoism and Christianity. 
During the Cultural Revolution, suppression of religion was especially harsh, although underground movements preserved the faiths' traditions. 
One explanation for the policy change is that Government officials may believe that religious traditions can be regulated better if they are allowed to operate in the open. 
Even with an easing of restrictions, the religious groups face strong pressures.
''There is a delicate balance,'' the Rev. Hays H. Rockwell, rector of St. James Episcopal Church in New York, said, ''between collaborating with the Communist Party, on the one hand, and retaining independence on the other.''
The other members of the delegation were the Rev. Donald Campion of the Jesuit Conference in Washington and the Rev. David Randolph, senior minister of the Christ United Methodist Church in New York.
