
The Agency for International Development has withdrawn its contribution to the United Nations Fund for Population Activities this year because of its involvement in China's population program, officials said today.
The United Nations group, which provides aid to 134 countries, will lose $25 million as a result of the decision, which was disclosed today to Congressional leaders and others.
The American action comes after months of intensive lobbying by anti-abortion activists, who asserted that the Chinese Government's population program involved the widespread use of compulsory abortions. 
Chinese officials have repeatedly denied reports that their program coerces abortions or sterilizations.
A senior A.I.D. official said the money was being withheld ''because we think there is not an adequate change in the family planning program in China, and we conclude that the U.N.F.P.A. is too involved in that program.''
The A.I.D. official emphasized the Reagan Administration's continuing support of family planning assistance abroad. 
The $25 million which had been appropriated this year for the United Nations group will be spent on other family planning programs, he said.
 
Statement by U.N. Group
Rafael M. Salas, executive director of the United Nations group, said in a statement, ''The fund accepts this withdrawal as a sign that, for domestic reasons, the United States is no longer willing to assist developing countries in voluntary family planning programs through the United Nations system.''
The decision was hailed by the National Right to Life Committee. 
''We think most Americans can think of better things to do with their tax dollars than fund a U.N.-supported program of compulsory abortion,'' Douglas Johnson, the group's legislative director, said.
Advocates of population planning described the action as an American retreat from family planning assistance at a time when the need is most acute. 
''It says to the world that we are willing to dismantle our family planning programs abroad to keep happy a small, but noisy, anti-family planning constituency at home,'' said Sharon L. Camp, vice president of the Population Crisis Committee.
Representative Jim Moody, incoming chairman of the Congressional Coalition on Population and Development, said the decision penalized many countries dependent on aid from the United Nations group. 
''Bangladesh, Haiti and other similar countries will be the ones to suffer, in order to satisfy a purely American domestic political dispute,'' the Wisconsin Democrat said.
 
Decision Was Expected
The decision had been expected for some time. 
Last year A.I.D. announced a partial cutoff of aid to the United Nations group because of the same issue. 
In that instance, the agency cited an amendment approved by Congress last year that barred all Federal aid to groups that ''support or participate in the management of'' Government programs that coerce abortion or sterilization.
The decision today affected $25 million that had been appropriated to the group for the current fiscal year but never released. 
It represents a total withdrawal of financing, although the senior A.I.D. official said assistance could be resumed next year should the circumstances change.
''This doesn't close the door to another year,'' he said. 
''We will continue to look at what happens in China's program, and what happens to U.N.F.P.A.'s involvement there.''
The United States had been a leading donor to the United Nations group since its establishment in 1969. 
In the last eight years, the United States has provided an average of 27 percent of the group's annual budget, according to a spokesman for A.I.D. 
Other major donors include Canada, West Germany, Japan, Norway and Sweden, according to a spokesman for the United Nations group.
Because the United States cutoff was expected, Mr. Salas said today that the group had already managed to raise $20 million from other donors to make up for the lost American funds. 
He said the group's programs would not be disrupted.
