
The State Department has authorized American diplomats to conduct substantive conversations with North Korean officials at receptions and parties and in other ''neutral'' locations.
Previously, American officials said, diplomats who were approached by North Koreans were under standing orders either to walk away or to restrict the conversation to social platitudes. 
The ban on formal, prearranged meetings at each other's embassies remains in effect.
Officials portrayed the change as part of a broader effort to create an atmosphere conducive to direct talks between North and South Korea, a goal for which China's support was urged by Secretary of State George P. Shultz in his meetings last week in Beijing.
The United States has asked China to encourage North Korea to take part in the 1988 Summer Olympics in Seoul and to resume talks with South Korea on reunifying families that were divided during the Korean War. 
In addition, Washington wants to see North and South Korea open direct mail service and establish other contacts.
 
Approval From South Korea
The Chinese were told last week of the shift in American guidelines, a State Department official said, as was President Chun Doo Hwan of South Korea, with whom Mr. Shultz met on Friday. 
President Chun endorsed the change, according to an American present during the talks.
The new guidelines were reportedly contained in a directive sent on Feb. 
26 by the State Department to United States embassies around the world. 
An official said that to date, no such conversations with North Koreans had been reported, but he said he thought the most likely capitals for them to occur would be Beijing and Cairo. 
Moscow was also a possibility, he said.
The United States issued a similar change in guidelines on Sept. 
30, 1983, according to Charles E. Redman, the State Department spokesman, but rescinded the changes nine days later when a bomb, believed to have been planted by North Korean agents, killed four South Korean Cabinet members and two leading advisers in Rangoon, Burma.
''We are committed to the reduction of tensions and building of dialogue in Korea,'' Mr. Redman said. 
''We have taken this modest step, which I just described in terms of contact, in support of those ends, and we would welcome conciliatory actions by North Korea.''
 
Erratic Interest by North
In recent years, North Korea's Communist Government has shown erratic interest in contacts with the United States and the pro-American Government in Seoul. 
In 1985, small numbers of American journalists were able to visit North Korea for the first time in several years.
That year, the North and South Korean Red Cross societies met for the first time since the early 1970's to discuss family reunification. 
Talks have also taken place in two other forums involving economic affairs and parliamentary delegations.
North Korea broke off the talks twice, in 1985 and 1986, to protest an annual American-South Korean military exercise called Team Spirit.
In December, President Kim Il Sung of North Korea called for high-level talks to reunify the Korean peninsula.
''The North-South high-level political and military talks,'' he said, ''will have to discuss the measures to remove the present political confrontation, such as the matter of promoting the national bonds by refraining from slandering each other and by realizing multilateral cooperation and interchange between the North and the South.''
 
North Wants Three-Way Talks
American officials say North Korea and China advocate three-way political talks among North Korea, South Korea and the United States, an arrangement based on the Communists' contention that South Korea is an American puppet.
Mr. Shultz reportedly urged the Chinese to press North Korea for fuller, direct talks with South Korea alone and on narrowly defined issues. 
Seoul wants to reconvene the Red Cross, economic and parliamentary discussions, an American official said, but North Korea argues that the specific disagreements will be resolved if reunification, or a federation, is accomplished.
American officials said China, which plans to send teams to the Seoul Olympics, privately supported the idea of North Korea's participation, but it was not clear if the Chinese would actually encourage the Pyongyang Government to do so. 
China is reportedly concerned about a recent movement by North Korea toward a closer relationship with the Soviet Union.
North Korea is asking that numerous Olympic events be shifted to Pyongyang, and several minor ones are scheduled to take place there.
