
The Reagan Administration has clearly taken a gamble in the bitter dispute between Washington and Peking over the sale of fighter planes to Taiwan, a gamble that rests on the assumption that China needs the United States more than the other way around.
President Reagan has said to Chinese leaders, in effect, that they must choose between an evolving political, military and economic relationship with the United States, to the benefit of both nations, or a stance distant from the United States that may make China and, to a lesser extent, the United States more vulnerable to the Soviet Union.
For the Chinese, who have the next move, the choice is between pragmatism and pride. 
They must decide which is the more important, a quasi-alliance with the United States that promises muscle in the competition with the Soviet Union, or renewed alienation as the return of Taiwan to China recedes further into the future.
Richard Halloran News Analysis discusses US-Chinese relations and trouble caused by sale of fighter planes to Taiwan by US
The United States and China were brought to this critical turning point a week ago with the announcement of President Reagan's decision that the United States would sell more Northrop F-5E supersonic fighters to the Nationalist Government on Taiwan, the rival of the Communist Government in Peking.
 
Production Agreement to Continue
Specifically, the Administration announced that it would permit a production agreement between the Taiwan Government and Northrop to continue indefinitely past its scheduled expiration in mid-1983. 
By that time, Taiwan will have built a total of 248 F-5E's and F-5F's. 
The F-5F is a two-seater training version of the fighter.
The Chinese immediately issued a strong protest, contending that their sovereignty had been violated by a sale of weapons to what they consider to be a rump regime in a Chinese province.
In announcing its decision, the Reagan Administration tried to soften the choice presented to the Chinese by emphasizing that it had refused a request from Taiwan for a more advanced fighter, known as the FX. 
The Chinese brushed this aside, asserting that it did not make much difference which aircraft was sold since the United States should halt all arms sales to Taiwan.
Since then, the Chinese have been almost silent on the issue, presumably sorting things out before taking the next step.
 
Chinese Demand Deadline on Sales
For Peking to go along with the Reagan Administration's decision would mean backing down from a position previously taken in public and in private. 
The Chinese have insisted that the United States set a deadline for ending all arms transfers to Taiwan, or at least establish a downward trend in those transfers.
Unless the Administration has made a secret deal with Peking, there is nothing on the horizon to suggest such a deadline. 
A State Department spokesman, in announcing the arms sale to Taiwan, said that future sales were anticipated.
 
From Peking's point of view, it is the poli tical, not the military,aspects of this issue that are important. 
Chi nese diplomats here havemade clear that they see continued sales of a rms to Taiwan as evidence that the United States intends to fo ster the indefinite separation of Taiwan from the mainland. 
They contend that the United States has reneged on a commitment to conside r Taiwan a province of China.
But the Administration has indica ted that if the Chinese accept the President 's decision, it would be ready to enlarge the United States' polit ical relationship with China. 
The American delegation that was in P eking when Mr. Reagan's decision was announced included a State Depar tment official who specializes in East European affairs.His task was to help in trying to persuade the Chinese to take a tough stand a gainst the Soviet Union on the Polish question.
 
Arms Deal With Peking Sought
Militarily, the Administration has been waiting for a high-level Chinese delegation to come to Washington to discuss the sale of weapons to Peking. 
A deal would mean supplying large quantities of conventional arms and equipment that the Chinese need to modernize their still relatively primitive forces.
From the American point of view, a military relationship with China would be helpful but far from essential. 
The Chinese Army now ties down 50 Soviet divisions along the two countries' 5,000-mile border. 
But that situation will continue whether or not the United States supplies arms to China. 
Chinese diplomats have pointed out that they have gotten along thus far without American military assistance.
Moreover, whatever arms the United States supplies to China in the foreseeable future cannot affect the balance of military power along that border except marginally, military analysts say.
 
Peking Choices Limited
On the future of Taiwan, the Chinese appear not to have much choice so long as Mr. Reagan sticks to his current policy. 
If Peking accepts the F5-E sale, the United States would be free to sell arms to Taiwan so long as those arms do not become a direct threat to the mainland.
If the Chinese do not accept, they may reduce the level of United States diplomatic representation in Peking, a step similar to that they took when the Netherlands sold two submarines to Taiwan several months ago. 
They almost certainly will refuse to buy weapons from the United States and may cut down on the large quantities of American agricultural products they buy.
But that retaliation is not likely to persuade the Reagan Administration to stop supplying arms to Taiwan, especially since American law requires the United States to provide Taiwan with enough weapons for its defense.
