
The Glomar Java Sea, a United States oil- drilling ship with 81 people aboard, sank in the stormy South China Sea and its wreckage has been identified by Chinese searchers, officials said today.
The week-old search for survivors, still hampered by bad weather, continued without result. 
The 81 people aboard included 42 Americans, 34 Chinese, 4 Britons and an Australian. 
Two of the Americans were identified by their families as John Lawrence, 38 years old, of Odessa, Tex., and Bernard Patrick Cates, 39, of Midland, Tex.
''We found nothing today,'' said a spokesman for the Western Pacific Search and Rescue Center reached in Okinawa. 
''It's still raining and visibility is poor. 
For now we will continue the search but I don't know for how long.''
The Glomar Java Sea, owned by Global Marine Inc. of Houston and on lease to the Atlantic Richfield Company of Los Angeles, sank off the south China coast in a tropical storm.
Chinese search vessels said they had located the wreckage last Friday under 300 feet of water but were unable to identify it at first.
Oil company officials here said another vessel with divers was heading toward the drill site south of China's Hainan Island and about 40 miles from Vietnamese waters.
The divers' first task will be to determine how many of the 81 aboard went down with the ship.
Built to ride out hurricanes, the drill ship had already weathered several fiercer storms since it arrived in the South China Sea last January.
Taking part in the search for survivors were more than a dozen Chinese ships, three Vietnamese ships and three United States Navy search planes from Okinawa.
The Vietnamese sent out vessels to search their own waters after refusing to allow Chinese ships to enter them, diplomatic sources said.
 
Ship Located by Special Sonar
HOUSTON, Nov. 
1 (UPI) - The wreckage of the ship was identified by Chinese ships using special sonar, a spokesman for the ship's owners, Global Marine Inc. of Houston, said today.
The vice president of Global, Dick Vermeer, said, ''They have definitely confirmed the fact that our drill ship, the Glomar Java Sea, has been sunk at the drill site.''
