
A ranking United States trade official said today that the Reagan Administration hoped to raise the level of American technology that China was permitted to buy.
The official, Lawrence J. Brady, Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Trade Administration, said that ''we anticipate the technology levels to increase and we're willing to license in a manner that is different from the past.''
The assistant secretary added that the Administration was even willing to permit the export of some items that the Chinese could put to military use.
 
80 U.S. 
Companies Represented
Mr. Brady made his remarks at a news conference before he opened an exhibition of American light industry at Peking's exhibition center, where nearly 80 American companies are displaying products worth nearly $4 million.
Christopher Wren comment discusses plan by Reagan Administration to raise level of American technology that China is permitted to purchase
In contrast to the first United States trade exhibition here, which offered an assortment of agricultural and industrial commodities in November 1980, this smaller exhibit is concentrating on what American light industries can offer.
The Chinese Government, which requested the theme, is carrying out a huge restructuring of its economy to provide its nearly 1 billion citizens with more consumer goods and a higher standard of living.
 
Trade Could Reach $7.5 Billion
The exhibition, which covers 77,000 square feet, features textileand shoe-manufacturing machinery, cold-storage and refrigeration units, food-processing and packaging machines and printing and photographic equipment. 
But it also includes sophisticated analytical and process-control instruments, including lasers and spectrometers.
Eugene K. Lawson, the Deputy Assistant Secretary for East-West Trade, who also came here for the exhibition, said Chinese-American trade was expected to reach $6.8 billion to $7.5 billion in 1982.
This is well above the $5.5 billion achieved last year and more than six times the $1.1 billion of 1978, just before the United States and China established formal diplomatic relations. 
The United States has become China's third largest trading partner, after Japan and Hong Kong.
The American exports are predominantly agricultural, mostly grain. 
With the Chinese closing their trade gap from $2.7 billion in 1980 to $1.7 billion last year, American companies are anxious to sell more machinery and other industrial products.
There have been complaints that some exports to China have been hampered by United States export-control requirements, which set a limit on the technological sophistication of products that can be sold without Washington's permission.
Mr. Brady, who oversees the export controls, observed today that the Reagan Administration had ''dramatically shortened the time required for the processing of export licenses to China of items not on the export control list'' and had eliminated the backlog of applications.
Chinese Annoyed by Delays
Chinese officials had expressed particular annoyance at the delay they encountered in getting permission to import American computers that they said China needed to conduct its national population census this summer.
Mr. Brady also noted that the Reagan Administration had already raised the level of computer sophistication t hat could be permitted for China, which does not come under the rest rictions imposed on the Soviet bloc nations.
The assistant secretary said the United States was now willing to allow the export of computers with a data processing rate of up to 68 bits, which is more than twice the previous ceiling. 
A bit is a technical standard for measuring a computer's capacity.
 
Some Exhibitors Still Concerned
Mr. Brady said Peking's desire to have Washington raise the ceiling on its export controls ''indicates that the Chinese want higher technology from the United States, and if we're prepared to license it, they'll b uy, and that is precisely why this Administration has undertaken th e policy that it has.''
Nonetheless, some of the current American exhibitors expressed concern that the Department of Commerce might not issue licenses in time if the Chinese offered to buy their display models. 
The need has developed because of the widespread utilization of microprocessors, which require export licenses.
Ron Reggev, export sales manager for E.G. and G. Applied Research in Princeton, N.J., said many of his company's analytical instruments for physics and chemistry needed licenses because of technological advances. 
''Several years ago,'' Mr. Reggev said, ''only 5 percent of our products needed export licenses. 
Now it is 50 percent.''
 
Holding Seminars for Chinese
In addition to the exhibits, 32 seminars, each lasting a day and a half, are being presented for the Chinese by the representatives of some products being displayed. 
While United States officials concede that the seminars could be used to secure sensitive technical data, Nancy A. Rinehart, the director of China exhibitions for the Department of Commerce, said that ''We've gotten it down to where we can give away sufficient information without giving away the store.''
Not all of the exhibit's participants deal in high technology. 
Paul G. Durmeyer said that his company, Gilson Brothers Company, in Plymouth, Wis., hoped to interest the Chinese in co-producing its lawn tillers and small garden tractors for farm use.
''Our visit here is purely exploratory,'' Mr. Durmeyer said. 
''We don't know if we will be able to sell our equipment here, but we think we can develop contacts for the future.''
Admission to the exhibition is by invitation only, with the China Council for Promotion of International Trade determining which Chinese officials, managers and engineers will be allowed to attend. 
About 80,000 tickets are being given out for the 10-day exhibition.
To alleviate the heavy dose of industrial wares, the United States International Communications Agency has contributed a bright display of telephones, bicycles and even a new Dodge sedan.
