
Reagan Administration officials considered and rejected a military option to intercept ships carrying Silkworm missiles to Iran in recent weeks, deciding the idea was probably illegal and diplomatically unwise, according to several officials.
Despite its rejection, the thought of intercepting a ship carrying the Chinese-designed anti-ship missiles to Iran, which has repeatedly fired them into Kuwait's harbor and has deployed them near the Strait of Hormuz, illustrates how seriously the United States views the continued supply of the weapons and how few are the American options for ending these and other arms shipments to Iran, the officials said.
In describing the proposed interception, officials working for the Defense Department, the State Department, and Congress differed over how seriously the plan, which was drafted at the Pentagon, was considered.
National security officials discussed the plan, which was not directed at a specific shipment, but never recommended it to President Reagan for approval.
Proposal Is Played Down
Most officials said that the plan would not have survived a formal inter-agency review including the Pentagon, the State Department and the White House National Security Council, and that there was even some opposition to it at the Pentagon.
Not only would the move be difficult to justify under international law, they said, but it would also have called into further question American neutrality in the war between Iran and Iraq, and would have damaged relations with China. 
China is believed to sell arms to both sides in the war, though it has denied it. 
Late last year, it said it would stop selling Silkworms abroad.
Last week, officials disclosed that the the most recent known shipment of Silkworm-type missiles, carried on a ship from North Korea, had been unloaded in Iran. 
Iran already has more than 100 of the weapons, which are able to sink large ships.
 
'Harebrained' or 'Very Serious'
A senior State Department official said the idea of stopping the ship never reached the point where it would have required a formal review of the plan's legality.
''It's one of those harebrained schemes that someone thinks up when the day gets long and people run out of practical solutions,'' said another official who was more caustic.
But a senior Pentagon official, who said he opposed the idea on the grounds it would remove any vestige of American neutrality in the Iran-Iraq war, said the proposal was ''very serious.''
The possibility of intercepting arms bound for Iran could arise again if the United States succeeds in its current diplomatic effort at the United Nations. 
Washington is pressing for a Security Council resolution imposing an arms embargo on Iran, which has refused to accept a separate resolution calling for a cease-fire. 
The two nations, at war for seven years, have attacked hundreds of commercial and naval ships in the Persian Gulf since 1984.
 
Would Need Chinese Approval
The arms embargo, binding under international law, would be an unusual step and would require approval by China, a permanent member of the Security Council. 
In any case, it is not clear what recourse the United States or the United Nations would have to thwart Iran's arms suppliers.
Secretary of State George P. Shultz said Friday that setting up a blockade of arms shipments under United Nations auspices would be ''a complicated proposition.''
But he told staff members of the Washington Bureau of The New York Times that ''I could conceive of a mission that would be a blockade.''
Mr. Shultz declined to say whether the United States had recently considered acting alone to stop a shipment of Silkworm missiles.
He noted that on the one occasion when a Silkworm missile hit a ship flying the American flag, the United States responded with a small but direct strike against Iranian oil platforms in the gulf that had been used as military outposts.
 
Option Followed Attack
In October, Iran launched several Silkworms at Kuwait's main oil harbor from positions inside occupied Iraq, and one of them hit a Kuwaiti oil tanker that had been re-registered to fly the American flag. 
Another missile badly damaged a Kuwaiti oil loading dock. 
After these attacks, which made it clear that Iran was willing to use the Silkworms, military planners apparently drafted the option of intercepting a shipment of missiles bound for Iran.
In early December, the Iranians launched yet another Silkworm at Kuwait's oil harbor. 
But that one hit a decoy barge designed to lure the radar-guided missile away from real targets.
At about that time, a ship was loaded with Silkworm missiles in North Korea and began a long voyage to the Persian Gulf, arriving last week.
Reagan Administration officials said they are not entirely sure whether the missiles on the shipment were built in China or were Soviet or North Korean Styx missiles, which have essentially the same design. 
But most officials said they believed China was continuing to provide the weapons, though it has repeatedly denied doing so.
Some officials also say they believe that the latest shipment included missiles that could be mounted on Iranian naval vessels, vastly expanding the areas of the gulf where merchant ships and escorting naval vessels of the United States, European nations and the Soviet Union could be threatened.
China is believed to be the largest supplier of arms to Iran. 
One official estimated that last year's shipments at $1 billion.
