
When Anne Henderson-Pollard was arrested last month, she was planning to offer the Chinese a secret document that describes in detail what American intelligence knows about Peking's spying activities in this country, prosecutors asserted today.
In a 23-page document filed in Federal District Court here, prosecutors contended that Mrs. Henderson-Pollard, who has been charged with obtaining classified documents, was more deeply involved in the alleged espionage activities of her husband, Jonathan Jay Pollard, than previously indicated.
 
Neither Has Been Indicted
The document is the Government's first assertion that Mrs. Henderson-Pollard had been intending to deliver secret documents to the Chinese. 
Her husband has been accused of selling secret intelligence documents to Israel. 
They have not been formally indicted and they have not indicated how they would plead.
In Jerusalem, Israeli Government sources said today their nation would permit Americans to interview the senior Israeli counterterrorism official who is said to have obtained secret documents from Mr. Pollard beginning in the spring of 1984. 
[Page A6.] Mr. Pollard, a Navy counterintelligence analyst, gave Israel information about Arab military forces, Soviet weaponry used in Arab lands and sensitive Israeli defense matters, a high Israeli official has reported.
The promised interview was said to be part of a wider understanding worked out in an effort to resolve the spy affair before it caused further damage to American-Israeli relations. 
The understanding was reached in a telephone call placed early Sunday morning by Secretary of State George P. Shultz to Prime Minister Shimon Peres.
 
Second Chinese Case
The statements by Federal prosecutors marked the second time in two weeks that officials have charged Americans with spying for the Chinese. 
Last month, Larry Wu-Tai Chin, an analyst for the Central Intelligence Agency, was charged with conducting espionage on behalf of China for 30 years. 
He pleaded not guilty today. 
Reagan Administration officials have said they believe he gave China many of the C.I.A.'s reports on the Far East, including detailed information about the Vietnam War.
Officials familiar with all the papers seized from the Pollards last week, including those mentioned in the document filed in court today, say there is no evidence of any connection between the Mr. Chin and the Pollards.
According to the document filed in court today, Mrs. Henderson-Pollard had been preparing to make a ''presentation'' to the Chinese Embassy. 
Among the documents found by Federal agents in a search, the prosecutors said, were ''detailed analyses of intelligence-gathering capabilities and activities of the People's Republic of China within the United States.''
Such a document would be invaluable to any espionage service because it would confirm its success or failure in concealing covert efforts to gather information.
Officials said it was not clear whether the Pollards had provided any information to the Chinese.
James F. Hibey, the attorney for Mrs. Henderson-Pollard, said he would have no comment on the document. 
In the first hearing on his client's bond, held last week, Mr. Hibey argued that the ''presentation'' to the Chinese involved Mrs. Henderson-Pollard's attempts to begin a public relations company. 
Mr. Hibey said that the authorities had interviewed one of Mrs. Henderson-Pollard's business associates, and knew that the session did not involve classified documents.
The document quoted an unnamed witness as recounting a conversation with Mrs. Henderson-Pollard. According to the witness, Mrs. Henderson-Pollard wanted to meet at a hotel where they would burn classified documents hidden in a suitcase.
She told this witness that ''something had happened to her husband.''
The suitcase, which which was seized by Federal agents and opened after they received a search warrant, contained papers Mr. Pollard had obtained for her, the court document said.
In the document, prosecutors also explained for the first time why the Israeli Embassy refused to accept the couple's plea for asylum.
 
'Shake the Surveillance'
Last month, according to the testimony of an agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Mr. Pollard's contact at the embassy offered to help him escape if he was able to ''shake the surveillance.''
On the day of his arrest, Mr. Pollard and his wife entered the embassy. 
Mr. Pollard later told the authorities that he had been turned away ''because of the presence of the agents outside the embassy grounds,'' the papers said.
The prosecution filed the papers to support their request that Mrs. Henderson-Pollard be held without bond, At an earlier hearing, a Federal magistrate delayed ruling on her bond, and a hearing is scheduled for Tuesday.
''We are suggesting at this point that the level of her involvement is much more significant than has been heretofore been made public,'' said Joseph DiGenova, the United States Attorney here.
The motion said that in a phone call to Mrs. Henderson-Pollard that was overheard by Federal agents, her husband asked her remove the cactus from her apartment. 
Days later, after poring over documents that she had removed from the apartment, agents discovered a reference to a weapon system known by the acronym cactus, the prosecutors alleged.
The prosecutors said that this showed she was thoroughly familiar with the documents that her husband has been accused of stealing from the Naval Intelligence Service, where he was a civilian employee.
The court papers said that the Federal agents intially had no idea that the term ''cactus'' was a codeword and did not learn until they had reviewed the contents of the suitcase.
 
Papers Relating to China
At a bail hearing last week, an F.B.I. agent disclosed the existence of the documents related to China. 
The agent said that the documents had been found in a suitcase belong to the couple, and that Mrs. Henderson-Pollard had attempted to destroy the suitcase shortly after her husband's arrest.
Mr. Pollard, 31 years old, was arrested outside the Israeli Embassy in Washington two weeks ago. 
According to prosecutors, Mr. Pollard has acknowledged that he had sold secret documents to the Israeli Government for a year and a half.
Mr. Pollard was charged with transmitting classified Government documents to a foreign government. 
His wife, 25, was taken into custody the day after her husband's arest and charged with the lesser offense of obtaining classified documents.
Mr. DiGenova said tonight, however, that Mrs. Henderson-Pollard may face other charges, including espionage or conspiracy to commit espionage, both of which carry potential life sentences.
According to Navy officials, Mr. Pollard worked in a special counterterrorism unit and had access to a wide range of top secret information involving the capabilities of foreign military forces.
His suitcase, which is now in F.B.I. custody, was found to contain a stack, more than 15 inches high, of top secret documents, officials said.
