
A modest protest recently at the United States Embassy in Jakarta by a group of Moslem youths protesting American support for Israel was just one example of the tensions between Indonesia and the United States.
Disagreements on China and the world economy are also straining a relationship that has remained friendly since General Suharto came to power in the mid-1960's.
Indonesians believe that the tensions are the fault of the United States. 
Although relations have grown closer in recent years, it is the complaints of the Indonesian Government that are being voiced most clearly.
BANDUNG, Indonesia, July 22 - A modest protest recently at the United States Embassy in Jakarta by a group of Moslem youths protesting American support for Israel was just one example of the tensions between Indonesia and the United States.
Diplomatically, relations have improved in one respect since last spring, when Morton Abramowitz was rejected by Indonesia as the United States Ambassador.
Having taken the extraordinary step of rejecting Mr. Abramowitz - and been accused of doing so because he is Jewish and outspoken as well - the Indonesian Government is now said to be prepared to take anyone offered.
 
Suharto to Visit U.S. in October
President Suharto is expected to be warmly received when he visits Washington next October, his first such trip since 1975. 
Moreover, a recent visit to Washington by the Indonesian Minister of Research and Technology, Bachruddin Jusuf Habibie, who has been seeking advanced American weapons, reportedly went well.
While Jakarta has been seeking more weapons and while it believes that the United States is right to want to match the Soviet Navy's buildup in the Pacific, some Indonesians are worried about the focus on military matters.
''The Reagan Administration is so military,'' said Jusuf Wanandi, director of Jakarta's Center for Strategic and International Studies. 
Dr. Wanandi, who is highly regarded by diplomats for his knowledge of government and military thinking, said the American military focus was out of step with Indonesia's top priority, the economy.
 
Need for Economic Aid Stressed
''The countries around here think of their main threat as domestic,'' he said. 
He said Indonesia needed economic help more than ever because world prices for its oil, tin, rubber and other exports have been so depressed that the country's reserves and development plans are swiftly being cut back.
Yet the United States, he said, has withdrawn support for international commodity agreements that might have kept prices higher, has lost interest in aiding international lending institutions and has declined to sign the Law of the Sea Treaty.
''It is boggling our mind,'' Dr. Wanandi said. 
''Economic help is more important for our stability than a few more tanks.''
Reflecting Indonesian ambivalence about the rearming of Japan, which occupied Indonesia in World War II, Dr, Wanandi asked where it might end if the United States kept urging Japan to bear more of a military burden in Asia.
 
Concern About Japan Voiced
''What, really, do you want the Japanese to do?'' he said. 
''If they really decide to arm, if they set their minds to it, if they can work out some consensus in the next five years, they could become a nuclear power. 
They can do anything they want, you know.''
American policy toward China causes further grumbling, an attitude that in the military's case goes back to 1965, when Peking was accused of encouraging the Indonesian Communist Party, which was powerful at the time, to stage a coup. 
The party was later liquidated.
Foreign Minister Mochtar Kusum@aatmadja said in a recent interview: ''I wish that the United States more actively supported our position, especially on the Cambodian question, rather than the Chinese position.''
He was alluding to China's emphasis on opposing the Vietnamese militarily and making their occupation of Cambodia as expensive as possible.
 
Indonesia For Aid to Vietnam
Though a member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, an anti-Communist grouping, Indonesia favors economic aid for Vietnam and feels that its fear of China is well founded.
On June 10, the Deputy Secretary of State, Walter J. Stoessel Jr., told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee that United States relations with China ''are seen by our Asian friends as a positive influence on the future direction of China's foreign policy and a stimulus to regional cooperation.''
When asked about that testimony, Dr. Wanandi said, ''One of the confusing things is what your China policy is.''
Indonesia, which broke diplomatic relations with China in 1967, but has revived trade relations since then, has its own problems with its China policy.
In an interview with Newsweek last month, the Foreign Minister said China was the most dangerous influence in Southeast Asia. 
Two weeks ago, the Minister of Information, Lieut. 
Gen. Ali Murtopo, said in a seminar that the greatest threat in Southeast Asia was the Soviet Union.
The Foreign Minister later explained that perhaps he had been thinking of the past, and his colleague of the future. 
But what struck some Indonesians as most significant about the mix-up was its possible relevance to Indonesia's stance in the East-West alignment.
''According to us,'' said the newspaper Merdeka, ''to cry anti-Soviet and anti-People's Republic of China and, at the same time, to sing the United States' song will lead the people to interpret our foreign policy wrongly.''
