
The Chinese Communist Party has turned to religious tolerance to help build popularity for its modernization policies, and the result has been ''renewed vitality'' for religious groups, a New York-based delegation of American religious leaders said here today.
The party's tolerance of religious practice in the last few years, a reversal of policies before 1976, has resulted in an upsurge of religious activity not only among older believers but also among a younger generation denied exposure to various faiths since the Communist takeover in 1949, the group reported.
''China takes the pragmatic view that religious believers must feel satisfied with their status if they are to be energetic supporters of the party's program for the four modernizations of society,'' the delegation said Chinese officials had told them. 
The four modernizations are those in agriculture, industry, defense and science.
US clerics find revival of religion in ChinaRabbi Schneier Leads Group
The delegation represents the Appeal of Conscience Foundation, founded in 1965 to support religious freedom, especially in Communist countries. 
Led by its president, Rabbi Arthur Schneier of Park East Synagogue in New York, the foundation said that it would sponsor the study next year for two fellows from the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences of a mosaic of religious life in the United States.
The agreement was made with the academy's Institute of World Religions, which was closed during the Cultural Revolution and resumed research in 1978. 
Other members of the American delegation were the Rev. Donald R. Campion, of the Jesuit Conference in Washington; the Rev. David Randolph, senior minister of the United Methodist Christ Church, and the Rev. Hays Rockwell, rector of St. James's Episcopal Church.
The group, one of many Western religious delegations to visit China in the last few years, arrived as the Chinese affirmed its tolerance of religion in an assessment of its first 32 years of rule.
''It is imperative to continue to implement the policy of freedom of religious belief,'' the assessment said, with the qualification that believers ''must not engage in propaganda against Marxism-Leninism and Mao Zedong thought or interfere with politics and education in their religious activities.''
Both Communist and non-Communist diplomats have said that they believe the party's new-found religious tolerance to be rooted in two goals: the need to curry favor with as many sectors of society as possible in an effort to rebuild the party's sunken prestige; and the need to use churches, temples and other religious institutions as tourist attractions for earning foreign exchange.
After a six-day stay in Peking, the New York group said churches, temples and shrines were being re-opened in China and Protestant, Moslem, Buddhist and Roman Catholic seminaries were to follow and that the Government was printing 106,000 copies of a Chinese edition of the Koran and 385,000 copies of a Protestant Bible.
