
NOBODY who knew Ronald Reagan's devout anti-Communism could have imagined that as President he would be helping ''Red China'' manufacture its own ammunition for 105 millimeter howitzers, training elite Chinese industrial managers and coordinating American and Chinese military aid to an Asian guerrilla force. 
But just as Americans' stereotypes of Chinese have oscillated through the decades between negative and positive images, between the Chinese as sinister hordes and the Chinese as industrious toilers, so have formal relations.
As demonstrated last week by Secretary of State George P. Shultz's five-day, five-city journey to China, the two countries are now in a period of extraordinary accord.
Mr. Shultz was received at the highest levels and with the pomp and hospitality usually accorded a head of state. 
He cruised on a river boat, visited an industrial training center with American instructors, ascended a sacred mountain, visited the grave of Confucius, watched an ancient ceremony of gongs, drums and horns, toured an aircraft factory built by McDonnell Douglas and always, as his motorcade sped through villages and cities, he attracted throngs of curious, silent onlookers.
In Beijing, he met with six top officials, including the Chinese leader, Deng Xiaoping, who joked with him about ''troubles and difficulties'' endured both by President Reagan and Mr. Deng himself. 
And throughout the discussions, the shared antipathy to the Soviet Union transcended whatever disagreements were expressed. 
For this is the cement that holds the relationship in place: Each side is interested in the other as a counterweight to Soviet influence in Asia.
Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, has begun courting the Chinese by indicating a willingness to resolve conflicts dividing the two countries. 
He has compromised on a longstanding border dispute, agreeing to draw the frontier down the middle of a river, rather than on the Chinese bank. 
He has announced the withdrawal this spring of one military division from Mongolia, a step dismissed by Beijing as insignificant in view of the six divisions that will remain and the other massive deployment just across the Sino-Soviet border. 
Mr. Gorbachev has expressed interest in getting out of Afghanistan, where rebels are armed by coordinated help from both China and the United States.
And Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze, also traveling in Asia last week, suggested that the emerging formula for Afghanistan might be a model in which a Vietnamese withdrawal from Cambodia could be arranged.
 
Sino-Soviet Fears
Chinese and American officials swapped analyses and agreed that so far the Soviet moves are just talk; they were skeptical that actual withdrawals, cited by China as prerequisites for improved relations with Moscow, would occur. 
Furthermore, Western analysts tend to see deep historical and cultural forces working against Sino-Soviet reconciliation. 
The two are adjacent empires in Asia with overlapping ethnic populations, racist attitudes toward each other and traditional, mutual fears: a Soviet fear of the Mongol hordes that once invaded Russia, a Chinese fear of the historic threat beyond the Great Wall to the north.Few Chinese study Russian anymore, one young Communist Party member said. 
It was an assertion that couldn't be confirmed, but his belief said something in itself. 
And, he added, laughing, that some who have studied Russian have found themselves assigned by the army to the Soviet border.
China, which has opened to Western investment to get technology and expertise, is also seen as eager to avoid a rapprochement with Moscow that would frighten Washington.
Since formal diplomatic relations began in 1978, the United States has embarked on a modest military relationship with China, exchanging high-level officers and strategists, receiving Chinese delegations to study training methods and selling China some military technology and weapons. 
The sales involve $500 million in electronics for Chinese-built F-8 jet fighters, Mark 46 antisubmarine torpedoes and a factory in China that is to produce artillery shells and fuses.
After introducing market forces and private enterprise into agriculture, China has slowed its economic reforms. 
But all six leaders told Mr. Shultz that neither reform nor the opening to the West would be abandoned. 
The issue, Mr. Deng told Mr. Shultz, is orderliness.
The student demonstrations in December and January raised a traditional fear of disorder, the Chinese explained; some parents were said to have warned their children who came home from college never to forget the chaos and terror of the Cultural Revolution. 
It was the need for order, Mr. Deng reportedly said, that led to the ouster of Hu Yaobang as party chief. 
Afterward, amid a press campaign against ''bourgeois liberalization,'' one factory manager noticed his workers leaving their Western clothes home and wearing traditional Mao jackets, perhaps feeling the first strirring of a new, anti-Western wind.
Still, some 19,000 Chinese students, from the elite of the coming generation, are currently studying in the United States, being exposed to political values that Chinese leaders reject.
That seems to indicate a self-confidence by the leadership that China can modernize without Westernizing.
