
The United States men's gymnastics team, alternately cautious and daring, won the team gold medal in tonight, upsetting the reigning world champions from China.
''This is certainly comparable to the U.S. hockey team winning the gold medal in 1980,'' said Abie Grossfeld, the team's head coach, as a near-capacity crowd of 9,356 at Pauley Pavilion waved American flags and chanted ''U.S.A.!
U.S.A.!'' behind him.
The startling victory capped a day of competition in which the United States continued to dominate swimming, winning all five finals including a victory by Rick Carey of Mount Kisco, N.Y., in the men's 200-meter backstroke. 
The United States also won a gold in shooting as 18-year-old Pat Spurgin of Billings, Mont. took the women's air rifle competition. 
The Americans won seven gold medals yesterday to bring their total to 16 gold - 11 in swimming - in three days. 
In addition, the American men's and women's basketball teams looked impressive in winning their second games in the round-robin competitions.
US men's gymnastics team wins team gold medal at Los Angeles Olympic Games, upsetting reigning world champions from China; photo of Mitch Gaylord and James Hartung, team members; Americans win seven gold medals on July 31, bringing their total to 16 gold in three days (M)
''It's the best feeling I ever had in my life,'' said Mitch Gaylord, who successfully completed his risky and dangerous stunt on the horizontal bar that is known as the ''Gaylord II.''
The stunt received a score of 9.95 and helped helped preserve the American victory over the the Chinese by the score of 591.40 to 590.80.
''And it's great for our sport,'' he added, ''it's a whole new era for gymnastics,.''
It was the first team medal in gymnastics for the United States since it won a silver in the five-team men's competition of 1932.
The Americans took a 1.05 point lead into the evening's competition, built in the compulsory exercises on Sunday. 
That lead had been whittled to .60 of a point by the time the teams faced their final exercise - the horizontal bar for the Americans and floor exercise for the Chinese.
The high bar is usually the Americans' best event. 
But just one fall from the bar would mean an automatic deduction of .50 of a point. 
So with such a slim lead to protect, they felt pressure to tone down the difficulty of their routines and go for more modest but more perfectly-executed performances, including less difficult dismounts.
''We saw the Chinese doing easier dismounts and gettings 10's,'' said Peter Vidmar, who had the best individual all-around score, edging China's Li Ning by .05 of a point. 
The Chinese were in the rotation just ahead of the United States team, and had scored two 10's on the rings using relatively simple dismounts, brilliantly executed.
Each of them did take out certain more difficult moves from their still rings and high bar routines, to be a bit cautious. 
But when the time came to take risks, in the last event and with the gold medal on the line, they were game.
''Jim Hartung came up to me and said, 'This is the Olympic Games - let's go for it,' '' said Vidmar. 
''and so Scott Johnson did his double-double, and Tim Daggett did his triple back, and I did my double-double and landed on my feet.''
Daggett hit his triple back somersault dismount perfectly, and got a perfect 10 as his reward. 
Vidmar hit his double-double - a double somersault with two twists - and got a 9.95 score. 
But those two were the last Americans to perform, and before they jumped onto the bar, the situaion had gotten very uncertain.
Although Johnson decided, like his teammates, to keep his tough dismount in his routine, he missed it - and his off-balance landing cost him badly, as he got a 9.50 score.
The lowest score of the six team members is always discarded. 
But that put a lot of pressure on Gaylord. 
He could not afford to get a low score, too, and he and the coach wondered if he should risk trying the Gaylord II. 
It is a supremely difficult maneuver done in midair above the bar, in which he does a one-and-a-half somersault with a half twist, then recatches the bar. 
More often than not, he misses the bar.
''And we already had one miss from Scott's performance,'' said Bart Conner, who had gotten a 10 on the parallel bars in the previous rotation, ''so Mitch was really up against the wall.''
Gaylord didn't miss. 
He soared above the bar, the crowd collectively caught its breath, he caught the bar, and the crowd gasped and then cheered. 
The score: a 9.95.
''He's been trying that move for the last six months with the intention of using it in the Olympic Games - he's not going to take it out now,'' said Gaylord's older brother, Chuck, who is also his coach. 
''It was a case of Mitch's style of gymnastics. 
He's never settled for a 9.9, he's always gone for the 10.''
Even his teammates were impressed.
''I told Mitch, 'You did the trick and you did it when it had to be done,' '' said Conner. 
''That's tough. 
My hat's off to him.''
Gaylord had given the American team a boost early in the evening, too. 
On the second rotation, while the Americans were having some problems on the pommel horse, the Chinese were wowing the judges on the rings. 
Both their stars, Li Ning and Tong Fei, scored perfect 10's, the first such scores of the evening.
 
A 10 on the Rings
But the Americans were on the rings next, and Gaylord earned a 10 on them, too.
''We felt like we showed 'em right there we can be as perfect as they can,'' said Vidmar.
There will always be a question about how well the Americans would have done if the Soviet Union team had been here. 
The Soviets won the gold medal in 1980 in Moscow, although they were upset by .10 of a point by the Chinese at the world championships in Budapest last October.
''The Chinese beat the Soviets and we beat the Chinese,'' said Conner, the 26-year-old veteran of this team, who has been on the American gymnastics scene for a decade and remembers the days when Americans were always at the bottom of the international heap.
''I could've been up in the stands watching, after having been part of all the momentum that built up over the years,'' he said. 
''And I'm so glad I'm here, and I'm performing, when we finally reached our goal.''
Not only is he here, he's in fourth place in the individual all-around standings. 
Each man's scores from the team competition, compulsories and optionals, are averaged to obtain a preliminary score. 
Compulsories are a set of identical routines with certain required elements, performed by all competitors. 
Optionals are routines devised by each contestant and varying in difficulty and style.
The top 36 athletes advance to the all-around finals, on Thursday, where they will do another round of optional exercises to determine the individual all-around medalists.
Vidmar has the lead in preliminary scores, with 59.275 points to the 59.225 of Li. 
Tong is third with 59.20, and Conner has 59.15 points.
For Vidmar, the excitement was so much that, as he walked away from the victory stand in the center of Pauley Pavilion after getting his medal and hearing his national anthem, he almost fainted.
''I suddenly got very, very light- headed and almost passed out,'' he said. 
''I think it was from all the shouting and yelling we were doing. 
I got real dizzy, but then I figured, so what if I pass out?
I've still got this medal around my neck.''
