
As Secretary of State George P. Shultz begins his visit to Peking, the prevailing view in the Administration, according to many officials, is that China is decades away from becoming a true global power, and that the United States has little to gain now in trying to play off China against the Soviet Union.
Over the last two years, officials acknowledged, the Reagan team has gone from the extreme of thinking of Peking as a major diplomatic counterweight to Moscow almost to the other extreme of simply seeing China as a struggling Asian giant lagging far behind Japan.
For the Administration, China remains an important strategic anchor, holding almost 50 Soviet divisions on its border. 
Because of this, a key Administration official explained, ''We will try to develop the relationship with them, but not oversell it and not pay a high price for it either.''
WASHINGTON, Feb. 
1 - As Secretary of State George P. Shultz begins his visit to Peking, the prevailing view in the Administration, according to many officials, is that China is decades away from becoming a true global power, and that the United States has little to gain now in trying to play off China against the Soviet Union.
Administration officials believe that the necessary price to preserve China as an anchor was paid last August with the promulgation of the Taiwan Communique, which included an American promise to phase out arms sales to Taiwan in return for China's promise to pursue peaceful reunification with Taiwan.
 
Demythologizing of China
This new thinking in the Administration represents what some officials called a demythologizing of China, a substantial lowering of expectations, a sense that China and the United States cannot do very much very fast for each other - sentiments reciprocated in full measure by Chinese officials.
Accordingly, American officials said that Mr. Shultz is bearing no surprises, concessions or gifts. 
There is nothing to break the deadlock over Chinese textile exports to America, nor any major breakthroughs on requests for high technology, and above all, nothing new on Taiwan. 
He will be bringing only an old list of military items Washington would ''consider'' selling and sale approvals for computers, semiconductors and laboratory measuring instruments Peking requested some time ago.
Officials said the aims of the five-day visit, which begins Feb. 
2, are to put the relationship on a firmer long-term footing, to discuss mutual opposition to Soviet involvements in Afghanistan and Southeast Asia and to set up other meetings on defense and trade. 
If the trip is successful, a visit by Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang to Washington could follow and maybe early next year, President Reagan could go to Peking.
 
Triangle Turned on Its Head
Throughout the 1970's, the United States was at the apex of the great power triangle, maneuvering with Moscow and Peking to capitalize on their antagonism, seemingly in control, almost always retaining the diplomatic initiative. 
Now, with Washington's relations with China and the Soviet Union nearly frozen and with Peking and Moscow now beginning to deal with each other again, the triangle has been turned on its head.
In this inverted triangle, Peking and Moscow are maneuvering in ways that officials and outside experts feel could weaken and certainly will complicate American foreign policy.
Administration officials comfort themselves with the thought that a lowering of Chinese-Soviet tensions is not contrary to American interests, and that their courtship is not likely to go far.
There is also comfort drawn from the sense that while President Nixon constructed triangular diplomacy as a strategic device to reposition major pieces on the global chessboard to contain the Soviet Union, Moscow and Peking appear to be using the inverted triangle essentially as a tactical device to court Washington.
 
U.S. Trade and Technology
Mainly, both want American trade and technology. 
But while Moscow is seeking arms limitation treaties with Washington, Peking is looking for American arms.
But American relations with both Peking and Moscow are at a 12-year low, and Administration officials say there is little disposition toward making compromises with either of them that might produce a major breakthrough.
''There is a degree of unavoidability to this,'' said Helmut Sonnenfeldt of the Brookings Institution and one of the framers of triangular diplomacy in the Nixon Administration. 
''Compared with the moves we were able to make with Peking and Moscow in the early 1970's, there probably isn't as much room for maneuver. 
The issues are harder.''
To Richard C. Holbrooke, a high-ranking official in the Carter Administration, the issues are harder in good part ''because of the inaction and insensitivity of the Reagan Administration.''
''Toward Moscow, the Administration concentrated on ideological rhetoric and took over a year before getting to the table on arms control,'' he said. 
''Toward Peking, they dragged their heels to the point where even when they settled some central issues in the Taiwan Communique, the atmosphere had been poisoned.''
It was former Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. who brought about the Taiwan Communique. 
One of President Reagan's campaign pledges in 1980 was to improve relations with Taiwan.
 
Linking U.S. and Soviet
Now, as described by officials in the State Department, the Pentagon and the White House, the view at the top is that China is a large and important Asian country with an almost hopelessly outdated conventional military force, and its influence is restricted essentially to Asia.
Mr. Shultz's estimate of China was said to be relaxed to the point where he turned down his Asian experts twice before agreeing to make the trip.
State Department experts argued that China was going through a particularly important leadership transition, from older to younger leaders, and that this was the time to shape attitudes.
In their judgment, new attitudes in the Administration toward China were being mirrored by new Chinese attitudes toward the United States.
But what troubled some senior Administration officials, much more than it disturbed the experts, was Peking's maneuvering with Moscow and Peking's return to the formula of ''double hegemonism,'' or speaking of the Soviet Union and the United States as equal threats to peace. 
''They wanted to get our attention,'' said one official, ''and they did.''
 
'They Pulled Back Somewhat'
The State Department let the Chinese know of the Administration's unhappiness about the yoking of Washington and Moscow: Washington would not look kindly on providing new dual-use technology, technology that could have military and civilian applications, as long as Peking maintained an anti-American profile.
Chinese diplomats reacted quickly, calling in their American counterparts and reporters to reassure them of Peking's intentions. 
''They understand that it's one thing to get our attention, and another to go too far, and they pulled back somewhat in their public rhetoric,'' said an Administration official.
The State Department's Soviet experts also began expressing concern about the talks between Peking and Moscow. 
While granting that Chinese-Soviet detente was not in the offing, they worried about perceptions in Europe and elsewhere. 
Western European diplomats are not as comfortable as the Administration is with perceptions of the diplomatic initiative passing from American hands to Soviet and Chinese hands.
