
A foreign banker new to Hong Kong tells of how, shortly after being posted here, he decided to close the office at 8 o'clock every night so his Chinese staff could spend more time with their families. 
He was taken aside and politely but firmly told to discard that notion, since nothing would be more likely to foment an office revolt than limiting working hours.
Hong Kong's reason for being seems to be unabashedly, singlemindedly to make money. 
That is its philosophy, its ideology, its worldview. 
The traditional New Year greeting here is, ''Happy New Year, and may you make a fortune.''
Negotiations between officials representing Hong Kong, Great Britain and China begin to discuss the future of colony
''Hong Kong is the last truly capitalist place on earth,'' said Jimmy D. McGregor, a former top Government official who is director of the Hong Kong General Chamber of Commerce.
 
Concern About the Future
What people in Hong Kong fear now is that this model of unfettered capitalism may be altered as a result of the negotiations between China and Britain over the British colony's future.
''People here are very worried, very concerned,'' said Joseph Cheng, a political science professor at the Chinese University of Hong Kong. 
''We do not want our economic system drastically changed and our living standards lowered.''
The first round of talks on the future of Hong Kong took place in Peking last Thursday and Friday, when Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of Britain and Chinese leaders met. 
As expected, the initial discussions produced only a general statement that further negotiations were planned, with the goal being an agreement that will maintain ''the stabilityI and prosperity of Hong Kong.''
Mrs. Thatcher arrived in Hong Kong today to meet with the colony's leaders.
Peking says it will reassert its sovereignty over Hong Kong when the 99-year lease on the so-called New Territories, accounting for 90 percent of the colony's land, expires in 1997.
Though the lease does not run out for another 15 years, Hong Kong's future status must soon be clarified. 
Many property mortgages and other business contracts run a 15-year term. 
Already, business leaders say, investments are being delayed. 
If the matter is left unresolved, it could seriously hurt Hong Kong's economy.
The key issue is not sovereignty itself, but who actually runs Hong Kong. 
No one here seems to care whose flag flies above the citystate. 
''The Union Jack isn't all that pretty anyway,'' one British expatriate said.
At the same time, there is almost universal resistance to China's playing any genuine part in running Hong Kong, even under a joint administration. 
''All indications are that the leaders in Peking are quite ignorant of what makes Hong Kong work and how capitalism operates,'' said Lawrence Chui, 34 years old, an investment manager.
 
'Close to Independence'
''We want something that is very close to independence,'' said Christine Loh, chairman of the Hong Kong Observers, a group of politically active Chinese professionals.
For the foreseeable future, most agree that the British, as symbols of the economic status quo, will have to retain the key administrative posts in order to maintain business confidence.
In many ways, Hong Kong is already independent. 
Although the colony is administered by a Governor appointed by Britain, and a council that he appoints, London is not consulted before Government decisions are made. 
The real objective of the negotiations with Peking, one British diplomat said, is to ''replace the fiction that Hong Kong is part of England with the fiction that it is part of China.''
One industrialist pointed out that Hong Kong's political and economic system is entirely different from that in England. 
''And thank heaven for that,'' he added with feeling.
Government in Hong Kong, though growing, is small. 
The economy is freewheeling and largely untouched by public-sector regulation.
 
Maximum Tax Rate: 15%
To anyone who has been perturbed about having so little of a paycheck left after the tax collectors get through with it, one statistic tells much about Hong Kong: the maximum rate of taxation on personal income is 15 percent. 
For corporations, the ceiling is 16.5 percent.
Most governments today are plagued by huge deficits, but Hong Kong runs a surplus. 
Personal wealth and living standards have risen sharply in recent years. 
In the decade 1971-81, per-capita income more than doubled, even though the population increased by 1.1 million, to 5.1 million.
Hong Kong's system of winner-take-all capitalism results in vast disparities in wealth and circumstances. 
Rolls-Royce and Mercedes Benz sedans are a common sight, but so are squalid squatter tenements that house roughly 600,000 people, more than one-tenth of the population.
Much of the squatter problem, however, is a result of Hong Kong's openness to immigrants. 
It has taken in more than three times as many Indochinese refugees as its larger, richer East Asian neighbor, Japan. 
Also, Hong Kong absorbs 65,000 people a year from China.
 
Immigrants' Goal: The Peak
The immigrants come because of the promise that hard work will pay off in a better life for them and their children. 
The animating myth of Hong Kong has long been that the noodle-shop owner on the waterfront can, if he has enough courage, brains and luck, someday live on the Peak, where Hong Kong's millionaires reside. 
And it is not always a myth.
There are rags-to-riches stories here that would have made Horatio Alger's jaw drop. 
Nearly all the superrich of Hong Kong are Chinese. 
Take Yue-kong Pao, the billionaire shipping magnate whose assets include probably the largest fleet of privately owned ships in the world.
''He started with one beaten-up rust bucket,'' said a crusty old Scot who has been around long enough to know. 
Mr. Pao was in Peking last week, seen on television with Mrs. Thatcher and the rest of the British delegation at official receptions. 
These days he is properly referred to as Sir Yue-kong, having been knighted in 1978 by Queen Elizabeth.
