
LOVE MUST NOT BE FORGOTTEN By Zhang Jie. 
207 pp. 
San Francisco: China Books & Periodicals. 
Cloth, $16.95. 
Paper, $8.95.
ZHANG JIE, the author of this collection of six short stories and a novella, is one of the foremost women writers in China. 
In the summer of 1982 she toured the United States as a member of the official Chinese Writers Association and so charmed her American hosts that one of them, the noted poet and essayist Annie Dillard, devoted half of her book ''Encounters With Chinese Writers'' to a lavish description of Ms. Zhang's winning character, though not much about her writings. 
In China, at age 50, she enjoys a degree of pre-eminence chiefly for her controversial novel ''Leaden Wings'' (1981), a roman a clef that deals with government bureaucracy and its manifold problems. 
The work won not only a prestigious prize in China but a translation award in West Germany. 
Ms. Zhang has also been hailed as China's first feminist novelist for her fearlessness in ''lashing out at male supremacy, hypocrisy, corruption, bureaucracy, nepotism, and other malpractices holding up China's advance,'' as Gladys Yang tells us in her preface to this book. 
These stories give the Western reader a true sampling of such social issues and, to some extent, of the author's real-istic art.
Reading contemporary Chinese fiction may be an ''acquired taste'' (a condescending remark perhaps unintended by Ms. Dillard in her book mentioned above) presumably because of its usually pervasive political ideology. 
But in these stories we do not see ''politics in command.''
Rather, it is the portraits that loom large; vivid and life-size, they are drawn on a human scale and deal with the familiar human problems of love, marriage, divorce, work, emotional sacrifice and death. 
The stories collected in ''Love Must Not Be Forgotten'' clearly show a feminist sensibility; the author unmistakably identifies with the women characters featured in three substantial stories. 
The title story reveals, through the familiar form of a discovered diary, the unbelievably romantic ''secret'' of a woman's lifelong devotion outside her marriage to a married man with whom she has never ''once even clasped hands!''
In the second story, ''Emerald,'' two strong-willed, educated women devote their lives to a handsome weakling; one of them, the story's heroine, suffers infamy and torture when she takes the blame for her lover's alleged petty crime during the Cultural Revolution and later secretly bears him an illegitimate son. 
The novella, titled ''The Ark,'' depicts three divorced women living in a rundown apartment, victims of shattered romantic illusions, all having to cope with everyday problems in a male-dominated society. 
Despite its sprawling, unstructured narrative, ''The Ark'' is also the most authentic and universal story in the volume.
Surely no American reader needs to acquire a Sinological taste to savor the following description in the novella of a typical Sunday morning in the women's apartment: ''A large pile of dirty dishes had collected in the sink over the past two days, and not a single clean bowl remained in the cupboard. 
. . . The water quickly turned murky, with a layer of oil bubbles floating on the surface. 
. . . They always seemed so busy, yet how was it that they never seemed to do anything properly?''
However, unlike the usual Chinese prototypes, these women all smoke and swear (the striking earthiness of their Chinese curses is less intense in the uninspired English translation). 
Even in Socialist China, it still takes courage to write like that.
On the other hand, the stories about men are weak: two - ''An Unfinished Record'' and ''Under the Hawthorne'' - deal with older males, one dying and the other hospitalized in a sanitarium. 
A third story, ''The Time Is Not Yet Ripe,'' is a mild satire about a party bureaucrat frustrated in his maneuvers to bar a nonparty friend from promotion. 
Only one story deals with the younger generation; ''Who Knows How to Live'' focuses on a heavily idealized portrait of a young woman bus conductor who handles with exemplary ease the obnoxious advances of one young man and gently accepts the friendship of another. 
WHEN the story ''Love Must Not Be Forgotten'' was first published in 1979, Ms. Zhang, like one of her characters in ''The Ark,'' came under fire from some conservative critics who accused her of glorifying a married woman's love for a married man -something that apparently does not meet with the socialist ideal of correct human behavior. 
It is a reflection of the liberalizing trend since then that in her more recent stories she is able to cut through such ideological hypocrisy and delve into the unhappy aspects of marriage and divorce. 
In defiance of all rosy visions, Ms. Zhang's fiction appears to deny that women are liberated in post-Liberation China. 
If her feminism does not evince the expected militancy, she nevertheless shows a respect for genuine emotions, particularly those of women. 
Indeed, one could conclude that Ms. Zhang is as much a romantic as she is a feminist.
But with all such outpourings of the heart, Zhang Jie is unable to exercise control over her narratives. 
I have read these stories in both Chinese and English and must admit that the original texts are as sentimental and full of descriptive cliches and overblown prose as can be found in the somewhat toned-down translations (some by such well-regarded translators as Gladys Yang and W. J. F. Jenner).
Despite the eminence Zhang Jie now enjoys, there are more outstanding practitioners of fictional art in China - both male and female - especially among the young generation. 
Though contemporary Chinese literature is taught in some colleges in this country, Western bias has precluded its broader exposure to the general public. 
As a result, China Books & Periodicals' initiative in launching with this book a series on New Chinese Fiction should be applauded. 
Perhaps time is still not ripe for contemporary Chinese literature from China and Taiwan to compete with modern Japanese and South American works in the American market. 
(The latter now exert a powerful impact on many young Chinese writers.) With the publication of this volume (and a similar collection, ''Chrysanthemum & Other Stories'' by Feng Jicai last year), a beginning step has at last been taken to introduce current works of Chinese literature to Americans.
