
raiders
 
By HENRY KAMM
BANGKOK - In Southeast Asia, where for more than a century the only dynamic forces were alien - Europe first, America, Japan and China later - a new power has come into being since 1975. 
Its actions and, perhaps even more, its assumed intentions are sending shivers down the spines of statesmen and politicians, as well as ordinary citizens.
Even neighbors who do not subscribe to a simplistic ''domino theory'' see in Vietnam a cause for worry. 
Hanoi has gobbled up Laos and Cambodia, the two neutralist states that served as buffers between the Communist world and pro-Western nations in the region and its armed might encircles the large northeastern bulge of Thailand.
AN-A
Last week, Secretary General Kurt Waldheim of the United Nations concluded a four-day visit to Hanoi and Bangkok persuaded that both Governments were willing to talk but that neither was ready to make the concessions that would give negotiations a chance of success.
If that were not enough to frighten Southeast Asians, Vietnam has also teetered from its neutrality between the two principal Communist powers and fallen entirely into the Soviet camp, grievously offending China. 
Soviet warships come and go in Vietnam's ports, and military transport planes regularly overfly anti-Soviet countries to deliver tools of war to Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos.
From these realities, differing conclusions have been drawn, but even those who believe that Hanoi's goals of dominance do not reach beyond the borders of former French Indochina have been shocked by Hanoi's bald aggression in Cambodia. 
Few in Asia set stock by Hanoi's pretensions to humanitarian concern when it overthrew the brutal regime of Prime Minister Pol Pot; until Phnom Penh broke relations, Hanoi ritually praised Cambodia as a brotherly nation. 
Vietnam's easy resort to military force has convinced many that a power of such bellicosity constitutes a menace to the non-Communist countries, whose small armies tend more to be bases of political power than military bastions. 
Whether Malaysia, Indonesia, the Philippines and Burma, which deeply distrust China, share the belief of Thailand and Singapore that Vietnam is, by its own design and with Soviet complicity, out for regional conquest has not been the issue since the invasion of Cambodia. 
A consensus exists that all in the region must be on guard.
In this context, Vietnam's brief incursion into Thai border villages in June provoked a demonstration of unity in support of Thailand. 
Even countries that feel uneasy in finding themselves on the same side as China were impressed by clear signals that Vietnam, for the first time using military might against a non-Communist nation, wanted its readiness to do so understood. 
What frightened many political leaders was that Hanoi made no attempt to describe the incursion as an act of hot pursuit or a local action by a unit commander. 
Vietnam made clear that it felt its anger over Bangkok's cooperation with the Pol Pot remnants entitled it to use armed force to teach Thailand a lesson on Thai soil.
Bangkok's fear of Vietnam's bellicosity is real, even if the premise that Hanoi desires to annex Thai territory may not be. 
The Government's hard line is matched by a popular perception of Vietnam as menacing and the continued disgorging of tens of thousands of refugees from the Vietnamese domain hardens this belief. 
Premier Pham Van Dong's olive branch visit to Thailand and other Southeast Asian countries three months before the full-scale attack on Cambodia in January 1979 is viewed as characteristic of Vietnamese duplicity. 
Thailand has aligned itself closely with China in adamant opposition to recognition of the Vietnamese puppet government in Cambodia, in strong support for the Pol Pot regime and in a border policy that favors the Pol Pot remnants in their enclaves. 
Its insistence that international food aid must be channeled to Pol Pot forces as well as to bona fide refugees has engaged Bangkok in angry controversy with international organizations.
Thailand finds encouragement in this policy, whether intended or not, from the United States. 
Although Washington never recognized the Pol Pot regime in power, American policy shifted, after Vietnam dislodged it, to backing its right to hold Cambodia's seat in the United Nations. 
The United States made clear that, between two governments it does not recognize, it prefers the one that has China's support, no matter how atrocious its human rights record, over the one backed by Moscow. 
Whatever chances may have existed for a reversal of the American policy - a shift might help the survival of Cambodians by encouraging Vietnam to adopt a more humanitarian attitude toward distribution of international food aid - have been vitiated by the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. 
In the present mood toward Moscow, it is unlikely that Washington will confer even implicit recognition on the conquest of a nation by a Soviet ally.
Non-Communist Southeast Asia, the United States and the rest of the West appear firmly entrenched in attitudes toward Vietnam that parallel China's. 
But Vietnam's position is equally firm and the balance of forces in Cambodia makes it unlikely that Hanoi will yield in its insistence that the situation is irreversible. 
The highest Vietnamese leaders emphatically made that point to Mr. Waldheim. This leaves Thailand and the other Southeast Asian nations behind it supporting a force whose hopes cannot go beyond resisting strongly enough to survive and continuing indefinitely a war it cannot win without active Chinese intervention against Vietnam. 
Hanoi's actions have set off reactions that seem to assure it of lasting hostility in the region and have made Southeast Asia an arena of Soviet-Chinese conflict.
