
China has stepped up its border attacks on Vietnam in the last week in an effort to deter Hanoi from beginning dry-seaon operations against guerrilla armies in Cambodia, a Vietnamese general said today.
According to the officer, Maj. Gen. Tran Cong Man, a veteran combat commander against both the French and the Americans and now editor of People's Army, the Chinese began on Dec. 
28 ''to create maximum military pressure on Vietnam so that they could prevent a major offensive in Cambodia.''
He said Peking, to ''realize its promise to the Khmer reactionaries,'' had been firing up to 20,000 shells a day into four border provinces, most of them aimed at the Vi Xuyen district of Ha Tuyen Province. 
He added that over the last month there had been two battalion-sized infantry assaults in that district.
The general also said the Chinese had been conducting a major propaganda campaign among the Hmong tribal people along the border area. 
He said the Hmong, who are also found in Laos, Thailand, Burma and southern China, were being encouraged to press for a separate ethnic state.
The general said that the scale of Khmer Rouge and other guerrilla attacks had been reduced in the last year or two, but that the number of guerrilla strikes might have increased.
General Man, who as editor of People's Army has made three tours of the Cambodian battle areas, said the Khmer Rouge ''in small groups of 20 or 30'' were active in the suburbs of the Cambodian capital of Phnom Penh. 
#150,000 Vietnamese Troops Vietnam is believed to have at least 150,000 soldiers in Cambodia to support the Government of Heng Samrin that it installed on Jan. 
7, 1979. 
Hanoi has said it hopes to withdraw its troops by 1990.
Today, however, when asked if there was any hope of settling the military situation in Cambodia sooner than that, General Man was not optimistic.
''The fighting must continue for some time,'' he said. 
''It is not possible to stop soon.''
The general said the Khmer Rouge forces had been using more artillery in attacks against the Vietnamese and were using smaller and more difficult to detect plastic mines along the Thai-Cambodian border.
General Man dismissed recent Khmer Rouge radio reports of mutiny in the Cambodian Army. 
He also rejected reports of major military successes against the Vietnamese.
''We consider what they say as anecdotes,'' he said, ''like selling bearskins without having killed the bear.''
General Man said he was not able to comment authoritatively on a recent Khmer Rouge radio broadcast that the rebels had briefly captured the Cambodian town of Takeo, 45 miles from Phnom Penh.
 
Chinese Threat Called a Constant
General Man said that in the border conflict with China, which he characterized as a source of considerable pressure on Hanoi, there had been no need to reinforce the military presence there because the Chinese threat was a constant. 
He said the level of fighting had not matched that of seven years ago when China invaded Vietnam in an effort to teach Hanoi a lesson for having overthrown the Chinese-backed Cambodian Government of Pol Pot.
General Man would not comment on Vietnamese plans for the next few months in Cambodia, saying that much of what happenes would depend on the three anti-Hanoi guerrilla armies.
The armies, grouped together as the Resistence Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea, have been troubled over the last few weeks by an open rebellion in the ranks of the Khmer People's National Liberation Front, the larger of two non-Communist groups in the coalition.
The front has been all but taken over by a dissident committee seeking to oust the front's founder, Son Sann. 
On Thursday, an offical of the front acknowledged in Bangkok that Mr. Son Sann was no longer able to visit the border camps where his followers live.
