
In the three and a half years since Vietnam invaded Cambodia, a stalemate has developed between Hanoi and most other governments around the world, which have adamantly refused to accept the invasion's legitimacy or results.
Vietnam, with as many as 200,000 troops in Cambodia, maintains a government in Phnom Penh and says it liberated the country from the atrocious rule of Pol Pot. 
It defends its occupation as a necessary defense against China and has often termed its action ''irreversible.''
With China's aid, however, Mr. Pol Pot's guerrillas still opppose the Vietnamese from strongholds on the Thai border. 
The United Nations continues to seat Mr. Pol Pot's representative in the General Assembly. 
An international conference on Cambodia has demanded that Vietnam withdraw its troops and let the United Nations supervise a Cambodian election. 
And since 1979 Vietnam's critics - including the United States, much of Western Europe, Japan and, not least, the non-Communist Association of Southeast Asian Nations -have denied it economic aid.
Vietnam is seen mounting full-scale diplomatic effort aimed at advancing its views on invasion of CambodiaVietnamese Initiative Sighted
Recently international pressure, threats, frustration and diplomatic initiatives have shown signs of jiggling the Cambodian chessboard. 
One of the most closely watched of these developments has been the growing evidence that Vietnam is starting a full-scale diplomatic initiative designed to advance its view on the Cambodian question.
Whether Vietnam's efforts can succeed is unclear. 
But that they have already made a mark became clear last week when most of the Asean foreign ministers announced that they welcomed - though in some cases skeptically - a proposed tour of non-Communist Southeast Asian nations later this summer by Vietnam's Foreign Minister, Nguyen Co Thach.
Whether that announcement in turn prodded the three major factions of anti-Vietnamese Cambodians to talk again of uniting after years of suspicion and hatred is also not certain. 
Diplomats in Bangkok, however, said Thursday that after a year of effort a formal coalition had been arranged among Cambodia's former chief of state, Prince Norodom Sihanouk; his former Prime Minister, Son Sann, who commands a few thousand Cambodian guerrillas, and the Pol Pot group, which commands as many as 30,000 troops and has avoided Vietnam's attempts to destroy it.
Today, in a statement monitored here, the Vietnam press agency denounced Asean's pledge of support for the coalition of resistance groups. saying ''the Asean countries are doing only harm to their organization.''
 
U.N. Vote Due in September
The effect of these developments on Cambodia may not be known until September, when the General Assembly will again vote on whether to seat a Cambodian Government that does not govern. 
By then, Vietnam's critics hope, Mr. Pol Pot will have gained more standing through formal ties with nationalist leaders who are untainted by his murderous record.
It is largely in anticipation of the United Nations session in September, as well as out of an interest in any shift in Hanoi's attitude concerning Cambodia, that Western and Asian officials have been carefully following the Vietnamese diplomatic initiative.
Since last fall Vietnameese officials, and particularly Mr. Thach, have argued that Vietnam is sincerely interested in peace and that Hanoi remains its own master despite its military and economic dependence upon the Soviet Union.
 
Vietnam Cites China
Vietnam has consistently asserted that it wants to withdraw its troops from Cambodia but that it has not done so out of fear that the Chinese would fill the vacuum and reinstate Mr. Pol Pot.
And fundamentally, perhaps, Hanoi has been saying that it needs Western economic aid. 
These arguments, though eliciting skepticism in some quarters, have led to increasing contacts between Hanoi and its critics. 
These contacts have been mostly with Mr. Thach, a diplomat who earlier this year was appointed to the Vietnamese Politburo. 
Through such contacts, some Western diplomats believe, Vietnam's goal is to end its isolation.
After Vietnam's defeat at the United Nations last fall, Hanoi has pressed its arguments wherever it could - during a visit to Japan by the Mayor of Ho Chi Minh City, in the United Nations during debates over humanitarian aid to Vietnam, to visiting delegations of American war veterans and to reporters.
 
France Sending Credits
Last year, President Francois Mitterrand of France indicated that $23 million in French credits that had been held up under his predecessor would be given to Vietnam despite France's continuing opposition to Vietnam's presence in Cambodia. 
France has since sent high-level delegations to Hanoi.
In February, Indochina's foreign ministers, meeting in Laos, issued a low-key statement suggesting that Thailand might help reduce the tension caused by the presence by warring troops on its border with Cambodia. 
Thailand replied that it had no interest in dealing on strictly bilateral terms with Vietnam, and it responded cooly to a proposal that it join Vietnam in disarming Cambodian guerrillas.
In April, Mr. Thach visited West Germany, France, Sweden and Belgium, all of which have provided economic aid to Vietnam but none of which approves its Cambodian policy. 
Chinese and most Western diplomats later called the visit a flop, since Mr. Thach's Chinese-Cambodian arguments were blandly received, and he came away with no new financial commitments. 
Mr. Thach, however, said in an interview in Hanoi last month that, despite differences ''on our military presence in Cambodia,'' the European foreign ministers ''understood better than before.''
 
3-Step Plan for Peace
Last month Mr. Thach summoned the Western ambassadors in Hanoi to brief them on his European trip and to outline a three-stage plan for peace in Cambodia. 
In the first stage, he said, Hanoi would unconditionally withdraw some troops.
