
A series of border incidents during the Lunar New Year holiday last month has prompted new recriminations between China and Vietnam, which have been on hostile terms since their border war three years since their border war th ree years ago.
Today The People's Daily accused Hanoi of hypocrisy in proposing a cease-fire on three recent occasions and then instigating 44 ''military provocations'' during the 10-day holiday that the Chinese call Chunjie and the Vietnamese call Tet.
The article by Ji Ying of the New China News Agency charged that a Chinese peasant was killed and two others wounded along the rugged border of the southern provinces of Yunnan and Guanxi between Jan. 
18 and 28.
 
''The Vietn amese authorities ''The Vietn amese authorities never tire of talking about their desire for pe ace, yet they have failed to show it in their actions,''the article s aid.
Series of border incidents during Lunar New Year holiday last month prompts renewed hostilities betwen China and VietnamPropaganda Coup by Hanoi
The charges come only a few days after Vietnam scored a propaganda coup by encouraging the new Secretary General of the United Nations, Javier Perez de Cuellar, to agree to mediate in the Chinese-Vietnamese border dispute. 
Mr. Perez de Cuellar assured Pham Van Dong, the Vietnamese Prime Minister, that he was ready to help ''contribute to a peaceful solution.''Mr. 
Perez de Cuellar has combined with Vietnam's public truce offers to put China on the defensive. 
The People's Daily took note of the Vietnamese proposals on Dec. 
28, Jan. 
14 and Jan. 
30, and charged that Vietnam had circulated them at the United Nations ''in an attempt to achieve maximum benefit from this propaganda stunt.''
Some Peking-based diplomats have speculated that China must be particularly annoyed because it helped Mr. Perez de Cuellar obtain the post by its adamant opposition to another term for Kurt Waldheim.
China told Vietnam last September that there could be no negotiations before Vietnamese forces pulled out of Cambodia. 
The Chinese have also contended that a truce is superfluous because the Vietnamese are to blame for the border hostilities.
 
Convenient Point of Pressure
''As long as Vietnam refrains from making any future military provocations or incursions into Chinese territory,'' The People's Daily said today, ''the question of fighting back simply will not arise and peace and tranquillity will prevail in the border area, festival or no festival.''
While it is almost impossible to determine who is at fault from the verbal exchanges, the Chinese have found the border a convenient point of pressure on Vietnam at a time when Hanoi is trying to buttress its client regime headed by Heng Samrin in Phnom Penh. 
According to Western intelligence reports last year, the Chinese were tying down up to two-thirds of the Vietnamese Army, which might otherwise be available for duty in Cambodia.
Peking also seems aware that any agreement with Hanoi would be interpreted in Asia as a softening of China's opposition to Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia, particularly when other Southeast Asian nations are trying to promote a coalition of resistance movements there. 
China continues to champion the ousted regime of Pol Pot.
But some diplomats here feel that Vietnam, realizing that China does not want to talk, may find it advantageous to press publicly for a truce while embarrassing the Chinese with border incidents.
 
Five Violations Cited
The Chinese press has been specific about at least five violations that it said took place recently. 
On Jan. 
18 the Vietnamese were accused of shelling a village in the Hekou Autonomous County of Yunnan Province. 
On Jan. 
22 Tan Jianmao, a commune member in Guanxi Province, was killed while traveling to visit relatives in a nearby village.
On Jan. 
25, the Chinese charge, Vietnamese fired at and broke up a holiday celebration in the Guanxi town of Congxin, while firing into the Hekou area on the same day for three hours. 
The next day, the Chinese assert, two civilians in Yunnan were wounded by Vietnamese mines.
The Vietnamese had previously said that Chinese troops fired across the border or intruded into Vietnamese territory on more than a dozen occasions between Dec. 
28 and Jan. 
13.
Paracel and Spratley Islands
The quarrel has extended to conflicting claims of sovereignty over the barren Paracel and Spratley Islands in the South China Sea. 
These scattered reefs and atolls have taken on value because of the possibility that oil may be found in the area.
Last month the Chinese press buttressed Peking's claim with a long historical study seeking to show that the Chinese had been there first. 
Vietnam responded by publishing a ''white paper'' and a long magazine article supporting its claim to the islands.
So me conflicting reports are mirror images of each other. 
On Jan. 
15 China announced that it had freed seven Vi etnamese soldiers captured while ''intruding into Chinese terri tory to conduct reconnaisance and sabotage,'' as well as four grateful Vietnamese fishermen whose boat sank while illegally in Chinese waters. 
At the same time, China said, 11 Chinese ''illegally captured and detained''were returned by Vietnam.
On the same day, Vietnam announced that it had released ''11 Chinese captured while illegally intruding into Vietnamese territory'' o n spy missions, and that 11 Vietnamese ''kidnapped whileworking on Vi etnamese territory by intruding Chinese soldiers'' were handed back t o Vietnam.
