
THE North China air was a cool 55 degrees and the silver poplar trees were budding. 
A slight breeze puffed swirls of dust up from the athletic field. 
The players were already warming up, woolen winter underwear peeping out from under the cuffs of their baggy pants. 
Their movements were awkward and a constant laughter belied their nervousness.
This was the first baseball game to be played in rural Shanxi Province, several hundred miles west of Peking, since the sport was banned following the 1949 revolution. 
Some baseball equipment had been found locked in a closet in the field house of the agricultural university where I was teaching.
''Must have been left here by some American missionaries,'' said the student who had brought the equipment to my office. 
Several cloth softballs, their wrappings yellow with age, rocked gently on my desk. 
The dry climate had also preserved the stubby baseball gloves and kept the slim bats from rotting.
First we talked about getting up a game. 
But, as so often happens in China, politics threatened to get in the way. 
Baseball had been introduced to China by American missionaries in the 19th century. 
Because of this association with the West, the Chinese Communists had denounced baseball as a bourgeois and decadent sport. 
Although the Chinese government was now seeking rapprochement with the West, change comes slowly to backwater regions like Shanxi Province. 
The student hemmed and hawed, unwilling to take responsibility for organizing the game. 
And so it fell to me. 
I scheduled the game for the following Sunday, telling only selected friends. 
If threatened by the authorities for playing baseball, they could always say they did it to please me, a visiting American English teacher who could not be punished for political mistakes.
So it was that one nippy afternoon a few years ago, baseball returned to Shanxi. 
Two dozen players gathered on a rutted yellow dirt field at the back of the small campus. 
A major road cut by the field, leading to a college store and a gate, beyond which peasants sold their produce in an open market.
One elderly player, a retired gym teacher, had umpired a few games in the 1940's, and could still say ''ball'' and ''strike'' in English. 
He explained the rules, or what he remembered of them, to the other players. 
And by dribbling lime powder from a paper bag, he marked off a rough diamond on the school athletic field.
My team batted first. 
A powerful tractor driver named Zhang from Manchuria stepped into the batter's box. 
He swung hard at an inside pitch and met it squarely. 
The bat, brittle with age, split in two and rifled back over our heads. 
Zhang stared at the stump of wood left in his hand and then took off for third.
''No!
No!,'' we screamed from the sideline. 
''Run to first!''
Zhang wheeled sharply and charged diagonally across the diamond. 
He collided with the pitcher. 
But scrambling on his hands and knees, he made it to first and stood up triumphant, yellow dust billowing from his once blue clothing.
The next batter, a graduate student named Liu, sauntered up to the batter's box. 
He spat on the ground and mashed the spittle into the earth. 
Then he deliberately twisted his blue Mao cap around so the brim covered the nape of his neck. 
''I saw an American player do this on television,'' he said.
Liu hit a grounder. 
He rounded first just as the first baseman caught the ball. 
Liu headed for second, the first baseman chasing after him with the ball. 
Meanwhile, Zhang had stopped at second, probably assuming that players progress only one base at a time. 
Liu barreled into him. 
They took the first and second basemen down with them.
A wheat specialist named Mei was up next. 
He said he was an old hand, having played baseball in missionary school in the 1940's. 
He was very short, and by crouching down he practically eliminated his strike zone. 
He got to first on a walk.
By now the game was attracting quite a crowd. 
Peasants and students were swarming onto the field. 
In China, when people see a line, they stand behind it. 
So here they stood on the edge of the infield. 
When our team took the field, I played shortstop. 
I tried to explain to the hundreds of people standing between second and third that this was dangerous. 
But the sight of a tall foreigner waving his arms and speaking Chinese only caused the crowd to swell.
A line drive was hit to third. 
I dove into the crowd, knocking over bicycles and trampling on feet in a frenzy to get the ball. 
But it seemed to have vanished. 
Finally someone tapped me on the arm. 
It was an old peasant woman tottering on bound feet, her cracked lips spread wide in a toothless grin. 
Her hands were raised to me as if offering tea. 
But she was proffering the softball instead.
The old woman was luckier than a student who was beaned a short time later by a pop fly. 
As the ball plummeted down, the crowd in the outfield scattered as if being strafed by a fighter plane. 
But one student hesitated for a moment and the ball thudded down on her. 
She fell to the ground clutching her head to ward off any further attacks. 
After that, people decided that maybe it was wise to move to the sidelines.
The game continued for four more innings. 
The most dramatic play was made by a boiler repairman playing right field who stopped the ball from rolling into the outhouse cesspool. 
The final score was 10-10; all the runs scored on errors.
For several days afterward, we nervously awaited a reaction from the authorities. 
But no wall posters appeared condemning baseball. 
At the weekly political study session, the game was not mentioned. 
In China, no reaction means tacit approval. 
We began playing baseball every Sunday afternoon.
Soon, the workers in a nearby herbal-medicine factory organized a team and challenged us. 
Then a chemical fertilizer plant got up a team and joined the competition. 
By summer, 10 teams were battling each other. 
And with each game, more baseball equipment kept turning up. 
It was like the equipment I had seen on my desk in the early spring, old and worn after having been locked away, presumably forever.
