
Merce Cunningham walked through his Manhattan studio yesterday as an international group of choreographers waited to watch class there. 
''Can't we meet him?'' the choreographers asked hopefully. 
They had seen Mr. Cunningham's company perform in their home countries, but to meet the choreographer himself was a special dream. 
When Mr. Cunningham stopped and talked informally with them, it was the climax of an extraordinary six-week exploration of American modern dance that began in North Carolina.
Representing countries from Argentina to Zaire that have comparatively little or no modern-dance tradition, the choreographers have been participants in the just-ended International Choreographers Workshop sponsored by the American Dance Festival and the United States Information Agency at the Duke University campus in Durham, N.C., where the festival is based.
There, over the past six weeks, 15 choreographers from 12 nations went to dance programs presented by the summer festival, which included everything from performance-art pieces and ballroom dancing to the work of leading American modern-dance choreographers.
They took part in the classes presented by the festival, which also trains young dancers - classes that ranged from anatomy to high-energy upheavals taught by Pooh Kaye, an experimentalist choreographer. 
And they were encouraged to create their own pieces during the project, working often with festival students and with music by composers participating in the festival.
 
'Different Directions'
Participants in the three-year-old project are selected on the recommendation of cultural experts and American Embassies around the world, 19 of which submitted 40 nominations for this summer's workshop. 
''The purpose is to give people from other countries an opportunity to enhance their idea of American culture,'' Stephanie Reinhart, head of the workshop, said. 
''And what could be a more wonderful vehicle than American modern dance?
We are trying here to give the choreographers an overview of the many different directions of modern dance.''
Alejandro Carlos Cervera, a soft-spoken young choreographer from Argentina who became known at the workshop for his colorful T-shirts, got just that from the project. 
''I think it's great that in one place there is African, classical and jazz dance,'' he said. 
''There are no walls here.''
Some aspects of American culture were familiar. 
At a homey potluck dinner given by a local family, Marion D'Cruz of Malaysia belted out ''Bye Bye Blackbird'' and ''Fascination'' as one of the family's neighbors accompanied her on the piano. 
That morning Dr. Yang Meiqi of China had demonstrated Chinese traditional dancing, which she teaches as a dean at the Guangdong Dance College in Canton. 
That night she danced a decorous Charleston.
Gopal Dubey brought his expertise as a leading interpreter of Chhau dance in Bihar, India, to bear on the workshop experience. 
Dr. Yang wondered if rigid teaching methods in China could benefit from a dose of the exploratory spirit of American modern dance. 
Reyes de Lara, an experimentalist from Spain, spoke of finding new steps in Spanish dancing. 
''I'm not an investigator of new movement,'' Mr. Cervera observed. 
''My work is abstract. 
But dramatic things start to come out and make the dance more theatrical. 
I suppose that is my history and the history of my country. 
In countries that are troubled, it is harder to keep things abstract. 
You feel you have to comment. 
Reality comes out.''
At one point, Dr. Yang asked Charles Reinhart, festival director, why dancers swing their limbs in the Jose Limon style. 
''Why not?''
Mr. Reinhart answered. 
It was a revelation. 
For Lin Hsiu-wei of Taiwan, there were other revelations. 
''It's very interesting to find your own nature in movement,'' she said, talking of Miss Kaye's classes. 
''Before, when I choreographed, I always set the movement like a computer. 
Now I want to do everything new.''
Miss Kaye was a figure of some controversy. 
''The kinds of things Pooh Kaye shows in her class are very hard for Chinese to accept,'' Dr. Yang said, speaking through an interpreter, Shuo Pang. 
''I think she is very good at developing a body self, but art is not only for creating some movement for bodies. 
And some of her movements the Chinese have already developed. 
I talked with her very frankly. 
I asked her to come to China.''
The workshop left some feeling a little wistful. 
Dr. Yang hopes to establish China's first university modern-dance department. 
''But there is a serious problem of teachers,'' she said. 
''I wonder if the American Dance Festival would have the generosity to provide teachers to my college.''
Sharon Kinney, an American choreographer who served as workshop coordinator, sighed as she talked of the project. 
''I wish there could be a program like this in another country,'' she said. 
''I'd like to be in it.''
