
The Kuomintang's particularly one-sided victory in Saturday's elections for the national legislature represents an acknowledgment by the voters of Taiwan that the ruling party has progressed in three related areas of social change, officials said today.
The areas are referred to here as democratization, Taiwanization and rejuvenation.
Democratization, officials said, means expanding the scope of elections and increasing freedom of speech and political activity. 
Taiwanization refers to bringing more native Taiwanese, who comprise 85 percent of the island's 18.5 million people, into positions of responsibility in the Government and the ruling party. 
Rejuvenation is adding new blood to the ranks of the Kuomintang, the Chinese Nationalists, led by Chiang Kai-shek, who fled to Taiwan in 1949 after the Communists took control of China.
Kuomintang's one-sided victory in elections for national legislature represents acknowledgment by voters of Taiwan that ruling party has progressed in democratization, Taiwanization and rejuvenation, officals say (S)
There has been gradual progress on all three fronts, despite occasional setbacks.
In the elections Saturday the Kuomintang won 62 of the 71 seats that were at stake. 
Most of the seats in the 371-member legislature are held by lifetime members elected on the mainland in 1947, who still nominally claim to represent districts in China.
 
Lifetime Members Dwindling
However, the 71 ''supplementary'' seats decided by election this year compare with 11 in 1969, when the first such elections were held here. 
The lifetime members, whose average age is 77, are often inactive and their numbers are being reduced by deaths at a rate of more than one a month.
Most of the elected legislators are native Taiwanese. 
Today, in fact, more than 70 percent of the Kuomintang's two million members are Taiwanese- born and only 5 percent are 75 years of age or older.
''The stereotype that the Kuomintang is a party of old people from the mainland is simply not true,'' said Chen Li-an, a top party official.
Amid the trend toward social change of recent years, there have been some notable exceptions. 
The most striking example came in 1979, in the aftermath of anti-Government demonstrations in the southern city of Kaohsiung. 
Some of the dissidents involved in the demonstrations were punished with stiff jail sentences, inordinately severe in the view of many people.
Fang Su-min, the wife of one of the jailed dissidents, handily won a seat in the legislature in the elections, in an expression of personal and political sympathy. 
''That issue still has not died,'' one Kuomintang member conceded.
 
Dissidents Treated Harshly
Many people here say the Government has sometimes dealt too harshly with dissidents. 
But most also note, as a businessman put it, that ''in terms of personal, economic and political freedom, this is heaven compared to what you will find on the other side of the Formosa Strait,'' meaning the mainland.
With the opposition divided, foreign diplomats here say they believe that the main arena for political debate and pluralism will increasingly be within the ruling party itself.
With this development, one diplomat said, there is often ''a significant split between the younger members of the party and the elders.
''The young Kuomintang members,'' he said, ''are just as critical of the elders as people outside the party.''
One of the key splits is over the pace of social change, an area in which the Nationalists were certainly not overly ambitious when they ruled the mainland. 
Still, the influence of the younger generation is evident.
