
WASHINGTON THE Commerce Department and the United
States International Trade Commission are
gearing up for major decisions on low-priced imports from China and the Soviet Union that could set a pattern in trade with centrally planned economies.
The textile industry's politically explosive case against China says that Peking's textile monopoly receives subsidies of more than 40 percent on exports to the United States because of a dual exchange rate benefiting exporters.
The domestic industry, still smarting from recently negotiated import quotas on Chinese textiles that it regards as too liberal, wants countervailing duties imposed by the Commerce Department that would practically halt the imports. 
China is the fourth-largest textile supplier to this country after Hong Kong, South Korea and Taiwan.
The State Department and other agencies fret about the broader political consequences. 
Washington and Peking have taken a number of steps since the late 1970's to improve relations. 
The cutting off of its textile trade would hardly be seen by Peking as a friendly act.
Experts believe that the case, which was prepared for the industry by a former Commerce Department official, John D. Greenwald, now with the Washington law firm of Verner, Liipfert, Bernhard & McPherson, will reach the decisive stage next April at about the time President Reagan is scheduled to visit China. 
That will also be in the heat of a political campaign that promises heavy involvement of the textile lobby, one of the most potent because of the large labor force it represents. 
Employers as well as unions filed the complaint.
Some in the Administration are urging the Commerce Department to dismiss the case, arguing that quotas are the only equitable way of dealing with centrally planned economies.
The ferroalloy industry's case against the Soviet Union involves two sizable shipments into New Orleans this year of a product known as 50 percent ferrosilicon, used in the deoxidation of steel.
The argument is that the 11,000 tons have suddenly raised imports of this sparsely traded product from 5 to 13 percent of the domestic market and are therefore causing ''market disruption.''
The Russians went from zero to 8 percent of the United States market within a three-month period.
At the urging of the National Security Council, the United States trade representative, Bill Brock, asked the trade commission to make a finding on whether the shipments constitute disruption. 
The commission's preliminary ruling may come before the end of the year.
Here, too, the penalty could be higher duties. 
The Russians already pay a 13 percent tariff on the 50 percent ferrosilicon. 
No duty is currently levied on the product if it comes from countries with whom the United States has normal trading relationships.
Competing With Exhibits
''Retaliate,'' came the order from the United States command at the Geneva-based International Labor Organization, and soon officials were wheeling into the assembly models of geothermal power plants, tractors and earth-moving equipment. 
A lightweight firefighter's suit drew cheers. 
It was made of the same material as the spacesuits of astronauts. 
Washington's decision was in response to a propaganda offensive undertaken by the Russians to try to convince third-world delegates of Moscow's industrial leadership.
''The Soviets would usually give them a couple of glasses of vodka, then show them movies of Soviet industries that were 20 years behind the American industries,'' said Barbara Dunkak, a Labor Department international affairs officer. 
Added her boss, Robert Searby, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Labor for International Labor Affairs, ''We're in a competition.''
Trucking Immunity Battle
The chairman of the Senate Commerce Committee, Bob Packwood, Republican of Oregon, took the unusual step of walking across to the House to personally urge Representative James J. Howard, Democrat of New Jersey, to withdraw an amendment that would upset the delicately balanced trucking deregulation package. 
The amendment would extend antitrust immunity for single-line freight rates two years, to July 1986. 
Mr. Howard said he could not oblige.
Senator Packwood decided he could play rough as well. 
He returned to the Senate and introduced a bill that would totally deregulate trucking by 1987. 
But it would abolish all collective rate-making antitrust immunity as of July 1, 1984.
Briefcases
- Edmund T. Pratt Jr., chairman of Pfizer Inc. and of the Emergency Committee for American Trade, representing large American multinationals, warns in a letter to Senator Howard H. Baker Jr., the majority leader, that the President's authority to impose export controls may now be open to a ''disruptive legal challenge.''
- The White House nomination of Terry Calvani, a Vanderbilt law professor, for a seat on the Federal Trade Commission may face some major obstacles in the Senate, according to Congressional sources.
- J. Peter Grace's recommendations to cut $340 billion from Government spending over three years are expected to be attached to the debt ceiling bill in the Senate this week. 
Mr. Grace headed the President's budget-cutting task force.
