
In a sign of warming Chinese-American relations, Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger ended talks with Chinese leaders today by announcing that President Reagan and Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang would exchange official visits next year. 
He said there had also been progress toward eventual sales of American arms to China.
But the Chinese balked at formal military cooperation involving American arms purchases or exchanges of training missions.
Secretary of Defense Caspar W Weinberger ends talks with Chinese leaders in Peking by announcing that Pres Reagan and Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang will exchange official visits next year; reports making some progress toward eventual sales of American arms to China, although Chinese are said to have balked at formal military cooperation involving American arms purchases or exchanges of training missions; photo (M)
Mr. Weinberger, who arrived Sunday for a five-day visit, told reporters that the progress made during his talks here could ''mature very quickly into actual transfers of weapons systems, if that is what the Chinese want.''
He said air-defense and antitank weapons had been among the items discussed but declined to give further details.
The Defense Secretary, who spoke at a news conference in the Great Hall of the People, announced that Prime Minister Zhao would visit the United States in January and that Mr. Reagan would come to China in April. 
The Secretary also said Defense Minister Zhang Aiping had accepted his invitation to visit the United States ''at a mutually convenient time.''
 
Curb on Technology Eased
Mr. Weinberger's announcement suggested that the Chinese leadership had been persuaded to go ahead with plans for the visits, which had been under discussion, after Mr. Weinberger gave assurances that the Reagan Administration was making sophisticated American technology more accessible to China.
Earlier this year, the Reagan Administration reclassified China as a ''friendly, nonallied country,'' making it eligible for some equipment intended for civilian use but with possible military applications. 
However, the items involved were not announced.
The agreement on an exchange of visits came after Mr. Weinberger apparently explained to the Chinese in some detail that, through the reclassification, the Reagan Administration was relaxing controls on exports to China of such sophisticated dual-use equipment as computers and semiconductors.
While there were signs of improved Chinese-American relations, Chinese leaders also made clear during the talks that American military sales to the Chinese Nationalist regime on Taiwan remained the major irritant between Peking and Washington. 
Mr. Weinberger met here with Deng Xiaoping, China's paramount leader, Prime Minister Zhao and Defense Minister Zhang.
 
Taiwan Issue Called 'Crux'
The New China News Agency reported that Mr. Deng had told Mr. Weinberger during their closed meeting that the Taiwan issue was at the ''crux'' of Chinese-American relations. 
On Tuesday Mr. Zhao called it ''the main obstacle'' in the relationship.
''Once this issue is resolved, the major issue in Chinese-U.S. relations will be removed and this will benefit peace and security in Asia and the world,'' Mr. Deng was quoted today as having said.
Mr. Weinberger acknowledged at his news conference, held after the meeting with Mr. Deng, that ''Taiwan was obviously mentioned, of course.''
But he said he had emphasized President Reagan's commitment to the 1972 Shanghai joint communique, which recognizes that there is only one China with Peking as its capital.
The Chinese have accused Mr. Reagan of reneging on that pledge, first made by President Richard M. Nixon, and on a joint document of August 1982 that envisions a gradual reduction of American military sales to Taiwan. 
When a Chinese journalist asked about assurances that the United States would honor both communiques, Mr. Weinberger sharply replied, ''You have the assurances of the President of the United States.''
The Secretary of Defense described his meetings with Chinese military officials as ''very friendly and frank and productive.''
Mr. Weinberger flew this afternoon to the ancient capital, Xian, to tour an aircraft parts factory and a renowned archeological excavation there of terra-cotta soldiers.
