
Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger arrived in Peking today to a Chinese welcome that was at once cool and warm.
At a banquet tonight, Defense Minister Zhang Aiping made clear that his Government had limited interest in military cooperation with the United States, saying in a toast, ''We will not attach ourselves to any big power or bloc of powers.''
Mr. Weinberger rose to propose ''an enduring relationship,'' saying that ''close United States-China relations and cooperation in the strategic area serve both our national interests.''
Defense Secretary Caspar W Weinberger arrives in Peking in his first trip to China; proposes 'an enduring relationship' between US and China (M)
Neither Mr. Zhang nor Mr. Weinberger mentioned the Soviet Union by name. 
Earlier in the day in Tokyo, Mr. Weinberger called the Soviet regime ''a corrupt government'' that had exhibited ''paranoia'' and ''total barbarity'' in shooting down a South Korean passenger plane with the loss of 269 lives on Sept. 
1.
 
Words Reflect Feelings
A senior official traveling with Mr. Weinberger said later that the choice of words was not calculated but reflected the Pentagon chief's feelings about that episode. 
The official said Mr. Weinberger believes that the image of Soviet behavior should not be allowed to fade. 
In his speech at the banquet this evening, Mr. Zhang recalled that the Chinese had been subjected to the miseries of foreign aggression, a reference to European, American and Japanese forces in China in the 19th and 20th centuries.
''That's why we treasure our independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity,'' Mr. Zhang said. 
He said that, while China is still a developing country, ''We do believe that with our own efforts, with our own initiative and our own hands, we will be able to achieve the modernization of our country.''
But he said that China would be willing to cooperate to speed up the modernization of Chinese armed forces. 
Mr. Zhang spoke without a text and his remarks were translated into English.
 
Shared Strategic Concerns
In reply, Mr. Weinberger spoke from a prepared text, saying that ''the United States and China share many important strategic concerns.''
He said he hoped his visit would be the basis for ''exchanges and cooperation between our two armed forces.''
He added that the Reagan Administration's ''new policy on technology transfer provides the means for us to contribute in a responsible way to China's modernization, including defense modernization.''
The Reagan Administration in June decided that China could acquire American technology, including that for weapons and military equipment, on the same basis as other friendly nations.
Officials accompanying Mr. Weinberger, however, said that a specific agreement on technology transfer had not been worked out. 
The United States, they said, wants written assurance that China would not pass along American technology to other nations.
 
'An Enduring Relationship'
Mr. Weinberger, repeating the theme of ''an enduring relationship,'' said that ''candid exchanges of views will enable us to avoid the kinds of unjust criticism of one another's policies which come from incomplete or inaccurate understanding of those policies.''
After arriving in Peking aboard his Air Force plane, Mr. Weinberger was whisked into the city to receive military honors in front of a military museum. 
Chinese soldiers, sailors, and airmen in bright new uniforms stood at attention while the American and Chinese national anthems were played.
Then under a bright warm sun, Mr. Weinberger, who is in China for the first time, toured the Forbidden City built by the Ming emperors in the 15th century as a residence and seat of Government. 
Mr. Weinberger was heard to remark that the expansive palace was ''much more beautiful than the Pentagon.''
