
After a slow start, Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger ended a five-day visit to China here today having apparently achieved most of what he called the ''modest goals'' of this venture. 
He accomplished this, however, by taking the position of supplicant. 
Through Mr. Weinberger, the United States offered assistance and asked for Chinese cooperation. 
But the Chinese offered nothing and asked for nothing, dealing with Mr. Weinberger the same way they have treated with foreigners for centuries.
Mr. Weinberger was successful in obtaining Chinese consent to an exchange of visits between Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang, who was scheduled to go to the United States in January, and President Reagan, who plans to visit China next April.
Analysis of Defense Sec Caspar Weinberger's China trip suggests US, as 'supplicant,' offered China assistance and asked for cooperation, obtaining Chinese consent to exchange of visits between Prime Min Zhao Ziyang and Pres Reagan which may be politically advantageous to Reagan; notes Chinese 'condescension'; Weinberger illustrated
Preliminary negotiations for that exchange had gone through regular diplomatic channels, according to officials accompanying Mr. Weinberger. But an agreement and specific dates were unresolved and President Reagan gave the problem to the Defense Secretary to nail down.
 
Different Role for Weinberger
Asked why he had undertaken what is normally a diplomatic function of the State Department, Mr. Weinberger chuckled and said, ''One does what one is requested to do.''
A senior official in the airplane with Mr. Weinberger pointed out that the exchange of visits, plus another by the Chinese Minister of National Defense, Zhang Aiping, perhaps in the winter, was intended to improve relations between Washington and Peking.
What was left unmentioned was the political benefit President Reagan hoped to reap in a possible re-election campaign through a highly visible trip to the capital of China.
Mr. Weinberger also obtained, at least in principle, the agreement of the Chinese to exchange military missions beginning early in 1984. 
Those would be intended to give American officers a better idea of Chinese military needs and to enable Chinese officers to see how Americans train and operate.
 
Military Missions to China
There was some confusion, however, over just what would happen. 
Prime Minister Zhao, at a news conference in Peking, appeared to brush off the idea. 
But American officials said later that Mr. Zhao seemed to dismiss any thought that American soldiers would help train the Chinese Army.
A senior official in Mr. Weinberger's delegation said an array of possibilities for exchanging military missions had been put before the Chinese and that the Chinese would let them know later what they might want.
Perhaps the most difficult discussion was over the sale of United States weapons and military technology to China. 
Mr. Weinberger made it clear to the Chinese, according to a senior American official, that Washington would make available weapons such as antitank and antiaircraft missiles.
But those sales would be carefully limited by United States law, especially concerning the possible resale of the weapons and technology to a third nation. 
Discussions on that issue would continue, American officials said.
 
Chinese Stress Self-Reliance
Perhaps more important, the Chinese seemed to disparage the American offer, saying repeatedly in public that they would modernize their armed forces by relying primarily on their own efforts, not on foreign nations.
To underscore that, the Chinese Army issued a report on the first day of Mr. Weinberger's visit saying the army had accomplished 12,000 technical renovations solely through its own efforts.
Throughout his stay in China, Mr. Weinberger sought to enlist the Chinese in what he called ''strategic cooperation'' against the Soviet Union. 
While vaguely defined, that seemed to mean a convergence of actions but not a formal alliance.
The Chinese, however, would have none of that. 
Mr. Zhao and Defense Minister Zhang reiterated the Peking line that China would not attach itself to any power or bloc. 
In effect, the Chinese said they would go their own way even if they accepted help from the United States.
 
Maneuvers by Chinese
The evidence that the Chinese maneuvered Mr. Weinberger into the role of supplicant showed up in many ways, some great, others small.
In their first meeting, Defense Minister Zhang insisted that Mr. Weinberger speak first, thus getting the American side to show its cards. 
Even when Mr. Weinberger asked for comment, the Chinese persuaded him to continue exposing his hand.
Later Mr. Zhang suggested an air of condescension when he quoted to Mr. Weinberger, as reported by the official New China News Agency, an old Chinese saying, ''Coming from afar, you must have brought something to benefit our country.''
As the Chinese often do, they withheld many details of the schedule from the American delegation until the last minute. 
In one instance Mr. Weinberger's meeting with Mr. Zhao was postponed for an hour at the last minute.
 
'Barbarians Waiting at the Gate'
A knowledgeable Western resident of Peking explained this by saying, ''The Chinese like to keep the barbarians waiting at the gate.''
The way in which the Chinese dealt with Mr. Weinberger is almost as old as China. 
It is the mentality of the Middle Kingdom, in which the Chinese see themselves at the center of the world and all other countries as vassals or tributaries.
Diplomatically, the Chinese Government wants to keep its distance from the United States to retain its credentials in the third world. 
To take sides with the United States while Foreign Minister Wu Xueqian appealed to third world nations at the United Nations would have been contradictory.
