
For days Wham had been the talk of the town.
But when big-time rock music hit China today in the form of a concert by the British group, the reaction in the 12,000-seat Workers Stadium was characteristic of the perplexity that is common when Chinese encounter a new facet of Western culture first hand.
Western college students danced in the aisles as the British duo played some of the songs that have propelled them onto best-selling charts in the United States and Britain. 
But most Chinese remained stolidly in their seats, seemingly unsure what to make of the arcing strobe lights, the pulsing guitars and the rest of the paraphernalia that accompanies a Western rock band.
Article discusses rock music group Wham and their concert tour of China; reaction of Chinese audiences discussed; illustration (M)
The result was a concert that was curiously muted, at least by the frenetic standards for such performances in the West.
It was the first time that a major rock group had been allowed to perform here, and there was a recognition on both sides that it was something of a test. 
With minor exceptions, the only live performances of Western music that the Communist Party has allowed until now have been by symphony orchestras and smaller classical ensembles.
 
Landing in a Debate
When they flew to Peking last week with a 105-member entourage, George Michaels, 21 years old, the singer and songwriter, and Andrew Ridgeley, 22, who plays guitar, dropped into the middle of an ideological debate. 
Arrangements for the tour were made last year in the freewheeling atmosphere that pervaded many aspects of Chinese life before a shift in the political winds brought fresh questioning at high party levels about how far the country's ''open door'' policy should go.
At one level, the debate is about the extent to which the party should encourage foreign investment, private enterprise and other Western economic practices, but the debate has had a cultural dimension, too. 
A leftist faction associated with the party's chief of ideology, Deng Liqun, has voiced renewed concern about the ''spiritual pollution'' that can result if Western influences are admitted too freely.
Wham, which has sold more than 2 million copies of its current album, ''Make It Big,'' has paid all costs for the performance here today and for a second one in Canton on Friday. 
The band's managers estimate the costs at $750,000, which the group hopes to recoup through sale of a video that is being made of the tour.
 
Some Eroticism Is Cut
To obtain their invitation, the group tried to accommodate Chinese sensitivities. 
They submitted a videotape of a live performance, dropped at least one of their hit songs, ''Love Machine,'' from the concert and cut erotic sequences from a video that was played during intermission. 
This enabled the sponsoring organization, the All-China Youth Federation, to describe the group as healthy.
Since its arrival in China, the group, which appeared at the Beacon Theater in New York in February, had been careful to avoid political comments. 
But at the concert today Mr. Michael introduced a song called ''Freedom,'' which has been at the top of the charts in Britain. 
''We hope that one day it will be the No. 1 in China too, with your help,'' Mr. Michael said, punching his arm in the air.
There was no visible reaction from the Chinese audience, which did not have the advantage of translation. 
But there was little doubt that it registered with the senior officials who watched from a podium set to one side of the stage, with interpreters behind them. 
Among the officials was Gen. Xiao Hua, 70, who is a member of the party's Central Committee and an associate of the country's pre- eminent leader, Deng Xiaoping.
 
Some Scuffles Erupt
Something else that might disturb the officials was scuffles involving policemen. 
At the start of the concert an announcer asked the audience to ''remain seated and watch with patience.''
Batteries of policemen tried to enforce this, at least for the Chinese, but Western students intervened several times. 
As the concert ended, at least one Chinese was led away under arrest.
Opponents of the '' open door'' policy have been warning that giving freer rein to popular instincts could cause the authorities to lose control. 
Some of the gyrations of Mr. Michael and Mr. Ridgeley and Mr. Michael's decision to appear bare-chested beneath his white jacket seemed unlikely to win official friends.
Western diplomats who attended the concert said it was almost certain that a report would go to Deng Xiaoping. 
At times, when under pressure from the left, Mr. Deng has warned of what he called the pernicious influence of some aspects of Western culture. 
At other times, he has said that China has little to fear. 
In this mood, prevalent in recent years, he has permitted a latitude in cultural matters that was unthinkable in the days of Mao Zedong.
