
China will no longer classify as secret the new national laws that local citizens and foreigners are obliged to obey, according to China's official newspapers.
New laws will henceforth be printed and publicly distributed, the newspapers reported Friday, emphasizing the advantages of such a system.
''The publication of regulations signed by China's Prime Minister will help the people to learn exactly what they are being asked to adjust themselves to,'' the official New China News Agency reported. 
In fact, almost all regulations already have been publicly released, but there have been some uncertainties even within the Chinese Government about whether some laws exist.
Last year, for example, China's Ministry of Public Health announced that it was a crime to engage in casual sex, while the Ministry of Justice said there was no such law.
Whatever the legal niceties, about a dozen foreigners were detained by the police last year after being found in what the police regarded as suspicious circumstances with Chinese nationals of the opposite sex in their hotel rooms. 
One West German was fined the equivalent of $2,700 and other foreigners were fined lesser amounts.
 
Glasnost a la Beijing
The announcement that laws would be publicly distributed apparently is part of China's current effort to increase toumingdu, the Chinese equivalent of the Russian glasnost, or increased openness. 
As part of toumingdu, often translated as transparency, China has increasingly been releasing timely information about natural disasters and cases of official corruption, as well as about its economic problems.
There remain well-defined limits to the new openness, however.
The State Council, the top-level Government body whose regulations are the subject of the latest decision, could not be reached to clarify the announcement that its regulations no longer would be confidential. 
The telephone numbers of the relevant departments in the State Council are unlisted.
While the Government has also begun to release snippets of biographical information about officials, much is still regarded as confidential - including birthdates. 
For example, the Communist Party General Secretary, Zhao Ziyang, is usually said to be 69 years old, but it is only known for certain that he was born in 1919. 
If his birthdate happens to be Dec. 
31, his age as reported is incorrect every day of the year but one.
The Government has also said that Mr. Zhao's wife is named Liang Boqi -it had not even been known if she was still alive - but almost nothing else is known about her.
 
Foreigners Welcome Decision
Foreigners engaged in business with China today welcomed the decision to circulate the State Council's regulations.
''If it means they're going to discontinue the practice of having internal regulations, and that all regulations and notices are going to be made public, then of course I would welcome it,'' said John Frisbie, director of China operations for the U.S.-China Business Council. 
''Anything that increases transparency in China's laws and regulations is bound to increase the confidence of foreigners and businessmen.''
The New China News Agency, in reporting the decision, said that the New China publishing house would regularly publish collections of Government regulations, ''including those that may not appear in newspapers and periodicals.''
The agency also said that previously all the regulations approved by the State Council were issued ''in documents with red characters designating them as restricted.''
Since in fact almost all were released, it is not clear in what way they were restricted.
Roderick W. Macneil, a lawyer based in Hong Kong who operates a consulting business on the China trade, noted that State Council regulations normally already were published in the official State Council gazette. 
The latest decision may simply have been an attempt to collect and publish the laws systematically, he said.
