
CHRISTOPHER S. WREN is the Times bureau chief in Peking.
Two hundred years ago an American merchant ship dropped anchor in the Pearl River at Canton, beginning the first contacts between China and the United States. 
Even in 1784, Canton, or Guangzhou as the Chinese call it, had been trading with the outside world for many centuries. 
Today, Canton, a scant 75 miles from Hong Kong, remains China's most accessible city. 
Last year, 350,000 Western tourists, nearly a third of them Americans, came to visit. 
They have not spoiled Canton, which looks more like a traditional Chinese city than many others here. 
Its 5.5 million inhabitants are kin to the largest group of Chinese who emigrated to the United States. 
They are gregarious, lively and refreshingly at ease with foreigners. 
A tourist can have greater freedom to explore Canton's sights and smells, its tree-lined back streets, grimy shop arcades and quaint old neighborhoods than would be possible for him in the Chinese interior.
Getting There
The usual gateway to Canton is Hong Kong, where a tourist visa for Canton can be obtained in a few days from the China International Travel Service or through most well-known travel agencies, if hotel and transportation are booked at the same time. 
Once in Canton, you can use the visa to travel on to other Chinese cities open to foreigners including Shanghai and Peking.
A flight from Hong Kong to Canton takes a bare half-hour and costs $36, but there are more interesting ways to go. 
The train from Hong Kong's Kowloon Terminal travels for three hours through the lush rice paddies and wooded hills of Guangdong province. 
A normal tourist ticket will cost about $12. 
It is also possible to ride a Hovercraft up the Pearl River to the port of Whampoa on Canton's outskirts. 
The three-and-a-half-hour trip costs about $17 and offers beguiling glimpses of the South China coast. 
Unless you thrive on chaos, you should ask to be met in Canton by a travel service guide and car, who will whisk you to your hotel.
Where to Stay
An influx of Hong Kong investment has improved the quality of Canton's once seedy accommodations. 
The elegant 18-story China Hotel opened this year across from the Canton Trade Fair grounds, with managers and chefs imported from Hong Kong and Europe to try to raise the service to luxury standards. 
It has 1,200 rooms, several good restaurants, a corner bar and a basement bowling alley. 
A double room costs $52. 
(The telephone is 66888.)
The 28-story White Swan Hotel opened last year on Shamian Island overlooking the Pearl River with 1,000 rooms. 
Designed by Chinese architects, it incorporates a garden and waterfall in its three-story lobby (telephone: 86968). 
A standard double room costs $35.
The 1,200-room Dongfang Hotel, the old hangout for Western businessmen and tourists, has been undergoing a face-lift now that it must compete with the China Hotel next door. 
A double room runs up to $30. 
Cheaper but more spartan hotels include the Baiyun Hotel on Huanshi Road (67700) and the Guangzhou and Overseas Chinese Hotels near downtown Haizhu Square. 
A double room at any of these establishments costs $22 or less.
Dim Sum
Starting at dawn, Cantonese spill out of their cramped homes and converge on the teahouses to sip tea and eat dim sum while they chat, play chess or read the newspaper. 
Canton is celebrated for its dim sum - bite- sized sweet or savory snacks that are generally pastries stuffed with such tasty fillings as shrimp, minced pork and bean paste.
The best dim sum, locally called yum cha, are found at the Banxi Restaurant at the eastern edge of Liwan Park. 
The Banxi attracts up to 10,000 customers a day and can seat 3,000 of them at a time. 
It usually does not seem crowded because the restaurant consists of more than 30 dining rooms arranged around a series of small gardens and a lake. 
The most popular date from the Qing dynasty, like the Greeting, the guest pavilion on the second floor with its 19th-century- style furniture and blue-and-white etched-glass windows. 
In good weather, customers also like to sit out in the patios near the lake.
A selection of a dozen varieties of pastries plus slender rice noodles and tea costs $4.30 a person. 
You can ask the staff to choose for you. 
The Banxi is open from 5:30 to 9:30 A.M. for breakfast, from 11 A.M. to 2 P.M. for lunch and from 5 to 9 P.M. for dinner. 
Reservations are necessary to get a good table (85655).
Dim sum are served in other restaurants in Canton, including the Village Restaurant of the China Hotel, where a dim sum lunch runs up to $8 a person. 
The pastries are pushed around on carts, and you pay only for the ones you take.
Sightseeing
Canton's most historically interesting area for Westerners is Shamian Island, a sandbank on the northern bank of the Pearl River that the British and French turned into a colonial enclave in the late 19th century. 
They built grand mansions, a couple of churches and promenades among the shady banyan trees on the island's 44 acres and closed its two bridges to shore at night to keep out the Chinese. 
Most of the Mediterranean-style buildings have now deteriorated, but the government plans to restore the island to something of its old architectural splendor.
In central Canton west of Renmin (People's) Road are a pair of ancient temples that recall China's Buddhist heritage. 
Guanxiao Temple, built in the fourth century, is one of the oldest in southern China and contains two small 10th-century iron pagodas. 
The Liurong (Six Banyans) Temple dates back to the fifth century. 
Near the main hall stands the nine-story Flower Pagoda, 180 feet high, which offers a good view of the city.
The Huaisheng Mosque, built in 627, is still in use by Chinese Moslems. 
It is south of Zhongshan Road. 
Canton's 19th-century Catholic Cathedral with its twin Gothic spires, on Yide Road, is now open for Sunday mass after being closed down by leftists during the Cultural Revolution.
The impact of China's new agricultural reforms is visible at the farmers market along Qingping Road. 
Here peasants from the countryside may sell their surplus produce privately. 
They squat and haggle with customers over live chickens, ducks, fish, snakes, frogs, herbs, vegetables and handicrafts. 
Spring flower markets also appear along Haoxian and Renmin Roads.
On the River
One of the pleasantest ways to view Canton is from a boat on the Pearl River, which winds through the city. 
The cruise boat with guide leaves from the No. 1 Pier near the old customs house on Yanjiang Road at 3 P.M. and spends two hours sailing back and forth across the river,dodging tugboats, barges and small sampans sculled by lone oarsmen. 
The trip costs 10 yuan, about $4 and includes soft drinks and snacks. 
A short voyage across the Pearl River on the local ferry, which leaves from a dock west of the White Swan Hotel, can be enjoyed for three fen - about a penny.
Restaurants
Other Chinese joke that the Cantonese will eat anything with four legs except a table, anything that flies except an airplane and anything that swims except a submarine. 
Canton has probably the best restaurants in China. 
The chefs work with a range of fresh ingredients that would intimidate lesser cooks, with an eye for color and a light touch with the spices. 
Foreigners are less likely to be segregated from Chinese diners in Canton than in other Chinese cities, so they can share in the conviviality that characterizes Canton's restaurants.
For those who do not speak Cantonese, it is best to agree upon a price per person, excluding drinks, when you make a reservation and have the restaurant arrange the menu, though you may want to specify a few favorite dishes.
The century-old Tao Tao Ju Restaurant (87306) on Xiaju Road seats 1,500 diners at a time. 
Its dishes include a whole chicken roasted with spices, $17.25, pan-fried frog with chives, $3.45, and roast pomfret (sea bream), $1.50. 
A meal will run up to $12.90 a person, without drinks. 
Look for the sign out front in the calligraphy of the Qing dynasty scholar Kang Youwei.
The Guangzhou restaurant ((87840) at the corner of Wenchang and Xiajiu roads is arranged round an indoor garden under a skylight. 
It is popular with residents because it is cheaper than most tourist restaurants and seats 2,000 customers. 
Specialities include pigeon cooked in tea, $5.60, and fried duck with crabmeat and eggwhites, $7.80. 
A full dinner will start at $6.50 a person. 
The Guangzhou also serves dim sum until midnight, which is shockingly late for China.
The Beiyuan or Northern Garden (33365) across from Yuexiu Park offers traditional-style pavilions with etched windows surrounding a garden. 
Dinner runs up to $12.90 a person. 
An American resident of Canton thinks that the Beiyuan serves the best suckling pig in town.
Although famous for its dim sum, the Banxi also offers a full dinner starting at $8.60, excluding drinks. 
Try the steamed melon soup, frog meat wrapped in ham and fried crab.
Visitors with bolder palates must try the Snake Restaurant (24679) on Jianglan Road. 
Do not be put off by the vipers slithering around the window display. 
Snake meat tastes like chicken, and is done best here in the meeting of the dragon, tiger and phoenix soup, as the brew of snake, cat and chicken meat is euphemistically called. 
An individual bowl costs $1.70. 
Or drink down a glass of snake bile ($8.60 to $12.90 depending on the number of snakes needed), which Cantonese say does wonders for your health.
Shopping
The usual tourist souvenirs, from cashmere sweaters to T-shirts printed with pandas, are stocked at the Friendship Store in the north wing of the China Hotel. 
If you want to browse away from the tourist route. walk along Xiajiu Road with its dozens of small shops. 
Bamboo wares are sold along Taikang Road. 
The Nanfang Department Store near the river carries everyday items for ordinary Chinese. 
You can find bargains like corduroy shoes for a couple of dollars. 
The store's underground annex used to be an air raid shelter.
Canton is not a good hunting ground for antiques, because the best pieces have already found their way to the antique shops of Hong Kong. 
The Guangzhou Antique Store (31241) on Wende Road sometimes gets a few pieces of the blue willow porcelain made for export during the later Qing dynasty (the 19th century). 
. Calligraphy scrolls and jewelry can also be good purchases. 
Make sure that anything you buy carries a red wax seal certifying it for export.
Night Life
Canton is slightly ahead of other Chinese cities in its nightlife, though it is still meager compared to that of the West. 
The China and White Swan Hotels both operate discoth eques for foreigners. 
Local Cantonese entertainment includes traditional Chinese Opera, called Yue Ju , at various theaters. 
A ticket costs from 21 to 52 cents, depending on who is performing. 
A children's acrobatic troupe, with artists as young as 9 years old, also puts on performances.
The best amusement can be found in good weather at the Cultural Park on Luersan Road near the Pearl River. 
Cantonese congregate here in the cool of the evening to stroll, roller skate, listen to music or watch open- air operas, dramas, puppet shows and films. 
Admission is only 4 cents but don't go unless you like crowds.
Country Trips
Canton lies at the edge of the Pearl River Delta, a lush rice bowl, crisscrossed with canals and streams, that is still ploughed by water buffalo. 
A half-day excursion may be arranged through the China International Travel Service (179 Huanshi Road) to the wealthy Dali Commune in Nanhai County. 
If you have a full day, you can go a few hours farther south to Shunde County, where you will also get a firsthand look at the prosperity brought about by the current agricultural reforms. 
It will cost about $17, including bus with guide and lunch, depending on the number of passengers.
When to Go
Canton enjoys a semitropical climate similar to Hong Kong's. 
The best seasons are spring and autumn, but the semiannual Canton Trade Fair, held in April and October, crowds hotels and restaurants. 
The winter is mild, with temperatures in the high 50's. 
The summer is hot and humid but still manageable if you stay at one of the air-conditioned hotels.
