
-------------------------------------------------------------------- HENRY KAMM is chief Asian diplomatic correspondent of The Times.
 
By HENRY KAMM
THE OTHER CHINA - Tourism in China need not be synonymous with fully pre-arranged and prepaid package travel, omnipresent official guides who avert their eyes and yours from what is ideologically out of fashion and shopping without bargaining. 
''Little China'' - the island of Taiwan, the hilly land that 16th-century Portuguese colonists named Formosa, the Beautiful - remains easily accessible and requires little more pre-arrangement than a weekend in the Catskills.
Tourist visas are quickly obtained from Nationalist Chinese consulates, which, since America's derecognition of Taiwan, go under the euphemism of Offices of the Coordination Council for North American Affairs. 
The New York office is at 801 Second Avenue, New York 10017 (697-1250-4); others are in Washington, D.C., Atlanta, Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, San Francisco, Seattle and Honolulu. 
A valid passport and three photographs are required for the visa, which is issued, without charge, the same day.
Trip to Taiwan is suggested as way to see "China" without going through red-tape and hassle
GETTING THERE - Northwest Orient Airlines, Singapore Airlines and China Air Lines each have several weekly direct flights between Taipei and such United States cities as Seattle, Los Angeles, San Francisco and Honolulu. 
Fares vary with type of service and advance booking; Singapore Airlines, for example, offers an advance purchase round-trip fare from Los Angeles, valid for a year, with no maximum or minimum stay requirement, for $960. 
All major Asian airlines fly at least once a day between their capitals and Taipei, so Hong Kong, Bangkok, Tokyo, Singapore , Manila or Seoul ar e also good starting places.
GETTING AROUND - Despite its shining modernity, Chiang Kai-shek Airport is antiquated in its customs procedures. 
It can take a good hour of being scuffed about by some of the noisiest and pushiest crowds in Asia and having one's most innocuous belongings, particularly printed matter, fussed over by rude customs agents before one is freed to be set upon by the hotel agents in the terminal lobby. 
It is best to take the hotel bus to town. 
The drive takes about a n hour, and the fare is about $5.50.
The language problem exists everywhere except places that are meant strictly for tourists. 
The only way to beat it is to decide upon each day's outing in advance, then ask a clerk at the hotel desk to write in Chinese, on separate slips of paper, all the places that you are likely to visit before returning to safe harbor. 
Your own job is to write the English equivalent on each slip, so that you will be sure you have given the taxi driver directions to take you to the museum rather than to the herbal medicine shop.
Public transportion is crowded and confusing, but taxis are cheap. 
All have meters, and tips are not expected, even from foreigners. 
Some meters still run on an earlier tariff, so the driver who asks you for more than is shown on the meter is not trying to cheat you. 
The roads are bumpy and potholed, the cabs have long ago exhausted their springs and shock absorbers and the drivers take no pains to avoid bad spots. 
Most drive at reckless speeds with lots of lastsecond jabs at the brakes.
MONEY - The currency is the New Taiwan dollar, locally known as the N.T., and 36 or 37 of them make one United States dollar. 
Traveler's checks are generally accepted, and hotels and bigger restaurants and shops take credit cards. 
One caution: After you have struck a hard bargain with a shopkeeper and pull out your credit card, the deal might collapse. 
You may then have to renegotiate whether you or he should pay the percentage that credit card companies charge shopkeepers, or pay cash.
THE CITY - It is not the physical beauty of Taipei that makes the trip worthwhile. 
Although the sprawling city has a lovely situation in a river valley surrounded by green mountains, it has made nothing of it. 
The old public buildings date to the period of Japanese rule, from 1895 to 1945, when Japan's idea of modern architecture was modeled on the squat and clumsy European government buildings of a century ago. 
Newer buildings, at their best, are of the featureless international style; at their worst, they are shapeless concrete tenements and factories or structures that look like them.
But Taipei is a marketplace of immense animation, with unceasing and unrestricted manufacturing, buying and selling. 
It makes New York look placid and approaches Hong Kong in cash-register cacophony. 
There is little respite, but if your spirits flag, make for the one authentic old-style (although the decor is tastefully modern) tearoom, Cha Yi Gwan, at 6 Alley 8, Lane 27, Ren Ai Road, Section 4. 
Strong tea ceremoniously brewed in tiny cups, taken in a setting of works of art, restores spirits and senses.
NATIONAL PALACE MUSEUM -What is perhaps the greatest single collection of Chinese art in the world is a short taxi ride from the heart of the city in the National Palace Museum. 
Its heart is the Imperial Collection, whose origins can be traced back to the Sung dynasty in the 10th century.
The collection's history is as vexed as it is long. 
The violent upheavals of Chinese history sometimes caused the collection to be scattered, or to be moved between the shifting capitals of the Middle Kingdom; it came to rest at the National Palace Museum in Peking in 1925, but not for long. 
In 1931, when the Japanese invaded China, the collection was sent to Shanghai, and then to Nanjing. 
It was further dispersed, in Sichuan and Guizhou, when the war spread over central China in 1937. 
At the end of World War II, the works of art were reassembled in Nanjing and Peking; they were taken to Taiwan shortly before the Communist triumph in the Civil War and were left crated and stored in mountain caves in the island's interior. 
Only in 1965, with the construction of the present museum, did they once more go on public display.
Only a fraction of the museum's riches - perhaps 6,000 to 8,000 pieces from a collection tentatively numbered at more than 600,000 - can be shown at one time. 
The scroll paintings, dating from the 10th to the 17th centuries, are the most striking exhibits, although the porcelain and ceramics, the jade and lacquerware, the bronzes and enamels are perhaps even more richly representative. 
Calligraphy and rare books and manuscripts complete the comprehensive view of Chinese culture, which is on view seven days a week at an admission price of about 50 cents.
There are frequent guided tours in English and, for special exhibitions, rental cassettes with a recorded English commentary. 
The museum also sells good reproductions of scroll paintings at a wide range of prices.
ADDED ATTRACTION - The National Palace Museum is surely the only major art gallery in the world that breaks with the standards of blandness that even museums adventurous in their art set for thei r nonspiritual foods. 
In a separate building ac ross a driveway, the museum offers splendidly unbland Sichuan cuis ine at rock-bottom prices. 
Some might say merely that this makes it possible to spend morning and afternoon at the museum without r eturning to town for lunch. 
Others, to whom the pleasures of the p alate are as important as the pleasures of the eye, might find that the museum restaurant, ahomely place with waitresses who have learned patience with nonspeakers of Chinese, is worth a trip by itself. 
A good meal can beput together for $2 or $3 a head, and a feast for not much more than that. 
The restaurant is crowded at noontime, so get there a few minutes earlier. 
Like the museum, it closes at 5 P.M.
RESTAURANTS - For many, the museum might by itself be reason enough to visit Taipei. 
For many more, the restaurants, even those without museums, are at least as important. 
All the cuisines of the Chinesespeaking world - the fare of Peking, Shanghai, Canton, Sichuan, Hunan, Shanxi and the hearty indigenous dishes of Taiwan itself - are amply available in this city of 2.2 million. 
Whatever you have learned to appreciate or would like to open your palate to, there are representative restaurants in all categories and price ranges. 
Except for what passes for western food and for the food served in the restaurants of major hotels, it is impossible to have a really bad meal - and the chances of finding a good one just by walking in off the street are higher here than anywhere else in the world.
The only problems are those of an embarrassment of riches - and, once again, language. 
Many menus are offered in Chinese only, but pointing at dishes on other tables is perfectly permissible, waiters sometimes have a bit of menu English and other diners tend to be helpful to those in linguistic distress. 
Here are a few good restaurants, but there are many others just as good. 
About $5 a person will fetch a good meal in any.
For Taiwanese food, strong in creatures of the sea, try Taiwan Shiau Diau, 71 Chuangshan North Road (561-0879). 
Specialties are roast fish with scallions and stir-fried oysters with fermented beans.
Shanghai specialties are featured at Fu Shin Yuan, 105 Chung Ching South Road (311-0751). 
Ask for shrimp with sticky-rice cakes, stirfried eel and smoked fish.
Hunanese food is the strong suit of Charming Garden Restaurant, 16 Nanking East Road, Section 1 (521-4131). 
The specialties are smoked ham, pigeon dumpling soup and a dessert, date dumplings.
Sichuanese food is good at Rong Shing, 45 Chulin Road (521-5341).Specialties include spicy bean curd, stewed carp with hot bean paste and pork with chopped garlic.
For a Cantonese meal, try An Lo Yuan, 232 Tunghwa Street (772-5929), and order pork ribs with tomato sauce, fried kale in oyster sauce and sweet and sour pork.
OTHER THINGS TO DO - A stroll through Snake Alley (ask the hotel clerk to instruct a taxi driver) any night will make the traveler from the West feel that he has really come a long way from home. 
A narrow and teeming street near the popular Lungshan, or Dragon Mountain, temple in the heart of the city's original center, Snake Alley has come by its name honestly. 
Many restaurants feature snake, to the eating of which people of southern China attach almost mystical properties. 
It is said to be good not only for what ails you but also for anything that might ail you much later in life. 
You may not wish to partake, but to watch the snake pitchmen in front of their shops display their charges and vaunt their qualities makes you aware that, despite leveling influences at work throughout the world, there remain great differences between its peoples. 
Other restaurants offer more conventional fare - do not worry about the monkeys in some of them. 
They are pets, not for eating.
Chinese opera flourishes in Taipei and has not suffered from the buffeting that the Cultural Revolution gave it on the mainland, when some of the greatest traditional practitioners were purged. 
The 600-year-old art form, whose conventions are highly stylized, is worth experiencing because it can hardly be explained. 
Costumes and makeup are extremely ornate, even exaggerated, to denote clearly the character who wears them. 
About 400 works are in the Taipei Opera's repertory; unless the visitor wants to make a serious study of the art form, he should perhaps not try to understand the plot but simply let the rich and exotic spectacle pour into his eyes and ears. 
Performances last for hours (and occasionally days); the audience wanders in and out at will, chatting and gossiping and eating box lunches. 
Again, hotel clerks can guide you to what is available. 
Tickets cost from about $1.50 to about $5.
The memorial to the late president Chiang Kai-shek, somewhat grandiose and bombastic in conception, is too big not to be a tourist site. 
A huge archway gives access to the memorial hall in classical Chinese style, size extra large.
SHOPPING - Taipei is a good place to buy coral and beads of semiprecious stones, Chinese knickknacks, bric-a-brac and bibelots. 
Antiques are rare, fakes plentiful. 
Textiles and shoes are inexpensive; suits can be quickly tailored for about $150 and u p. 
Electronic gadgets, such as games or lighters or ballpoint pens with built-in digital clocks, are plentiful and ch eap.
A nice and typical souvenir is a traditional name stamp, which took the place of a signature in days of illiteracy. 
These are made of soapstone or such more expensive materials as ivory or jade. 
For about $10, cr aftsmen in many shops will carve a Chinese approximationof your name into a carving of the Chinese zodiac sign of your birth.
ACCOMMODATIONS - Taipei has 22 hotels that meet the standards the official tourist organization has designated for ''international tourist hotels.''
Prices range from about $35 to $75 for a double room at any.
The Grand Hotel, on a hillock a little out of the center of town at 1 Chungshan North Road, is the ultimate in chinoiserie, a late Ming palace in a striking shade of red magnified to Disneyland dimensions, with an olympic-sized pool and other sports facilities. 
Its rooms are spacious, the housekeeping and service excellent. 
Avoid the restaurants except for the basement tearoom, which serves good noodles and dumplings. 
A double room costs between $36 and $65. 
Others in the same category are the Hilton, at 38 Chunghsiao West Road; Lai Lai Shangri-La, at 12 Chunghsiao East Road; President, at 9 Teh-hwei Street; and Miramar, at 3 Nanking East Road.
CLIMATE - Taiwan has a subtropical climate. 
Most of the year is summer, with daytime temperatures from May to September well above 90 degrees. 
May and June are rainy, but Taiwan is humid year-round. 
The cool season, when jackets or even topcoats come in handy, arrives in December and lasts through February.
EXCURSIONS - To get away from Taipei's humid heat and see some of the spectacular mountain scenery of central Taiwan, a number of plane, bus and rail tours are available. 
One of the most popular places within reach of two or three-day tours is Sun Moon Lake, which offers an exceptional view of 13,114-foot Mount Yushan and the Sea of Clouds that rings it. 
A drive through rugged mountains along the scenic East-West Cross-Island Highway, 120 miles long and ending at the eastern end in Taroko Gorge, is also rewarding. 
Three-day tours cost about $200, without meals.
Those who cannot resist the lure of tropical islands will be tempted by such romantically named offshore spots as the Pescadores or Orchid Island. 
The names are more attractive than the places, which offer nothing of sufficient interest to make up for the absence of good hotel and restaurant facilities.
INFORMATION - The Taiwan Visitors Association, 1 World Trade Center, Suite 86155, New York 10048 (466-0691) has free brochures, maps and guides as well as slides, cassettes and films that can be borrowed without charge.
