
A garden is a garden except in China, where it has been refined into an art form over more than 2,000 years. 
Western gardens, with their tidy rows of flowers or vegetables, hold little fascination for the Chinese. 
Grassy lawns are deemed best fit for grazing livestock, and spraying fountains disrupt the concept of water as a medium of tranquillity. 
A Chinese garden employs illusion and discovery to transform available space into a microcosm of the world, not merely as it is but as it should be.
Christopher S Wren article on gardens of Suzhou, near Shanghai, on how to visit them; photos (L)
CHRISTOPHER S. WREN is the Peking bureau chief of The New York Times. 
The esthetics of a Chinese garden rest on four basic ingredients - water, rocks, plants and buildings. 
The water is placid, mirroring the surrounding scenery. 
Rocks echo the grandeur of mountains. 
Trees and flowers add vitality and variety with the inexorable change of seasons. 
The pavilions themselves offer perspectives from which to contemplate the deeper harmony of the landscape. 
Embellishments may be added, such as carved bricks, window latticework and calligraphy that enhances the setting with a classical literary allusion. 
The earliest Chinese gardens were laid out in the Qin and Han dynasties, running from 221 B.C. to A.D. 220. They matured during the elegant Tang dynasty over 1,000 years ago, as mandarins, scholars and wealthy merchants created oases of beauty and introspection within the walls of their property. 
For well- bred ladies, crippled by bound feet, the gardens often marked the horizons of their lives.
The finest private gardens were built in Suzhou, a graceful old city with a network of canals and a cultured ambiance. 
It was founded in the sixth century B.C. as the capital of the kingdom of Wu and flourished as a center of trade and scholarship under successive dynasties.
When Marco Polo stopped in Suzhou around 1276, he found ''a very noble city and great'' with 6,000 stone bridges. 
A few of the bridges remain in what is now a factory town, along with several Sung and Ming dynasty pagodas. 
But Suzhou is renowned foremost for its gardens, which first appeared 17 centuries ago. 
Today, fewer than a dozen of them survive.
Suzhou's proximity to Shanghai, 53 miles away, has made the gardens a popular destination for tourists. 
But many tour groups descend with bullhorns and clicking cameras in disregard of the tranquility the gardens should inspire.
The secret of enjoying the gardens of Suzhou is to approach them as their owners did, in relative solitude with a mind receptive to every nuance, from the slender stalk of bamboo growing in a corner to the light and shadow playing on a whitewashed wall. 
Such touches, no less than grander vistas, were intended to stimulate the intellect, evoke a snatch of poetry or justify a cup of wine.
This may mean visiting when the foliage is not at its height, in spring or autumn. 
The best gardens lend themselves to every change of season, and are no less lovely when the soft rain has chased the sightseers away. 
Do not let yourself be hurried through a Chinese garden. 
The sense of discovery should suffice to encourage you to walk on.
If you are traveling with a tour group, you might pass up breakfast and catch the gardens when they open, or miss a shopping excursion to revisit some view that intrigued you earlier. 
It is better to absorb a few gardens than to depart having seen them all and comprehended nothing.
These then are the finest gardens of Suzhou, listed arbitrarily in order of preference after three separate visits:
 
Garden of the Master of Fishing Nets (Wangshiyuan) is the smallest in Suzhou, covering less than an acre and a half, yet it is quite possibly the best because its elements are so exquisitely arranged. 
It is only 10 minutes' walk from the Suzhou Hotel, where most tourists stay.
The garden, reached through a nondescript alley, was built in 1140 by a Sung dynasty official, Shi Zhengshi, to hold his many books. 
It deteriorated under a succession of owners until 1770, when a Ming dynasty official, Song Zongyuan, restored it and gave it a name more eloquent than the Fisherman's Retreat.
The centerpiece is the main garden, whose pavilions, halls and corridors surround a large goldfish pond. 
The panorama changes as you move around the pond. 
The best vista is found at the hexagonal Arrival of Moon and Breeze pavilion, from which guests enjoyed not only the summer evening breeze but also two moons, one in the sky and the other reflected in the water. 
Beside the more formal Pavilion of Clean Water, where plays were sometimes performed, is a grotto of rocks cemented firmly with glutinous rice and the smallest arched bridge in Suzhou, four steps on each side.
The westernmost courtyard, with its Hall of Staying Spring, was reproduced on a smaller scale three years ago at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York. 
The windows of the hall itself frame actual rocks, flowers and bamboo leaves inside the delicate wooden latticework.
The path out leads past a 200-year-old pomegranate tree, planted in a stone tub, to the 10,000 Volumes Hall. 
The large exterior doors were opened to let distinguished guests be borne in by sedan chair. 
The ornate hall itself is furnished with mahogany chairs inset with circles of marble. 
Next to the final courtyard is a new teahouse where old men, with a pass costing 30 cents a month, come to pass the time sipping, conversing or dozing.
 
Surging Wave Pavilion (Langcangting) is Suzhou's oldest surviving garden. 
It was laid out in 1044 by the Sung dynasty poet Su Zimei on the site of an older house. 
Unlike most other gardens, it has no water of its own, so it borrows the view of the large pond outside, where fishermen still patiently cast for silver carp. 
This architectural device of using exterior surroundings to create a sense of more space has been employed less dramatically by some other gardens.
The pavilion, approached by a simple stone bridge over the pond, is known for the intricately geometrical designs of the latticed windows along its winding corridors. 
The Hall for Understanding the Way has grotesque furniture fashioned from heavy banyan tree roots. 
Another Hall for 500 Virtuous Men is celebrated for its fine calligraphy. 
Portraits of 500 sages, each with a 16-character poem, are etched on the limestone walls, which have been blackened for contrast. 
Two other pavilions serving tea overlook the pond outside.
 
Lingering Garden (Liu Yuan) originated in 1522, but took its name nearly three centuries later from Liu Rongfeng, an official of the Qing dynasty. 
The next owner, Shan Cunhui, didn't like to hear it called Liu's garden, so he changed the name to another character with the same sound that meant ''to linger.''
The garden, which covers more than eight acres, was renovated in Qing dynasty style 200 years ago. 
Some visitors find that its numerous buildings clutter the garden, but 2,100 feet of connecting corridors are convenient for enjoying the views on a rainy day. 
The windows are called ''alive'' because each presents a different picture of the garden pond. 
The central garden, with poplar, gingko and pine trees, changes with the seasons. 
The roses, peonies and wisteria of spring give way in summer to lotus blossoms. 
In the autumn, chrysanthemums bloom and the winter brings plum flowers.
The limestone was hauled from Lake Tai, a dozen miles away, where it was immersed for years or even centuries to be sculptured by the currents. 
The finest garden rocks are slender, ragged from erosion, pierced with holes, yet smooth enough that the rainwater drains. 
One of the most famous such rocks in China is displayed here behind a lily pond. 
It stands nearly 20 feet high, weighs five tons and arrived in the dowry of a bride who married into the family. 
In a smaller garden, a clump of rocks turns into an eagle fighting dog if viewed from the proper angle.
The garden's Mandarin Duck Hall was so named to symbolize harmony, because mandarin ducks were thought to be inseparable in pairs. 
Ironically, this stately hall was divided into separate sections for men and women. 
The main banquet hall is built from a precious hard wood called nanmu, once popular for coffins because it does not decay. 
The silk-screen paintings create an illusion by seeming to reflect the other side of the hall.
The Lingering Garden is a good spot to pause for a cup of tea at a rear nursery where a dazzling variety of dwarf bonsai trees are cultivated.
 
Humble Administrator's Garden (Zhuozhen Yuan) is Suzhou's largest, covering about 12 acres. 
Wang Xianchen, a disgruntled Ming dynasty official, lost out in bureaucratic infighting and retired to build this garden in 1513. 
Hence, it is sometimescalled the Garden of the Unsuccessful Politician. 
The garden took 16 years to complete and after Wang's death was gambled away by his frivolous son.
A large pond occupies well over half the garden area. 
It is approached through a conventional-looking park with grass and pine trees. 
A circular moon gate leads to the pond, which has bridges that zigzag to keep out evil spirits and a bargelike pavilion called Fragrant Isle.
Covered water-wave corridors seem to undulate, creating an illusion of passers-by treading on the water. 
The 36 Mandarin Ducks Hall has blue and white glass windows and a flock of live mandarin ducks in the pond below. 
This garden is popular on summer evenings with local residents who come to stroll and smell the lotus blossoms.
 
Lion Forest (Shizilin) was created by a monk, Tian Ru, about 1350 as part of a Buddhist temple, but was later detached as a private garden. 
It is celebrated for its formations of rocks from Lake Tai, some of which vaguely resemble lions. 
The rugged rocks form a mountain skyline with miniature peaks bearing such poetic names as Rising Moon and Black Jade.
Other rocks protrude from a large pond to make it look deeper. 
The Flying Waterfall pavilion, the garden's highest point, sits atop a multilevel limestone grotto. 
A stone boat on the water's edge is considered a choice place to view the lotuses in bloom. 
This garden, which includes cypress trees, traditional halls and clover-shaped plum blossom doorways, once belonged to the forebears of the distinguished American architect I. M. Pei.
 
Garden of Pleasure (Yi Yuan), one of Suzhou's newest gardens, cost 200,000 ounces of silver when it was built in 1875 by a Qing dynasty official, Gu Wenbin. 
A little over an acre in size, it borrows successfully from other gardens with partitioned double corridors, inset with lattice windows, and dainty courtyards bright with potted flowers. 
The garden even shows off eroded chunks of Lake Tai limestone that earlier gardens discarded.
A couple of lesser gardens are worth visiting if there is time to spare.
 
East Garden (Xi Yuan), which is actually a public park, contains a full-scale prototype of the Master of the Nets garden that was assembled at the Metropolitan Museum. 
The technical problems were first worked out here.
 
Lotus Garden (Ou Yuan) offers quietude when more renowned gardens are overflowing with tourists, because it is off the beaten track. 
Nearly 400 years old, it was renovated by an official with the reward that he got for helping quell the Taiping rebellion 120 years ago. 
It follows a classic design, with a central white stucco pavilion and a small lake.
The Lotus Garden, across the canal from the silk factory in northeast Suzhou, is most interesting for its approach down an alley south of the East Garden. 
This back lane provides a glimpse into timeless Suzhou life, as millers grind rice for dumplings, vendors juggle baskets of vegetables and women draw water from the communal wells, much as was done when Suzhou's gardens were in their heyday. 
Basics Suzhou, one of the loveliest cities of the Yangtze River basin, was founded almost 2,500 years ago. 
The old city wall and all but two of its gates have been torn down, but Suzhou still evokes the past in its whitewashed houses with sloping black tile roofs and its narrow streets shaded with plane trees. 
Though many of the old canals were filled in to make roads, flat-bottomed barges still crowd the remaining waterways. 
Though Suzhou has other worthwhile attractions, such as a fine Taoist temple and a seven-story pagoda at Tiger Hill, northwest of town, the gardens are its most rewarding sights. 
Suzhou is also known for its fine silk and embroidery, which are available at the Suzhou Hotel and some local stores. 
For a more lasting souvenir, look at the woodcuts and watercolors of Suzhou by local artists, which are sold at exhibitions inside the Master of Fishing Nets and Lingering gardens. 
An attractive original work can be bought for less than $100. 
All the gardens open at 7:30 A.M. and close at 5 P.M. In theory, the best time to visit is in October or April, but the good weather and colorful flowers and foliage are offset by crowds of tourists. 
If you want to avoid them, come in the slacker winter or summer seasons. 
After all, the winter plum trees bloom in January and February. 
Getting There A suburban train from Shanghai to Suzhou takes about an hour and a quarter and costs $5.50 for a round-trip-first class ticket, making a day trip possible. 
The earliest train from Shanghai departs at 6:25 A.M. But there are more convenient ones, such as a 9:20 A.M. train that arrives in Suzhou at 10:36 A.M. The last train back from Suzhou leaves at 9:19 P.M. and pulls into Shanghai at 10:28 P.M. Check with your hotel for changes in this schedule. 
Reservations can be made in Shanghai by China International Travel Service (major hotels have offices) to have a guide and car meet your train in Suzhou and take you directly to the first garden. 
For example, the Lingering Garden could be visited in the morning and the Master of the Nets garden and Surging Waves pavilion in the afternoon. 
An English-speaking guide should cost about $22 for the day and a car with driver less than $30, depending on how much driving around you do. 
Food and Lodging Lunch is most easily obtained at the Suzhou Hotel at around $3 to $6 a person, though the service can be slow and the food undistinguished. 
You might prefer to bring sandwiches or fruit from Shanghai if you don't want to waste time. 
For dinner, the best downtown restaurant is the Songhelou, or Pine and Crane. 
Foreigners are hustled to an upstairs dining room and it is best to set a price per person of about $7.50 and let the restaurant arrange the menu. 
Specialties include fragrant crisp duck, ham with bamboo shoots, tiny lake shrimp and freshwater crabs. 
If you would rather stay overnight, the Suzhou Hotel offers comfortable double rooms with bath for less than $20 a night. 
You can get up early and visit the Master of the Fishing Nets garden, only a 10-minute walk from the hotel. 
C. S. W.
