
Two decades of official animosity between China and the Soviet Union have created some strange situations for the minority peoples divided by the border between the two countries in Central Asia. 
Two frontier points will reopen next month for resumption of local Chinese-Soviet trading. 
But there are no prospects for reviving normal cross-border traffic, sealed off since the 1960's.
A visit among relatives separated by the border is a major operation that requires official permission and epic round-about journeys to distant crossing points. 
For example, the large town closest to Kashgar in China's Xinjiang-Uighur Autonomous Region is Osh in Soviet Kirghizia, less than 200 miles away. 
But Li Dianying, a Xinjiang official, said that a Chinese Uighur wishing to visit a Soviet relative in Osh would have to fly nearly 10,000 miles - first east to Peking, then west to Moscow and back southwest to Tashkent. 
Or he could take an equally inconvenient train to a crossing in Manchuria at the opposite end of the country.
URUMQI, China - Two decades of official animosity between China and the Soviet Union have created some strange situations for the minority peoples divided by the border between the two countries in Central Asia.
A professor at Xinjiang University recently was able to visit a Soviet relative, officials said, and a language specialist in Urumqi had a visit from his mother in the Soviet Union, but such contacts are rare.
After an estimated 30,000 Uighur refugees fled from Xinjiang into Soviet Kazakhstan in the 1960's to escape forced assimilation, China shut the border. 
It was delineated when the weak Qing dynasty ceded a chunk of Central Asia to czarist Russia in the ''unequal'' treaties of 1864 and 1881. 
China has not demanded return of this land, which includes the Soviet city of Alma-Ata, but it does lay claim to territory along Xinjiang's border with Soviet Tadzhikistan.
Trade, notably in Chinese fruit and long-staple cotton and in Soviet glass and coffee, is to be resumed at Korgas and at Turugart, said Eisa Shakir, a deputy commissioner of Kashgar prefecture in western Xinjiang. 
But no other improvement is visible in Chinese-Soviet relations in Central Asia. 
The former Soviet consulate in Urumqi has been taken over by a song-and-dance ensemble and the consulate in Kashgar is now a guest house for tourists.
The exchange of mail is slightly easier. 
Mr. Li said parcels and letters cross but language is also a barrier. 
The Cyrillic alphabet has been adopted in Soviet Central Asia, while Arabic script is again used in Xinjiang, after nearly two decades of experimentation with Roman letters.
Still, information does get through, suggesting to some Uighurs that living standards are higher on the Soviet side. 
A man in Urumqi said a relative in Alma-Ata had bought a Zhiguli sedan. 
It is all but impossible to buy a private car in Xinjiang. 
Chinese officials stress the advantages on their side - ample markets and relative tolerance for Moslem religious practice.
Urumqi's mayor, Ismail Mahsut, said he knew people with relatives on the Soviet side who are not so well supplied. 
Chinese Uighurs could easily buy a sheep to slaughter for a wedding, Mr. Mahsut said, ''but in the Soviet Union it is more difficult to get these things. 
People also say that the prices of daily necessities are more stable here and that the prices are comparatively lower.''
Radio broadcasts in the Uighur and Kazakh languages float across the snow-crowned peaks of the Tianshan, describing a happy life for ethnic minorities on the Soviet side. 
They emanate from radio stations such as ''Peace and Progress'' in Soviet Tashkent and are beamed at the same minorities in China. 
''I don't think people listen to them. 
Or very few listen to them,'' said Bahar Rahim, an Uzbek and director of Xinjiang's Department of Nationalities Affairs.
But the broadcasts are heard more widely than Chinese officials like to admit. 
Non-Han minorities constitute 60 percent of the population of Xinjiang, an expanse of mountains and deserts more than twice the size of Texas. 
Besides Uighurs, they include Kazakhs, Kirghiz, Uzbeks and Tadjiks, who have their own nominal Soviet republics.
In last year's census, Xinjiang also had a Russian minority of 2,500 descendants of White Russians who fled the Bolshevik revolution or came to trade. 
The 1964 census had recorded only 600 ethnic Russians because some Chinese, after considering the political climate, concealed their Russian ancestry, as the law permits. 
Tamara Mikhailovna Shi, whose mother is Russian (her father is Chinese), teaches Russian language and literature at Xinjiang University. 
English, Uighur, Kazakh and Chinese are also taught there.
The border has been quiet since 1969, when skirmishes were reported in the wake of larger clashes in the Far East. 
China maintains up to 250,000 troops in Xinjiang, according to Western estimates, although only the preponderance of senior officers on local airline flights confirms a substantial military presence.
Officials in Xinjiang blame the Russians for the absence of a real thaw in relations. 
''We feel the threat from the Soviet Union,'' said Mayor Mahsut, pointing to what he said was a heavy buildup of Soviet forces along the border.
''The Soviet Union also broadcasts propaganda and sends across spies from both the Hans and the minorities, but people find them out,'' the Mayor added. 
He would not say how many had been caught or when.
