
TO many people, the opening of China to foreign investors at the outset of the 1980's seemed like one of the most promising political and economic developments since World War II. 
But now, fresh on the heels of the American Motors Corporation's well-publicized problems with its jeep-making venture here, there is a growing sense among Americans and Chinese alike that the lure of investing in China has dimmed.
In public, at least, the Chinese continue to stress their successes. 
According to Chinese Government statistics, 2,300 joint ventures between foreign companies and Chinese state enterprises had been approved by the end of 1985, drawing $6 billion in foreign equity investment to China. 
Of this, about $1.4 billion was American, including investments by such Fortune 500 corporations as McDonnell-Douglas, A.M.C., Pepsi-Cola, Coca-Cola, Atlantic Richfield and Occidental Petroleum.
But now - despite the Chinese decision to meet A.M.C.'s threat of a pullout with concessions that at least temporarily resolve the problems -there is widespread doubt among foreign investors whether their efforts to establish a foothold here are worthwhile. 
Many are increasingly doubtful that their dream of gaining access to the vast Chinese market will ever materialize. 
All but a handful of them remain plagued with the same foreign exchange problems, disputes over contract interpretation, inflexible bureaucracy and high costs that have shadowed A.M.C.
Currency remains the major sticking point. 
Only a few investors -mainly owners of luxury hotels built to accommodate foreign tourists and business executives, which have guaranteed hard currency earnings - are untouched by the problem. 
The 1,000-room Holiday Inn-Lido Hotel in Peking enjoyed a profit rate of more than 50 percent on revenues last year of nearly $38 million. 
Robert Lo, the Singapore millionaire who is the majority owner, is said to be confident that he can pay off his investment in three and a half years, faster than hotels in Hong Kong. 
BUT most joint ventures have yet to show a profit in anything other than the inconvertible Chinese currency, the renminbi. 
To some executives the compromise with A.M.C., which involved a pledge to resume payments to that company in dollars, represented the first hope that the Chinese, after years of promising investors at least a ''reasonable'' hard-currency profit, might be preparing for more than the half-measures adopted hitherto. 
But to others the deal looked like an exceptional fix, made to avoid the ripple effect of a pullout by A.M.C. 
''A happy ending?
Don't bet on it,'' said one American executive.
The Chinese, clearly worried, have intensified their efforts to reassure investors, particularly Americans. 
Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang, meeting last week with an American business group headed by Robert Strauss, the United States special trade representative in the Carter Administration, acknowledged that there were ''inconveniences'' because of shortcomings in China's legal system, its limited foreign exchange and low industrial efficiency. 
But he said ''the problems will surely be resolved.''
Still, skepticism persists, partly because of a growing awareness that China and its foreign partners are seeking contradictory ends. 
Ever mindful of foreign depradations in the century before Communist power, Chinese leaders have always said that foreign investment is a tool to be used for the shortest time necessary to effect a transfer of technology and managerial skills. 
Their declared purpose is to help China modernize in a manner that ultimately will make it possible to manage without a major foreign investment presence in China.
Until recently, executives making investment decisions, usually far away, have tended to minimize this stated concern for sovereignty and to assume that China - in the manner of many of the non-Communist nations in Asia - is embarking on a path that will make it progressively more receptive to multinational corporations. 
But recent events are forcing a reassessment.
There is concern as well about the future of the ''open door'' policy after Deng Xiaoping, the 81-year-old head of the Communist Party, passes from the scene. 
The past two years have shown more clearly than before that forces are at work inside the party that are a good deal less friendly to foreign influences - and to investments - than Mr. Deng.
For some companies, which cannot afford to take the long view, the question of whether China's markets will open to foreigners is academic. 
Among them, there is growing fractiousness over day-to-day treatment. 
In matters involving labor, taxes, customs duties, and living costs, among others, there is a sense that foreigners have been marked for discriminatory treatment.
Some executives who have had difficulty holding Chinese partners to negotiated terms have concluded that the Western notion of contract, implying a pact between equals, is alien to traditional Chinese concepts of the role of foreigners on Chinese soil, in which the foreigner has no rights, only the privileges the Chinese confer.
This dovetails with another view, which sees the free enterprise ideas of Westerners as the natural enemy of the monopolistic attitude ingrained in a state-owned economy. 
Winston Lord, the United States Ambassador, who is optimistic that investment conditions will improve, puts it politely. 
''The Chinese,'' Mr. Lord said recently, ''are having some difficulty mating Communism and capitalism.''
A West German executive is more blunt: ''Here, you see every evil of textbook monopoly. 
Dealing with a Chinese state enterprise is like bargaining with a pistol at your head.''
Not everyone believes the blame can be easily apportioned. 
Lois Dougan Tretiak, a senior China analyst with Business International Ltd. in Hong Kong who wrote a study of joint ventures, said many problems resulted from poorly negotiated contracts. 
''People come here and they get over-awed,'' she said. 
It is virtually a truism among foreigners who have lived here for some time that an initial acquaintance with China - its lavish banquets, elaborate courtesies, physical beauty and lingering sense of mystery - can cause normally hard-headed people to suspend or relax their judgment.
The A.M.C. experience demonstrated the pitfalls. 
The jeep maker made a deal with the Chinese in 1984 to import kits of the company's Cherokee model for assembly at the Beijing Jeep Corporation. 
But by October 1985, when Vice President Bush drove the first model off the assembly line, the country was in a foreign exchange crisis. 
Abuse of new, decentralized economic powers had drained state reserves, which sank to barely $10 billion, a drop of more than 30 percent in six months. 
All foreign exchange payments to A.M.C. stopped.
The freeze left the company with millions of dollars in uncollected bills for the $12,000 kits, as well as millions of renminbi from its share in the profits from the production of a standard Chinese jeep. 
When the Chinese refused to compromise, the American company halted shipment of Cherokee kits. 
It took months of acrimony and an appeal to Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang to produce the recent pledge to resume dollar payments.
It is a concession that is unlikely to be granted to others. 
Under a recent Chinese directive, most new joint ventures will be expected to export 51 percent of their production and to draw their earnings from the hard- currency receipts. 
But most enterprises face price and quality problems that make exports of that scale an illusion. 
A.M.C., for example, has exported none of the 800 Cherokees it has assembled, and does not expect to until it has sharply reduced production costs, which are higher than in its main Cherokee plant in Toledo, Ohio. 
FOR many, the best that can be expected is an accumulating surplus of renminbi, whose value is questionable. 
At one point last year, for example, Pepsi-Cola Inc.'s bottling plant in the Shenzhen special economic zone near Hong Kong had a surplus of 8 million renminbi, $2.5 million officially. 
The company used several million renminbi in the construction of a second plant, in Canton. 
But Pepsi's efforts to spend the rest faltered when it was unable to buy even simple chemicals in the local market.
On the principle that China will not allow itself to be exploited for ''cheap'' resources, and to help rebuild foreign currency reserves, Western businesses are being subjected to very high costs. 
Mats Engstrom, president of Tsar Nicoulai, a San Francisco-based fine foods company, had to parry Chinese demands that he pay a daily rental of $100 each for two $19,000 Cherokee jeeps that he had bought for his caviar operation here this spring. 
''I told them, 'They're my jeeps,''' Mr. Engstrom recalled. 
''After a while, they got the message.''
One United States company was asked to pay $9,000 a month for a Chinese-trained high-technology specialist, more than 10 times the specialist's take-home pay for a year. 
Many are paying rents of $90,000 a year for three-bedroom apartments, and proportionate amounts for offices. 
And new import duties of up to 275 percent have pushed the cost of a medium-sized Japanese car close to $40,000.
Problems with workers have been another bugbear. 
Peking's Sheraton Great Wall Hotel, dogged by financial troubles for most of its first two years of operation, recently won the right to fire incompetents among its 1,200 Chinese employees. 
But the concession was rare. 
Generally, the work force is supervised by the Chinese partners. 
In many cases, the result has been dismal productivity rates that make it more expensive to produce products here than in Western Europe and the United States.
Confronted with a chronicle of such problems, Chinese officials are inclined to point out that few joint ventures have collapsed, indicating at least minimal satisfaction. 
But many foreign executives say that this is a false standard, since their head offices have made a strategic decision to stick with their investments here for the time being, regardless of cost. 
It is a demoralizing situation, and the turnover among expatriates -A.M.C. had three chief executives in a year - is high.
One source of comfort for American investors is that their complaints have been taken seriously by a succession of senior United States officials visiting here. 
The most recent was the Treasury Secretary, James A. Baker 3d, who raised some of the most pressing problems with senior Chinese officials last month. 
A briefing paper prepared by the American Embassy for the visit put the situation starkly: ''In every case, U.S. partners are paying a very high price to be in China now because their parent corporations have made a strategic decision to enter the China market for the long term. 
They have taken a great commercial and potential political risk, and, for most, the potential payoff is still years away.''
 
Largest Sino-American Joint Ventures
Projects ranked by estimated investment by United States company
U.S. Company
U.S. Company's
Investment
Equity Stake
U.S. Company
($ millions)
in Project
Nature of Project
Occidental Petroleum
$175
25%
Develop the Antaibao open
pit coal mine
Atlantic Richfleld
170
35%
Develop offshore gas field in
South China Sea
John Portman
170
n.a.
Manage a hotel and foreign
Associates
trade complex
Mutual Petroleum
100
n.a
Construct deep-water berths
for container ships
Beatrice Companies
60
60%
Develop food-processing and
light industrial products
Eastman Kodak
50
n.a
Build prductin line for color
photographic materials
E-S Pacific
35
49%
Construct and initially
Development
manage the Great Wall Hotel
Sheraton Corporation
35
n.a
Manage Hua Ting hotel
(under construction)
Empire Trading
30
n.a
Build hotel and commercial
Company
complex
American Motors
16
31%
Manufacture 4-wheel drive
vehicles
n.a. not available
Source: National Council for U.S.-China Trade
