
On Tuesday it will have been exactly two years since the radicals known as the Gang of Four were found guilty of almost all the evils that racked China during the bitter decade of the Cultural Revolution.
At the time of their conviction, the two ringleaders - Jiang Qing, the widow of Chairman Mao Zedong, and Zhang Chunqiao, a former mayor of Shanghai - were given suspended death sentences that could be changed to life imprisonment in two years if they repented suitably.
Wang Hongwen, once a deputy chairman of the Communist Party, got a life sentence and Yao Wenyuan, a propagandist, was given 20 years in prison.
During the long show trial, Miss Jiang taunted the court to execute her, shouting that ''it is more glorious to have my head chopped off.''
There is no sign that Mao's widow, having been blamed for everything that went awry in the Chairman's last years, has shown the slightest remorse.
PEKING, Jan. 
22 - On Tuesday it will have been exactly two years since the radicals known as the Gang of Four were found guilty of almost all the evils that racked China during the bitter decade of the Cultural Revolution.
But no one expects her or Mr. Zhang to be executed, if only because it might inflame dormant Maoist passions. 
Last August the party chief, Hu Yaobang, told some French reporters that ''Jiang Qing lives well in prison, but she persists in behaving as a political and ideological enemy of our people.''
 
'Jiang Qing Will Remain Alive'
Mr. Hu ventured that a court reviewing her case ''will take account of the circumstances and reduce her sentence.''
When Peng Zhen, another member of the ruling Politburo, visited Yugoslavia last summer, he too said that Miss Jiang would not be executed. 
''Jiang Qing will remain alive and we shall continue to feed her,'' Mr. Peng told a Belgrade newspaper. 
''She has only one mouth.''
The leadership must figure out how to justify the reprieve of Miss Jiang, whom most ordinary Chinese still detest because of her role in the repressive years of the Cultural Revolution, because she has shown none of the contrition demanded by law. 
The weekly Literary Digest hinted last month at a face-saving solution. 
It quoted a university student in Peking as saying: ''Jiang Qing's crime did not consist of directly killing anyone. 
If she is spared, she will act as a teacher of a negative lesson.''
It is rumored that Jiang Qing, now 69 years old, is confined to Qincheng Prison in suburban Peking, where she has been put to work making dolls. 
Prisoners in China must do something useful. 
But according to one version, she has embroidered her name on each doll so they cannot be sold and are now piling up in a warehouse.
As for the three other members of the Gang of Four, Zhang Chunqiao, now 65, is said to be dying of throat cancer. 
Wang Hongwen, 47, who turned state's evidence at the trial, has become a model convict at a labor camp in Shaanxi Province, where he impresses warders and prisoners alike with his positive attitude. 
Yao Wenyuan, 51, is working as a prison librarian and has fleshed out to nearly 230 pounds.
Profits and Smiles
The Peking municipality has just begun a drive to rid the downtown stores of their old surliness and sloth by instituting the kind of responsibility system that perked up economic performance in agriculture and industry.
From now on, stores will be allowed to retain part of the so-called profit shown on their books. 
For example, the Tianqiao Department Store will be allowed to keep 2 percent of the ''profit'' it normally hands over to the state, plus half of what the Chinese accountants call surplus.
At Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang's suggestion, the change has been tried first in the busy commercial district of Xidan and Qianmen streets, where 14,000 store employees have been getting their regular pay regardless of their performance.
A Peking television crew visited a major grocery store on Xidan Street to investigate how the system was doing. 
The 7 P.M. evening news reported that sales since the beginning of January had jumped 31 percent over those for the comparable period in 1982 and that quality and promptness of service had soared too. 
There was even a greater variety of food available, it said.
 
Customer Finds Different Story
A customer who visited the model grocery store the next day saw five clerks arguing with someone who wanted to buy candy. 
The customer asked an idle clerk at another counter for a jar of fruit jam.
''There isn't any,'' the clerk said with a yawn. 
But didn't the store sell jam?
''Yes,'' the clerk replied. 
Then when was the next shipment of jam expected?
''I don't know,'' the clerk said, winding up the conversation. 
By contrast, the clerks over at the Xidan Department Store were helpful and polite. 
But the new responsibility system has not been instituted there yet.
Diplomatic Chagrin
Peking's diplomatic circuit has its own tales about the new dean of the diplomatic corps, Ambassador Nguyen Trong Vinh of Vietnam, who has been here since July 1974.
The Vietnamese envoy has posed an embarrassment for the Chinese Foreign Ministry, and not only because the two countries have remained virtual enemies since their border war in early 1979. 
Mr. Vinh has a habit of excluding from ambassadorial functions those envoys representing countries he doesn't like, such as the United States Ambassador, Arthur W. Hummel Jr., and the Chilean Ambassador, Benjamin B. Opazo.
Another ambassador explained that when a colleague departed, the dean of the Peking diplomatic corps was responsible for advising the other envoys and collecting 15 yuan - nearly $8 - apiece for a farewell gift and presentation. 
Mr. Vinh doesn't tell Mr. Hummel or Mr. Opazo because, he says, he can't deal with ambassadors he has not met officially.
 
No Alternative, Chinese Find
For a while, the Chinese Foreign Ministry kept recognizing the Lebanese Ambassador, Elie J. Boustany, as the dean, even though he had quietly gone home. 
Mr. Boustany finally sent back word that he was not returning and this left the Chinese with no alternative to Mr. Vinh, because of his diplomatic seniority.
A senior Asian diplomat considered the succession. 
When and if the Vietnamese Ambassador leaves, he said, the next dean will be the Cuban Ambassador, another Soviet-bloc envoy who is already known for making long speeches. 
He would be followed by the Moroccan Ambassador, whom the diplomat called ''quite a good fellow,'' and next the Hungarian Ambassador.
''But then we will have the Ambassador of Democratic Kampuchea,'' the Asian diplomat said, referring to the ousted Pol Pot regime of Cambodia, which China still recognizes. 
''And he will be around forever.''
