
LIKE Ellis Island on the East Coast, Angel Island in San Francisco Bay was a clearing house for immigrants in the first decades of this country. 
Both facilities have become symbols of the oppressed being welcomed into the golden new land of opportunity. 
Many of their realities, however, were a little more complicated, considerably less sentimental. 
''Paper Angels,'' an hourlong drama on WNET/13 tonight at 9, considers the Angel Island experience from the vantage point of a several Chinese men and women, a mere handful plucked from the lists of 175,000 who passed through between the years of 1910 and 1940.
The year is 1915. 
Because of the Chinese Exclusion Act, imposed in 1882, immigration authorities are making it difficult for ordinary laborers to enter the United States. 
Immigrants from poor rural communities are forced to buy, at considerable expense, false identification papers making them ''paper sons'' with a higher social and economic status. 
They study ''coaching books'' designed to get them through official interrogations bent on sending them home. 
Finally reaching the ''golden mountain'' of the new world, they discover that they might have to spend weeks, months and, in some cases, years in the barracks of Angel Island.
John J O'Connor reviews WNET television drama Paper Angels; photo
Genny Lim, the playwright, is a descendant of two generations of Angel Island immigrants. 
Becoming interested in the painful experiences of her family and other Chinese immigrants, she and two friends - Him Mark Lai and Judy Yung - published in 1980 a book titled ''Island.''
Her play evolved out of that project. 
It was first produced at San Francisco's Asian American Theater Company, and in 1982 won favorable notices at New York's Federal Theater. 
Miranda Barry of public television's American Playhouse series was enthusiastic and the result, with Phylis Geller as executive producer, is tonight's presentation.
The original play has been scaled back to an almost impressionistic portrait of small, fragile lives trying to survive within a hostile system. 
Directed by John Lone, whose previous impressive credits include David Henry Hwang's ''Dance and the Railroad'' at the New York Public Theater, ''Paper Angels'' consists largely of relatively brief scenes drifting in and around the lives of seven characters. 
In the men's barracks, there are Fong (James Hong), a middle-aged man who only wants to avoid being buried in a pauper's grave; the elderly Chin Gung (Victor Wong), who returned to China to bring back the wife he left 40 years earlier; Lee (Ping Wu), a young scholar forced to pose as a merchant's son; and Lum (David Huang), a cocky rebel unimpressed with menacing officials.
In another section, there are Chin Moo (Beulah Quo), the elderly wife who has been unexpectedly reunited with her husband; Mei Lai (Joan Chen), the scholar's traditionally obedient (and pregnant) wife; and Ku Ling (Rosalind Chao), contemptuous of ''musty superstitions'' and lashing out in hate at those around her. 
Each scene reveals still another facet of personality as the characters get caught up in the peculiar rhythms of their imprisonment. 
The Americans are not depicted with much sympathy. 
They range from the immigration official who explains that ''you've got to have a system - if you don't they'll take advantage - next thing you know they'll be bringing over their wives and children,'' to the ludicrously cheerful missionary determined that she will baptize the new immigrant ''now that you are American.''
With his very talented cast, Mr. Lone transforms Miss Lim's play into a series of sharply defined, unusually affecting images. 
The set is abstract, a few props and architectural lines defining the necessary spaces as the camera drifts from one area to another. 
The music is especially imaginative, delicately establishing and maintaining the emotional weight of a scene. 
Lucia Hwong, the composer, uses a bamboo flute, Chinese lute, percussion and a synthesizer. 
Gerald Zelinger gets credit for something described as ''sound design.''
Miss Lim has written about her play: ''It was essential for me to discover and to articulate the meaning of what went on out there at Angel Island, how it linked up with the present.''
She and ''Paper Angels'' are well served by this American Playhouse production.
''Television: Our Life and Times,'' a two-hour compilation on WOR/ Channel 9 at 9 P.M., is purporting to be ''a history of the medium's greatest moments.''
But like most such anthologies, this one is curiously selective, leaving the viewer with the uncomfortable impression that much of the content was determined by who and what was available cheap to the producers.
Written by Larry McCarthy, the On The Air/RKO TV Production, made in association with Ailes Communications, features Tony Randall as host. 
Sitting in a studio about the size of a postage stamp, Mr. Randall presides, with sometimes strained patience, over clips from ''shows you've probably forgotten and some you never even knew existed'' to review TV's entertainment record. 
The program gets off to a promising start with situation comedies, beginning in 1949 with ''I Remember Mama,'' in which Dick Van Patten can be seen playing the teenaged son. 
''All musicians are sissies,'' says he. 
''Half the princesses in Europe were in love with Franz Liszt,'' he sister retorts smartly.
After the obligatory testimonials to classics such as ''I Love Lucy'' and ''The Honeymooners,'' there is an interesting detour to some of the comedians who thrived on television -Grouch Marx, Ernie Kovacks, Steve Allen - which brings the subject to Jack Paar, who actually sits down with Mr. Randall for a brief interview. 
Clips from some old ''Tonight'' shows, especially those with Jonathan Winters, are amusing but then we are treated to a long excerpt of Mr. Paar, in more recent years, telling a not terribly funny story on an interview show called ''Hour.''
Our anthology is clearly in trouble.
Before long, the titles of shows are whizzing by almost recklessly, listed in batches under pointless headings. 
Some milestone series - ''All in the Family'' and ''The Mary Tyler Moore Show'' - are virtually ignored. 
Others are barely mentioned in passing. 
''M*A*S*H,'' for instance, pops up briefly in the middle of a list that includes ''Father Knows Best'' and ''The Andy Griffith Show.''
Then, interviews are inserted at arbitrary points with generally pointless information. 
Louise Lasser, looking rather otherworldly, recalls that when she was approached to star in ''Mary Hartman, Mary Hartman,'' she didn't get the humor at all and turned the series down five times.
There are bits of practical advice. 
Garry Marshall, producer of such series as ''Happy Days,'' lists three ingredients for having a TV hit: good writing plus casting, the proper time slot, and being the right show for the right historical moment. 
A final section called ''Strong Opinions,'' includes McLean Stevenson, who has had several failed sitcoms after walking out of ''M*A*S*H,'' declaring that ''for the most part, television stinks.''
It is not clear if he was including ''Television: Our Life and Times'' within his thoughtful appraisal.
