
Molly Yard, who was elected Saturday to guide the National Organization for Women through politically critical times, described herself today as a born feminist and the spiritual descendant of Eleanor Roosevelt.
At a news conference this morning, Ms. Yard recounted the circumstances of her birth in China, as the third daughter of Methodist missionaries there, and said her upbringing there helped mold her feminist views.
''My father's male Chinese friends said that was a fate worse than death, to have daughters and no sons,'' she recalled. 
''They gave him a gift of commiseration, a brass wash basin, and I grew up in a society that devalued girls and women.''
 
Efforts on NOW's Agenda
Ms. Yard, who is in her 70's but steadfastly refuses to divulge her precise age, is taking over as NOW's president as the 150,000-member organization enters its third decade. 
On its agenda are determined efforts to block the confirmation of Judge Robert H. Bork for a seat on the Supreme Court, to insure the continuation of legalized abortion and to promote Representative Patricia Schroeder of Colorado for the Democatic nomination for President.
But Ms. Yard's election also comes at a time when some are questioning whether NOW represents a broad spectrum of American women, many of whom are concerned with subtler and more personal issues, like the family and career goals.
But her sweeping victory, along with those of her running mates for vice president and secretary, was interpreted here as approval by the NOW membership of the approach to public issues taken by the departing president, Eleanor C. Smeal, who favored visible confrontational tactics.
Ms. Yard vowed repeatedly during the three-day convention in the Wyndham Franklin Plaza Hotel here that the organization would continue to be heard in the most public ways possible, including street demonstrations.
''Our first action will be to continue what has already been begun: to stop the Bork confirmation,'' Ms. Yard said. 
She also vowed that the group would picket the Vatican mission in Washington for five days starting on Aug. 
26 to protest the Vatican's position on abortion and birth control. 
''In October,'' she added, ''we will participate in a major way in a march for lesbian and gay rights.''
But, clearly in response to criticism of the group's past confrontational efforts, she emphasized that NOW would be active on other fronts, too: filing lawsuits, promoting legislation favorable to women, working for the election of women at all levels of office and leading the bandwagon for the Mrs. Schroeder candidacy. 
$350,000 for Schroeder On Saturday, NOW members pledged more than $350,000 to Mrs. Schroeder's campaign, enough to qualify for Federal matching funds. 
That, Ms. Yard said, demonstrates the organization's clout and ''said volumes about where our heads and hearts are.''
In addition to continuing Ms. Smeal's policies, Ms. Yard will apparently also follow her predecessor's style. 
As Ms. Smeal does, she speaks in ringing, emotional tones. 
In her final campaign speech she vowed to rally more than a million marchers on behalf of an equal rights amendment to the Constitution and in opposition to military spending and toxic waste. 
She declared: ''The only war we seek is the war to end poverty, ignorance and disease.''
Ms. Yard is reticent about divulging details about her life. 
A close associate said that although she had known Ms. Yard for 30 years, she knew little about her personal life.
Ms. Yard was born Mary Alexander Yard but prefers to be called Molly. 
She reminds many of the old-school liberal activist of the Roosevelt era, and indeed, she described Eleanor Roosevelt as ''my second mother.''
She said that in the 1930's she was a member of the American Student Union, a radical organization that was critical of Roosevelt's New Deal policies. 
She said Eleanor Roosevelt called her once to discuss her criticisms. 
''Out of that we became close friends,'' she said.
 
A Protest at Swarthmore
After having been educated in China, both by a tutor at home and later in the school system, Ms. Yard attended Swarthmore College, graduating in 1933.
It was there that she got her first taste of public protest. 
After a Jewish student was denied admission to the sorority to which Ms. Yard belonged, she was so angered that she worked to abolish the sorority and fraternity structure on the campus.
After graduation, and with the nation still in the throes of the Depression, she became a social worker in Pennsylvania. 
But she soon became disillusioned with the system and turned to political activism.
Through the years she has been active in trade union and civil rights causes, and she was involved in efforts that led to the equal apportionment for men and women of delegate positions at the Democratic National Convention.''I worked for years in the Democratic Party,'' she said, ''but as a woman I always felt left out of the process. 
I never dreamed of going to the convention as a delegate, for example.''
Ms. Yard was also active in Philadelphia politics, serving in the early 1950's in the Democratic administrations of Mayor Joseph Clark.
Mrs. Yard moved from Philadelphia to Pittsburgh in 1953 and in 1956 she helped coordinate Mr. Clark's campaign for the United States Senate.
She herself sought public office in 1964, winning the Democrat nomination for a seat on the state legislature but losing in the general election.
In the mid-1970's she turned her efforts to NOW causes and became a key figure in the organization's campaign for ratification of the proposed equal rights amendment. 
Securing a constitutional amendment remains the centerpiece of her program.
Before being elected president, she served as NOW's political director. 
She is also vice president of the Americans for Democratic Action.
 
Met Mao in China
Since her childhood, Ms. Yard has returned to China twice, the first time in 1938 when she met Mao Zedong and other leaders. 
In June of this year, she visited Beijing and presented leaders with a journal from her years in China.
Ms. Yard, a resident of Ligonier, Pa., has been married for 48 years to Sylvester Garrett, a labor arbitrator. 
They have two sons, James, a 43-year-old assistant United States attorney in Pittsburgh, and John, 39, a doctoral candidate in forestry at the State University of New York at Syracuse, and a daughter, Joan Garrett-Goodyear, 45, a professor of English at Smith College. 
They also have four grandchildren.
Few people at the convention were neutral about her candidacy. 
Some said they were concerned that, as a longtime friend of Ms. Smeal and her close ally in the organization's frequently bitter internal politics, Ms. Yard would continue to run an autocratic administration and would be a surrogate for Ms. Smeal. Some also contended that her stirring rhetoric masked a lack of pragmatic strategy.
But the vote to elect her, 940 to 629, and the comments made in meeting rooms and hallways indicated that those criticisms represented a minority view.
Alma Steed Fox, a national board member from Pittsburgh, and a longtime colleague in rights battles with Ms. Yard, said: ''One reason I support her is that to a certain extent she will be a continuation of Ellie. 
But she has a mind of her own, too. 
And she certainly will not be a quiet leader.''
