
During World War I, thousands of illiterate Chinese laborers were brought to France to help dig trenches. 
They were desperately homesick, working 14 hours a day and unable even to write to their families. 
A young Chinese-born Yale University student arrived eager to help.
''I made a discovery there,'' Dr. Y. C. James Yen recalled the other day. 
''I discovered these human beings, in effect, buried for 3,000 years, despised and rejected.''
He became first their scribe and then their instructor.
International Institute of Rural Reconstruction founder Dr Y C James Yen to be awarded People to People Eisenhower Medallion for his work with poor worldwide; his portrait (M)
Dr. Yen, who is approaching his 90th birthday, looks back on his ''discovery'' as the starting point of a career teaching and training millions of illiterate peasant farmers in the developing countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America.
In recognition of the success of the international movement he still helps lead, Dr. Yen is to be awarded the People to People Eisenhower Medallion on Oct. 
26, his birthday.
 
Dinner to Be Given at U.N.
The date also marks the 23d anniversary of the founding of his International Institute of Rural Reconstruction, the network through which his program works. 
And there will be a dinner at the United Nations on the same day given in his honor by David Rockefeller. 
Several generations of Rockefeller family members have supported Dr. Yen's work.
''The institute is what I call a 'power- releasing' organization,'' said Dr. Yen, sitting in his office on Broadway in Manhattan, which serves as the American headquarters of the institute. 
''We do not offer relief to the poor, but release,'' he said, underscoring the institute's self-help approach.
The institute's main training center is in Cavite Province in the Philippines. 
There are affiliated organizations elsewhere in the Philippines, Thailand, Ghana, Guatemala, Colombia and India. 
But much of the work is carried out in villages in impoverished rural areas where the institute's staff tests the agricultural, public health, family planning and educational techniques developed in the Philippines.
 
Self-Help Concept Preserved
Methods have changed over the years. 
Computers are now used to check research in crop improvement, for example. 
But the basic concept of self help has been preserved and has been a continuing thread through Dr. Yen's work since his wartime encounter with the Chinese laborers in France.
When World War I broke out, Dr. Yen volunteered to go to Europe with the Young Men's Christian Association. 
At first, the homesick Chinese workers begged him to write their letters and he obliged.
But then he stopped, insisting that the workers had to learn to read and write. 
He began with ''40 daring souls willing to spend an hour each night struggling to learn.''
Because they lacked textbooks, he started a newsletter, he said, adding, ''I was in my 20's, a good age for a revolutionary, and I didn't know the difficulties I faced and I was not timid.''
The experience in France led him to return to China, committed to helping the poor through a mass education movement. 
He moved from Peking to a district of villages in Hopeh Province, persuading fellow scholars to join and bring their families.
 
Simplified Vocabulary Used
He developed teaching methods using a simplified written vocabulary of 1,000 Chinese characters. 
He also broadened the instruction to include improved farming methods and public health. 
Health workers were trained to teach disease prevention and immunize the villagers, a practice that gained acceptance throughout China.
In 1928, Dr. Yen returned to the United States, in part seeking support for the growing movement. 
He was introduced to John D. Rockefeller Jr., who offered a personal gift of $100,000 if other donors would contribute. 
In all, $500,000 was raised.
In 1936, the work in Hopeh Province was shifted to the west when the Japanese invaded China. 
After the war, Dr. Yen returned to the United States seeking assistance for rural reconstruction. 
As a result, Washington authorized a $27.5 million program under a Chinese-American Joint Commission on Rural Reconstruction.
The commission's work in China was aborted 16 months later, however, when civil war erupted, but was continued on Taiwan. 
Later, Dr. Yen's work was moved to the Philippines. 
Besides the six autonomously operated affiliates, the institute has trained 600 specialists from 37 countries since its establishment in 1963.
