
China may eventually rank with India as the World Bank's two largest borrowers, according to a top bank official who has completed talks with the Government here.
''We are still far from reaching our cruising altitude with regard to China,'' said Munir P. Benjenk, the World Bank's vice president of external relations. 
He estimated that China might approach India's level some time in 1985.
PEKING, Oct. 
6 - China may eventually rank with India as the World Bank's two largest borrowers, according to a top bank official who has completed talks with the Government here.
India borrows close to $2 billion a year, Mr. Benjenk said; China has drawn only $260 million so far. 
There have been reports here that the Government is unhappy with the amount of aid that it has got since it joined the World Bank in May 1980. 
China wants foreign capital to help finance its ambitious modernization program.
 
Current Talks on Project Loans
But Mr. Benjenk said he saw ''no sign at all'' of such unhappiness. 
He noted that the World Bank was now negotiating four other project loans and working on another 20 potential projects that would qualify for financial assistance in China.
When China joined the bank, a round of loans for the previous members had already been worked out, and special arrangements had to be made to find money for China.
But China will be a party when the seventh replenishment, or allocated capital, is negotiated next month. 
And Mr. Benjenk told Chinese and foreign journalists at a news conference today that China would get more substantial aid then. 
The World Bank arranges its replenishments every three years.
The World Bank offers two kinds of loan to developing countries. 
The first is at near market rates, using a formula of the cost of borrowing for the previous three to six months plus a service charge of one-half of 1 percent; the current interest is 11.43 percent.
The other, more desirable, kind of loan is made through the bank's affiliate, the International Development Association. 
It bears no interest, only a service charge of three-quarters of 1 percent, and is repayable over 50 years, with a 10-year grace period.
 
Loans Are Usually 'Blended'
Because funds are insufficient to give every developing country interest-free loans, the World Bank often offers a blend of loans, based on a country's per-capita income and other economic resources.
China's negotiations with the World Bank recently have centered on what share of the development association loans China will get. 
Its gross domestic product was estimated at only $279 per capita last year. 
However, it also ran a foreign trade surplus of $3.8 billion and is now preparing to tap what are thought to be considerable reserves of oil offshore.
Mr. Benjenk said the World Bank, in giving loans, took into account not only a country's income level but also its creditworthiness and potential for repayment. 
''China, as the largest developing country in the world, will have to have a share of I.D.A. funds,'' he said.
He insisted that China's participation in the World Bank would not reduce the money available to poorer countries, including the 31 nations the bank calls the least developed. 
These are mostly in Africa, and qualify for exclusively interest-free loans.
''Everybody would like to borrow more from the I.D.A. than from the World Bank - it's natural,'' Mr. Benjenk said. 
''But there is a scarcity of resources of the I.D.A. 
The rationing process is based on the greatest need, and the greatest need is in Africa.''
