
In his 26 years of unchallenged rule in Burma, U Ne Win, whose name means ''Brilliant as the Sun,'' has preserved the facade of Burmese independence while turning a country with extraordinary economic potential into one of the poorest nations in Asia.
As a young man, Mr. Ne Win was engaged in the political and revolutionary efforts to rid Burma of British colonial rule, a goal finally achieved in 1948 amid the general British retreat from empire after World War II. 
He seized power in a bloodless coup in March 1962.
His justification for ousting a freely elected former colleague, U Nu, as Prime Minister was that Burma's multiparty democracy seemed incapable of coping with a host of ethnic and ideological rebellions that had brought warfare to the edges of Rangoon.
What he put in place was a xenophobic military dictatorship under the rubric of socialism, but marked by such inefficiency, corruption and incompetence that East European diplomats would complain that Burma was giving socialism a bad name.
Not What Marx Had in Mind
Mr. Ne Win's ''socialism,'' in fact, was a borrowed title for a murky and contradictory ideology that had little to do with Marx, whom few in Burma had read, but that served as a barrier to the modernization that continues to transform much of the rest of Southeast Asia.
It was also an excuse for the wholesale expulsion of most of Burma's merchant, commercial and technical classes, who were almost all Indian and Chinese.
The economic nationalization that followed covered almost all aspects of commercial activity and stifled it; private foreign investment ceased as Burma was increasingly isolated from the outside world. 
Last year, the United Nations assigned Burma to the category of one of the world's ''least-developed nations.''
The 38 million Burmese feed and clothe themselves through an intricate black market and a pattern of smuggling that results in much of the country's natural wealth being exported with little or no benefit to the official treasury.
 
Widespread Insurgency
Burma's frontiers are controlled by insurgents, and the nation's rich gemstones and hardwoods are smuggled out through Thailand. 
Burma's rubber leaves the country through Penang and is labeled Malaysian, and its art and religious treasures have been lost wholesale to the markets of Bangkok.
It has been a harsh fate for a strategic and attractive corner of Asia, stretching from the tropical waters of the Andaman Sea and the Bay of Bengal to the point in the foothills of the Himalayas where India and China meet. 
Bordering India, China, Bangladesh, Laos and Thailand, Burma was an important battleground in World War II.
Its isolation since Mr. Ne Win's ascension in 1962 has given Burma a romantic quality, especially to Westerners, who can secure a seven-day tourist visa to experience a more ''pure'' Southeast Asia, unencumbered by pollution, traffic jams and advertising slogans.
But for the Burmese, the isolation from the modern world and real political discourse has meant a life of dinginess and poverty, making great spiritual demands on the Buddhist ethos of passivity and concentration on the next life that commands the allegiance of 85 percent of the population.
 
Tinkering With the System
Only last year, amid overwhelming evidence of economic and social decay, did Mr. Ne Win concede mistakes and begin to tinker with Burma's stifling, corrupt and contradictory system and its complete domination by a single party, consisting almost entirely of the military. 
In September, without warning, the Government reduced the value of its highest banknotes to nothing in an effort to stop hoarding and to damage the black market. 
The effort destroyed the savings of many.
But even timid efforts at reform, after so long, led to violent protests by students in March and June that spread through Burma's major cities and flared again this month despite significant brutality by the security forces.
Diplomats reported that more than 200 people were killed by the army and police in the first major manifestation of civic unrest since student riots were put down in 1974, three years before a failed coup.
Mr. Ne Win was born Shu Maung on May 24, 1911, in Paungbe, in the Prome district 180 miles northwest of Rangoon. 
He was born into a country that had become a British colony piecemeal, after Anglo-Burmese wars in 1824, 1852 and 1885. 
In 1937, the British had separated Burma from India; in 1941, on the eve of the Japanese invasion, the British evacuated the country.
 
Trained by Japanese
The tall, bespectacled Shu Maung studied medicine for two years but failed his examinations and became a Rangoon postal clerk. 
By 1940, he had drifted into an anti-British revolutionary grouping and had taken on a new name. 
He was among 30 young Burmese nationalists, known as the ''30 Comrades,'' who left secretly for Japan that year and were trained to fight, as collaborators, with Japanese troops when they invaded.
When Japan declared Burma independent in 1943, Mr. Ne Win became army commander in chief; in 1945, the nascent Burmese Army, seeing the fortunes of war changing, turned against the Japanese, and had significant influence when the British returned after the war. 
The British reorganized the Burmese Army but maintained Mr. Ne Win and his colleagues in command positions.
Burma was declared independent on Jan. 
4, 1948, but was immediately confronted by widespread insurrections by Communists and Burma's ethnic minorities, the Karens, Shans, Kachins, Mons and others, who demanded autonomy. 
In 1958, Mr. Nu, faced by a potential civil war, gave Mr. Ne Win temporary control of Burma to deal with the emergency.
To the delight of Westerners, Mr. Ne Win then relinquished control, and Mr. Nu returned to power in the 1960 elections. 
Two years later, however, Mr. Ne Win, apparently obsessed by Burma's fragility and the economic domination of foreigners, overthrew Mr. Nu, and began his transformation of Burmese life.
 
The 'Burmese Way'
He set up a revolutionary government, removed Buddhism as the state religion and set out the ''Burmese Way to Socialism'' and ''The System of Correlation of Man and His Environment,'' two confusing documents that were taught in schools but never discussed. 
He did, however, extend literacy and basic medical care throughout the country, and maintained a stiffly neutral course between superpower blocs, despite intermittent tension with the Chinese.
An avid womanizer and gambler, Mr. Ne Win banned gambling, closed nightclubs and promoted a strict morality while marrying at least four times; he has at least one son and three daughters.
Said to have a violent temper, he nonetheless persisted in a passion for golf, making it a popular game among Burmese officials. 
Because such officials needed permission to entertain foreigners, the golf course also became an important meeting ground for diplomats and journalists. 
In earlier years, he traveled widely and lavishly in the West; lately he has spent much of his time as a recluse in a lakeside villa, emerging only to hit the heavily guarded fairways.
Mr. Ne Win officially retired from the military in 1972 and became president in 1974 under a new Constitution, a position he relinquished in November 1981, citing old age. 
But until yesterday, he retained control of the Burma Socialist Program Party, the country's one legal mass organization, and is thought to retain the loyalty of the military.
