
First a small flashing robot stepped on the Chinese Prime Minister's toes. 
Then a 7-foot Colombian boa constrictor stuck out its forked tongue at him. 
Then Zhao Ziyang was treated to a slide show of bugs eating fruit and given a chance to examine some dead mosquitoes in a bottle.
Mr. Zhao was on the road in America, seeing unofficial pursuits and ordinary citizens after leaving the high- level talks and cocktail parties of Washington behind him.
Chinese Prime Min Zhao Ziyang continues nine-day tour of US with visit to students and scholars at University of California's Lawrence Hall of Science, Berkeley, Calif; White House chief of staff Michael K Deaver, who is traveling with Zhao on his California visit, comments (M)
He continued his nine-day tour of the United States today with a visit to the students and scholars at the University of California's Lawrence Hall of Science in Berkeley.
The visit showed off the style that has endeared Mr. Zhao to many Chinese - a down-to-earth practicality, an unassuming but self-confident air and an easy manner.
 
'Charming and Most Pleasant'
''He's very charming and most pleasant to be around,'' said Michael K. Deaver, the deputy White House chief of staff, who is traveling with the Prime Minister on his California visit. 
''And he has a wonderful sense of humor.''
Mr. Zhao's visit to Berkeley started with a welcome from students waving the Chinese flag and a greeting from a 2-foot-high robot named RE5X that was a ringer for R2D2 of ''Star Wars'' fame. 
Wearing a T-shirt emblazoned with a panda, the robot wheeled up to the Prime Minister and failed to stop, as planned, nudging the Prime Minsiter's toe. 
Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, a Nobel laureate who is acting director of the Lawrence Hall of Science, had to kick RE5X back.
''I work for Dr. Glenn Seaborg,'' the robot said, undaunted by the kick, as the Prime Minister laughed and clapped delightedly. 
''Please follow him now. 
He will give you a tour. 
Please excuse me. 
I must go back to work now. 
Enjoy your visit.''
 
Visits Elementary Students
After a break for Chinese green tea, the Prime Minister visited some grade- school students who were performing experiments in the biology and physics labs. 
He walked quickly past the boa constrictor, petted an iguana and chatted with students who were measuring the body temperature of animals with crystal tape and measuring electricity with zinc and copper.
''I'm not sure if he's a good Prime Minister or not,'' said Emily Shapiro, 11 years old, as she held tight to a brown and white rabbit. 
''But I think it's good that he came, and I think the two countries should share our science.''
Mr. Zhao was then shown some slides showing the university's program to use parasites for pest control and an
 
exhibit of dead insects by Donald Dahlsten, a professor of entomology.
 
Agriculture a Main Interest
Mr. Zhao seemed delighted with the tour. 
Agriculture is one of his main interests, and he gained prominence in China for his policies that led to improvement of agricultural production in Sichuan Province from 1975 to 1980.
The Prime Minister's style on this trip contrasts somewhat to that of Deng Xiaoping, the paramount Chinese leader, who toured the United States in 1979.
Mr. Deng is a more flamboyant person, adept at one-liners and crowd- pleasing spontaneous acts. 
By contrast, Mr. Zhao is friendly and warm but somewhat stiff. 
He seems determined to take a measured stance and not make any mistakes.
His style is perhaps best illustrated by the way he has handled the Taiwan issue. 
Mr. Deng has made reunification one of his top priorities.
Mr. Zhao pressed his case for reunification strongly and clearly with President Reagan and in meetings with business leaders and Chinese Americans. 
At a cocktail party with Chinese- American leaders, he promised that Taiwan could maintain its own military, trade policy and judicial system. 
''We don't want to swallow Taiwan,'' he said this morning at a news conference. 
''We don't want to absorb it.''
 
'He's Done His Homework'
But he did not let himself be backed into a corner. 
Asked if he could make it an issue of principle and not negotiate with the United States unless the Taiwan Relations Act was repealed, Mr. Zhao sidestepped. 
He said that if the act could not be repealed, he hoped that the United States would act in accord with joint communiques on Taiwan.
Those who are traveling with him praise his measured performance. 
''The main thing I notice about him is that he's interested in people and he's done his homework,'' Mr. Deaver said. 
''He's very good at small talk.''
The Prime Minister's only complaint thus far on his trip, Mr. Deaver said, is that he misses jogging. 
The Prime Minister usually jogs a few miles a day.
Mr. Zhao said he had not yet considered what to tell his family about his American visit when he returns home. 
''The first thing will be that I never expected such profound friendship from the American people,'' he said. 
''I don't know what else.''
