
Zhao Ziyang held his Tiffany's crystal seal of New York aloft, showing the assembled crowd his latest American gift.
''Turn it around,'' Mayor Koch told Mr. Zhao. ''You're holding it backwards.''
And so began an encounter yesterday between the Mayor of New York and the Prime Minister of China. 
For the first time during his nine-day tour of America, Mr. Zhao shed his deliberate, and somewhat stiff, demeanor and seemed to relax and enjoy himself at a Gracie Mansion lunch in his honor.
Chinese Prime Min Zhao Ziyang visits New York City during his 9-day tour of US; appears to enjoy banter with Mayor Koch during luncheon in Zhao's honor at Gracie Mansion; photos (M)
Catches the Mayor's Style
He caught the Mayor's bantering style and deftly lobbed it back, with a wit and animation that charmed the 80 assembled guests, mostly New York City and State officials.
The Mayor quickly set the tone when he said that, in a private meeting, the two men had exchanged views. 
''But because of protocol,'' he said, ''I can't tell you how we disposed of Hong Kong, Vietnam and other problems.''
Then Mr. Koch strayed from his prepared remarks to tell the Prime Minister about the recent visit to New York of the Mayor of Peking, Chen Xitong. 
''You should promote him,'' he said, adding an aside to the audience that he hoped that Mayor Chen would ''do the same for me.''
Then it was Mr. Zhao's turn. 
He raised his arm above his head and said archly, through an interpreter, ''As far as my personal wishes are concerned, I would like to see Mayor Koch promoted to an ever higher and higher position.''
As the Mayor and his guests roared with laughter, Mr. Zhao continued with a neat jab at the Taiwan issue he has been talking about all week in more serious tones.
''But I don't think I can make this a commitment in front of the reporters because if I did that, the State Department will complain that the Premier of China is interfering in U.S. internal affairs.''
That is exactly the phrase he has been using to explain why the United States should not interfere in the Taiwan issue.
And so they went, back and forth. 
Asked why he was serving the Prime Minister marinated scallops and chicken Florentine instead of the ''authentic American beef stew'' he had promised, Mr. Koch shrugged, ''I looked in the wrong pot.''
Before lunch, the Prime Minister was given a grand - and swift - Gotham tour. 
As hundreds of police officers blocked off city streets, his 30-car motorcade left the Plaza Hotel.
Most New Yorkers didn't give the procession a second look, except those who loudly cursed the traffic snarl it caused.
One tourist staying in the hotel, however, turned to another in wonder. 
''Whose motorcade is that?'' she asked. 
''Do you think it's a soap opera star?''
''I hope it's Burt Reynolds,'' her friend replied.
 
Visits the Met
Accompanied by a coterie that included the United States Ambassador to Peking, Arthur W. Hummel Jr., and the Chinese Ambassador to Washington, Zhang Wenjin, Mr. Zhao started with an early trip to the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
He looked at paintings of Chinese sages with wispy beards, calligraphy exhibits, and then was shown the Ming garden with its dramatically shaped rocks and bamboo and banana trees. 
He was given two presents by museum officials: a book on the Met's Chinese treasures and a film showing the construction of the Ming garden, which opened in 1981.
At the World Trade Center, Mr. Zhao received yet another gift, this time a silver medallian showing the activities of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
''I hope you will recommend businessmen here participate in China's modernization,'' Mr. Zhao told Alan Sagner, chairman of the Port Authority.
 
Sees Statue of Liberty
It was a theme he has repeated often in his meetings with Americans, both in Washington and in San Francisco, where he spent two days before coming to New York.
In New York, as he has throughout his trip, Mr. Zhao urged a closer friendship between his country and the United States that would lead to an infusion of foreign capital, technology and trade.
Mr. Sagner told the Prime Minister that he would find every New York official eager to promote such trade, since the jobs of 150,000 New Yorkers depend on the import-export business. 
The Prime Minister then met the Lady in the Harbor, taking a quick Circle Line tour boat for a brief trip around the Statue of Liberty. 
A tugboat saluted Mr. Zhao with an arching, All-American spray of red, white and blue waterspouts.
Back at the Plaza, Mr. Zhao was interviewed by the television networks.
 
Serenaded by John Denver
At lunch, he struck a lighter tone. 
He was serenaded by John Denver, who was introduced by Mayor Koch as a singer who is ''as famous in China as he is in America.''
Afterward, the Chinese press asked their American counterparts who the singer was. 
''We've never heard of him,'' said one reporter.
Mr. Denver, wearing a Big Apple lapel pin, told the Prime Minister about a trip to China he took in 1981. 
He sang a song he had written about the country called ''Shanghai Breezes.''
About his day in New York, which ended with a meeting with members of the city's Chinese-American community and a dinner given by David Rockefeller and Henry A. Kissinger at the Council on Foreign Relations, he remarked: ''New York is the biggest city in the United States and plays a very important role in American political, economic and cultural life. 
Some people say New York is a miniature of the U.S. and that one cannot claim to have been in the U.S. without visiting New York.
''Others say that New York does not represent the U.S. 
It's difficult to say which position is right.''
''Nevertheless,'' Mr. Zhao concluded with a grin that indicated which camp he was in, ''it is universally acknowledged that New York is a world famous city. 
As the Chinese saying goes, better to see once than to hear 100 times.''
