
Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang of China addressed a joint session of Canada's Parliament today and praised Prime Minister Pierre Elliott Trudeau for his efforts to quell a nuclear arms race that ''is becoming white hot.''
Mr. Zhao, the first Communist official ever to address a joint session of the Canadian House of Commons and Senate, was warmly received by politicians of all parties.
In his speech, the Chinese Prime Minister assessed his country's relations with Canada, the United States, the Soviet Union and Britain. 
The speech, for the most part, repeated views expressed in Mr. Zhao's visit to the United States, but it also included references to the Canadian leader's peace initiative in which Mr. Trudeau has had consultations with more than 30 world leaders in the last two months.
China's Prime Min Zhao Ziyang addresses joint session of Canada's Parliament and praises Canada's Prime Min Pierre Elliott Trudeau for his efforts to quell nuclear arms race (S)Zhao's Visit to Last a Week
''We appreciate the efforts made by Prime Minister Trudeau to safeguard world peace, relax international tension and promote nuclear disarmament,'' said Mr. Zhao, who started his weeklong visit to Canada, the first by a high Chinese official, with the address in the House of Commons.
As opposition politicians listened to the translation from Chinese, Mr. Zhao continued, ''We support his appeal for participation from all political leaders of the world in the cause of safeguarding peace.''
''There are hot spots in the world,'' he said, ''and the nuclear arms race is becoming white hot.''
A key element of Mr. Trudeau's proposals has been to open up the issue of disarmament to political debate and political pressures, removing it from exclusive jurisdiction of bureaucrats,
 
whom he has disdained as ''nuclear accountants.''
 
'Nations Go Into Action'
Mr. Zhao alluded at one point to Mr. Trudeau's attempt to stimulate action by nations other than the superpowers in the face of United States-Soviet standoff on disarmament and military balance.
He expressed his hope that all ''peace-loving nations go into action to urge the two major nuclear powers, who represent 90 percent of the world's nuclear weapons, to stop the nuclear arms race, resume disarmament talks and agree on measure to drastically reduce nuclear arms to create conditions for joint disarmament by all nuclear countries.''
There was no mention, however, of a conference of the five avowed nuclear nations, which was the hardest item in Mr. Trudeau's proposal. 
The Chinese leadership brushed aside the proposal when Mr. Trudeau raised it on his visit to Peking in November.
After praising what he termed the historic and special relations between Canada and China, Mr. Zhao assessed his visit to the United States, characterizing his talks with President Reagan as ''friendly, candid and serious.''
 
'Fairly Big Progress' He said relations with the United States ''have made fairly big progress'' since the establishent of diplomatic relations, with the question of Taiwan reminaing the outstanding obstacle.
By contrast, he said, Peking's relations with Moscow have only ''somewhat improved'' after three rounds of talks.
In these meetings, he said, the Soviet Union has ''evaded'' discussion of what he described as the three major obstacles - Moscow's support for the Vietnemese in Cambodia, its military involvement in Afghanistan and its deployment of troops on the Chinese border in Mongolia.
