
A San Francisco newspaper characterized him as ''more an amiable panda than a Chinese tiger.''
Michael K. Deaver, a White House official, called him ''very charming and most pleasant to be with.''
With a warm personality and a message of friendship and cooperation, Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang of China seemed to evoke a positive response wherever he has appeared.
But beyond the atmospherics, he presented another side, the competent and tough Communist leader holding firm to positions on Taiwan and other touchy subjects.
Article on visit to US by Chinese Prime Min Zhao Ziyang, who, despite positive response he has presented during visit, is holding firm to positions to Taiwan and other touchy subjects; notes Zhao has indicated he is flexible enough not to make Taiwan obstacle to cooperation with US and at same time stressed importance of issue (M)
''He has the ability to be charming,'' said Mr. Deaver, ''without giving up any of his positions. 
Sort of like Reagan.''
A former United States Government official who met Mr. Zhao said he had been impressed with this blend of sophistication and realism.
''He is intelligent and well prepared and he knows quite clearly why he came here,'' the former official said. 
''He was not conciliatory on matters that he felt he needed to be clear and strong on. 
But he also indicated areas where he thought United States and Chinese interests coincide.''
Mr. Zhao seemed successful in accomplishing two aims: maintaining the momentum that has marked American-Chinese relations, and showing that he has the ability to handle foreign policy as well as economic affairs at home.
Before his visit, experts said that the way he handled the Taiwan issue - whether he let it become a sticking point - would be the key to the success of his trip.
In Washington, San Francisco and New York, Mr. Zhao put forth a clear message. 
He indicated that he was flexible enough not to make Taiwan an obstacle to cooperation with the United States. 
At the same time, he stressed the importance of the issue as ''the principal obstacle to the growth of Chinese-United States relations.''
In a 40-minute meeting yesterday with Zbigniew Brzezinski, President Jimmy Carter's national security adviser, Mr. Zhao voiced concern that people in the United States might not understand the attitudes of the Chinese Communist leaders on the issue.
''They are concerned that we don't appreciate the depth of their feelings on the subject, and they are probably right,'' Mr. Brezinski said later. 
''But I told him that if he makes the issue the main bone of contention, it could have consequences neither we nor they wish.''
In speeches across the country to Chinese-American groups and businessmen, Mr. Zhao sought to educate the public on China's stance and to marshal support.
In San Francisco, he promised that Taiwan could maintain its own military, trade policy and judicial system.
''China's reunification and rejuvenation is the common aspiration of the whole Chinese nation, including those living in Taiwan and abroad,'' Mr. Zhao said. 
''We will respect history and reality and will take into consideration the wishes of the Taiwan people. 
It is not a case of the mainland swallowing up Taiwan.''
At a news conference the next day, he refused to rule out the use of force against Taiwan, in words similar to those that his aides said he had used with President Reagan.
''We cannot undertake the commitment only to use peaceful means because it is an internal affair to be resolved by the Chinese themselves,'' Mr. Zhao said, adding that Peking wanted the United States to stay out of the problem and ''not place any obstacles'' in the way of reunification.
He indicated that Taiwan would not be a roadblock. 
When asked whether Peking would drop talks with Washington if the Taiwan Relations Act were not repealed, he said that, if the law could not be repealed, he hoped the United States would act in accord with joint communiques on Taiwan.
In exchange for diplomatic relations with Peking as of Jan. 
1, 1979, Washington ended its diplomatic and treaty ties with the Nationalists in Taiwan, but reserved the right to supply Taiwan with defensive arms.
