
MANY YEARS AGO, I had dinner at a restaurant in Chinatown in Boston -- the sort of city where most non-Chinese people seeking Chinese food are in fact seeking what might better be described as American Chinese food: General Tso's chicken, fried pork dumplings, ''house special'' lo mein; mild, comforting Cantonese dishes slick with sauce and loud with sugar, salt and the intense umami buzz of MSG. 
In an attempt to be adventurous, I ordered instead the most unusual thing I could find on the menu: beef with bitter melon. 
The waitress looked at me, her brow furrowed. 
''You don't want that,'' she declared. 
''You won't like it.''
''I do!''
I insisted. 
''I've had it before.''
A little while later, she returned with a dish of beef strewn with crescents of a jade-hued, scallop-ridged, firm-textured fruit that looked not unlike oversize celery. 
The truth was, I'd never had it before. 
As advertised, it was bitter, in a distinctly vegetal way, with none of the fruity sweetness that the word ''melon'' would imply. 
I took a bite, then another, and another -- in a different context I might have stopped, but my reputation was on the line. 
By the time I was finished, the melon hadn't become more palatable, exactly, but my palate had changed. 
What had tasted like bitterness now tasted like pride.
WHY DO HUMANS eat bitter foods?
Our bodies crave sugar, salt, fat, protein -- all forms of replenishment or efficient providers of caloric energy. 
When something tastes bad, we're meant to take it as a warning sign: danger, don't eat this, it could kill you. 
And yet two of the five sensations we've universally categorized as tastes are, arguably, bad ones: sour and bitter. 
Then there's spicy food, whose flavor can be so extreme that it actually qualifies as a form of pain instead of a taste. 
But the discomfort of eating a superhot chili pepper can also be physiologically compared -- for some people, at least -- to riding a roller coaster or watching a horror movie. 
It's a pain we perversely crave, a feeling that's as pleasurable as it is uncomfortable. 
Super-sour foods, too, can offer a kind of exhilarating rush. 
There's something addictive about the tangy, mouth-puckering effect: Watch a baby suck on a lemon for the first time, burst into tears and then go back for more; try to resist a bag of Warheads or sour gummies.
Flavor, then, needn't be pleasant for it to be attractive. 
But the appeal of bitterness is less obvious -- unlike spicy and sour foods, the sensation has never been much of a selling point, at least not in America. 
If the physical impulse when eating sour foods is to suck in your cheeks, bitterness hits hard on the back of your tongue and, in excess, makes you gag. 
And yet this taste has long been an integral element in the cuisines of many other countries and cultures, which are starting to gain real traction here. 
The current trend for Middle Eastern food, for example, means more eggplant, even when roasted until caramelized; tahini, made from naturally bitter sesame seeds; and za'atar, an herb and spice mixture heavy on wild thyme and oregano. 
The movement toward more authentic Mexican food introduced mole, a Oaxacan sauce whose primary ingredients are tomatoes and alliums, charred until earthy and blended, and has made cilantro as common as basil.
As difficult as it is to trace the origin stories of the use of bitter ingredients, it seems safe to assume that it was often the result of necessity: In times of scarcity, you learn to make do with anything edible. 
Over time, however, eating bitter foods became not only traditional but in some cases even philosophical, revealing of a culture's resilience: In China, there is a colloquialism that translates literally to ''eat bitter,'' a metaphor for the ability to endure hardship. 
Jews eat bitter herbs, usually horseradish, at Passover seders, to remind themselves of the suffering endured by their ancestors. 
On the Japanese island of Okinawa, a ubiquitous stir-fry of egg, tofu, pork and bitter melon called goya chanpuru is thought to ensure longevity -- suffering in service of a long life.
It's hard not to see the current worldwide health-food craze as being a convoluted translation of this: If beauty is pain, health, you might say, is bitter. 
Conscientious eaters choose salads overflowing with raw kale or collard greens; frothy, chalky matcha and ''golden lattes'' tinged with pungent turmeric. 
These things are nutritious, yes, but there's also a psychological element: Bitterness equals raw, which in turn equals purity. 
Adding sweetness to your coffee or chocolate is a corruption of this purity. 
And, as with my bitter melon experience, eating bitterness can be a brag: How better to prove your connoisseurship than ordering something whose pleasures are either obscure or nonexistent?
To order a drink with no trace of sweetness -- say, a hoppy India pale ale or a straight shot of the Italian amaro known as Fernet-Branca, dark, viscous, herbal -- is to announce one's fortitude and disdain for instant gratification. 
Nothing worth doing is easy, and nothing worth consuming goes down easy. 
In an age of ready pleasures, choosing something difficult and unlikable is an announcement of sophistication. 
The craze is born, you might say, from having too much enjoyment.
Danny Bowien, the chef behind Mission Chinese, a restaurant with outposts in New York and San Francisco, is passionate about bitterness, which he describes, affectionately, as ''challenging.''
Bitter melon not only makes multiple appearances on his menus -- most prominently in one of his signature dishes, thrice-cooked bacon with rice cakes -- but he also seeks it out elsewhere, including at the taxi-stand Punjabi restaurant across the street from his Lower East Side apartment, where he orders an Indian varietal of the fruit braised in a curry with radish or potato. 
''It takes something out of you, in a way,'' he muses. 
''The first time you have it your body kind of seizes up. 
I like that it punches you in the face.''
What he calls ''abrasive'' flavors ''break up the experience'' of eating.
For Bowien, discovering bitter flavors was thrillingly world-expanding. 
He grew up in Oklahoma, where food was often sugary, but when he was 19, he left for San Francisco, where he had coffee-braised pork shoulder at a New American restaurant, and beef with bitter melon and fermented black beans at a Chinese restaurant in the Mission, both dishes that changed the way he understood flavor. 
At his restaurants now, he tries to create ''food that really leaves an impression on you, and you can do that in many ways -- drama, luxury products, really amazing techniques. 
But there are a lot of ingredients that up until recently have not really been highlighted within what we cook on a daily basis.''
This includes, for example, grapefruit rinds, which Bowien has used to garnish scallop sashimi, giving it a mouth-twisting bite.
The Mexican chef Enrique Olvera, too, has been steadily elevating certain ingredients and recipes not only for the American palate, by way of his New York restaurants, Cosme and Atla, but also for his own countrymen at his Mexico City restaurant, Pujol. 
There, he serves fine-dining dishes that showcase bitter vegetables like the wild greens known as quintoniles and prickly pear cactus, or nopal -- and Pujol is especially known for his dark, rich, intensely complex, intensely acrid mole, aged for over 1,200 days.
To Olvera, an affinity for bitterness is evidence of human innovation and diversity. 
''Mole doesn't taste like tomato with garlic and onions -- you probably think of that and you think of Italian pasta sauce,'' he says. 
''But the fact that when you char tomatoes and add peppers and cinnamon and mix it together, and then it tastes like mole is magical.''
For Olvera, bitterness is essential for depth of flavor and harmony of tastes. 
''In Mexican food,'' he says, ''it's a huge component of every dish, combined with spice, or with sweetness, or even with acidity.''
His mole teases at your tongue by promising but never quite delivering the relief of sugar. 
As such, it's perhaps the best literal example of another poignant and enduring metaphor for an otherwise ephemeral human feeling: It's bittersweet. 
And what's more understandable than that?
