
''Dad!
You have to say he did a good job,'' said the filmmaker Lulu Wang. 
She was addressing her father, Haiyan Wang, who was sitting next to me at dinner. 
It was a beautiful recent evening at the West Hollywood restaurant Auburn. 
A bottle of Maotai, the fiery Chinese liquor, was open, a feast of Chinese food was in front of us. 
Lulu has made a film about her family called ''The Farewell,'' which comes out this week, and I was curious whether her father liked how he was portrayed by the actor Tzi Ma. 
Lulu's boyfriend, the Oscar-winning director Barry Jenkins, ever the peacemaker, chimed in: ''Knowing him and knowing you, he did a good job. 
He's not imitating you, he's himself as you.''
Her father nodded with a knowing smile.
''The Farewell'' is a tender story of family deception. 
Lulu learned five years ago that her grandmother, her father's mother -- or, in Chinese, her Nai Nai -- had stage-four lung cancer; the doctor said she had three months left to live. 
The family decided never to tell her, but arrangements were made to visit her immediately. 
In order to explain the sudden arrival of every family member in Changchun, China, where Nai Nai lived, Lulu's father came up with an inventive proposal: Why not say that Lulu's cousin was marrying his Japanese girlfriend and that they were throwing a wedding in Changchun?
The story of that moment -- as well as the fact that Nai Nai is still alive -- eventually became a 2016 ''This American Life'' piece, which ultimately became a feature-length film starring Awkwafina (Nora Lum) as Lulu.
That recent evening, Auburn -- where Lulu's younger brother, Anthony, works as the sous chef for Eric Bost -- was closed to the public, offering a quiet space for Lulu to celebrate with her family and friends before the flurry of promotion for the film began. 
Bost and his family were there as well. 
The Chinese food they were serving was off-menu; Auburn typically offers more seasonal, modern Californian food. 
In honor of Lulu's film, which depicts how meals are consistently a way for the family to come together, there were cubes of spiced cumin lamb, pickled lemon seed cucumbers, slices of fermented cone cabbage, bowls of wood ear mushrooms, cold sesame noodles, braised pork shanks, a steamed fish, fresh snow pea shoots, sautéed eggplant, as well as scallion pancakes made by their mother, Jian Yu. 
When I asked Yu, who used to work as a critic and editor in China, how she had learned to cook -- as Jenkins attested that she is a phenomenal chef -- she simply replied, ''I learned myself.''
''My mom always goes, 'It's common sense,''' Lulu added. 
Yu agreed: ''Yes, I think it's common sense. 
My family is an eating family. 
You know how to do it. 
That's just in the blood.''
A lot of clichés exist about Chinese families gathering over a plate of dumplings or what have you, but ''The Farewell'' succeeds in portraying something more complicated. 
Wang told me she resisted more packaged ideas about a Chinese wedding when pitching the film to producers. 
To her, this was always a story about her and her grandmother. 
But her movie also articulates the nuances of her experience as an immigrant. 
''When you come from China you feel like you were whole at one point,'' Lulu explained to me. 
She left China for the United States when she was 6. 
''When you leave you feel like something has been taken away.''
''The Farewell'' captures the yearning for a sense of wholeness, the feeling of being pulled in two directions as an immigrant. 
There are small details in the movie that perfectly illustrate this: fictional Lulu's Chinese isn't that good anymore, she is seen as too emotional compared with her more traditional family members, she struggles with accepting that the family would lie to her grandmother. 
To the Wang family, food is a way to connect with a place that was once home. 
Below, Lulu and Anthony share a few tips on how to create a meal that highlights Changchun (where Lulu did, in fact, end up filming ''The Farewell'').
Play With Tradition
The Wangs had laid out an ambitious number of dishes for the night. 
They shared with me that the family had engaged in several heated debates about what to serve and how to make it. 
Anthony, for example, prepared his cold sesame noodles with sweet potato noodles instead of the more traditional flat noodles, much to the objection of his mother. 
His dish of sliced pig ears -- loosely inspired by a Sichuan dish of sliced beef tendons -- was more of a nod to what he and Bost regularly serve at Auburn. 
The pig ears are cooked in a vacuum-sealed bag at 90 degrees Fahrenheit for 10 hours, pressed into a tureen mold and then sliced into thin strands. 
They're topped with vinegar made from leek blossoms and dressed with herbs such as butterfly sorrel from a local California farm, intended to balance out the meaty, gelatinous texture of the pig ears. 
''It's not wrong,'' said Yu, ''but it's different than the traditional Chinese way.''
It's a nice reminder that home is often more of an idea than anything else.
[Coming soon: the T List newsletter, a weekly roundup of what T Magazine editors are noticing and coveting. 
Sign up here.]
Embrace Humble Food
The siblings still use their mother's recipe for making scallion pancakes, those flaky fried pieces of dough that anyone can make but taste so damn good. 
''For a home cook, I'm not bad?''
Lulu asked her brother. 
''You're better than the average person,'' he said with a straight face. 
Yu insists on mixing two types of dough, one made with cold water and one made with hot water (most recipes will just say to mix dough and water). 
Once combined, balls of dough are smothered with chopped scallions, then curled up like a cinnamon roll, and then rolled out flat again. 
Their mother likes to fry hers with duck fat, which could explain how quickly they disappeared from the table. 
The fermented cone cabbage -- a refreshing, crisp accompaniment to the heavier food -- was quartered, shocked quickly in ice water to keep its texture, and then lightly salted and put in a vacuum-sealed bag for a week (home cooks can use a jar or bowl to roughly the same effect). 
Either way, these dishes require only the simplest of ingredients.
Create an Impressive Centerpiece
Chinese banquet food is about extravagance -- there are always too many courses, the platters are always filled to the edge -- especially at the wedding banquet featured in ''The Farewell.''
''It's about pride and saving face, and it can't be cheap,'' Anthony said. 
Banquet meals often feature a choice piece of meat, shellfish or seafood -- or all of the above. 
The Wang family chose to braise enormous pork shanks (with the skin still on) with dark soy sauce (aged, it offers more body), sugar and sliced ginger and chicken stock. 
The steamed fish with tofu was also a beautiful addition to the table, simply prepared on a bed of ginger, scallions and green garlic. 
Knife skills are a highlight in Chinese cooking, too, which is why at the finest restaurants, the ginger is sliced into exquisitely symmetrical strands.
Always Make Your Own Chili Oil
Chili oil is an essential condiment, and though it is available to buy in specialty supermarkets, most chefs say it's better to make your own: It's not difficult and the results are better. 
You're essentially heating a neutral oil with a combination of spices of your choice -- however spicy or dense you want to make it is entirely up to you. 
Anthony's is so good, his parents want him to bottle some for them to take home. 
He chose to combine star anise, clove, cumin, chili flakes, fennel seeds and Sichuan peppercorns, which he then pulverized in a spice grinder, and then slowly heated in oil that never rose above 320 degrees Fahrenheit. 
The oil is then drained through a coffee filter and the ground spices are discarded. 
For most home cooks, this should suffice. 
But Anthony opted to add sweated sliced shallots, garlic, peanuts, sunflower seeds and lightly toasted sesame seeds as well. 
The result is a potent, textured condiment you can use to dress everything from plain rice to scallion pancakes to braised pork.
Stay True to Rare Ingredients
The cumin lamb skewers were a direct reference to Changchun. 
''It's really common where my dad's family is from -- you can smell it everywhere, hundreds of stalls all grilling cumin lamb,'' Anthony said. 
He took cuts of lamb shoulder and marinated it with cumin, chili flakes, fennel seeds and Shaoxing wine (which is like cooking sherry) -- then roasted the skewers on Auburn's open flame grill with almond wood. 
Certain ingredients like Shaoxing wine, Doubanjiang (broad bean paste used with the eggplant), Sichuan peppercorns, or dark soy sauce can be picked up in Chinatowns in major cities or at specialty spice retailers such as Kalustyan's. 
Wood ear mushrooms or fresh snow pea shoots can be found at most grocery stores with a little persistence. 
But as the Wangs told me that evening, some ingredients, like a bottle of Maotai or a jar of osmanthus jelly, which was drizzled over the sliced melons and white peaches for dessert, lending them a sweet, flowery taste, are just inexplicably better in China. 
''When you toast,'' Lulu's father, Haiyan, said pointing to the Maotai, ''You say 'ganbei.'
Meaning what?
Meaning bottoms up. 
Dry glass.''
Bost nodded. 
''I made the mistake of saying that at a wine dinner,'' he said. 
''It was a Grand Cru White Burgundy. 
I said 'Ganbei.'
I didn't get it. 
I just thought it was cheers.''
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
