
The Chinese artist Ai Weiwei is all too familiar with roadblocks: Over the last few years he has fought disputes with the governments of China and Britain as well as with the Lego Group, to name a few. 
This time, he's being challenged by a much smaller group: The Washington Square Association.
Mr. Ai is currently plotting a large-scale public art installation across New York City, entitled ''Good Fences Make Good Neighbors.''
The exhibition, commissioned by the Public Art Fund in celebration of its 40th anniversary, will bring 300 works centered on the theme of borders and immigration to all five boroughs.
But the Washington Square Association is protesting Mr. Ai's proposed installation in the park's archway. 
It has reported receiving widespread complaints from the community members, who contend the installation would compromise the arch's own artistic integrity and disrupt the annual holiday tree lighting.
''This installation sets a dangerous precedent that one of New York City's most recognized monuments and pieces of art can be decorated and co-opted for four months at a time,'' Trevor Sumner, the Association's president, wrote in an open letter addressed to the Public Art Fund.
In an interview, Mr. Sumner said that although the exhibition was announced in March, the Public Art Fund waited until four weeks ago to inform the Association of its plans, and left little time for change or negotiation.
''It's ironic that the installation is called 'Good Neighbors,''' he said, given that the Fund did not formally consult with neighbors like his association and the Washington Square Park Conservancy. 
The Fund did, however, meet with the members of the Manhattan Community Board No. 2 about the project.
In an interview, Nicholas Baume, the director and chief curator of the Public Art Fund, said that the installation has been cleared by relevant city agencies and officials -- including the Landmarks Preservation Commission -- and that his organization has contacted various members of the community.
''Every organization, with the exception of the Association, has been absolutely enthusiastic,'' Mr. Baume said. 
He also said the Fund would pay for the relocation of the holiday tree and would meet with the community board on Sept. 
6 to respond to questions.
The installation, which renderings depict as a large cagelike structure sitting in the archway, is scheduled for display from Oct. 
12 through Feb. 
11. It arrives just as President Trump seeks funds for a border wall along the Mexican border.
In an email interview with The New York Times in March, Mr. Ai spoke about the need for such an installation: ''We are witnessing a rise in nationalism, an increase in the closure of borders, and an exclusionary attitude toward migrants and refugees, the victims of war and the casualties of globalization.''
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
