
On every table at Happy Stony Noodle sits a bowl of suan cai, pickled mustard greens, dark and minerally, fermented and then flopped in a wok with sesame oil, garlic, dried onion and a flick of sugar. 
The chef, Chih Shen Hsu, calls it "Chinese kimchi." It's a condiment, to be spooned into soup or over meat, lending a sour frisson and crunch. 
But I ate it straight and was, as the restaurant's name promised, happy.
Mr. Hsu, 65, was born in Hsinchu City in northern Taiwan under martial law. 
As a child, he often lingered over soup at Happy Beef Noodle, a no-frills storefront opened by veterans of the Kuomintang's Nationalist Army who had fled to Taiwan after the Communists' victory in mainland China. 
When he grew up, he took over the noodle shop and ran it for two decades with his wife, Yu Lan Hsu, while they watched the transformation of their country from rural society to megalopolis.
They moved to the U.S. in 1997 and brought Happy Beef Noodle with them, trying out iterations of the restaurant in Flushing, Queens, then Edison, N.J. 
(Both have shuttered.) Two and a half years ago, they settled on this quiet side street off Broadway in Elmhurst, Queens. 
The "Stony" now on the awning is Mr. Hsu's English nickname, bestowed on him by a professor in his college days.
The heart of the restaurant is the same as it was in Hsinchu City: beef noodle soup, which Mr. Hsu starts making every morning at 5 a.m. He sets beef neck bones to boil with star anise, goji berries, doubanjiang (fermented bean paste) and prickly ash, along with a half-dozen herbs that double as Chinese medicine, and keeps stirring the broth over a low flame until nightfall.
The soup is deceptively mild at first, gaining carnality with each spoonful but never growing too forceful, held in check by a faint, ameliorating sweetness. 
It comes with rough cuts of beef, only half-pliant, putting up gentle but firm resistance, and whole spinach leaves added at the end so they're still vivid. 
Pickled mustard greens are essential, the tang offsetting the velvet cling of liquid fat.
Four types of noodles are on offer, all delivered daily from the same factory in Chinatown that has been making them to Mr. Hsu's specifications for 20 years. 
For the beef noodle soup, I liked the flat white bands made of rice flour, slippery with a bit of stretch.
The menu is best when it focuses on forthright comfort food, like lu rou fan, pork leg broken down into caramelly hunks, long simmered with rock sugar and Shaoxing wine, and heaped over rice so the flavors trickle down. 
For texture, there's a spongy rectangle of fried tofu on the side, along with a hard-boiled egg, shucked of its shell and stained with soy sauce, and more of those beautifully bracing pickled mustard greens.
Hunks of salt-and-pepper chicken are colloquially known as popcorn chicken in Taiwan, the name justified by airy, bubbled coats of fried potato starch. 
Here, the meat inside is juicy from a wallow in sa-cha sauce, with its briny payload of dried shrimp and ground brill. 
Another snack, chicken roll, is identified on the menu in English as pork roll, which is technically more accurate — the filling is ground pork and fish paste, wrapped tight in tofu skin and crisped until the outside evokes the rugged golden armor of fried chicken.
Elsewhere, little notes were off: too many chives in a dish called flies' heads (for its scattered dots of fermented black beans, which I wanted more of); in three-cup chicken, overly fatty meat with jellyish corners, and not quite enough of the dark, creased leaves of Thai basil that traditionally give it fragrance.
For a recent arrival from Taiwan at my table, missing home, there was only one dish that mattered: four spirits soup, a cloudy broth steeped with four curative herbs, with the supposed power to bolster immunity, ease digestion, bring a glow to the skin and defy time. 
It's finished with pale curves of pig intestine and a splash of wine. 
After all the lush fat and crackle, it tastes like hardly anything at all, and exactly what you need.
Follow NYT Food on Facebook,   Instagram,   Twitter and   Pinterest. 
  Get regular updates from NYT Cooking, with recipe suggestions, cooking tips and shopping advice.
