
An artist who was detained by the police after documenting mass expulsion of migrant workers from the Chinese capital was released Monday on bail, a friend said.
The artist, Hua Yong, posted dozens of short videos in recent weeks recording how the authorities had forced tens of thousands of people to leave Beijing and demolished vast swaths of neighborhoods.
The police came for him after he filmed residents protesting by blocking a roadway in the Daxing district of Beijing, and he fled the city. 
He was detained late Friday in Tianjin.
Ji Feng, a friend, said Mr. Hua had been held on suspicion of ''gathering the masses to disturb traffic order.''
He was released on a form of bail known as ''qubao houshen,'' which allows the police to continue investigating for up to a year. 
Often the suspect won't face charges, but can be monitored and face restrictions on his ability to travel and speak publicly.
Mr. Hua was allowed to travel to Chengdu, where his daughter lives, Mr. Ji said.
Before he was detained Friday, Mr. Hua posted a series of short videos that he said were filmed in an apartment in Tianjin, a large city near Beijing. 
In some of the videos, someone can be heard pounding on the apartment's door and telling him to come out.
Mr. Hua, 48, who had shaved his beard and shorn his dreadlocks, said his arrest was imminent. 
As he waited, he recorded himself singing ''Happy Birthday'' to his daughter, who turns 3 this month.
''Everything I do is so your generation won't have to go through what I and your grandfathers' generation experienced,'' he said in the video to his daughter. 
''I want to make our country better. 
To be just, fair, free, democratic and have freedom of speech.''
Reached by phone, the police in the Daxing district declined to answer questions about Mr. Hua.
Mr. Hua's work documenting the evictions of migrant workers touched a nerve with the authorities, said Patrick Poon, a Hong Kong-based researcher for Amnesty International.
''His videos became important evidence about the human rights violations during the evictions,'' Mr. Poon said. 
''His detention makes him become like a symbol about how grass-roots people are treated by the Chinese government.''
Mr. Hua has been incarcerated over speech issues in China before. 
In 2012, he was sentenced to 15 months in a labor camp after a performance in Tiananmen Square in which he punched himself in the face, then used his blood to write the date of the 1989 massacre of pro-democracy protesters.
In the videos recorded Friday, Mr. Hua repeated his desire to remain in China rather than leave for someplace where he would be able to speak more freely about political issues.
''The People's Republic of China constitution provides for freedom of speech, freedom of the press,'' he said. 
''All I did was take and post a few videos online. 
There's nothing wrong with this. 
So I will stay in China. 
Even if I die, I die in my country.''
