
HONG KONG -- Clad in a furry, antler-shaped headband and denim overalls, the young woman smiled at the camera, waved her arms in the air as if conducting an orchestra and belted out a garbled snippet of ''March of the Volunteers,'' the national anthem of China.
It seemed to be a lighthearted moment. 
But the police in China saw it differently. 
The woman, Yang Kaili, 20, a Chinese live-streaming star with tens of millions of followers, was detained for five days for singing the national anthem in a ''disrespectful'' manner while broadcasting live.
In a statement posted over the weekend on the microblogging platform Weibo, the police in the Jing'an district of Shanghai described Ms. Yang's behavior as ''an insult to the dignity of the national anthem which repelled internet users.''
[Video: Yang Kaili, a Chinese live-streaming star, was detained for five days for singing the national anthem in a ''disrespectful'' manner. 
Watch on YouTube.]
According to the police, Ms. Yang was detained under China's National Anthem Law, implemented last year, which threatens up to three years of detention for people who disrespect the anthem.
In previous live broadcasts, Ms. Yang could often be seen dancing and singing along to saccharine pop songs. 
In a sign of the booming popularity of China's live-streaming industry, last month Ms. Yang was even invited to perform on a televised variety show on CCTV, the state-run broadcaster.
Following the incident, the Chinese live-streaming platform Huya deleted Ms. Yang's account and took her videos offline. 
And in what has become something of a rite of passage for Chinese celebrities who fall afoul of the law, Ms. Yang issued two self-critical statements on her official Weibo account, apologizing for her ''stupid, low-level mistakes.''
''I sincerely apologize for the fact that I did not sing the national anthem in the live broadcast in a serious manner,'' she wrote. 
''My behavior deeply hurt everyone's feelings. 
Sorry. Sorry to the motherland, sorry to my fans, sorry to everyone online, sorry to the platform.''
Ms. Yang said she would ''stop all live broadcasting work, carry out self-reformation, painstakingly deepen reflection, fully accept ideological politics and patriotic education and diligently study the relevant laws and regulations of the National Anthem Law of the People's Republic of China.''
Ms. Yang said she would also watch patriotic propaganda films and participate in volunteer activities.
Earlier this month, Fan Bingbing, China's most famous actress, also apologized on Weibo after being fined nearly $70 million in unpaid taxes and penalties. 
In her statement, she said she owed her success to the policies of the ruling Communist Party.
The Yang incident comes at a time when the Chinese government, under President Xi Jinping, has stepped up demands for patriotic devotion even in areas of life that are typically seen as apolitical. 
Last year, for example, a large number of Chinese celebrity gossip blogs were taken down as part of the Communist Party's push to spread ''positive energy'' and ''socialist core values.''
In mainland China, where nationalistic sentiment runs high and space for public debate is shrinking, there has been little discussion of the National Anthem Law since its implementation.
By contrast, conduct surrounding the national anthem has been a subject of heated debate in Hong Kong, a semiautonomous Chinese city with broad protections for freedom of speech. 
Amid discontent with what many residents see as Beijing's growing influence in the former British colony, some spectators have taken to booing and catcalling the anthem when it is played before soccer matches in Hong Kong.
Last year, the National People's Congress in Beijing, China's rubber-stamp legislature, demanded that Hong Kong adopt the National Anthem Law. 
But the law has yet to be enacted in Hong Kong, which retains a degree of legal autonomy from the mainland under a framework known as ''one country, two systems.''
As a result, spectators have continued to boo the anthem without being punished, most recently at a soccer match between Hong Kong and Thailand last week.
