
BEIJING — China has sent the global gambling industry a message: Be careful when trawling for business there.
A court in Shanghai on Monday sentenced three Australian employees of Crown Resorts to less than a year in prison each for illegally promoting gambling in China. 
Including the time they have already spent in prison, all three should be released in weeks or months. 
Thirteen other employees, one Malaysian and 12 Chinese, received similar sentences, the company said.
Crown, based in Australia, said in a news release that the court had sentenced Jason O'Connor, the vice president of its V.I.P. international operations, to 10 months in prison. 
Two other Australians, Pan Dan and Jerry Xuan, were each sentenced to nine months. 
They have been in detention since Oct. 
14, the company said.
Three more Crown employees were convicted but not fined or sentenced to prison.
Although gambling is illegal in mainland China, many Chinese flock to Macau — a special administrative region under Beijing's rule but governed by separate laws — as well as places like Australia, Singapore and the Philippines to try their luck. 
Many casino operators in those places try to lure Chinese high rollers, or big-stakes gamblers, to their properties by enticing them with rides on private jets, haute cuisine and swift visa approvals.
But the accusations against Crown drew the industry's attention and were closely watched for a sense of how other operators should run their businesses. 
It is unusual for a high-ranking foreign executive to be prosecuted in China, but the law mandates a maximum sentence of as many as three years for organizing gambling sessions or trying to profit from the business.
"The uncertainty was stifling for a lot of casino operators because they didn't exactly know how this was going to pan out and what the exact objections were because not much was made public," said Sudhir Kalé, the founder of GamePlan Consultants, a gambling consultancy based in Australia that has advised Crown in the past.
"Most operators will also learn that, every now and then, the government does become very serious about implementing the laws in the strictest sense of the word, and therefore they will be a lot more subtle in terms of promoting their properties to the mainland Chinese market," he said.
The detentions followed a crackdown on South Korean casino chains in 2015, when the authorities arrested more than a dozen employees accused of luring Chinese tourists with free accommodations and prostitutes. 
They also come on the heels of President Xi Jinping's crackdown on corruption, in which he warned against ostentatious displays of wealth, and at a time when the government is struggling to stem capital flight.
Australia has watched the case closely, and its prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, has expressed concern. 
A spokeswoman for Australia's Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade said that consular officials would continue to aid the Australians and their families until they were released.
The detentions have also caught the attention of other foreign companies operating in China, where fears of increased government scrutiny are growing. 
Still, the sentences were lighter than the penalties meted out to some others that have come under the cross hairs of the Chinese government. 
In 2010, a senior executive at Rio Tinto, a mining giant, was sentenced to 10 years in prison in a case involving bribery and theft of commercial secrets.
Chen Zhao, deputy director of Fudan University's China Center for Economic Studies in Shanghai, said he did not believe the Crown case meant that the government was putting foreign companies in its sights. 
"I believe that the Chinese government itself is very welcoming of all kinds of legitimate and reasonable investment, so I think this action isn't targeting a specific company, foreign investor or country," he said.
Crown said 16 of the 19 defendants were fined a total of $1.3 million, which the company paid.
It is unclear what the case would mean for Crown's growth prospects in China. 
On its website, the company lists Hong Kong, another special administrative region governed by its own laws, as its only international representative office. 
In May, Crown sold its remaining stake in the Macau casino operator Melco Resorts & Entertainment for about $1.2 billion.
Although Macau, the world's largest gambling market, has been hurt by the campaign against graft, it has rebounded in recent months as new resorts have opened.
Jacqueline Williams contributed reporting from Sydney, Australia. 
Zhang Tiantian contributed research from Beijing.
