
China's deal makers edged out their American counterparts in their first round of trade talks.
United States beef producers and financial firms will get more access to Chinese markets in exchange for chicken imports and a potential opening for Chinese banks. 
It's a good start, but Beijing didn't give up much.
President Trump's administration was quick to crow about trade concessions wangled from Beijing. 
The deal is part of a 100-day plan hashed out when Mr. Trump met President Xi Jinping of China in April.
American companies like Visa and MasterCard will get access to the Chinese market, and two banks will get bond underwriting licenses.
''I have a new boss who's very demanding that things get done on time,'' Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross told CNBC. 
''So I'm quite relieved that we had tangible achievements.''
Though a decent start, it will not do much to reduce the American trade deficit with China, which stood at nearly $350 billion in 2016 and widened in March. 
American companies will not find it easy to compete with Chinese firms, which are experienced and at this point deeply entrenched in their home market. 
For example, in electronic-payment services, China has already leapfrogged the United States in many ways.
The agricultural liberalizations are overdue, and in the interest of both counties. 
American beef is a premium product that will compete with imports from other countries, not domestic farms. 
As for chicken, the complementary trade is one that Beijing has long pushed. 
Chinese consumers tend to prefer dark meat and are happy to export the breast meat that Americans like. 
But Chinese chicken could raise food-safety concerns in the United States.
On matters beyond trade, Washington appears to be taking a softer stance than Mr. Trump promised on the campaign trail. 
He rattled Beijing by taking a congratulatory call from President Tsai Ing-wen of Taiwan after the November election, but later said he would refrain from speaking directly with the Taiwanese president unless he first checked with Mr. Xi. In the meantime, the White House appears to be stalling on planned arms sales to Taiwan.
Most of the contentious issues, like barriers to American carmakers and product dumping by Chinese state-owned heavy industry, have yet to be addressed. 
It's also unclear how these incremental steps will affect a comprehensive investment treaty that the two parties have been negotiating for years. 
American negotiators will have to push harder than this if they want better bargains.
Gina Chon is Washington columnist and Pete Sweeney is Asia editor at Reuters Breakingviews. 
For more independent commentary and analysis, visit breakingviews.com.
