
Yang Hengjun has been shackled, cut off from all contact with his family and interrogated daily to make him confess to being a spy, his representatives said.
SYDNEY, Australia — Chinese officials have cut off all contact between a detained Australian writer and democracy activist, Yang Hengjun, and his family, in what his lawyers described on Sunday as an effort to "break" Mr. Yang and force him to confess to being a spy.
Mr. Yang, who was detained in January after arriving in Guangzhou, China, on a flight from New York, has consistently denied the charge.
Mr. Yang's lawyers said they had confirmed that Chinese officials were conducting daily interrogations of him in isolation, shackling his ankles and wrists, refusing to allow access to any messages of support from relatives or friends and giving him at least nine pills a day for supposed health problems like high blood pressure and kidney complications.
"We're concerned because he went in as a fit and healthy man," Sarah Condon, one of his lawyers in Melbourne, Australia, said in an interview. 
"Now he has this purported diagnosis and is being fed a concoction of drugs."
Mr. Yang's case has already complicated relations between Australia and China, but the latest accusations added yet another obstacle to easing any tensions. 
The Australian government is under pressure to respond more forcefully to Beijing after intelligence officials confirmed last week that they were investigating an alleged Chinese plot to install a spy in the Australian Parliament.
It is not clear if the attention to Beijing's covert efforts in Australia — which Chinese officials have denied as pure hysteria — have affected Mr. Yang's treatment. 
The office of Australia's foreign minister, Marise Payne, who has been deeply engaged with the case, could not be reached Sunday night for comment.
But what Mr. Yang's lawyers described appeared to be an all-out attempt to persuade him to confess to a charge of espionage that has not been detailed or explained. 
The Chinese officials appear to be trying to make him believe that his case is hopeless and that Australia has forsaken him.
In August, Mr. Yang said that one of his Chinese interrogators had told him that Australia was small and would not care about him because he is not white and because the country was dependent on China for its trade and economy.
He rejected that assertion, according to his lawyers, in part because he knew of Australia's efforts to help through the snippets of information passed on through official channels. 
Now those avenues appear to have been cut off.
"There is a plain attempt to have Mr. Yang be subjected to interrogation in complete isolation, cut off entirely from his loved ones and supporters," said Robert Stary, another of his defense lawyers.
Mr. Yang is one of many writers and activists who over the years have run afoul of the Chinese authorities and disappeared into detention. 
He is one of a few people with foreign citizenship to be detained indefinitely over the past year or so. 
In December 2018, the Chinese police detained two Canadians, Michael Kovrig and Michael Spavor, as officials in Beijing pressed Canada to free Meng Wanzhou, the Huawei executive held   for possible extradition to the United States on fraud charges.
The motivation for Mr. Yang's arrest is harder to untangle.
He worked for the Chinese Foreign Ministry before setting out as a novelist and commentator, moving to Hong Kong, the United States and, finally, Australia, where he studied for a Ph.D. and became an Australian citizen in 2002.
After migrating, he remained an influential voice in China, using his online presence to sell health supplements and to offer lectures, commentaries on current affairs and advice on migration to Western countries.
While he has often stayed within the bounds of official Chinese acceptance, he has also issued barbed critiques in playful tones.
"I'm like an old auntie jabbering on, always promoting democracy and repeating its benefits," he wrote in a 2014 article.
Before his detention in January, he spent two years with his family in New York, where he was a visiting scholar at Columbia University.
Yang Hengjun with his wife, Yuan Xiaoliang. 
He was detained in January on a trip to China, and has been accused of being a spy. 
CHONGYI FENG, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS
