
Steve Daines faced a tougher-than-expected re-election race, but Steve Bullock, the popular two-term Democratic governor, could not overcome Republican advantages in the state.
Senator Steve Daines, Republican of Montana, beat back a strong challenge from Gov. Steve Bullock on Tuesday to win a second term, keeping a crucial seat in Republican hands as Democrats pressed to try to wrest control of the Senate.
Mr. Daines, 58, a Bozeman businessman long active in Republican politics, survived tens of millions of dollars in attack ads by the governor and his Democratic allies, questioning his business ties to China and his support for repealing the Affordable Care Act and its guarantees of coverage for pre-existing conditions.
Despite Montana's conservative leanings and the certainty that President Trump would carry the state, Mr. Daines was considered at risk because of Mr. Bullock's long electoral history in Montana, having been elected statewide three times.
He remained popular as governor, and Republicans had the tricky task of persuading people that voting for Mr. Bullock for governor was different than sending him to Washington, where they argued that he would become part of an ultraliberal Democratic majority.
Mr. Bullock's loss complicated Democrats' strategy for taking the Senate majority, which relied in part on picking off vulnerable Republicans in conservative-leaning states.
Both candidates were well known to Montana voters. 
Mr. Daines was defeated in his first statewide run for lieutenant governor in 2008 but was elected to the state's sole House seat in 2012. 
He then won election to the Senate in 2014 after John Walsh, the Democrat who had been appointed to the seat, was accused of plagiarism and forced to withdraw. 
Mr. Bullock was elected attorney general in 2008 and won terms as governor in 2012 and 2016, the latter when Mr. Trump was on the ballot as well.
Mr. Daines almost avoided a serious re-election challenge this year altogether. 
Despite pleas from national and state Democrats to run for Senate, Mr. Bullock resisted and instead embarked on a run for president. 
But his candidacy never gained traction, and he dropped out of the race in December 2019. 
He made clear then that he would not run for Senate and Mr. Daines looked to be running against a much weaker candidate. 
But at the last minute, Mr. Bullock, citing the encouragement of his wife and daughter, entered the race.
Besides a barrage of attacks against Mr. Bullock on a range of ethical accusations about state contracting and other issues, Republicans closed out their campaign raising the alarm about the potential that Mr. Bullock would cement a Democratic Senate majority and a progressive agenda in Washington. 
Republican ads often featured him with Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the minority leader, and Speaker Nancy Pelosi.
Trying to appeal to independent and conservation-minded voters in Montana, Mr. Daines joined a push this year to require that the federal government for the first time fully fund the Land and Water Conservation Fund, which preserves and acquires public lands. 
He and Senator Cory Gardner of Colorado, who lost his seat on Tuesday, traveled to the White House in February to personally lobby Mr. Trump to sign the legislation if it passed, even though the administration's budget office had proposed zeroing out funding for the program. 
Grasping the political implications, Mr. Trump agreed and both Republican senators campaigned hard on the accomplishment.
Though Democrats believed they had their best possible candidate in Mr. Bullock, they said they always knew that winning Montana would be difficult given the Republican advantages in the state. 
They had hoped that the fact that Mr. Trump was running behind his 2016 showing would be enough to push Mr. Bullock past Mr. Daines.
