
WASHINGTON — For several weeks this spring, a handful of employees at a Texas steel manufacturer stopped producing pipes used to drill thousands of feet below the earth's surface to concentrate full time on another task: trying to win the company an exemption from President Trump's metals tariffs.
Borusan Mannesmann Pipe U.S. filed 19 separate requests with the Commerce Department asking it to exempt the multiple shapes, sizes and forms of steel pipes that it imports from its parent company in Turkey and then finishes at a plant in Baytown, Tex. 
Until it gets an answer, the 60-year-old business is paying significantly higher prices for imports of the raw material and is putting off any major projects.
In the two months since the Trump administration's steel and aluminum tariffs went into effect, the Commerce Department has been deluged with more than 8,200 exemption requests from companies that import foreign metals. 
With just a handful of countries temporarily exempted from Mr. Trump's steel and aluminum tariffs, companies are scrambling to win exemptions for every screw and spring they import, with each width and length requiring stand-alone filings. 
One company alone has submitted 1,167 of the filings, according to government officials.
The imposition of tariffs was supposed to help protect American companies from foreign competition. 
But they have also created a chaotic, time-consuming process and provoked deep uncertainty among executives, who are delaying investment, expansion and hiring as a result.
The disarray stems from the sheer vastness of the administration's attempt to reshape the rules of global trade in a matter of months, as it threatens a trade war with China and races to rewrite the North American Free Trade Agreement.
This week, the administration will hold three days of public hearings on its plan to impose tariffs on roughly $50 billion in Chinese goods and may also welcome top Chinese leaders to continue trade talks. 
And it faces a looming deadline to wrap up the Nafta talks in time for the deal to be approved by the current Republican-controlled Congress.
Those affected by the steel and aluminum tariffs say the administration's aggressive approach could backfire on American companies and workers.
"It's hard to predict what could happen to us and these families if the exemption process doesn't go in our favor," said Joel Johnson, the chief executive of Borusan Mannesmann's United States operations, which employ 264 people. 
"I don't have a crystal ball, but for sure we won't be hiring more people. 
We might have to reduce our existing base because we won't have that material coming in."
The Commerce Department has yet to grant any company an official exemption. 
A department official said that the agency was making "an unprecedented effort to process the requests expeditiously" and that companies with a valid need for foreign products should rest assured that their needs will be met.
To deal with the flood of applications, the department has added about a dozen workers dedicated to processing the applications, bringing the total number to 19. 
So far, the department says it has reviewed most of the filings, but only 1,700 had been posted online as of May 8 — and that is just an early step in a lengthy process. 
Domestic steel and aluminum companies have 30 days to file an objection to any application. 
Government officials then have 60 days to make a final decision.
"We knew that the process was going to be messy," said Monica de Bolle, a senior fellow at the Peterson Institute for International Economics. 
"It just prolongs this pain of not knowing what is going to happen."
A few countries have been granted blanket exemptions for all their products. 
The European Union, Mexico and Canada have been given a temporary reprieve from the tariffs until June 1 as the Trump administration tries to reach a deal to limit their steel and aluminum exports to the United States. 
But countries like Japan, Turkey and Russia have not been exempted, leaving companies that use their metals anxious and uncertain.
Mr. Johnson said the potential for permanent tariffs on the raw materials his company imports from Turkey had "put our customers into full panic mode. 
They need our product to extract oil and gas."
Without a supply of unfinished steel from its parent company, the United States plant, which uses a special heating process to ensure that the finished pipe is strong and resilient, may not make sense to continue operating. 
American competitors may be reluctant to supply the company with unfinished products that will ultimately end up competing with their finished pipes. 
Mr. Johnson says its American operations may face a $25 million to $30 million hit annually to bring in the materials it needs.
Its vendors are already worried. 
Automation Engineering Company, a South Carolina company that provides equipment to Borusan to move pipes within its factory, sent a letter to the Commerce Department on Tuesday saying that Borusan's business helped support 75 jobs in its own factory.
Borusan Mannesmann has filed for a two-year exemption for products from its parent company in Turkey, arguing that imports are what allows its American factory to thrive. 
If it wins an exemption, Mr. Johnson said, the firm will invest $50 million to $75 million to build another factory in Baytown, which would employ upward of 170 people.
The tariffs' most ardent proponents, including some domestic steel and aluminum makers, have argued against granting many exemptions, saying they will create loopholes that ultimately make the measures less effective at defending American industry. 
The administration, in imposing the tariffs, said national security was at risk from foreign metals that were weakening American manufacturers.
Wilbur Ross, the commerce secretary, has said the department will grant exclusions that "further hone these tariffs" to protect national security while also minimizing the impact on American industries.
Companies have been appealing to the Commerce Department with a variety of arguments, including that they depend on some foreign goods but ultimately strengthen the American economy.
In its public filing to the Commerce Department, American MSC, a Michigan company that manufactures springs for automotive transmissions, argued that the few goods it imports are often components of other products.
Union Pacific, the railroad giant, filed an exemption for a specialized longer steel rail from Japan that it says is not available in the United States. 
While the company buys some American-made rail, the longer Japanese rail is safer because it requires less welding and reduces the potential for derailments on its highly trafficked routes, the company says.
Greenfield Industries, a drill manufacturer that employs more than 330 people in South Carolina, claimed that it will pay more under a tariff to bring in unfinished components for its factories in the United States than competitors who have offshored entirely will pay to bring in finished goods. 
"This gives offshore manufacturers an unfair advantage over domestic manufacturers," the company said.
Even if the Commerce Department is sympathetic to those arguments, other American companies have a chance to scuttle any exemption. 
Under the process, domestic manufacturers can make filings saying they can or would be able to make an imported product, potentially giving them an influential voice over competitors seeking exemptions.
In April, Orrin G. Hatch, the Republican chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, and Ron Wyden, the Democratic ranking member, sent a letter to Mr. Ross urging him to improve the process, saying it has lacked "basic due process and procedural fairness for stakeholders, especially American small businesses." They also expressed concern about whether the Commerce Department was taking steps to prevent the program "from being abused for anticompetitive purposes."
Because steel and aluminum are used in so many products, the effects will be felt not just among direct importers, but their customers as well, said Teresa Fort, an economist at Dartmouth College's Tuck School of Business. 
"It will go down through the chain," she said.
The Federal Reserve's April "Beige Book" included a report from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis about a manufacturer of tractor-trailers that said it could not increase prices fast enough to keep up with its rising material costs. 
And the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston reported that a local toy manufacturer said that tariffs had raised threefold the price of a type of thin-gauge foil produced only in China. 
"These tariffs are now killing high-paying American manufacturing jobs and businesses," the company said.
Jim Tankersley contributed reporting.
