
PALE RIDER The Spanish Flu of 1918 and How It Changed the World By Laura Spinney 332 pp. 
PublicAffairs. $28.
Each time the specter of bird flu arises, so too do grim references to the global pandemic that killed tens of millions of people in 1918. 
And yet Spinney, a novelist and science writer, argues that almost a century later, the Spanish flu is ''still emerging from the shadows of the First World War'' in our collective memories. 
She sets out to rectify this, knowing just which medical mysteries and haunting vignettes will give the pandemic full purchase on our imaginations.
Researchers now believe that the 1918 virus originated in birds, but exactly when and where it made the leap to humans remains under debate. 
Spinney explores three possibilities: In March 1918, a mess cook at the United States Army's Camp Funston in Kansas contracted the disease, possibly from a nearby farm. 
Yet more than a year earlier, a flulike illness had ravaged a military camp, close to the Western Front in northern France. 
And in 1917 an unknown respiratory disease also swept communities in Northern China, which sent workers to assist the allies as part of the Chinese Labor Corps.
Wherever human transmission occurred, as soon as it did the disease spread around the world, accelerated by troop movements, poor nutrition and overcrowding. 
At the time, no one knew where the flu had come from or why it was so deadly; misinformation abounded as, Spinney writes, ''news of the flu was censored in the warring nations, to avoid damaging morale.''
The French, British and American publics blamed the Spanish, generating its ubiquitous misnomer (the pandemic had already struck France and the United States before it arrived in Spain in May 1918), the Brazilians accused the Germans, ''the Persians blamed the British, and the Japanese blamed their wrestlers.''
Spinney describes how various communities tried to make sense of the disease and manage its impact. 
Some areas instituted public health measures like banning funerals and parades. 
Others tried mixtures of ritual and desperation, which Spinney describes with a novelist's eye: In Odessa, Russia, the community held a ''black wedding'' between beggars to defend against the disease. 
In Rio de Janeiro, individuals positioned corpses' feet in their windows so that public agencies would know to remove the bodies.
MIRACLE CURE The Creation of Antibiotics and the Birth of Modern Medicine By William Rosen 358 pp. 
Viking. $28.
In the 1930s, the advent of sulfa drugs represented a turning point for the health care industry, previously limited in its ability to fight infectious disease. 
Doctors now had a potential cure for strep, meningitis and gonorrhea, while patients were for the first time requesting a specific treatment by name. 
In ''Miracle Cure,'' Rosen skillfully blends scientific, political and economic history to trace the development of antibiotics and how they underwrote the modern pharmaceutical trade.
He dedicates much of his narrative to penicillin, which catalyzed the greatest change in both industry and clinical practice, starting with the Scottish physician Alexander Fleming's accidental discovery, in the 1920s, that a penicillin-producing fungus slowed the growth of staph bacteria in a petri dish. 
In 1940, British researchers led by the Australian pathologist Howard Florey established the drug's efficacy in mice. 
Recognizing the mass-market potential, Florey enlisted the United States Department of Agriculture's Northern Regional lab in Illinois, where a bacteriologist found ''a mold so powerful that it would, by the end of the 1940s, be the ancestral source for virtually all of the world's penicillin.''
For Rosen, part of what made penicillin's path so revolutionary was the government's reliance on private companies like Pfizer and Merck to produce large quantities of the compound as part of the war effort. 
The lucrative federal contracts these entities received muscled out competitors and established Big Pharma as we know it. 
''The only comparable events in American economic history were the deals that built the transcontinental railroad and allocated the radio broadcast spectrum.''
Other antibiotics followed, promising to cure diseases from typhus to tuberculosis. 
Enter the age of drug-resistant ''superbugs,'' the consequence of corporate marketing, prescription-happy physicians and the use of growth-inducing antibiotics in livestock. 
Rosen's take on this crisis is understandably cursory, given that he died of cancer shortly after finishing the book. 
He does make clear, though, that the current pipeline is meager, and the future of antibiotics insecure.
CATCHING BREATH The Making and Unmaking of Tuberculosis By Kathryn Lougheed 272 pp. 
Bloomsbury Sigma. 
$27.
In the 1940s, scientists developed the first cure for tuberculosis, the drug streptomycin. 
The disease almost immediately showed signs of resistance, so researchers devised a combination therapy to hold tuberculosis at bay temporarily. 
Yet, as Lougheed, a science journalist and former disease researcher, explains, tuberculosis continues to evolve in new and menacing ways -- spurred on in part by our very efforts to contain it.
Lougheed's history of tuberculosis dates it back to ancient mummies and medieval bones. 
She touches on New England folklore that links the disease to vampirism, as well as TB's 19th-century associations with creativity (think: Frédéric Chopin, Keats and the Brontës). 
Still, she is generally flippant about the cultural significance of disease; she calls Thomas Mann's ''The Magic Mountain'' ''a looong German book set in a TB sanatorium.''
Fortunately she becomes more engaged as she delves into contemporary research on the pathogen itself. 
Tuberculosis establishes a complex presence in the people it infects: Upon entering the body usually through the lungs, it is engulfed by immune cells called macrophages. 
In most cases, instead of succumbing to them, the bacteria spur the creation of organized structures, called granulomas, fortified by walls that are several cells thick, making them hard for drugs to penetrate. 
This means that as patients undergo treatment, the bacteria may be exposed to ''sub-lethal concentrations'' of drugs, which can hasten the evolution of resistance. 
In addition, granulomas often enter a quiescent state, during which they may be even less susceptible to therapy.
Lougheed offers an impressive survey of current attempts to diagnose and treat the disease, from the experimental use of cancer drugs that modify the immune system to statins, which are typically prescribed to lower cholesterol. 
(As it happens, M. tuberculosis can feed on cholesterol within the body.) Without underplaying the challenges, especially of TB's multidrug-resistant and extensively drug-resistant strains, she presents a league of smart scientists whose ingenuity and commitment offer at least some sense of hope.
