
July 1 is the 150th anniversary of Canada's founding as a nation. 
It will be a day celebrated by newcomers seeking economic opportunity or refuge from war, immigrants of several generations and descendants of arrivals from more than a hundred years ago. 
For aboriginal peoples, who remain subjected to discriminatory policies, the anniversary is not one to celebrate.
We asked readers in Canada to share stories of their family's earliest histories in the land now called Canada. 
We received about 150 submissions. 
Many expressed a deep sense of pride in the tolerance and diversity of modern Canada. 
Others wrote about the intergenerational trauma they endure as indigenous people whose lands and family members were taken away.
Here are some of those stories, which have been edited and condensed.
A peasant from China
Ruth Lor Malloy, 84, in Ontario
Slavery in Cuba was abolished in 1886. 
But who was going to cut the sugar cane, Cuba's main crop?
Plantation owners looked to the willingness of peasants from South China, including my paternal grandfather, Lor Jock Wing, to sign up to work cheaply. 
But conditions on the ships to Cuba were so bad many of the Chinese died on the trip. 
Many others perished after arriving in Cuba from poor living and working conditions. 
Fortunately, my grandfather had a Chinese friend who had chosen to emigrate to Canada. 
He urged grandfather to join him.
In Brockville, Ontario, a small town on the St. Lawrence River south of Ottawa, my grandfather started a laundry business, and before Canadian exclusion laws forbade further immigration from China, my father and other male relatives joined him.
My father, Lor Leip, arrived in Brockville in 1909 when he was 12 years old. 
He worked in the family laundry. 
Volunteers from the local Presbyterian Church taught him and other immigrants English. 
On the street, other children taunted him with chants of ''Chinky, Chinky, Chinaman.''
He once told us about the times he delivered clean laundry in a wagon. 
Boys would tip the wagon over, and the shirts had to be washed again.
Lured by jazz clubs and beautiful women
Laura Francis, 48, in Port Perry, Ontario
My father, Caliste Oliver, came to Canada from his native Guyana to attend McGill University in the late 1940s. 
His father, Oliver, had graduated from the same university and was one of the first black graduates of its medical school. 
My father was supposed to do the same, but got a little ... distracted. 
Jazz clubs, beautiful women, great food.
After switching majors and delaying his graduation, my father ended up with a degree in engineering and chose to stay in his newly adopted country. 
His family was devastated and he never saw his mother or father again.
When he retired from his job at a mining company (after 40 years of service), I asked him if he regretted his choice to stay. 
No, he replied. 
He said he had made a home for himself in the best place he knew.
I am pleased that he did.
A descendant of 2 tragic pasts
Leah Gazan, 45, Winnipeg, Manitoba
'Until the Canadian government stops violating fundamental indigenous human rights, I have nothing to celebrate.'
My mother, Marjorie, was from the Wood Mountain Lakota Nation. 
She was a street kid and a survivor of the child welfare system. 
She moved 15 times between the ages of 5 and 18 between group homes, orphanages and convents with abusive nuns. 
It wasn't that my grandmother did not love her. 
Like my mother, she was also a street kid who became a serious alcoholic as a way to deal with the violent genocide she experienced as a result of the Indian Act and institutional disruptions caused by residential schools and child welfare.
Although we often talk about people having choices, in the 1930s in Canada, indigenous women were not even considered human under Canadian law. 
How sad is that, especially because we are descendants of Sitting Bull, who is one of the most revered leaders in North America.
My mother was one of the first indigenous psychiatric nurses in the province of Saskatchewan. 
She was an award-winning researcher, a scholar and a social justice warrior who assisted with changing child welfare legislation to support former children in the state's care and expanding rights for persons experiencing mental health issues.
My father was a Dutch Jew and Holocaust survivor. 
He was the only surviving child on both sides of my family at the conclusion of World War II. 
It is for this reason that my life is truly a miracle as a descendant of genocides from different parts of our globe.
Like my parents, I have learned to speak up and to never stay silent in the face of injustice. 
Indigenous peoples have been on Turtle Island, an indigenous name for North America, since time immemorial, more than the 150 years of colonial genocide that Canada wishes to celebrate. 
Until the Canadian government stops violating fundamental indigenous human rights, I have nothing to celebrate.
Escaping slavery in Ohio
Joy Cornelius, Peterborough, Ontario
My great-great-grandfather George M. Lucas was a black slave in Ohio and arrived in Canada in 1836 through the Underground Railroad, via Detroit. 
He married an Irish lady and they endured much prejudice due to their interracial marriage. 
He became a farmer, and their farm was burned down several times with Christian crosses imprinted on their grass.
Together they had 15 children who survived.
A line of courageous women
Carmelita Boivin-Cole, 77, Annapolis Royal, Nova Scotia
'She so terrified the Iroquois that they fled.'
The first of my ancestors, the apothecary Louis Hébert, arrived in Port Royal (now in Nova Scotia) with Samuel de Champlain in 1606. 
Legend has it that he learned much about native herbal medicines from the Great Chief Membertou's Mi'kmaq people. 
In 1617, he and his wife, Marie Rollet, settled in Quebec. 
Their daughter Guillemette reappears again and again in my family tree, as her descendants intermarried with the children of other early settlers in Quebec.
I heard tales from this family history when I was a young girl. 
What fascinated me the most was the courage of the women, who mainly lived in the shadows of the men except when they did something absolutely astounding. 
One example is that of Barbe Poisson. 
Around 1651, in Ville-Marie (now Montreal), she looked out of a window in her house and saw a band of Iroquois marauders descend with their tomahawks on her husband and his workers in a field. 
She remarried after his death.
All went well until 1661 when she once again looked out the window and saw another band of Iroquois attack her second husband. 
She gathered every weapon in the house into her arms, rushed out screaming at the top of her lungs, throwing weapons to the French workers: ''You killed my first husband. 
You are not getting this one, too.''
She so terrified the Iroquois that they fled, earning a place for herself in the annals of history.
Fleeing a firing squad during the Russian Revolution
Katie Neustaeter, 35, Kamloops, British Columbia
My grandma, Anne Krueger, and her family fled from the Bolsheviks during the Russian Revolution, when she was 2 years old. 
The day they fled, her father had escaped a firing squad; they told him that if he could run far enough into the woods before they shot him he could keep running. 
They ran all the way to Canada.
When they boarded the boat to sail, they were asked for the full names of the family, but at that time in Russia middle names weren't given. 
My great-grandpa was so afraid of being denied sail that he spontaneously assigned his own name to all of the kids: Peter Peter, John Peter, Anne Peter, Kay Peter. 
I can only imagine how proud Peter Neufeld would have been to know that his grandson, my father, would one day be elected and serve four terms as a sitting member of the Legislative Assembly in British Columbia.
Rejected by America, a new life with a Cadillac
Jane Park, 40, Edmonton, Alberta
'When I ask if they would want to move back to South Korea, they say, in perfect English, 'No way.'
'
My parents immigrated to Canada from South Korea in March 1976 after being rejected from the U.S. twice. 
A man from Kinistino, Saskatchewan, sponsored my father to be a car mechanic. 
Two weeks after their arrival, my mother gave birth to my brother. 
Afterward, my father went to meet his sponsor -- the tallest man he had ever met -- who drove a Lincoln, the fanciest car he had ever seen. 
Everyone in Kinistino was white and my father's heart failed him: He didn't want to live there. 
He parted ways with his employer, who responded graciously. 
This is how their Canadian adventure started, complete with rudimentary English and $1,000 in their pockets. 
(They had bought a camera and rice cooker en route in Japan, and because of an unfavorable exchange rate, their American money converted to less in Canadian dollars.)
A year later, my grandparents and two uncles immigrated and joined our household so that suddenly my parents had to take care of eight people. 
There were many struggles and hardships along the way, but in the end, they did succeed, at least in monetary terms. 
My father is now a hotel developer and bought himself a Cadillac, which he never drove (perhaps he felt it was too ostentatious and in the end, he gave it to me).
When I ask if they would want to move back to South Korea, they say, in perfect English, ''No way.''
When I ask if they regret not getting into America, they say, ''No way.''
Working the fishery in Newfoundland
Marilyn Hayward, Toronto
My ancestor Benjamin Hayward arrived in Bonavista, Newfoundland, in the early 1600s from Ringwood, Hampshire, England. 
Benjamin was a planter, a person working the fishery from May to September who then would return to England for the winter. 
Ben opened an inn and store on the Avon River to cater to the many planters living in Hampshire and Dorset Counties. 
The Avon River was also used as a means to get to the larger port where ships were going not only to Newfoundland, but also to the New World, whether Canada or the United States. 
Ben's son Thomas was first to settle in Newfoundland in about 1685.
An indentured employee, as a teenager
Shawn Rosvold, 65, Colorado Springs
My paternal grandfather came to Calgary, Alberta, from a small hamlet north of the Arctic Circle in Norway in the late 1800s as a teenage indentured employee to a tailor. 
He eventually became a tailor in his own right, and owned his own shop. 
He met his future wife at a Lutheran youth group. 
She came to Calgary as a teenager from Norway.
On the losing side of the Revolutionary War
Margaret Olive, 69, Salt Spring Island, British Columbia
Having sided with the British during the American War of Independence, ancestors on both sides of my family were obliged to leave their homes to become residents of New Brunswick and Ontario. 
In Saint John, my father's ancestors built wooden sailing ships until their vessels were surpassed by railways, steam engines and steel hulls.
Losing children to 'ship fever'
Susan Gurd Bexton, 70, Portland, Ore.
In July 1847, my great-great-grandparents Joseph and Marianne Gurd set off from Cork, Ireland, in a small sailing ship called the Highland Mary. 
It carried coal and 100 passengers including them and their four children. 
In September 1847, they were put ashore at the ''Emigrant Hospital'' on Pointe-Saint-Charles at Montreal. 
There were 21 large ''fever sheds'' that housed victims of ''ship fever'' in an effort to control the typhus among famine refugees from Ireland. 
Within three months, three of their four children died.
The flip of a coin
Joan M. Baril, 82, Thunder Bay, Ontario
My dad, William Allen, newly released from the British army in 1918, returned to Birmingham, England, to look for a job. 
Both his parents were dead. 
His dad had been killed by a sniper at the First Battle of the Marne in 1914. 
His mother died of tuberculosis soon after, leaving five children to fend for themselves. 
My dad left school at 10 years old to work. 
When he turned 17, he lied about his age to get into the army.
After the war, work was hard to find. 
On the street, he spied an immigration office covered with posters. 
He could sign up for Australia where he would be sent to work in the outback to repay his passage or he could go to Canada to work in the northern bush. 
He flipped his last coin.
Canada won.
Eventually, he became a police officer in the northern Ontario city of Thunder Bay. 
He always considered himself a lucky man, but he hated one thing about Canada: the vicious cold days as a rookie police constable ''walking the beat'' in weather that sometimes sank to minus 40. 
Even though he wore an enormous buffalo robe coat, he still felt the cold.
On those days, when he came home, he told his story to his children, always ending, ''Today was another day when I wished the coin had sent me to Australia.''
