
Stocks fell on Friday as another week of volatile trading came to a close with uncertainty over the health of the global economy and the impact of the trade war continuing to grip financial markets.
Wall Street was lower in early trading and markets across Asia and Europe also tumbled. 
Data on China's retail sales and industrial output showed that the country's slowdown deepened in November. 
Friday's data came just days after weaker-than-expected trade figures were also released by the world's second largest economy.
Stocks were buoyed earlier this week by signs of a thaw between China and the United States that suggested Beijing and Washington are making progress toward a trade deal. 
That thaw continued on Friday, with China pledging to cut tariffs on imports of American-made cars starting in the new year. 
Automakers' shares rose Friday on the news.
But more broadly, investors remained jittery, and Friday's early decline erased the weeks gains for the benchmark S&P 500 stock index. 
The benchmark is in negative territory for the year.
Stocks on Wall Street had been faring better than their counterparts around the world, as the United States economy continued to show signs of robust growth and job creation, even amid a slowdown in China, Germany and Japan. 
But gains through late September have faded quickly as investors begin to assess the potential for trade concerns, economic uncertainty and rising interest rates to erode corporate profit growth.
The S&P 500 pared some of its earlier losses and was down about 0.7 percent by midmorning. 
The technology-heavy Nasdaq composite fell further. 
Apple, whose stock has been weighed down by concerns of a sales slowdown in China, fell 2 percent.
Markets across Asia dropped. 
The SSE index in Shanghai ended trading down 1.5 percent, while stocks in Shenzen were off 2.5 percent. 
Japan's Nikkei 225 index fell 2 percent, and Hong Kong's Hang Seng dipped 1.6 percent.
European markets followed a similar downward path, edging down through to the afternoon. 
In Britain, where Prime Minister Theresa May was rebuffed by European leaders in her request for help in navigating Britain's exit from the European Union, the FTSE 100 was down 0.6 percent around midday. 
France's CAC 40 had slipped about 1 percent, the DAX index in Germany had dipped 0.6 percent and the Euro Stoxx 50 was down 0.7 percent.
Mrs. May's continuing troubles also appeared to taking a toll on the pound, which slid through the day and was at $1.254 by early afternoon.
Amie Tsang contributed reporting.
