
Get the DealBook newsletter to make sense of major business and policy headlines -- and the power-brokers who shape them.__________
A struggling global economy. 
A trade war. 
Geopolitical turmoil.
Heading into 2019, Wall Street analysts had good reason to worry about the impact of international markets on corporate America's profits. 
So far, it appears they weren't worried enough.
A wide divide has developed in the performance between the companies with the most exposure to the rest of the world and those that are mostly focused on the United States.
At companies in the S&P 500 that draw more than half their revenue from abroad, first-quarter profits fell about 12 percent, according to data from John Butters, the senior earnings analyst at FactSet. 
By contrast, earnings at firms that generate most of their sales within the United States grew about 6 percent.
These diverging fortunes are a reflection of the global economy.
After months of hand-wringing about an imminent recession late last year, the United States economy proved surprisingly resilient through the first three months of 2019, expanding at a 3.2 percent clip.
Overseas, though, the economic picture was more gloomy. 
A slowdown in China, exacerbated by rising trade tensions with the United States, has reverberated around the world. 
Germany, Europe's largest economy and one that is increasingly reliant on trade with China, has teetered on the verge of a recession. 
Britain's tortured withdrawal from the European Union has weighed on the country's economy as well as that of broader Europe.
The International Monetary Fund earlier this year lowered its forecast for global growth in 2019, citing trade tensions and waning business confidence.
Not surprisingly the earnings slide among America's big multinational firms was most acute among those with the greatest exposure to the global economy and the escalating trade war between Beijing and Washington.
Technology firms in the S&P 500 have been at the center of the trade dispute, and profits at those companies decreased about 7 percent during the quarter. 
Much of that was driven by Apple, which accounted for about 40 percent of that decline.
China's slowdown has hit the iPhone maker particularly hard. 
China is Apple's third-largest market and a key area of growth. 
During the first three months of 2019, Apple's profit fell 16 percent as sales from China, Hong Kong and Taiwan dropped 22 percent.
Earnings at American semiconductor manufacturers, which rely on production networks in China and generate a large portion of their sales there, fell 20 percent during the first quarter. 
And the profits of energy companies have also suffered, as lower oil prices left earnings from the sector down 27 percent in the first quarter.
The split could persist as the Trump administration ratchets up the trade war. 
Wall Street analysts now expect profits at companies with the most overseas exposure to fall 1.4 percent in 2019, compared with a 6 percent increase for domestically focused companies. 
At the start of the year, analysts forecast that profits for those two sets of companies would grow 6.9 percent and 8.4 percent.
And it is a potential threat to this year's stock market rally.
A rebound in the shares of big technology companies propelled the stock market to record highs this year. 
But the trade war was long considered the biggest risk to the profits of tech companies and the rally in their shares as well as the broader market. 
With the tensions between the United States and China escalating this month, the bottom lines of those companies and their shares are likely to remain under pressure.
Get the DealBook newsletter to make sense of major business and policy headlines -- and the power-brokers who shape them.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
