
THE YEARS, MONTHS, DAYS Two Novellas By Yan Lianke Translated by Carlos Rojas. 
192 pp. 
Black Cat. 
Paper, $16.
The first Chinese recipient of the Franz Kafka Prize and a frequent target of government censorship, the novelist Yan Lianke creates imaginary wounds in real blood. 
Yan was born in Henan province in 1958, and his childhood coincided with the worst years of the Great Leap Forward, when China's rush toward modernity thrust millions into biblical-level famine and privation. 
(His mother, Yan later recalled, was forced to teach him the most edible forms of bark and clay.) As his translator, Carlos Rojas, explains in his introduction, these experiences profoundly marked Yan's sensibility. 
Yan has called his style ''mythorealism.''
His books read like the brutal folklore history couldn't bear to remember, and his characters feel stranded, forgotten by time.
''The Years, Months, Days,'' the first of the two novellas collected in this volume, begins with an arresting line: ''In the year of the great drought, time was baked to ash.''
Set after a mass migration, the story has three major characters: a 72-year-old man known as the Elder, a sun-blinded dog and a cornstalk. 
The minimal staging recalls a Beckett play. 
Like Beckett's most memorable characters, the Elder is drawn from a long tradition of absurdist sages, barely lucid but often wise. 
He talks to his dog, weighs sunlight on a scale and waters the cornstalk with his own urine.
The Elder's world is nauseatingly vivid, reminiscent of the too-sharp smells and sounds associated with a migraine. 
When he licks the powder from a flour jug, ''the pure white taste of wheat'' blossoms in his mouth. 
When the sun is at its height, he hears his hair burning. 
Desolation has rarely seemed so sensual, so insistently alive. 
In chronicling with extraordinary sensitivity the suffering of an ordinary man, Yan forces us to pay attention.
The second novella, ''Marrow,'' revolves around the efforts of Fourth Wife You, the widowed parent of four epileptic and mentally compromised children, to marry off her third daughter to a healthy man -- what they enviously call ''a wholer.''
Her children are what used to be called village idiots. 
(And the village is, in fact, named after them: Four Idiots Village.) Their lives seem hopeless until a ghost reveals that they can be cured by drinking soup made from a dead relative's bones.
There is a rich tradition in China, going back to the advent of written narrative and predating fiction, called zhiguai: accounts of the inexplicable and occult, often featuring ghosts. 
''Marrow'' is a saucy sendup of that genre. 
Fourth Wife You argues with her husband's ghost, exposes herself in exchange for help cultivating her field and tries to keep her son from sleeping with his sister. 
Everyone is out for himself. 
''Good soil in this tomb,'' Fourth Wife You remarks, disinterring her husband.
Yan's world is earthy, male and often very juvenile: snot, urine, phlegm and voluminous breasts almost qualify as secondary characters. 
It's also funny, although Rojas's otherwise smooth translation mishandles Yan's curses. 
(''That ass caressed her breasts!'' conjures a mental image more surreal than even Yan would intend.) Yan's vulgarity is the flip side of his sensuality, and recalls Upton Sinclair's line about aiming for his readers' hearts and hitting them in the stomach. 
In Yan's case, the effect is deliberate. 
His tools as a social critic are shame and disgust.
''Marrow'' is a mordant look at a depraved society, more exemplary of Yan's other work -- he has handily drawn comparisons to Kafka and the foundational Chinese satirist Lu Xun -- than its companion novella. 
(Readers looking for his Kafkaesque side should turn to Yan's ''The Four Books,'' his knife-sharp indictment of Communist mismanagement.) Unlike Lu Xun, whose work pointed to structural shortcomings in Chinese society, Yan doesn't suggest any solutions in his disillusioned fables. 
The problem, he implies, is human nature. 
We are all degraded and degrading. 
There's no help for that.
Follow New York Times Books on Facebook and Twitter (@nytimesbooks), and sign up for our newsletter.
