
Two weeks before a much-anticipated exhibition featuring Chinese conceptual artists opens at the Guggenheim, the museum is facing intense pressure to exclude one piece of art: a video of dogs trying to fight one another.
The museum tried to tamp down the criticism on Thursday night, announcing in a statement that the piece, "Dogs That Cannot Touch Each Other," would stay in the exhibition even though "the work may be upsetting." The seven-minute clip shows four pairs of American pit bulls charging each other but unable to touch because they are running on nonmotorized treadmills.
Real dogs were used when the piece was first shown in 2003 in Beijing, but the Guggenheim will feature a video of it. 
Critics and animal-rights supporters have called it animal abuse and started a petition encouraging the museum to remove it.
"The curators of the exhibition hope that viewers will consider why the artists produced it and what they may be saying about the social conditions of globalization and the complex nature of the world we share," the Guggenheim said in a statement posted on its website on Thursday.
The three-month show, "Art and China After 1989," opens Oct. 
6 in the New York City museum and will feature about 150 pieces of experimental art. 
Many works are deliberately shocking, including the signature piece, "Theater of the World," which features live insects and reptiles scurrying under an overhead lamp.
But so far the backlash has centered on the video by the artists Sun Yuan and Peng Yu, the husband-and-wife creators of often stirring and unsettling work. 
(In 2000, their transfused blood was injected into the corpse of conjoined babies in the performance piece "Body Link.")
"Shame on the ‘artists' for using animals in their pitch for sensationalism," one reader wrote in the comments of a New York Times article this week about the Guggenheim show. 
"Shame on you Guggenheim for prompting heinous animal cruelty under the guise of ‘art.'"
In an interview last year, Mr. Sun and Ms. Peng defended "Dogs That Cannot Touch Each Other" and dismissed claims of animal cruelty.
"Where is the soft spot in all of this?" Ms. Peng said. 
"Were the dogs being abused?
The answer should be no. 
These dogs are naturally pugnacious."
She added: "In fact, human nature and animal nature are the same. 
China hosted the Olympic Games in Beijing in 2008. 
What is the goal of this type of sporting event?
Actually, it is the conversion of actual fighting into regulated competition."
Follow Matthew Haag on Twitter: @matthewhaag.
