
Twitter on Wednesday briefly suspended the account of a Chinese-born billionaire who was using the social media service to publicize allegations of corruption against top Communist Party officials.
The billionaire, Guo Wengui, also known as Miles Kwok, had in recent days added tens of thousands of followers to his account, @KwokMiles, where he posted screenshots of documents that he said suggested corruption at the highest levels of the Chinese government. 
  China, where Twitter has a minimal presence and is blocked by the authorities, considers Mr. Guo to be a criminal. 
A Chinese official said last week that Interpol, the global police organization, had issued a   global request for his arrest.
Nicholas Pacilio, a spokesman for Twitter, declined to comment.
Mr. Guo's account was apparently suspended for about four hours before it was restored after inquiries from members of the news media. 
Twitter normally suspends accounts if they are deemed to be sending out spam, if they appear to have been "hacked or compromised" or if they engage in "abusive behavior," according to the company's website.
Twitter considers the posting of private information, like identification numbers, without the consent of those involved to be abusive behavior. 
In recent days, Mr. Guo had posted two screenshots that contained the Chinese national identification numbers of several people. 
When his account was restored, those screenshots had been removed.
Rebecca MacKinnon, who studies internet companies' policies and practices affecting users' freedom of expression and privacy at New America in Washington, said that many governments work with contractors or nonprofit groups to monitor social media accounts of people they are concerned about.
"Some authoritarian governments engage in a variant of this practice, monitoring accounts of critics and opponents for apparent violations of the companies' own terms of service, then flag them through the companies' abuse-reporting channels," Ms. MacKinnon said in an email.
In recent days, Mr. Guo was in New York. 
He has said publicly that he does not have a Chinese passport. 
The suspension of his Twitter account came days after his Facebook account was suspended in what the company called a mistake.
Mr. Guo has done business with family members of top Communist Party officials, and he had a close working relationship with one of China's top spies. 
His recent public denunciations appear to have alarmed Beijing.
On April 19, Mr. Guo appeared in a televised interview with Voice of America's Chinese-language service, during which he accused one of China's most senior leaders of corruption. 
China summoned Voice of America's Beijing reporter to the Foreign Ministry and contacted it in Washington through its embassy, urging the news service, which is part of the United States government but is run independently, to cancel the interview.
Mr. Guo did not respond to a request for comment.
