
HNA Group, a Chinese aviation and shipping conglomerate, is hoping to buy a bridge directly to the White House with its latest deal. 
HNA is taking a stake in SkyBridge Capital, the hedge fund of the newly minted presidential adviser Anthony Scaramucci. 
The business fit is a stretch, but the rationale of HNA making a friend on Donald J. Trump's team as it tries to expand in the United States is hard to avoid.
Neither SkyBridge nor HNA nor RON Transatlantic, its partner in taking a majority stake, has revealed the terms of the deal. 
HNA probably paid less than $200 million, making it little more than an amuse-bouche for the deal-hungry company. 
It gobbled up more than $17 billion in overseas assets in 2016, including hotels, golf courses and the American cloud-computing company Ingram Micro, according to Thomson Reuters data.
Last week, HNA spent $460 million on the New Zealand-based leasing and investment company UDC Finance. 
That will help expand its nascent financial empire, which domestically spans asset management, life insurance and peer-to-peer lending as well as aircraft leasing.
There's a big difference, though, between the services offered by its fledgling finance unit and the fund of hedge funds business for which SkyBridge is best known. 
And it's not as if HNA can suddenly offer its new acquisition's services to Chinese investors: Beijing's recent imposition of tighter capital controls, including limiting outflows, has put that to rest, possibly for several years.
The potential return on the SkyBridge deal looks far more political than financial. 
Congress has long been wary of Chinese deal makers; of late, even private companies like HNA have been tarred with the same brush as state-run concerns. 
President-elect Trump has raised the ante by courting Taiwan and threatening to brand China a currency manipulator.
If buying a chunk of Mr. Scaramucci's business has even a chance of offsetting that, HNA may consider it money well spent. 
Using government connections, after all, is how Chinese businesses often get their deals over the finish line at home. 
Granted, currying favor with one presidential adviser won't suddenly clear a path through Congress, the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States and a host of other regulators, but every advantage helps.
