
HONG KONG -- The Hong Kong police arrested 75 people in a raid of a local prostitution ring, the police said Thursday, a case that showed the breadth of the problem in the territory.
Although working as a prostitute is legal in Hong Kong, the semiautonomous Chinese territory bans organized prostitution, and a conviction for knowingly taking from a prostitute's earnings could result in a 10-year prison sentence.
Among those arrested in the raid Wednesday night were eight Hong Kong residents charged with profiting from the earnings of sex workers, running a ''vice establishment'' and operating an unlicensed massage parlor.
The arrests highlighted how organized gangs, known as triads in Hong Kong, are believed to wield control over the local sex industry, which often relies on women from mainland China and other countries to fuel the trade. 
The women arrested in the raid came not only from mainland China but from Southeast Asia, Russia, Kazakhstan and Ukraine, The South China Morning Post reported, quoting police officials.
Prostitutes in Hong Kong can work legally in so-called one-woman brothels, but prostitution syndicates often earn their money by taking a share of the income of women who ply their trade in small, subdivided flats. 
Wednesday's raid occurred in several such units in the Yuen Long district, not far from the border with mainland China.
Furthermore, prostitution syndicates have increasingly relied on prostitutes from the mainland and other countries who come to Hong Kong through entry permits and tourist visas. 
However, receiving money from any work, including sex work, is a violation of tourist status.
In Wednesday's raid, 59 women and eight men were arrested on charges of ''breaching their conditions of stay,'' the Hong Kong police said.
The raid resulted from an investigation, code-named Rushflow, that began three months ago. 
It was the city's second biggest prostitution raid this year; on Jan. 
31, the police arrested 99 suspected prostitutes and two suspected pimps in a raid of a 14-story building in the Mong Kok district of Hong Kong.
The South China Morning Post reported that syndicates in the territory often take up to half the earnings of prostitutes they control, charging them for rent and other services.
