
Simone Tong was putting together a bowl of cold noodles, heap by delicious heap -- salty ground pork, crushed peanuts, tiny mint leaves, florets of pickled cauliflower -- a jumble of textures, lit up with vinegar and chile. 
It was a simple dish, and one she affectionately described as homey in an earlier conversation, when I told her that it was one of my favorite things, and that I wanted to learn how to make it at home.
At the restaurant she runs in the East Village, Little Tong Noodle Shop, Tong drops glowing charcoal into hissing oil, so that the oil is infused with its flavor. 
This way, she can add something close to the specific seared quality transmitted by a hot, seasoned wok, even to raw ingredients. 
She cures, smokes and dehydrates egg yolk, so that she can shave it in frills, simulating the umami of bonito, but with no tuna in sight. 
The shop seems cozy and informal, but that's only because Tong is the kind of chef who doesn't like to draw attention to her technique; you enjoy the food without realizing how much work has gone into it.
Tong was born in China and eventually came to the United States for college. 
During that time, she cooked for her friends at school and went back to Chengdu for the summers to work as a translator in her mother's restaurant. 
A friend insisted she start watching some new television programs, and after streaming an episode of a food show that featured the chef Wylie Dufresne, Tong applied to a culinary school and hoped to extern at his restaurant, WD-50, which in time she did. 
She worked for him, and for other chefs, for years, all the while revising ideas for her own restaurant.
Tong is from Sichuan, but many of the flavors at Little Tong have roots in nearby Yunnan, a vast and diverse province, scattered with small family farms. 
Tong spent months there last year Airbnb-hopping, getting around through China's ride-sharing app, Didi Chuxing, asking everyone she met, ''What's good?''
In every town, there was a different answer: tarts filled with flower petals, eggs scrambled with young ferns, fresh cow's-milk cheese dabbed with rose jam, beautiful dry-cured hams, marbled with fat. 
Tong tried mushroom varieties she didn't have the words for, picked tea leaves to roast and realized it would be impossible to precisely replicate the food of the region back in New York. 
Instead she improvised, building the flavors of Yunnan into her menu like a guiding principle. 
''I wouldn't say what I do is authentic,'' she said, ''and I wouldn't want anyone to think that's what I'm trying to do.''
To make her version of the pork noodles, Tong ground fresh pork butt and belly and let the meat cook down with garlic, ginger and scallions. 
She added some fermented vegetables after a while, which gave the meat a level of depth and tang it could never have on its own. 
The noodle dressing was gently salty with soy, a balanced mix of black vinegar and rice vinegar, softened with homemade chile oil. 
Tong picked herbs, leaving the leaves whole, so that some bites would be bright and fresh, standing out against others, sharp and sweet and tingling with heat. 
She piled all the toppings over the noodles, along with sliced breakfast radishes and lacto-fermented cauliflower, cabbage and long beans, then used chopsticks to mix it all up.
When I got home, I tried to make something similar, using whatever vegetables I had around, cooking it differently every time I made it. 
This could be another way of saying that in the kitchen I can be lazy, and cut corners, and I'll do anything to avoid going food shopping at rush hour, which is often true, but Tong had encouraged me to swap and replace toppings according to mood and season. 
The essentials were pork, peanuts and herbs, she said, and everything else was flexible.
So I added what was around, what seemed compatible with vinegar-splashed rice noodles: chopped cucumbers, boiled soybeans, jarred pickled chiles, sliced watermelon radishes, leftover grilled corn, shaved off the cob. 
These versions were all a little different from Tong's, and from each other, but delicious. 
On a particularly sweaty afternoon, my appetite and energy curbed by the heat, I had all the components ready, so I washed herbs and assembled lunch. 
It was a comfort, but a luxurious one, like an hour in an empty, cool movie theater on a summer day when the air doesn't move and your thighs stick together and it feels as if the city is melting.
Recipe: Rice Noodles With Spicy Pork and Herbs
Recipe: Rice Noodles With Spicy Pork and Herbs
This cold rice-noodle dish, dressed in vinegar and chile oil and topped with spicy pork, herbs and peanuts, has roots in Yunnan, a southwestern Chinese province, where the garnish may vary according to the kitchen and season. 
The dish is quick to put together but can be served at a leisurely pace: Plate it, or set all of the components on the table and let people put together their own bowls the way they like, to their taste. 
The chef Simone Tong, who runs a Yunnan-inspired noodle restaurant in Manhattan, makes her version with ground pork, peanuts and a mix of fresh herbs but adds raw breakfast radishes and lacto-fermented pickles as well, for extra crunch and flavor. 
Feel free to do the same, or not; it's in the spirit of the dish to improvise with what's in season and what's on hand.
1 pound thin, round rice noodles
2 tablespoons rice vinegar
1 tablespoon soy sauce
1 tablespoon black vinegar
1 tablespoon chile oil (like Lao Gan Ma brand)
1 teaspoon sugar
1 tablespoon canola or other neutral oil
1/2 pound ground pork
1 teaspoon salt
2 garlic cloves, sliced
1 1-inch piece ginger, chopped
2 scallions, light parts chopped, green parts reserved for garnish
1 tablespoon yacai (Sichuan preserved vegetables, optional)
Handful of herbs like mint, basil and cilantro leaves, washed
1/4 cup salted, roasted peanuts, chopped
4 breakfast radishes, sliced (optional)
1. Bring a large pot of water to boil, and cook noodles according to instructions. 
Drain noodles while running under cold water, until they are cool to the touch. 
Set aside. 
Mix dressing by whisking rice vinegar, soy sauce, black vinegar, chile oil and sugar until sugar dissolves. 
Set aside.
2. Cook the pork topping: Heat oil in saucepan over medium heat, and add ground pork and salt. 
Pan-fry, breaking meat into small pieces with a wooden spoon, until no pink parts and no liquid remain in the pan, about 5 minutes. 
Add garlic, ginger and scallion whites, and stir occasionally until the raw smell has disappeared and the meat is starting to brown in places, about 5 minutes. 
Add the vegetables, if using, along with a tablespoon of water, and cook for 2 or 3 minutes more, or until mixture is darkened and thick. 
Set aside.
3. When you're ready to serve, divide cool, drained noodles into four individual bowls, and top each with a tablespoon of vinegar dressing followed by a pile of ground pork, herbs, peanuts and radishes, to taste. 
Serve with any remaining garnish, and additional chile oil and chile-oil solids, on the side.
Yield: Serves 4
Adapted from Simone Tong.
