
BEIJING — Before the Chinese human rights lawyer stood trial for subversion, he wrote a letter saying he would confess to such charges only if he was tortured.
But on Monday, the lawyer, Xie Yang, appeared at court a drastically altered man. 
He had become a seemingly contrite actor in a trial intended to discredit China's struggling dissident lawyers who take up contentious cases and want courts freed of Communist Party control.
"I feel ashamed and deeply remorseful for my past actions," Mr. Xie said at his trial in Changsha, a city in southern China, according to transcripts issued online by the court. 
"Everyone should take me as a warning to certainly stay within the framework of the law, and avoid being exploited by Western anti-China forces."
At the trial, Mr. Xie withdrew his claims of torture, which were laid out in piercing detail in transcripts of meetings shared earlier by his former defense lawyers. 
He pleaded guilty to the subversion charge and a charge of disrupting court proceedings. 
And he placed blame for his years as a combative lawyer on seductive but toxic ideas about constitutional government learned from study sessions abroad.
"The legal authorities fully ensured my legitimate rights and did not extract confession through torture," Mr. Xie said, according to the court's account, which was widely publicized by Chinese official news media.
Mr. Xie, 45, is the latest in a succession of lawyers and activists arrested in a 2015 crackdown who have faced trial, pleaded guilty and been displayed on television voicing remorse for their former activism. 
Four stood trial in August last year, and last month, Li Heping, another rights lawyer, was given a suspended prison sentence after   pleading guilty to a subversion charge. 
Others detained in the crackdown and released on bail have also made televised confessions.
The Chinese government has said that Mr. Xie's trial and the others were open. 
But Western diplomats and journalists who have tried to enter such hearings have been kept outside, and friends and supporters of the defendants have said the confessions appeared carefully rehearsed and made under compulsion.
Human rights groups denounced the proceedings against Mr. Xie as a show trial illustrating how far China's president, Xi Jinping, has rolled back dissent.
"Never mind that the trial was closed to the public, and that Xie was deprived of representation by a lawyer of his own choosing and of family contacts," Maya Wang, a researcher for Human Rights Watch in Hong Kong, said by email. 
"Somehow, the authorities want us to believe that under these circumstances, Xie's sudden change of heart was made under free will."
A day before the trial, Mr. Xie's wife, Chen Guiqiu, denounced the Chinese government's claims that his case would be heard openly and impartially.
"I have a deep understanding of how in China the police, prosecutors and courts are in league, and there is no judicial fairness or transparency to speak of," Ms. Chen said in a letter issued on Sunday. 
She fled China in February, eventually reaching the United States through Thailand, according to an   interview she gave to The Associated Press.
In her letter, Ms. Chen said she remained convinced that her husband was tortured after the police detained him in July 2015 during a crackdown on lawyers accused of subversion, encouraging protests, fraud and other crimes.
"If the torture didn't happen, all the authorities have to do is show the video footage from Xie Yang's time in custody," Ms. Chen wrote.
Mr. Xie's trial stood out because of the allegations of torture that emerged from his detention in January, and his reversal at the trial. 
Mr. Xie said he was abused by interrogators who blew smoke in his face, punched and kicked him, and forced him to sit on top of a wobbly stack of plastic stools, warning him not to move or suffer recriminations.
"I wanted to end their interrogation of me as quickly as I could, even if it meant death," Mr. Xie told his lawyers, Chen Jiangang and Liu Zhengqing, according to transcripts of their meetings that Mr. Chen vouched for as authentic. 
He and Mr. Liu were told that Mr. Xie did not want them as his lawyers, and Mr. Xie was represented at the trial by lawyers who accepted much of the prosecution's case.
Chinese state news reports also said their transcripts were "fake news," and at the trial, Mr. Xie said his claims of torture were bogus, according to the court. 
Mr. Xie said he had been "brainwashed" into antigovernment beliefs at training sessions organized in Hong Kong and South Korea by human rights groups.
"What was the training about?" a prosecutor asked Mr. Xie, according to the online court transcript.
"It was mainly brainwashing in Western constitutionalism and other erroneous ideas," Mr. Xie answered, according to that transcript.
"What effect did this training have on you?" he was asked.
"It gave me ideas like overturning the present system and realizing Western constitutional government in China," Mr. Xie said.
The prosecutors said that Mr. Xie used Weibo, a popular Chinese microblog service, to voice subversive ideas, and they cited messages he sent with Telegram, a message service that has become popular among Chinese rights activists because of its supposed security. 
The Changsha Intermediate People's Court did not announce a verdict on Monday, but a guilty verdict seems virtually certain.
"I express my sincere regret for the misleading and negatively influencing the public over the question of torture," Mr. Xie told the court.
In the letter written in January and issued in March, Mr. Xie sounded a warning.
"If one day in the future I admit guilt — whether in writing or in a video or voice recording — that will not be a true expression of my thoughts," Mr. Xie said in that letter. 
"Now, I'm under huge pressure, and so is my family, demanding that I admit guilt and keep my mouth shut about the torture and torment."
Mr. Chen, the defense lawyer who exposed Mr. Xie's claims of torture, was taken into custody in southwest China last week, according to a message he sent to friends. 
On Tuesday, he said in a brief phone call that he had been released in Beijing after being accompanied by security officers for several days.
