
United States markets stemmed an early slide on Friday, finishing mostly higher and nudging the benchmark S&P 500 index to its second weekly gain in a row.
Gains in shares of technology and consumer goods companies outweighed losses in financial stocks and shares of retailers as investors continued to size up the latest batch of quarterly corporate snapshots.
Before a late-afternoon flurry of buying, the market had been on pace to finish lower as investors hit pause after a tumultuous two months where the index followed up its worst December since 1931 with its best January in three decades.
''Earnings are coming in good -- we're seeing over 15 percent growth -- but there are some concerns about the next quarter that growth is going to be pretty close to zero,'' said Karyn Cavanaugh, senior markets strategist at Voya Investment Management.
The S&P 500 rose 1.83 points, or 0.1 percent, to 2,707.88. 
The Dow Jones industrial average lost 63.20 points, or 0.3 percent, to 25,106.33.
The Nasdaq composite added 9.85 points, or 0.1 percent, to 7,298.20. 
The Russell 2000 index of smaller companies picked up 0.77 points, or 0.1 percent, to 1,506.39. 
Major stock indexes in Europe finished lower.
Traders have been worried about predicted slowdowns in economies around the world, with trade tensions between the United States and China adding to the strain. 
Warnings about slower growth from Europe and Britain earlier this week hit hard, helping to derail a five-day winning streak for the S&P 500.
It hasn't been all bad news, however. 
Companies have been reporting better-than-expected earnings for the last three months of 2018, and the Federal Reserve has indicated it will take a more patient approach to raising interest rates. 
Still, concerns are building about whether profits can keep growing this year, especially after companies' strong gains in 2018 following a sweeping corporate tax cut.
''The markets are looking forward to an earning season that might be a little bit challenging for the first quarter, because they're going to be having to jump over a higher bar,'' Cavanaugh said.
Across the S&P 500, analysts are forecasting earnings per share to drop 1.8 percent in the first quarter from a year earlier. 
They were calling for growth just a few weeks ago, and if the updated forecasts prove true, it will be the first decline in nearly three years. 
Looking beyond the first quarter, earnings growth by S&P 500 companies is expected to grow 5 percent for all of 2019.
Technology stocks drove much of the market's late-day recovery Friday, with Motorola Solutions leading the pack. 
The stock vaulted 14.1 percent.
Financial stocks took some of the heaviest losses and were hurt by a drop in interest rates, which can limit the profits they make from lending money. 
Morgan Stanley shares slid 1.6 percent.
Treasury yields fell as investors continued to seek out safer areas of the market, given all the economic and profit concerns. 
Treasury yields fall when prices for the bonds rise.
The yield on the 10-year Treasury note dropped to 2.63 percent from 2.66 percent late Thursday. 
It had been above 3 percent as recently as December.
Traders continued to weigh a mixed batch of company earnings reports Friday.
Shares of the chip maker Qorvo declined 3 percent although the company reported stronger earnings for its latest quarter than Wall Street expected. 
Investors focused instead on its revenue forecast for the current quarter, which was below analysts' expectations. 
The company cited weakness across the smartphone market.
Goodyear Tire & Rubber shares plunged 9.1 percent, posting the biggest loss in the S&P 500 index, after the company reported weaker-than-expected profit for the latest quarter. 
The company cited some weakness in China, which has been a big source of concern for investors recently.
Markets around the world have been lurching up and down in recent months as investors worry about fallout from the United States-China trade dispute. 
President Trump said on Thursday that he did not plan to meet the Chinese leader Xi Jinping before their cease-fire on tariffs expires in early March.
Mr. Trump's announcement weighed on markets around the world, and indexes in Europe and Asia mostly fell.
