
imagine you have to make a bet. 
There are two 18-year-olds, one in China, the other in the United States, both poor and short on prospects. 
You have to pick the one with the better chance at upward mobility. 
Which would you choose
China has risen so quickly that your chances of improving your station in life there vastly exceed those in the United States.
China is still much poorer over all than the United States. 
But the Chinese have taken a commanding lead in that most intangible but valuable of economic indica- tors: optimism.
In a country still haunted by the Cultural Revolution, where politics are tightly cir- cumscribed by an authoritarian state, the Chinese are now among the most opti- mistic people in the world -- much more so than Americans and Europeans, accord- ing to public opinion surveys.
What has changed?
Most of all, an economic expansion without precedent in modern history.
Eight hundred million people have risen out of poverty. 
That's two and a half times the population of the United States.
Not only are incomes drastically rising within families, but sons are outearning their fathers. 
That means expectations are rising, too, especially among China's grow- ing middle class.
Life expectancy has also soared. 
Chi- nese men born in 2013 are expected to
live more than seven years longer than those born in 1990; women are expected to live nearly 10 years longer.
''It feels like there are no limits to how far you can go,'' said Wu Haifeng, 37, a financial analyst who was born to a family of corn farmers in northern China and now earns more than $78,000 a year. 
''It feels like China will always be strong.''
China used to make up much of the world's poor. 
Now it makes up much of the world's middle class.
There are risks, of course, and no guar- antees that China's rise will continue indefi- nitely.
A prolonged economic slump could inflict major damage. 
And experts warn that China could fall into the middle-in- come trap -- in which growth and earnings plateau -- if it fails to address high corpo- rate debt levels or doesn't do more to encourage innovation. 
Demography is also a ticking bomb: China is racing to get rich before it gets old.
Yet for now, the economic arc seems ever upward.
Like the United States, China still has a yawning gap between the rich and the poor -- and the poorest Chinese are far poorer, with nearly 500 million people, or about 40 percent of the population, living on less than $5.50 a day, according to the World
Bank.But by some measures Chinese society
is now the more equal of the two countries. 
Today, the economic output per capita in China is $12,000, compared with $3,500 a
decade ago. 
The number is far higher in the United States, $53,000.
Yet few analysts doubt where the bigger increases will come.
China's progress is especially remarkable given how the government has used social engineering to restrict where people live and how many children they have. 
Loos- ening those constraints could accelerate income growth.
This is why many people now talk about ''the Chinese Dream.''
Xu Liya, 49, once tilled wheat fields in Zhejiang, a rural province along China's east coast. 
Her family ate meat only once a week, and each night she crammed into a bedroom with seven relatives.
Then she attended university on a schol- arship and started a clothing store. 
Now she owns two cars and an apartment valued at more than $300,000. 
Her daugh- ter attends college in Beijing.
''Poverty and corruption have hurt aver- age people in China for too long,'' she said. 
''While today's society isn't perfect, poor people have the resources to compete with rich people, too.''
