
THE LOST PIANOS OF SIBERIA By Sophy Roberts
No musical instrument connotes bourgeois European respectability like the piano. 
Large, unwieldy and expensive, a good piano is a mark of affluence and stability. 
With its delicate balance of wood and strings, it also requires a stable climate. 
For all these reasons, the piano is not often associated with Siberia.
In ''The Lost Pianos of Siberia,'' the English travel writer Sophy Roberts describes her attempt to track down ''lost pianos'' in remote places like Irkutsk, Kamchatka and Kolyma. 
Her quest begins in the summer of 2015 in Mongolia, where a wealthy German friend introduces her to his protégé: a gifted musician named Odgerel Sampilnorov. 
''Within a few hours of hearing her play, I had an epiphany,'' the German recalled of Sampilnorov's earlier performances, on an old instrument from Ulaanbaatar. 
''I'd never heard talent like it.''
She now plays in a tent on the steppe on a modern Yamaha that's ''out of sorts.''
So her patron offers to help finance Roberts in an effort to find Sampilnorov a Siberian piano with a better back story and more character in its sound: a ''historic piano ... which still resonated with the gentler timbre of the 19th century.''
In the end, Sampilnorov gets her piano, and Roberts a travel narrative in which Siberia's sublimely harsh natural setting, brutal history and exotic folk traditions are placed in contrast with the great percussive symbol of European civilization.
In 1774, Catherine the Great ordered a square piano anglais -- then the hot new instrument -- from England. 
By the beginning of the 19th century many affluent Russian households had pianofortes, and piano lessons and recitals were in high demand. 
Russia eventually produced outstanding classical composers and musicians, among them pianists like Anton and Nikolai Rubinstein and Sergei Rachmaninoff. 
The 1917 Revolution scattered and destroyed many of Russia's pianos, but the Soviets later brought affordable pianos, as well as musical education, to people who could not otherwise have afforded to touch such an instrument.
As Russians and other travelers moved east -- first as explorers, traders and colonizers and later as political exiles and prisoners -- their musical instruments went with them. 
Anna Bering, the wife of the Danish maritime explorer Vitus Bering, brought a clavichord from St. Petersburg to the Sea of Okhotsk in the 1730s, traveling 6,000 miles by sleigh, boat and horse, and then brought it back again. 
Maria Volkonsky, the famously devoted wife of one of the Decembrists, brought a piano when she joined her husband in exile in Irkutsk, soon dubbed the ''Paris of Siberia.''
Another Siberian town, Kyakhta, was known in its 19th-century heyday as Asia's ''Sandy Venice'': a stopping point on the tea-caravan road from Mongolia. 
There rich merchants bought pianos and hired exiled Poles (their country had produced Chopin, after all) to teach their children to play. 
Much later, Stalin-era music education campaigns sent Soviet-made upright pianos to Siberian music schools. 
There were even pianos in the Gulag, where prisoners put on musical performances. 
Roberts tries to locate some of these instruments, with varying degrees of success. 
In the process, she discovers and recounts stories of Siberian musicians and music lovers.
Much of ''The Lost Pianos of Siberia'' consists of neat summaries of major events in Russian history -- the Decembrist uprising, the Gulag -- and well-known anecdotes, such as Chekhov's trip to Sakhalin Island, and the composition and debut of Shostakovich's ''Leningrad'' Symphony during World War II. 
This is not a book for readers already familiar with Russian history.
Nor is it a book for music buffs. 
There are many pianos, but there is remarkably little about music. 
Roberts's descriptions of landscapes are as lovely as fine embroidery, but when she searches for words to describe music she comes up empty. 
She describes the ''pace'' of Russian bells as ''an exhilarating distillation of music's power.''
When she fails to locate the Romanovs' last piano in Tobolsk, she reminds herself to ''just find a piano with a pure sound ... something humble, human and loved.''
In the epilogue, as she listens to Sampilnorov play her new instrument, she thinks, ''This was music at its best: intimate, pure and true.''
Pianos are delicate instruments that do not endure forever, especially under harsh weather conditions. 
Like Lenin's corpse, a very old piano will have to be reconstituted from new materials if it is to persevere. 
But Roberts loves a relic, and she is convinced of the value of individual pianos as testaments to the lives and experiences of their owners, and to history. 
''Each piano sings differently because of the people who used to play it and polish its wooden case,'' she writes. 
This is the magical approach to objects that prevails in house museums, which rely on possessions as a kind of spirit medium. 
But a reader cannot finger the keys of these instruments or peep inside at the strings and hammers, touching the piano and communing with its former owner. 
A reader is reading, and words will have to do.
At one point Roberts fails to find the pianos she's seeking in the Chinese city of Harbin, which became a haven for refugees from the 1917 Revolution. 
''It was as if there was no past before Mao ... no spectacular refugees who had brought with them (and left behind) that brilliant early sound of jazz,'' she writes of the experience. 
''The sense of dystopia struck me forcefully, how an object can lose its meaning when it has lost its owner's story, like a body detached from its soul, or a refugee from his homeland.''
It's a thin line between memorabilia and the detritus of the past; every piano will rot eventually. 
But stories, like songs, you can carry with you forever.Sophie Pinkham is the author of ''Black Square: Adventures in Post-Soviet Ukraine.''THE LOST PIANOS OF SIBERIABy Sophy RobertsIllustrated. 
433 pp. 
Grove Press. 
$27.
