
When Jed Levin's grandfather opened the Piper Inn in Aurora, Colo., in 1968, customers would fly in, literally. 
Farmers landed their Piper Cub crop-dusters at the nearby airstrip and walked over for a simple meal.
Now, the place sits amid big-box stores in Denver's suburban sprawl, ranks of Harley-Davidsons fill the parking lot and the menu is decidedly eclectic. 
''There isn't a single item that doesn't have a story behind it,'' said Mr. Levin, 36, who now runs the place with his father, Rich, and sister, Piper.
At first, the restaurant served diner staples like grilled cheese sandwiches and hot hamburger (a patty on a slice of white bread, topped with gravy; you eat it with a knife and fork). 
The first cook who left his mark on the menu was a guy from Buffalo who put the place ahead of the curve as a local destination for hot chicken wings in the 1970s.
That's also when the inn gained a reputation as a biker-friendly bar. 
(Colorado, with its smooth highways and mountain views, is an international destination for motorcycle riders.) Benny Armas, who went on to start the Capitol Hill institution Benny's in Washington, added chiles rellenos and enchiladas while he was in charge.
In about 1984, Kenny and Marcia Mah, a couple who had immigrated from Guangzhou, China, took over the kitchen and added a separate, successful Chinese-American menu. 
They stayed for 37 years. 
As the menus gradually fused, the Piper Inn became known for -- and still serves -- the Mahs' Chinese hot wings, pork fried rice and won-ton soup, alongside tacos, Buffalo wings, BLTs and Bud Light. 
And the crowd is also famously diverse.
''It's a quintessential Colorado mix and the most welcoming place,'' said Patricia Calhoun, the founding editor of Westword, an independent online newspaper, who has lived in Denver since 1977. 
''There are people who love the danger of the open road, people who live in the suburbs but like the idea of the open road, and people whose idea of a taste of danger is a spicy hot chicken wing.''
When Mr. Levin moved back to Denver to join the family business after a decade in Los Angeles, he added made-from-scratch soft tacos and the dish that has pulled in a new generation of food lovers: carne asada fries (a California-Mexican classic most easily described as nachos, but with French fries instead of tortilla chips). 
Fries smothered in green chile gravy are a regional classic in Colorado and New Mexico, so it wasn't much of a leap to Piper Inn's plate of crinkle-cut fries topped with grilled steak, beer cheese sauce, chopped onion and cilantro.
Under the coronavirus lockdowns, the restaurant is serving takeout food only, and Mr. Levin said that, to his surprise, he is doing close to a normal volume of business. 
When the restaurant closed on March 17, all 24 employees, including family members, were furloughed; when federal Paycheck Protection Program funds came through in April, all but one were rehired. 
The near-term goal, he said last week: ''al fresco dining in our parking area.''
JULIA MOSKIN
