
LIUPANSHUI, China -- Guizhou is one of China's poorest provinces, yet its villages of rice paddies, buffalos and mud-brick homes have long been a proving ground for rising stars in the Chinese Communist Party. 
The former president, Hu Jintao, once ran this mountainous southwestern province, as did a powerful lieutenant to President Xi Jinping.
Now, the party has tapped another leader in Guizhou for promotion into its top tiers, making him a potential candidate to one day succeed Mr. Xi. The official, Chen Min'er, 56, a former Chinese literature student and propaganda worker, is nearly certain to enter the Politburo at a party congress in the autumn, putting him in the running for an even more powerful role in the future.
Several other Chinese leaders in their 50s are poised for promotion as well, and analysts are watching to see if any will be anointed with a seat on the Politburo Standing Committee, the party's highest rung of power. 
That would fit with recent party tradition, but some insiders believe Mr. Xi may delay designating a successor, setting up a leadership contest in which he will decide the victor.
Mr. Chen is ''clearly being fast-tracked, and I think he will end up on the Standing Committee someday,'' said Christopher K. Johnson, an expert on Chinese elite politics at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington. 
''I'm doubtful it will happen now, but Xi Jinping could force his elevation as a declaration of his leadership supremacy.''
In the jockeying for advancement, Mr. Chen starts with several advantages. 
He is one of Mr. Xi's protégés, having spent much of his career in Zhejiang, a wealthier province in eastern China, while Mr. Xi was the party chief there. 
This summer, Mr. Chen was handed a high-profile assignment as party secretary of Chongqing, a vast municipality of 30 million where he can showcase his political skills.
And in between, he spent five and a half years governing the 36 million people of Guizhou, including most recently two years as party secretary, the most powerful job in a province. 
A stint in a poor, heavily rural province like Guizhou is important for Mr. Chen's prospects. 
The future of China's 590 million rural dwellers is an increasingly pressing issue for the government, and his time in Guizhou gives him the gritty, grass-roots experience expected of an aspiring national leader.
''Guizhou is a very good province for hopefuls to stay there for several years,'' said Ding Xueliang, a scholar of Chinese politics at the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. 
''You go to one of the poorest, most difficult places and take up the burden of changing it. 
That will earn you additional credit to rise higher.''
Bruce J. Dickson, a political scientist at the George Washington University, said party officials are often groomed for higher posts by spending time in a less developed area. 
''There is wide recognition that inequality is rising, and improving living standards in rural areas is one way to show the Chinese Communist Party is trying to narrow the gap,'' he said.
[Video: President Xi calls for targeted policies to combat poverty in old revolutionary zones Watch on YouTube.]
Economic conditions in Guizhou have been improving, and rural life here is better than a decade ago. 
But persistent poverty in its mountain villages has been a blot on Mr. Xi's promise to end rural poverty by 2020. 
Mr. Chen took up the challenge with an acolyte's zeal.
''Meeting the targets on poverty eradication on schedule is a tough battle that Guizhou must not lose,'' he said in March, in one of many rousing speeches on the subject. 
''If we lose, we'll break our word and lose the good will of the public.''
Mr. Chen's antipoverty campaign applied policies sure to appeal to Mr. Xi's belief that the Communist Party can be an overseer of economic change, marshaling investment and resources for the national good.
Since Deng Xiaoping and his allies broke up Mao's rural communes in the early 1980s, Chinese farmers have mostly tilled small plots of land under long-term leases from village governments. 
But fewer and fewer young people see a future in agriculture, which offers lower, less steady pay than factories or menial jobs in towns and cities.
''In recent years earnings from farming were low, everyone let land go fallow,'' said Tao Yongpan, an official at Mount Niangniang, a cluster of villages in the Liupanshui area of western Guizhou that served as an inspiration for policies promoted by Mr. Chen. ''Soil erosion was serious and farmland was left idle. 
Rural production was on the slide.''
Some economists have urged the Chinese government to privatize farmland, arguing that would encourage better land use and unleash market forces to lift productivity.
But the party has been reluctant to shed its ideological commitment to collective ownership -- in effect state control -- of farmland. 
Officials and some experts also worry that privatizing the land would make farmers more vulnerable to exploitation and create kindling for social unrest.
In Guizhou, Mr. Chen instead promoted a solution that has gained favor under Mr. Xi: merging small family fields into cooperatives that pool villagers' land, money and labor. 
Other provinces and politicians have for years experimented with this approach, which is meant to boost production through economies of scale. 
But Mr. Chen pushed it hard and gave it his own twist.
Rural families became shareholders in the cooperatives, paying in by handing over some or all of their leased land. 
The cooperatives then used the larger acreage to produce commercial crops like tea and walnuts, paying villagers a share of returns and sometimes wages for farm work. 
Often local companies also invested in these enlarged farms, bringing finance and management experience, but also taking profits.
''Before the land was all fragmented,'' said Huang Zhineng, a manager at Mount Niangniang. 
''With unified management, the same land can lift incomes. 
It's a great model for poverty eradication.''
It is a policy that also fits into Mr. Xi's vision of entrenching the party's hold on power and restoring a spirit of socialist collectivism that harks back to Mao's era.
Mr. Xi started his career as an official in a rural commune under Mao and spent three years as a deputy party chief in a rural county in northern China. 
In Zhejiang Province, Mr. Xi promoted a cooperative scheme similar to Mr. Chen's.
Among the other Chinese officials expected to be promoted this autumn are Cai Qi, the party secretary of Beijing; Chen Quanguo, the secretary of Xinjiang, a tense region in the west; and perhaps Hu Chunhua, the secretary of Guangdong Province in the south, who was singled out for praise by Mr. Xi in April.
But that same month, Mr. Xi also said he would participate in the coming leadership congress as a delegate from Guizhou, although he has no career links there. 
Officials in Guizhou celebrated the striking gesture of support for Mr. Chen.
In villages in Guizhou, though, residents are waiting to see if Mr. Chen's policies can bring lasting profits. 
Many welcomed the changes. 
Others were wary.
''It's a good way forward for us,'' said Qiu Shuixian, 37, a farmer in Zhongxin Village in the Liupanshui area, where one cooperative has pooled land to grow red rice, a local specialty, and another newer cooperative produces fruit, walnuts, flowers and honey.
''There's no profit in farming the land ourselves,'' Mr. Qiu said.
But others said it was risky to devote so much land to crops like walnuts or red rice, which might fail in bad years or not find buyers. 
Some said they felt pressured to sign over farmland to the cooperative. 
One resident recalled Mao's time, when peasants were forced into huge communes that failed and resulted in mass starvation.
''I didn't want to hand it over,'' Chen Wenzheng, 64, said of his family's plot. 
''I wanted to grow some for myself as insurance. 
But then everyone handed theirs over, so what can you do?''
Luo Xiaopeng, a retired rural policy official who has long worked in antipoverty projects in Guizhou, said Mr. Chen's policies were designed to show quick results but could backfire. 
For example, farmers could be cajoled into risky, expensive ventures that take their land and fail after a few years. 
''I don't think this is getting a grip of the fundamental problems in the Chinese countryside,'' he said.
But Mr. Chen won't be around to see the long-term impact of his efforts. 
He has moved onto his next test.
As the new party secretary in Chongqing, he has a tricky assignment.
[Video: Chen Min'er appointed Chongqing Party chief Watch on YouTube.]
His predecessor, Sun Zhengcai, was also seen as a contender for the senior leadership. 
Then the party abruptly removed him from office and put him under investigation in July.
Bo Xilai, another party secretary of Chongqing seeking promotion, fell in scandal in 2012. 
He is now in prison.
