
Join us tomorrow (July 23) for a DealBook Debrief call with David Sanger, The Times's national security correspondent, at 11 a.m. Eastern. We will discuss "The New Tech Cold War," in which the U.S. and its allies are pushing back more aggressively on China's technology ambitions, and take your questions about Huawei, TikTok, 5G and more. 
R.S.V.P. here. 
(Want this in your inbox each day?
Sign up here.)
The pandemic stimulus cliff
Congress is racing to approve the next round of coronavirus aid — but serious disagreements remain, and Americans face dire economic straits if there's a delay.
Senate Republicans are close to rejecting their party's plans. 
At a private lunch yesterday with Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin and the White House chief of staff, Mark Meadows, several lawmakers objected to G.O.P. leaders' target of $1 trillion in new spending.
"What in the hell are we doing?" asked Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, arguing instead for more reopenings, despite a rise in coronavirus cases and the C.D.C. warning that infection rates could be even higher than reported. 
Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky said the meeting resembled "sort of a Bernie bros, progressive caucus."
But Democrats propose spending even more. 
The House's opening bid for coronavirus relief runs to $3 trillion, and Joe Biden yesterday unveiled a $775 billion plan focused on parents and caregivers.
The stakes are huge, too. 
With the jobless rate in double digits, many Americans have come to rely on an extra $600 a week in unemployment benefits, a measure set to expire next week. 
Expiry would cut the weekly income of 20 million households in half, The Times's Ben Casselman notes.
That could lead to American G.D.P. shrinking 2 percent by year end and 1.7 million fewer jobs nationwide, according to Ernie Tedeschi of Evercore ISI Research.
Here's what is happening
Investors are reportedly considering taking over TikTok. 
The Information reported that backers of the video app's Chinese parent company, including Sequoia, SoftBank and General Atlantic, are said to have held preliminary talks to buy a majority stake as the U.S. government takes a harder line against Chinese-owned companies.
Coca-Cola thinks the worst of the pandemic is over. 
The beverages giant said in its latest earnings report that revenue fell 28 percent in the second quarter. 
Sales in China and Europe have shown signs of recovery, and executives said they didn't expect things to get as bad as in spring.
The C.E.O. of the clothing group Tapestry resigned. 
Jide Zeitlin, one of the few Black leaders of a Fortune 500 company, said he was stepping down because of a pending news article about a past relationship. 
Tapestry, which owns Kate Spade and Coach, had hired a law firm to investigate an allegation of misconduct.
Elon Musk is in line for another multibillion-dollar payday. 
The Tesla chief appears to have qualified for $2.1 billion in stock awards, as the electric carmaker's average market cap surpassed $150 billion over six months. 
(Tesla is currently worth about $290 billion, more than any other auto company.)
President Trump asked the U.S. ambassador to London to bring the British Open to one of his resorts. 
The ambassador, Woody Johnson, told colleagues in 2018 that Mr. Trump wanted the golf tournament at his Turnberry resort in Scotland, The Times reports.
Trump's Fed takeover
The Senate Banking Committee advanced the nominations of Judy Shelton and Christopher Waller to the Federal Reserve Board yesterday, putting them up for a vote in the full Senate.
Ms. Shelton's passage was touch and go, but she overcame skepticism of her views about the Fed's political independence and unorthodox policy positions (she has long been a proponent of the gold standard, for example). 
Her approval went along party lines. 
Mr. Waller, a more mainstream economist, had some bipartisan backing.
Senators are likely to approve the nominations. 
Mitt Romney, Republican of Utah, said he has "concerns" about Ms. Shelton, but it would take more defections to sink her appointment — assuming that all Democrats vote against, which is not assured. 
Ms. Shelton is up for a seat once held by the former Fed chair Janet Yellen, and her term would last until 2024. 
(She has also been suggested as a potential chair if President Trump wins re-election.) Mr. Waller's term would run through 2030.
If both pass, six of the seven Fed board members will be Trump appointees. 
Board terms run for 14 years and are staggered (one is up for renewal every other year) to "ensure stability and continuity." But the seats to be filled by Ms. Shelton and Mr. Waller have sat vacant for years:
Allan Landon, nominated by President Barack Obama in 2015, never made it to a Senate Banking Committee hearing.
Marvin Goodfriend, nominated by Mr. Trump in 2017, made it through the committee but not to a full Senate vote.
Nellie Liang, nominated by Mr. Trump in 2018, withdrew from consideration after some Republican senators objected.
Mr. Trump spoke of choosing Herman Cain and Stephen Moore in 2019, but they were never formally nominated and eventually withdrew.
Deal Professor: A fair appraisal?
Steven Davidoff Solomon, a.k.a. the Deal Professor, is a professor at the U.C. 
Berkeley School of Law and the faculty co-director at the Berkeley Center for Law, Business and the Economy. 
Here, he considers the end of a contentious tactic for getting a better price for deals.
Back in 2015, Newell Rubbermaid offered to acquire a rival consumer goods group, Jarden, for around $15 billion, the equivalent of $59.21 a share. 
Two Jarden shareholders, the hedge funds Fir Tree Partners and Verition Fund Management, thought that was too low. 
So they exercised their so-called appraisal rights and petitioned a Delaware court to revisit the deal.
The battle peaked this month, when the Delaware Supreme Court ruled that the deal price was indeed off: Shareholders deserved $48.31 per share, approximately 20 percent less. 
That effectively marks the end of appraisal rights as an investor tactic, a life-altering moment for acquisitions and a loss for shareholders.
Appraisal rights allow shareholders to "dissent" from an acquisition agreement deemed unfair and ask a court for a better price. 
But they were seldom used until a 2008 case involving Transkaryotic Therapeutics. 
In that case, the court allowed shareholders to buy stock the day before a merger became effective and then dissent. 
Hedge funds then raised billions to bring more appraisal claims.
Delaware companies — that is, most U.S. corporations — howled in protest. 
The state amended its law in 2016 to limit such claims. 
In a string of cases, culminating with Aruba Networks in 2018, the courts ruled that as long as the process to sell a company was not biased, the price was fair. 
Appraisal petitions fell from 76 in 2016 to 26 in 2018. 
Jarden is likely to end them entirely.
At first, Jarden looked like a win for the dissenters, because a lower court found the sale process biased. 
But then that court ruled — and the Delaware Supreme Court affirmed — that this had led to a higher price. 
The Supreme Court also agreed that the price of Jarden's stock before the merger was announced was the fairest way to value it.
The result is that the Jarden dissenters will walk away with less than they would have gotten had they just taken the buyout price. 
Who, now, would fight a deal this way?
A top deal maker edges closer to an N.Y.C. mayoral run
Ray McGuire, a senior Citigroup banker, has hired a longtime political insider as an adviser, an indication that he's considering a campaign for New York City mayor next year.
Mr. McGuire hired Jerry Goldfeder, who has worked for Gov. Andrew Cuomo of New York and President Barack Obama, The New York Post reported. 
(Mr. Goldfeder confirmed his hiring.) Mr. McGuire is reportedly talking with policymakers and potential financial backers.
He's widely seen as a moderate Democrat, whose economic policies wouldn't look much different from, say, Mike Bloomberg's. 
Were he to run, observers say he could highlight both his back story — being raised by a single mother before attending top schools — and his long and successful Wall Street career.
"I think that his business management skills are definitely an asset right now for the city," Kathryn Wylde, the president of the business trade group Partnership for New York City, told The Post.
But is that a winning position?
Critics say the political winds don't favor a Bloomberg-like newcomer with no natural political base beyond corporate moguls. 
Mr. McGuire would face off against veteran Democratic lawmakers, including Corey Johnson, the speaker of the City Council, and Scott Stringer, the city's comptroller.
To profit, or not to profit?
Scientists around the world are rushing to develop coronavirus vaccines. 
(Quartz has a cool graphic charting their progress.) The demand is clearly there, but what isn't as obvious is how lucrative a successful vaccine might be.
Should vaccine makers profit from their treatments?
Executives from four developers — AstraZeneca, Johnson &amp; Johnson, Moderna and Pfizer — gave different answers to U.S. lawmakers yesterday.
AstraZeneca and J. &amp; J., whose efforts had federal funding, said they would sell their vaccines at cost.
But the president of Moderna, which received $483 million in federal funds, declared, "We will not sell it at cost."
Pfizer hasn't taken government money, and was noncommittal, though an executive said that "a vaccine is meaningless if people are unable to afford it."
The speed read
Deals
A group of lenders to AMC said the movie theater chain was in default because of inadequate disclosures about debt restructuring plans. 
(Bloomberg)
Hertz, the bankrupt car rental company, struck an agreement with creditors over how many of its leased vehicles it can sell. 
(WSJ)
Politics and policy
How Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany herded the E.U. to a historic $857 billion coronavirus aid package. 
Relatedly: No, the bloc didn't quite have its "Hamiltonian" moment. 
(NYT, WaPo)
Britain has reportedly abandoned hope of a U.S. trade deal before the presidential election. 
(FT)
Tech
The Justice Department accused two Chinese hackers of trying to steal coronavirus vaccine data. 
(NYT)
Twitter said it had taken down thousands of accounts tied to QAnon, a set of conspiracy theories that has led to violence and online harassment. 
(NYT)
Best of the rest
Trade wars and the pandemic have thwarted global supply chains. 
But that hasn't created many factory jobs in the U.S. 
(NYT)
A deep dive into the debate on how the pandemic might change cities. 
(NYT)
Correction: As many of you spotted, in yesterday's newsletter we got our New England politicos mixed up. 
Chris Dodd is, of course, the former senator from Connecticut, not Massachusetts. 
(His partner in the Dodd-Frank Act, the former Representative Barney Frank, represented a district in Massachusetts.)
We'd love your feedback. 
Please email thoughts and suggestions to dealbook@nytimes.com.
