
Sim Chi Yin has won the seventh annual Getty Images and Chris Hondros Fund Award, which was established in honor of Mr. Hondros, who was killed in Libya in April 2011 along with the photographer and filmmaker Tim Hetherington.
The $20,000 award comes at a fortuitous time for Ms. Sim, a freelance photographer based in Beijing who works for various publications, and also on long-term projects.
"This came completely out of the blue," she said. 
"I've been collecting rejection letters from various grants and trying to figure out funding for my long-term projects. 
It comes when I'm at a crossroads in my work and my life."
After a serious thumb injury on assignment resulted in permanent damage, Ms. Sim has been revaluating how she works, purposely slowing the pace of her photography. 
She has begun focusing on research-based projects and "thinking deeper, making fewer frames but being more intentional," she said.
Ms. Sim, 39, was named the Nobel Peace Prize photographer last year and with the commission created a multidisciplinary exhibition on nuclear weapons using photos, videos, text and objects. 
Another project is about her grandfather, who is revered in his hometown as a martyr in the Chinese Revolution, a topic that her family considers taboo.
She said photographers are looking for new ways to tell visual stories that stand out, since technology and social media have changed how these stories are made and seen. 
She noted that Mr. Hondros created a live performance with classical musicians and projections of his images from Iraq, while Mr. Hetherington made experimental videos.
"I think if Chris and Tim were alive today, they would also be searching for a new vocabulary in this age of image saturation," she said. 
"They would be at the forefront of this push for new ways of working, new ways of telling the stories that matter."
Ms. Sim's projects take an enormous amount of research before she even picks up her camera. 
But she is patient.
Raised in Singapore, she became interested in photography as a teenager. 
During an internship with The Singapore Straits Times, the paper gave her a scholarship that allowed her to study history at the London School of Economics, where she received a master's degree. 
In exchange for the scholarship, she was obligated to work for the newspaper for eight years.
When she returned to Singapore, Ms. Sim wanted to be a photographer, but she was told that she was "overqualified" and would be a reporter. 
Eventually, she rose to become the paper's Beijing correspondent, where she also took the photos for her stories. 
After fulfilling her eight years, she gave up her benefits, salary and job security and set out to be a photographer. 
The Magnum Foundation Human Rights Fellowship she received in 2010 helped start her career and she went on to freelance for The New York Times, among others. 
A mentorship at the VII Photo Agency led to full membership, though she left in 2017. 
Her long-term project on a Chinese gold miner dying from silicosis was published on Lens in 2015.
Just as her career was going "full speed" in 2015, she was attacked while on assignment by a group of North Korean migrant women workers who wrestled her camera out of her hand and severely injured her right thumb, she said. 
She was sidelined by the injury, and the publication that had given her the assignment did not cover her medical care, she said.
Two years of surgeries and physical therapy were "a bit of a wake-up call" and gave her time to reflect on the work she wanted to do. 
The advantage of "thinking more and shooting less" has led her to projects that are not classical photojournalism.
The six photographers who previously received the Hondros award were all noted photojournalists covering news internationally. 
While Ms. Sim is successful in her editorial work, she is more known for her long-term projects. 
Though Mr. Hondros was among the most admired conflict photographers of his generation, the award honors photographers who show deep human engagement and rigorous thought about what they cover, said Christina Piaia, the fund's founder, who was engaged to Mr. Hondros.
"This year, we definitely recognize that this work is different," she said. 
"We were particularly struck by her intelligence and the rigor embedded in her work. 
Her keen sense and knowledge about the geographic locations, cultures and subjects she covers are akin to Hondros's work and the immense preparation he undertook to learn not only about the current state of affairs, but the historical context of the people, conflicts and regions he covered."
In addition to the recognition for Ms. Sim, the Bronx Documentary Center received a $5,000 award in acknowledgment of its continuing community engagement and youth education programs.
