
It's a sentimental week for parent readers. 
Fans of Karl Ove Knausgaard's sprawling and often dark six-volume autobiographical novel, ''My Struggle,'' might be surprised to find the author showing his short-and-sweet side in ''Autumn,'' a slender book of essays about the material world addressed to his daughter. 
In time for school, we also recommend several books for parents, educators and kids. 
Lenora Chu's ''Little Soldiers'' compares the schooling systems in China and the United States. 
Bruce Handy's ''Wild Things'' is a spirited grown-up's tour through classics of children's literature. 
And new books for children feature a girl who grows up at a Renaissance faire, a cat who helps us with our ABC's and a track star stepping up to challenges at home.
John WilliamsDaily Books Editor and Staff Writer
AUTUMN, by Karl Ove Knausgaard. 
Translated by Ingvild Burkey. 
(Penguin Press, $27.) In ''Autumn,'' the first book in a planned series named for the seasons, Knausgaard writes 60 short essays, each considering a single object or phenomenon. 
Where the author's six-volume, 3,600-page autobiographical novel ''My Struggle'' was blunt and rangy, ''Autumn,'' addressed to the author's fourth child, is sweet and slender. 
Our critic Parul Seghal wrote: ''Loose teeth, chewing gum, it all becomes noble, almost holy, under Knausgaard's patient, admiring gaze. 
The world feels repainted.''
NO APPARENT DISTRESS: A Doctor's Coming-of-Age on the Front Lines of American Medicine, by Rachel Pearson. 
(Norton, $26.95.) In this med-school memoir that is also a probing moral inquiry, Pearson describes her struggles trying to treat patients left out of the American health care system. 
Pearson was a writer of poetry and fiction before she turned to medicine, and her literary skill is apparent.
WILD THINGS: The Joy of Reading Children's Literature as an Adult, by Bruce Handy. 
(Simon & Schuster, $26.) The premise of Handy's book is that we should take children's literature seriously. 
It succeeds wonderfully, not so much as an argument but as an emanation of spirit.
LITTLE SOLDIERS: An American Boy, a Chinese School, and the Global Race to Achieve, by Lenora Chu. 
(Harper, $27.99.) Chu vividly sketches the differences between the education structures of China and the United States in terms that will make readers ponder what they think about rote memorization and make parents question their preferences for their own children.
A BOY IN WINTER, by Rachel Seiffert. 
(Pantheon, $25.95.) Set over three days in November 1941, Seiffert's novel probes the bonds and betrayals in a Ukrainian town as it succumbs to Hitler's armies. 
Whether farmers or engineers, German or Ukrainian or Jewish, all of Seiffert's distinct and intricate characters must make wrenching choices.
THE LOCALS, by Jonathan Dee. 
(Random House, $28.) Dee's latest novel, set in the years after 9/11 in the fictional Berkshires town of Howland, Mass., offers a panorama of cops, nurses, carpenters, organic farmers and one relocated hedge fund titan. 
In this quietly engrossing narrative, Dee dishes out food for thought in sly, quotable lines.
CHESTER B. HIMES: A Biography, by Lawrence P. Jackson. (Norton, $35.) This comprehensively researched biography offers a bracing journey through the life of the uncompromising Himes, whose hard-boiled detective series mirrored his shrewd cynicism about racial progress in America. 
Jackson refuses to romanticize Himes's life or his motivation for becoming an artist.
ALL'S FAIRE IN MIDDLE SCHOOL, written and illustrated by Victoria Jamieson. 
(Dial, $12.99; ages 9 to 12.) This second graphic novel from the creator of ''Roller Girl'' offers a nuanced look at Imogene, a home-schooled girl who's grown up at a Renaissance faire. 
The book addresses racism, class differences, mean-girl doings and how to apologize effectively -- and none of it feels belabored.
THE LITTLE RED CAT WHO RAN AWAY AND LEARNED HIS ABC'S (THE HARD WAY), written and illustrated by Patrick McDonnell. 
(Little, Brown, $17.99; ages 4 to 8.) In this delightful book by the creator of the comic strip ''Mutts,'' a nameless cat wakes up and bounds out into a wide world full of adventure (in alphabetical order, of course). 
Readers must use the one letter on each page to figure out the plot.
PATINA, by Jason Reynolds. 
(Atheneum, $16.99; ages 10 and up.) This second book in Reynolds's series about the Defenders track team (the first, ''Ghost,'' was a finalist for the National Book Award) focuses on Patina Jones, the fastest girl on the team, who has to master passing the baton while navigating a rough road at home.
