
Stocks rose on Monday, buoyed by the efforts of central bankers to ease economic worries, as investors watched for developments in trade talks between the United States and China.
Trade negotiators from Washington and Beijing began discussions aimed at reaching an agreement that would end a trade war between the two countries. 
The United States and China have agreed to a standstill until early March so that they may reach a deal.
The S&amp;P 500 rose 0.7 percent, while the Nasdaq composite gained 1.3 percent as shares of large technology companies like Amazon and Netflix rose sharply.
After its shares rose 3.4 percent, Amazon ended the day with a market value of $797 billion, leapfrogging Microsoft to make it the largest company, by market capitalization, in the United States.
[Read more about how President Trump sees China's recent economic weakness as an opportunity.]
As the trade war drags on, however, investors have grown worried about its economic impact as well as the risk to corporate profits. 
Those worries were amplified last week when Apple warned that its sales in the most recent quarter would be worse than expected because of slowing demand for iPhones in China. 
And the rising cost of imports is also affecting businesses in the United States.
[Read more about American factory owners who say the trade war is hurting them.]
Offsetting those concerns, on Friday, the Federal Reserve chairman, Jerome H. Powell, said the Fed would be flexible amid market turbulence and broader concerns about slowing global growth. 
The comments sent shares in the United States higher, as did   strong job numbers for December.
Also on Friday, the People's Bank of China essentially injected $218 billion into the country's financial system. 
The move was intended to ease lending in the Chinese economy, which has experienced weaker factory output and consumer confidence.
Asian shares ended higher Monday, while Europe's major indexes pared early gains to close lower.
The Nikkei 225 index in Japan jumped 2.4 percent, and the Hang Seng in Hong Kong closed 0.8 percent higher. 
In China, the Shanghai composite index rose 0.7 percent, and the Shenzhen composite index rallied 1.7 percent.
The Euro Stoxx 50 index of European blue chips closed 0.3 percent lower, and the CAC 40 in France and FTSE 100 Britain were down about 0.4 percent. 
The Dax in Germany was 0.2 percent lower.
