
In the United States, we mostly get our foreign films through a filter: the filter of art. 
The movies of Philippe Garrel, for instance, are far outside the mainstream of contemporary French cinema, but festivals and the efforts of boutique distributors are likely to make you more conscious of his (very excellent) oeuvre than you will be about the ''Astérix and Obélix'' movies many French families eat up.
Streaming video services are beginning to change that. 
I spent some time recently looking into the sites DramaFever, Kocowa and Viki, all of which specialize in entertainment from Asia, notably South Korea, and got a hefty sampling of movies, TV dramas and variety shows. 
(DramaFever and Viki have content from China as well.)
All three sites offer some of their content free with commercials; premium plans, which yield ad-free content, go for $49.99 a year or $4.99 a month on DramaFever and Viki; and 99 cents a day, $6.99 a month, or $69.99 a year for Kocowa, which includes fresh shows a few hours after they are broadcast in South Korea. 
The movies you can find at these sites are for the most part genuine pop, as in popular, products that aren't often exported here.
The main draw of DramaFever and Kocowa is South Korean television fare. 
DramaFever, as its name implies, concentrates on serial dramas, many of them romances that are often like high-end soap operas with eccentric (by Western standards) plots and vivaciously slick production values. 
They're strangely addictive. 
I have more than one acquaintance who has dived into binge-inspiring series like ''Boys Over Flowers,'' about a female scholarship student at an elite Korean high school who is taken under the wings, sort of, of the academy's four most privileged male students. 
(''Boys Over Flowers'' is approaching its 10th anniversary, so there are a lot of episodes for the watching.)
DramaFever began in 2009 and was recently acquired by Warner Bros. Kocowa, which started in the United States in July, is a joint venture of the South Korean broadcasters KBS (the national broadcasting company), MBC (which owns the most popular variety/game show in South Korea, ''Infinite Challenge'') and SBS, which specializes in youth-oriented programming.
Viki, which is owned by Rakuten, the Japanese e-commerce giant, is certainly the most dizzyingly eclectic. 
On an iOS device, it lists more than 300 movies under the ''popular'' designation alone, and quite a variety of them. 
The late-period John Wayne western ''McClintock'' is listed next to the 2016 Chinese comedy ''Crazy Nurse,'' while John Ford's 1934 ''Judge Priest,'' starring Will Rogers, sits next to the Bengali movie ''Naughty Professor.''
The site is robustly interactive, featuring a live comment function on screen while you're watching a movie.
There are close to 200 movies now on DramaFever, not many of which were American art-house items, the director Hong Sang-soo's 2009 ''Woman on the Beach'' being a notable exception. 
A few days before getting into the site, I had read a newspaper article about Tang Wei, the Chinese actress who starred in Ang Lee's 2007 erotic drama, ''Lust, Caution,'' which earned her a two-year state-ordered hiatus from filmmaking. 
The article addressed her gradual comeback, and I was able to find one of the films discussed, the 2010 romantic drama ''Late Autumn,'' on DramaFever.
The movie's back story is itself fascinating: it's the latest of several remakes of a 1966 film that has long been lost. 
Set in Seattle, it stars Ms. Tang as a prison inmate on a furlough who falls in love with a Korean gigolo, played by Hyun Bin. 
It was the highest-grossing Korean film in China on release in 2012, and it's a surprisingly low-key work, with an excellent albeit very quiet performance by Ms. Tang. I also checked out ''So I Married an Anti-Fan'' (2016), whose boy-meets-girl, hate-love-hate-love plotline will be familiar to Hallmark movie fans, but it builds up interest through its peppy depiction of Asian fan culture.
Tim Lee, the licensing director for DramaFever, agrees that DramaFever's movie content is mostly chosen to meet the desires and expectations of its core audience, which is largely young and female. 
''We are constantly looking at what's coming out, theatrical runs, how movies are performing,'' Mr. Lee said in a phone interview. 
''If there's a limited theatrical release in the U.S. we monitor that performance.''
But because of DramaFever's prevailing ethos, you're going to find more romantic comedies than noteworthy Korean genre movies like the horror thriller ''The Wailing.''
The site is a kind of phenomenon, with 20 million viewers. 
The site streamed 800 million minutes in a recent month, and that number goes up every month, Mr. Lee said. 
DramaFever is expanding and will feature more films, including fare from China and eventually movies produced in the United States, in the future.
Kocowa's chief executive, Jeongsik Kim, explained an unusual feature of South Korean productions: why there was so much more segregation between TV and film talent, at least behind the camera. 
Speaking through an interpreter, he said in a phone interview that it had to do with differences in production practices. 
Most of the directors of TV shows are employees of the broadcast companies, which have their own production facilities, separate studios where there's no back-and-forth between film and television. 
''Many Korean actors and actresses prefer movies over dramas,'' Mr. Kim said, referring to television, ''because the amount of labor put in producing Korean dramas is at times unwieldy, for the same amount of money. 
If actors and actresses become famous through dramas, they usually go into the film industry and stay there, but this has been changing recently.''
Mr. Kim also cited a new TV drama, ''The Descendants of the Sun,'' partly produced by the Korean film studio Next Entertainment World, as a possible sign of change. 
Kocowa does not feature movies yet, as it concentrates on programs, but you can find American celebrities on some of its game and variety shows. 
For instance, Jack Black appeared as an impish ringmaster of a fake-film audition segment of ''Infinity Challenge.''
Such cross-pop-cultural currents are, like the serials on DramaFever, unusually gripping and potentially harmful to one's personal productivity.
