
Stocks rose on Wall Street on Thursday after the United States and China took steps to ease tensions in their costly trade war, putting investors in a buying mood.
Technology, financial and consumer-focused stocks helped power the modest rally, which extended the market's solid gains from the day before despite losing some momentum in the final hour of trading. 
The benchmark S&P 500-stock index closed within 0.6 percent of its all-time high set July 26.
The United States agreed to delay another round of tariffs on Chinese imports by two weeks to Oct. 
15. Meanwhile, Chinese importers have asked American suppliers for prices for soybeans, pork and other farm goods -- a sign they might step up purchases of agricultural products.
The gestures stoked cautious optimism among investors that the next round of trade talks in October between Washington and Beijing may lead to some progress after a string of failed attempts at resolving the longstanding dispute.
''What's driving markets today is the potential for an interim trade deal,'' said Tony Roth, chief investment officer at Wilmington Trust. 
''There's enough pain to (China's) domestic economy and there's enough pain to our domestic economy that it's in both presidents' interests to take a step back and have a little bit of breathing room right now. 
That's what's changed.''
The S&P 500 index rose 8.64 points, or 0.3 percent, to 3,009.57. 
The Dow Jones industrial average extended its winning streak to a seventh straight day, gaining 45.41 points, or 0.2 percent, to 27,182.45.
The Nasdaq added 24.79 points, or 0.3 percent, to 8,194.47.
Several weeks of solid gains have helped the S&P 500 more than recoup its losses in August, nudging it closer to another record high close this week.
The index is also on track for its best September since 2013. 
The S&P 500 is up 2.8 percent this month after slipping 1.8 percent in August. 
That is notable because the index has fallen in September 55 percent of the time since World War II, although the record has been better during the 10-year bull market.
Small companies are the star performers so far this month. 
The Russell 2000 index of smaller-company stocks is up 5.4 percent, with much of the gain coming this week.
Tech stocks notched solid gains Thursday. 
The sector's companies, particularly chipmakers, are heavily impacted by the trade war because many of them make products in China or rely on Chinese suppliers.
Chipmaker Intel gained 0.4 percent, while Advanced Micro Devices rose 1.5 percent. 
Microsoft, the most valuable company in the S&P 500, added 1 percent.
Consumer-focused stocks also helped lift the market. 
Starbucks rose 1.2 percent.
Energy companies tumbled as oil prices slid 1.2 percent. 
Oilfield services company Schlumberger dropped 1.1 percent.
Health care stocks gave up an early gain. 
UnitedHealth Group fell 1.8 percent.
The yield on the 10-year Treasury rose to 1.78 percent from 1.75 percent a day earlier, giving a boost to financial sector stocks. 
Higher yields drive interest rates on mortgages and other consumer loans higher, which drives up bank profits. 
SunTrust Banks gained 1.3 percent and American Express rose 0.9 percent.
Tailored Brands plunged 29.8 percent after the owner of Men's Wearhouse and Jos. 
A Bank gave investors a dismal third quarter profit forecast and halted its dividend.
Investors gave a cool reception to SmileDirectClub's stock market debut. 
Shares in the direct-to-consumer teeth-straightening company ended 27.5 percent lower than its opening price.
Benchmark crude oil fell 66 cents to settle at $55.09 a barrel.
Gold rose $4.30 to $1,498.70 per ounce.
