
A reporter explains how she's managing her kids and personal fears while trapped inside a small Shanghai apartment.
This article was originally published on February 11, 2020. 
As coronavirus continues to spread across the globe, we're working to answer the questions on many parents' minds. 
This is a fast-moving situation, so some information may be outdated. 
For the latest updates,   read The New York Times's live coronavirus coverage here.
As with most parents in China, when I'm not anxiously scanning my phone for the latest news of thecoronavirus outbreak, I'm consumed by another pressing question: How will I survive another day stuck indoors with my kids?
Throughout China, quarantines and lockdowns are the new norm as cities try to contain the virus. 
Most parents here are afraid to let their kids go outside even for a little while, and no one knows how long it will last. 
Just a few days ago, we heard that schools, which have been on winter vacation for the past three weeks, won't start again until March at the earliest.
So teachers are sending out e-learning assignments as many parents head back to work remotely. 
But how are we supposed to get any work done while taking care of our kids?
[What parents need to know about coronavirus]
Parents are commiserating with one another in online support groups and sharing funny videos of their forced family time on TikTok. 
Karina Feldmann, a Brazilian national who works for a Shanghai private school, posted about her 5-year-old son, who interrupted a conference call with her boss and colleagues by storming in and shouting, "I need to poop!"
"Everyone was quiet for a couple of seconds and I was like, ‘Excuse me, guys,'" she said.
Trying to run a business is also stressful. 
"The situation here is a disaster," said my friend Lotta Lagerdahl, a Swedish entrepreneur whose 4-year-old daughter is cooped up inside. 
"The only way that we can work is when she naps for an hour and a half or if we would put her in front of a screen, and we don't really do that. 
So my husband and I work two hours a day or one of us sneaks away if they have something urgent."
"My kid is hanging on me like a sticker," said Hillary Han, a Chinese national who works at a digital marketing firm in Shanghai, when we talked at 10:30 p.m. after her 1-year-old was asleep. 
"If he doesn't see me for five minutes, he shouts out, ‘Mama.'" She said she now schedules all her work calls at night or during nap time.
She and her husband are from rural Hubei Province, near the center of the outbreak, and are also hosting her parents in their tiny two-bedroom apartment. 
They came for the Chinese New Year holiday and are now unable to return home until at least April. 
So her bedroom has been transformed into a movie theater for her parents, while the living room is dedicated to playing. 
Her parents are helping, but when she needs to work, she hides behind the curtains on her enclosed balcony so her son can't see her.
On top of all of this, we are worried about the virus itself — for those affected by it and for those in its path. 
Neighborhood volunteers in bright orange vests patrol the entrance to our apartment compounds, stopping nonresidents from entering, and reminding everyone to stay indoors and to wear masks if they go out. 
The streets are almost empty, many businesses are closed and few cars are on the road. 
Parks are roped off to discourage people from congregating and any open businesses require a forehead temperature check and mask to enter, so there's really nowhere for a kid to go and play.
Our family has been in self-imposed isolation since our return to Shanghai from a Chinese New Year holiday in my husband's hometown near Hubei Province. 
At the start, I told myself I was going to rise to the occasion and remain calm to give the kids some sense of normalcy. 
My 7-year-old daughter and 4-year-old son relish the extra attention and mostly play together happily. 
But, as the weeks tick by, we're all getting stir crazy. 
We go out only for short bike rides or to kick a soccer ball outside our apartment building.
I've been trying to do fun activities with them, but even with my best intentions, I find my temper running thin. 
Every morning when they wake up, their first question is, "Can we watch iPad this morning?" I suggest doing a bit of homework first. 
Cue the tantrums. 
I find myself hiding in the bathroom sometimes just to get a moment's peace.
"I really feel for my children," said Dr. George Hu, an American psychologist and chief of mental health at United Family Hospital in Shanghai whose kids, ages 4 and 9, are home. 
School is associated with work and home is for fun, he said of children's thinking. 
"Now, it's not like that."
Hu said parents with kids stuck at home should give themselves a break. 
"None of us are perfect," but this situation "kind of highlights our perceived deficiencies," he said. 
"We should really be looking at taking care of our mental health."
Hu recommends establishing clear schedules. 
"Structure gives kids a sense that not everything is going down the tubes. 
‘I can rely on things. 
Like, I need to get up at 8 a.m., breakfast will be on the table by 8:30.' It helps send a message that vacation is over."
Roman Leng lives in Shanghai but was visiting in-laws in Jiangsu Province for the holidays and could not return. 
She went back to her marketing job remotely but realized her family's vacation habits had become unhealthy. 
"We were eating whenever we wanted to, sleeping whenever we wanted," she said. 
"I made a decision: We need to get our lives into a clear routine — what time to get up eat, study, learn English, work, watch TV, — and we try to follow this schedule. 
Everyone feels it is somewhat normalizing, and my kid gets up knowing what the day will hold."
Exercise is also important. 
"When we're stuck inside all the time, there's no release for all the energy inside our body," explained Barbara Poppell, an educator and child-development consultant in Shanghai. 
So we're starting to have big emotions with the people around us, she said, "losing our tempers and not wanting to see our family, these people that we love." Poppell recommends that families make time to exercise every day — using online videos, music, or movement games — as well as fight the temptation to park the kids in front of an iPad.
The added uncertainty over the coronavirus's daily developments and the government's responses has everyone a bit on edge, and staying together in tight spaces exacerbates the stress. 
A healthy mix of time together and apart is beneficial for adults and kids alike, Poppell advised.
Hui Yang, a scientist from Nanjing who often travels for work, said he's found a silver lining in his coronavirus-enforced staycation with his 3-year-old daughter. 
"Before this, when I left home, she was still sleeping and when I got home, she was already in bed. 
I really cherish these two weeks to exclusively spend time with my daughter." The threat of the outbreak has made their family change their habits, he said, as his daughter played next to him. 
"It's like a nuclear fusion. 
You have to put external pressure and heat to make it happen. 
I feel like this epidemic is like that external force to help us fuse together."
Putting down my work (and phone) and giving the kids my undivided attention has made me realize that being with them all day doesn't have to be a burden. 
Since this crisis has kept us housebound, I've taught them how to make handmade pasta and we've done chemistry experiments, slept in forts, played charades and eaten ice cream for breakfast.
In normally fast-paced Shanghai, our regular daily life is propelled by rushing to get to school on time and meeting friends. 
Being forced to slow down has allowed us to refocus and spend more time together. 
Like an endless snow day, this time will hold a special place in my kids' childhood memories. 
With few distractions, I'm reminded how much I should cherish these moments together. 
I will, I promise — after I'm done hiding out in the bathroom.
Rebecca Kanthor is a Shanghai-based journalist. 
Her Twitter handle is @rebeccakanthor.
