
THE YEAR 1000
When Explorers Connected the World — and Globalization Began
By Valerie Hansen
In the year 1000, the world was on the move. 
Traders and pilgrims were sailing across the Indian Ocean, to and from East Africa, Arabia, India and China. 
Slaves were being marched from Central Asia, Eastern Europe and Africa to Constantinople, Baghdad and Cairo. 
The Maya of the Yucatán Peninsula were traveling as far north as the Mississippi River Valley and as far south as Colombia. 
And then, in the most significant journey of the era, the Vikings sailed to Canada, connecting these trade routes and creating a round-the-world loop. 
Globalization, Valerie Hansen argues in her fascinating new book, "The Year 1000," had begun.
Today, we in the West tend to believe that it wasn't until the late 1400s and 1500s, when Europeans sailed to the Americas and around the Cape of Good Hope, that the world became interconnected, and that it wasn't until the 20th century that globalization developed. 
But, as Hansen shows, the Europeans were only using existing trade routes, and by the time they ventured forth, globalization, with all its pluses and minuses — cultural exchange and conflict, winners and losers, the growth of technology and the loss of tradition — was already well underway. 
One of the book's surprises is its demonstration of how much life in the early 1000s resembled that in the 21st century. 
In those years, a citizen living in Quanzhou, China, could buy sandalwood tables from Java, ivory ornaments from Africa and amber vials from the Baltic region; attend Hindu, Muslim or Buddhist religious services; and, if well educated, read a Japanese novel or the latest writings of Islamic scholars.
The Stanley Woodward professor of history at Yale University, where she teaches Chinese and world history, Hansen draws upon nearly 30 years of research to make her case. 
She has examined contemporary records, travelogues, art, artifacts and more, and consulted with archaeologists, Arabic scholars and other experts around the world to paint the fullest cross-cultural picture possible.
Playing a strikingly central role in the early years of globalization was religion. 
Time and time again, Hansen shows, leaders converted their peoples to the religion of a more powerful neighbor in the hopes of gaining commercial and political advantages. 
These conversions had little to do with belief and everything to do with pragmatism, and led to the demise of some smaller religions (like Manichaeism in Persia) and the explosive growth of others, in ways that still resonate today. 
Hansen writes, "We live in a world shaped by the interactions of the world in the year 1000: 92 percent of today's believers subscribe to one of the four religions that gained traction then."
The book is filled with legendary characters. 
There's Freydis, a feisty Viking woman who, upon finding herself surrounded by hostile Amerindians, pulled out her breast and "slapped" it with her sword, scaring her would-be attackers off. 
And there's Harald Bluetooth, the Danish king who, though raised non-Christian, converted his kingdom to Christianity in order to unite it; Bluetooth technology, which brings computers and mobile phones together in a similar manner, is named after him.
At times, Hansen's narrative bogs down in mind-numbing descriptions of dynasties and tribes. 
Occasionally, too, her use of the professorial "we," in phrases like "as we'll see in the next chapter," is irksome, drawing the reader out of the world she has created and into the lecture hall. 
But these are minor disturbances in an otherwise highly impressive, deeply researched, lively and imaginative work.
Christiane Bird is the author of "The Sultan's Shadow: One Family's Rule at the Crossroads of East and West." Her latest book, on the history of a single New York City block, will be published next year. 
THE YEAR 1000 When Explorers Connected the World — and Globalization Began By Valerie Hansen Illustrated. 
320 pp. 
Scribner. $30.
