
WASHINGTON — In any major crisis involving speed, judgment and getting reliable information, the first question any president needs to decide is this: Who is invited to the meeting to discuss the strategic options?
So the photograph of President Trump's group of advisers at his Mar-a-Lago resort in Florida on Thursday night — released by the White House and edited "for security" in the words of Sean Spicer, the press secretary — was immediately scrutinized for what it said about who has the commander in chief's ear at a critical moment. 
And of course, what you see may depend on what you are looking for. 
Or, in this case, whom.
Does Stephen K. Bannon's position on the outer ring reflect his recent removal from the principals committee of the National Security Council, or does his presence, and that of the adviser Stephen Miller, suggest a change in title but not in influence?
What about the presence of the only woman visible in the room, Dina Powell, a former aide to President George W. Bush and a longtime friend of Ivanka Trump who was recently brought on as a deputy national security adviser?
And why would the commerce and Treasury secretaries be involved in a Tomahawk strike?
(Answer: Because they were at the resort to meet Xi Jinping, the Chinese president.)
For those debating the meaning here, it is important to remember that pictures can be overinterpreted. 
The defense secretary, Jim Mattis, and the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Joseph F. Dunford Jr., were joining by secure video conference; the photo shows the back of a screen.
If there were C.I.A. and other intelligence briefers around, as there were in the famous photo of President Barack Obama's team during the 2011 Osama bin Laden raid, they are out of the picture. 
(Several people joined the meeting from the White House Situation Room, and they are not shown.) By the time this photo was taken, all the major decisions had been made. 
The only issue was whether the attack was successful.
Blowing up airfields is easy. 
Putting countries back together again, after six years of civil war, is a lot harder.
Everyone at the Table
1. President Trump is sitting at the narrow end of the table, much as he would be in a formal meeting in the Situation Room. 
His lean forward is a sign of Trump intensity — think of that photo behind the wheel of a big rig on the White House lawn not long ago.
2. Rex W. Tillerson, secretary of state, is at the president's elbow. 
By Tuesday, he will be landing in Moscow to discuss the situation in Syria and other issues with the Russian president, Vladimir V. Putin. Formerly the chief executive of Exxon Mobil, he is the one who knows Putin best.
3. Stephen K. Bannon, chief strategist, is at the end of a very bad week. 
But the fact that he is there in the room may have angered Jared Kushner and the national security adviser, Lt. Gen. H. R. McMaster, who engineered easing him off the principals committee.
4. Stephen Miller, senior adviser, is not often thought about in terms of national security interests. 
An acolyte of Mr. Bannon, he still retains significant influence.
5. Michael Anton, adviser on national security, is the National Security Council spokesman. 
An academic by nature, he is a nationalist by inclination and a veteran of the Bush years.
6. Dina Powell, deputy national security adviser, is a rising star on the National Security Council, rumored to soon be chief deputy to General McMaster, the national security adviser. 
Egyptian-born and an alum of Goldman Sachs, she has a subtle understanding of Middle Eastern politics.
7. Gary D. Cohn, chief economic adviser, is a rival of Mr. Bannon's. He was there for the Chinese visit.
8. Lt. Gen. H. R. McMaster, national security adviser, is known for iconoclastic views and a cool hand under fire; he was about to retire from the military before Mr. Trump selected him to succeed Michael T. Flynn, who was forced to resign in February. 
As the author of one of the best books on what went wrong in Vietnam War decision-making, he knows that organizing a strike is the simple part. 
Inside the White House, he had the most to gain and lose from how the strike went.
9. Reince Priebus, chief of staff, is reportedly on the rocks for all the chaos in the White House. 
No national security expert, he was there to make sure the president's interests were well protected. 
Rumors abound that he may soon be replaced, but in Trumpworld, such rumors always abound.
10. Joseph Hagin, deputy chief of staff, is the consummate pro and expert on White House operations. 
He redesigned the Situation Room for President George W. Bush, has been through the Tomahawk-strike drill before and used to organize Mr. Bush's secret trips to Iraq.
11. Jared Kushner, Mr. Trump's son-in-law and senior adviser, known to some as the shadow secretary of state, is probably the most influential foreign policy adviser in the White House. 
For him, strikes like this were all new.
12. Steven T. Mnuchin is the Treasury secretary. 
A former Goldman Sachs top executive, he has his eyes on the screen, and he must have known that the operation's success would affect the markets in the short term, and American credibility in the long term.
13. Wilbur L. Ross is the commerce secretary. 
This billionaire knows a lot about China — he has a spectacular Chinese art collection — but Syria policy is outside his lane. 
He was at Mar-a-Lago for the Xi visit.
14. Sean Spicer, press secretary, was there to place the best light on the president's actions — "decisive" — and to obfuscate the choices presented to Mr. Trump. He did that brilliantly at a Friday briefing.
Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook,   Twitter and in   the Morning Briefing newsletter.
