
The Customs Service today announced the arrests of two men suspected of trying to export highly sophisticated encryption devices to China.
The men, Eugene You Tsai Hsu, of Blue Springs, Mo., and David Tzu Wvi Yang, of Temple City, Calif., were charged with trying to buy encryption units from a Maryland manufacturer and ship them through intermediaries to China, customs officials said.
The units, produced by Mykotronx Inc., a technology company in Columbia, Md., are used by the United States government and its allies to transmit secret information by telephone or fax. 
The devices are relatively inexpensive -- about $8,000 a unit -- but are so important that their sale must be approved by the National Security Agency, the officials said.
"It's some of the best encryption technology the U.S. government has," said Allan J. Doody, the Customs special-agent-in-charge in Baltimore.
According to the Customs affidavit, Mr. Hsu contacted Mykotronx in May to ask about the cost of the encryption units. 
A Mykotronx security officer alerted Customs to his interest in the top-secret technology.
Customs then assigned an undercover agent who posed as an intermediary and corresponded with Mr. Hsu and two others: Mr. Yang, the owner of a freight forwarding business in Compton, Calif., and Charlson Ho, who represented a Singapore company that sought to buy the units.
The undercover agent notified Mr. Hsu that the technology he sought was on the State Department's Munitions List, and would require a license for export, the affidavit said. 
Mr. Hsu then asked if he could get a license, and the agent told him that no license would be approved for export to China. 
But Mr. Hsu persisted, discussing ways to repackage the units and disguise their ultimate destination, the affidavit said.
Mr. Hsu is a naturalized United States citizen, officials said; Mr. Yang was born in Taiwan and is a permanent resident alien.
A relative of Mr. Hsu declined to discuss the case. 
A young woman who identified herself as Mr. Yang's daughter said she had no information about the arrest.
Violators of the Arms Export Control Act face a maximum of 10 years in prison and a $1 million fine.
