
Two of China's biggest automakers announced a deal Wednesday to combine their production assets in hopes of creating a company able to compete in global markets.
The tie-up between the two companies -- the Shanghai Automotive Industry Corporation, known as SAIC, and the Nanjing Automobile Corporation -- adds to a flurry of recent alliances in China's fast-growing vehicle market, the world's second-largest. 
Both companies are state-owned.
SAIC is the local partner of General Motors and Volkswagen and has introduced its own Roewe brand. 
Nanjing Auto is known for reviving the MG sports car, bought from the defunct British automaker MG Rover Group.
The two hope to create a ''world-class auto company of an unprecedented scale in China,'' they said in a joint statement.
The communist Beijing government has been encouraging such tie-ups in the fragmented auto industry, hoping Chinese producers will pool resources to compete with bigger and richer foreign rivals. 
China's domestic market is dominated by G.M., Volkswagen and other foreign producers. 
The country has about 150 automakers, most of them small and financially weak.
China's biggest domestic automaker, Chery Automobile, had 8.3 percent of China's auto market last year, but most Chinese producers have less than 1 percent, according to the research firm J. D. Power & Associates. 
J. D Power said that passenger vehicle sales in China grew by 20 percent in November, to a record monthly high of 490,751 units.
SAIC will dominate the new venture, while Nanjing Auto's parent, Yuejin Motor Group, will retain a minority stake.
SAIC will pay Yuejin 2.1 billion yuan ($285 million) for Nanjing Auto's auto and core components businesses and combine them with its automaking subsidiary, the SAIC Motor Corporation, the companies said.
The two companies announced in July that they would cooperate in design, production and sales.
Also Wednesday, the Italian automaker Fiat said it would end its production joint venture with Nanjing Auto by selling its stake to its Chinese partner. 
Fiat said it would continue to cooperate in commercial vehicle and parts manufacturing.
