
A quarter of a century ago, a new secretary of defense, Donald H. Rumsfeld, faced a towering challenge: convincing a skeptical Congress that the post-Vietnam military needed a major infusion of money to meet the still-fearsome Soviet threat. 
Mr. Rumsfeld prevailed, winning the largest increase in military spending in a decade.
Twenty-five years later, the Soviet Union has collapsed and America stands unrivaled as a military power. 
But Mr. Rumsfeld, now 68, is back at the Pentagon's helm. 
And once again he is arguing before a wary Congress that the armed forces need an expensive face-lift to counter emerging threats like terrorists with biological weapons and potentially hostile nations with long-range ballistic missiles.
In the coming weeks, Mr. Rumsfeld will begin making his case foradding billions of dollars to the current defense budget and increasing President Bush's proposed $324 billion Pentagon budget. 
His goal is to transform the military into a more agile, lethal and stealthy force, and to build a costly and unproven missile shield.
Though Americans may feel safer today than in decades, he asserts that "weakness is provocative," that the nation is in danger of growing complacent and that the military must remain strong enough to deter and punish aggressors in this "dangerous and untidy world."
"If things are not bad, why do you need to change anything?"
Mr. Rumsfeld said in an hourlong interview this week in his Pentagon office overlooking the Potomac. 
"And, of course, that's exactly when institutions suffer. 
If they think things are good, and they relax and don't recognize the changes taking place in the world, they tend to fail."
Critics contend that Mr. Rumsfeld and Mr. Bush's other top advisers have exaggerated the military challenges facing the United States and that he is arguing for a missile shield at a time when, at least numerically, the missile threat has lessened.
Russia still has 6,000 nuclear-tipped ballistic missiles, but is no longer viewed as an enemy. 
China has perhaps only 18 long-range nuclear missiles, Iraq currently none, and North Korea perhaps one or two.
"These guys are movement conservatives, and they have a view of the world, and of the threat, that is very different than I have," said Senator Joseph R. Biden of Delaware, the senior Democrat on the Foreign Relations Committee. 
"This fixation on national missile defense is a mistake."
But such arguments do not sway Mr. Rumsfeld, who sees China as a potential military rival to the United States in the Pacific and nations like North Korea as potentially destabilizing forces.
"The weapons of mass destruction are more widely dispersed," he said. 
"And they are in the hands of people who are different than the people who had them 25 years ago."
Besides, he argued, America would be reverting to isolationism if it failed to build a missile shield because it would be unable to protect its allies. 
And to those who believe constructing such a system would lead to a renewed arms race, Mr. Rumsfeld countered that not building a system would encourage more nations to acquire ballistic missiles to defend themselves from nuclear attack.
In an extensive interview, Mr. Rumsfeld, a former naval aviator, college wrestler, congressman and pharmaceutical executive, spoke about his desire to build the missile shield, his vision for the military and his sweeping review of Pentagon policies and programs, a process that many senior Congressional and military officials have criticized as overly secretive.
That supposed secrecy has generated much grumbling on Capitol Hill and anxiety inside the Pentagon, where many senior officials worry that he will use the closed-door proceedings to justify deep cuts to weapons programs that do not fit his vision.
Earlier this month, Trent Lott, the Senate majority leader, summoned Mr. Rumsfeld to his office to discuss the Pentagon budget. 
During the sessions, Congressional officials said, Mr. Lott complained about being left "in the dark" about the reviews.
Mr. Rumsfeld expresses exasperation when told many people think he does not consult enough when it comes to the reviews that are being conducted by about two dozen panels staffed mainly by close aides, outside experts and retired officers.
During the interview, he dramatically thrust his hand into a sheaf of papers and pulled out a sheet containing this tally of his meetings in office: 50 with foreign officials; 70 with senior administration officials; 170 with 44 different general and flag officers; and 70 involving more than 100 members of Congress.
"I don't think of them as particularly close held," Mr. Rumsfeld said of the reviews. 
"Everyone in the building will have a chance to chew it and chop on it and kick it around and beat it up."
Throughout the interview, Mr. Rumsfeld was careful not to express opinions on several contentious issues like the antiballistic missile treaty.
He also left many points ambiguous and aides and colleagues said this was typical of how he works. 
Though he holds many strong views -- particularly on missile defense -- they say he is masterly at asking questions and soaking up information without revealing his positions.
The experience has been unsettling for even four-star generals, some of whom have complained about giving Mr. Rumsfeld detailed briefings and getting no feedback in return.
His critics say he has set a preordained course for the Pentagon and will simply use the defense review to justify it. 
But his allies say Mr. Rumsfeld is meticulously gathering information because he is trying to build consensus.
"He's getting his ducks in a row, and waiting for a full and complete buy-in by the president on the strategy and the dollars to go with it," said one senior Pentagon official.
Transforming the military after the cold war has proved more complicated than Mr. Rumsfeld probably expected. 
Until just a few days ago, the secretary and his deputy, Paul D. Wolfowitz, were the only senior political appointees in place at the Pentagon. 
Yet the real world has kept barging in.
In his first three months on the job, American warplanes bombed Iraq, a Navy submarine sank a Japanese fishing boat, killing nine people aboard, and 24 Americans were detained in China after their Navy spy plane collided with a Chinese fighter jet.
As a result, Mr. Rumsfeld has maintained a frenetic pace, typically arriving at the office by 6:30 a.m. and leaving about 8 p.m. Most days begin with a morning conference call with Condoleezza Rice, the national security adviser, and with Secretary of State Colin L. Powell. Mr. Rumsfeld said he talks to Mr. Powell one or two more times each day, and also speaks to Vice President Dick Cheney, his protege from the Nixon and Ford administrations, at least weekly.
Fittingly, Mr. Rumsfeld never seems to sit down. 
In his office, he works at a small stand-up desk, eschewing the walnut table at the center of the tennis court-sized room. 
He can be both calmly disciplined and manically exuberant, aides say, often pacing about during meetings, waving his arms to underscore a point.
Aides have become accustomed to a deluge of "snowflakes" from Mr. Rumsfeld -- a seemingly endless flurry of questions, problems or assignments he dictates into a Dictaphone and has transcribed by secretaries and dispatched to all areas of the Pentagon. 
Responses are expected to be terse: as much information and as little prose as possible.
Though he is a millionaire many times over, collects Theodore Roosevelt bronzes and owns a ranch in Taos, N.M., Mr. Rumsfeld, a Chicago native, has tried to portray a more regular-guy image than his predecessor, William S. Cohen.
A few years ago, when Mr. Rumsfeld was chairman of a bipartisan panel examining the threat of ballistic missile attacks, he would sometimes slip away to watch a Chicago Bulls basketball game at a local Washington bar while his compatriots repaired to fancy Washington parties. 
And during a recent outdoor reception for a foreign dignitary he yanked away an umbrella from a colonel trying to hold it over him.
Though friends say Mr. Rumsfeld is gracious and attentive, he is also often described as gruff and arrogant.
"He is a hard-nosed guy who is not a pushover," said Representative Porter Goss, a Florida Republican who heads the House Intelligence Committee. 
"I don't expect him to win a whole lot of friends."
Some Democratic lawmakers have suggested that Mr. Rumsfeld's secretive style may cost him most heavily in Congress, which may retaliate by blocking his proposals.
"Now is the time to bring Congress, the uniformed services and the defense industry in on the Rumsfeld review," Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, a Connecticut Democrat, wrote in Roll Call this week. 
"If their voices are ignored or not given their due weight now, then no matter how strong the review's recommendations are, they may well be dead on arrival."
But advocates of revamping the military say Mr. Rumsfeld is right to keep the "Iron Triangle" that dominates military budgeting -- Congress, the defense industry and the service chiefs -- at arm's length until his reviews are over.
"He has the best shot in a generation to scrub the defense budget and I hope he does," said Representative Jane Harman, a California Democrat on the House Intelligence Committee. 
"Both Congress and the Pentagon are part of the problem. 
We're very good at protecting our pet rocks and less good at focusing on long-term strategic solutions."
Mr. Rumsfeld acknowledges that he has a tough selling job ahead.
Perhaps the biggest immediate change he has in mind is fielding a national defense against a limited missile strike as quickly as possible, however imperfect the first attempts might be.
"It's wrong to allow people to develop a zero tolerance for risk," Mr. Rumsfeld said. 
"We would not have airplanes if the first 20 times the Wright brothers crashed and failed we said, 'Stop it, don't try it again, you're wasting money.'
"
