
A methane explosion in a coal mine killed at least 38 people early Thursday, opening fresh wounds in a Siberian region notorious for mine accidents, where more than 100 miners died in a blast two months ago.
A pocket of methane exploded in the Yubileinaya mine at 4:40 a.m., with 217 workers underground, a spokeswoman for Russia's Emergency Situations Ministry said. 
Rescuers helped 179 people escape, including seven who had been injured.
The explosion occurred in Novokuznetsk, a town in the Kuzbass region. 
The high concentration of methane in Kuzbass mines makes them especially dangerous, Aleksandr A. Sergeev, the chairman of the Russian Union of Miners, said by telephone.
A methane explosion at the neighboring Ulyanovskaya coal mine on March 19 killed 110 people, making it the worst mine disaster in recent Russian history. 
Russia's technical oversight agency fired three employees in the region on Tuesday in connection with that accident. 
Officials said the mine's management had deliberately disabled a methane detector to avoid costly work stoppages.
Yuzhkuzbassugol, a major coal company in the region, owns the Ulyanovskaya and the Yubileinaya mines, with several others where accidents have occurred in recent years. 
An explosion at the company's Yesaulskaya mine in February 2005 killed 25 people. 
Yevgeny V. Kiselyov, a spokesman for the company, would give no information regarding the explosion on Thursday or previous incidents. 
The Yubileinaya mine opened in 1966 and produced about one million tons of coal last year, he said when reached by telephone.
The regional prosecutor's office opened a criminal investigation into the explosion, and Prime Minister Mikhail Y. Fradkov also called for a thorough investigation of Yuzhkuzbassugol.
In February, the oversight agency required the company to close the mine after an inspection uncovered safety violations, but it soon reopened, said Svetlana V. Vinokurova, a spokeswoman for the agency. 
It is unclear whether the problems had been corrected at that point.
The agency again tried to close Yubileinaya in March, but a court overruled its findings and allowed the mine to remain open, Ms. Vinokurova said.
She said the agency would investigate whether the company had been negligent in the accident on Thursday. 
''If it is shown that the company violated safety regulations, their license will be revoked,'' she said.
Closing the mines could force miners into unemployment, Mr. Sergeev said. 
Instead, he said, Russia should pass legislation to improve safety procedures at mines.
''Underground coal extraction without the necessary clearing of methane from the mine's surface must be forbidden,'' he said. 
Russia, unlike China, for instance, has no legislation regulating this, he said. 
China, however, has had its own history of deadly mining accidents.
Ivan I. Mokhachuk, the leader of the Independent Union of Coal Manufacturing Workers, said poor wages were also to blame.
Since the coal industry was privatized, he said, ''there has been increased volume, increased effectiveness and increased profits.''
From the individual miner's point of view, however, the situation has worsened, he said.
Wages have fallen, as have pensions, detracting from the prestige of the profession and attracting those ''who have a mediocre attitude toward life,'' he said.
This has created discipline problems, which, Mr. Mokhachuk said, have led to accidents even when mines have had proper safety equipment.
