
The government's frantic attempt to control political views on the Internet has taken a new twist with the detention of a man whose only apparent trespass was to help his father maintain Web sites featuring the father's obscure, left-wing writings.
The father, Lu Jiaping, 60, a retired army officer, is free and still living in Beijing, where he spends his days writing essays from his own cranky perspective. 
He has lambasted the authorities, for example, for indulging the United States after the recent spy-plane collision, and he has questioned the 1989 massacre of student demonstrators at Tiananmen Square, not because of the blow to democracy but because it derailed a drive against an "unstoppable black tide" of corruption.
To publish his views, Mr. Lu, who is not adept with computers, mailed his articles to his son Hu Dalin, 30, who posted them on the Web sites he had created for his father. 
But while the father remains free, the son, who dabbled in computers, the stock market and an art-supply business in their hometown, Shaoyang, in Hunan Province, was jailed on May 18. 
That night, state security agents entered his house with a search warrant and confiscated his computer and copies of his father's articles, and told his girlfriend that this was a sensitive political case.
"This is very strange and I'm very angry," said Mr. Lu. "If I were detained there would at least be a reason, but my son has nothing to do with politics and this whole thing is illegal."
He added indignantly that the family had been required to pay a $46 fee to the district police to cover 15 days of incarceration. 
"You have to pay them to be kept in jail," he said. 
Mr. Hu's parents and his girlfriend, He Ying, have not been allowed to contact him. 
The police said to check on his status after 15 days, she said.
Mr. Lu says he has published two books and occasional articles in Chinese newspapers. 
But his main outlet recently has been two personal Web sites. 
They are among thousands of such sites in China today and are not widely known, though one of Mr. Lu's home pages records nearly 27,000 viewers since it began last Sept. 
3.
One of the strangest aspects of the case is that Mr. Lu's Web sites remained accessible in China today (www.a2053.home.chinaren.com and   www.a2053.myetang.com).
The government has increasingly worked to block what it considers objectionable foreign and domestic sites and requires Internet companies to censor their chat rooms.
Many of Mr. Lu's views are associated with the disaffected group here known as "old leftists," though he denies the label. 
He says that Mao's disastrous Cultural Revolution, for example, was a noble anti-corruption drive, later perverted by bad elements.
The article that appears to have triggered the detention, according to Li Qiang, head of China Labor Watch in New York who first reported the case, however, was Mr. Lu's recent homage to an against-the-grain article that appeared in Global Times, an official newspaper. 
That original article, published May 11, said the spy-plane case was further evidence that China must prepare to confront the United States.
Mr. Lu's article, posted soon after on his Web site, was called, "There is finally a different voice in the official media," and accused Chinese leaders of "fawning on" the United States.
