
A series of tactical errors, with peculiarities in the voting process, prevented democracy advocates here from winning as many seats as expected in the legislative elections on Sunday, politicians and political analysts said here on Monday.
The big question now is how China will react to the voting in this autonomous Chinese territory. 
The election has been widely watched in China as a test of the government's tolerance for democracy.
RTHK, a local radio station, reported Monday that a Beijing official had described the election as the most democratic in Hong Kong's history, but there was little immediate reaction otherwise from the mainland.
Pro-Beijing candidates fared better than expected after mainland officials used voter incentives and intimidation -- Chinese Olympic athletes came to perform here, but democracy supporters were denounced as traitors and one was accused of soliciting a prostitute and then jailed on the mainland for six months without trial.
As China assesses what worked and what did not, its response to Hong Kong in the coming days ''will show us whether they'll go for the hearts and minds or for the jugular,'' said Richard Baum, a China specialist visiting here this week from the University of California at Los Angeles.
Candidates from the pro-democracy opposition here captured roughly three-fifths of the popular vote, while Beijing's local allies captured most of the rest.
Half of all votes cast by industry leaders and professionals, who are allowed to send representatives to the 60-member Legislative Council, also went to democracy supporters, calculations by Civic Exchange, a nonprofit research group here, show.
But in terms of seats, democracy proponents won 18 of the 30 chosen by the public, but only 6 of 30 selected by industries and professions.
It takes only a couple of hundred votes to win a seat in some of the most narrowly defined industries. 
Some of those votes are cast not by people but by companies, which find it hard to defy Beijing. 
The Democrats did better representing professions, in which thousands of people are allowed to vote.
In addition to the 24 seats controlled by democracy advocates, for the first time two professions chose candidates with strong democratic leanings, and two industries re-elected candidates who occasionally favor greater democracy.
That could give the opposition a total of 28 votes on some issues, enough to create difficulty for the pro-Beijing local government because some lukewarm Beijing supporters in the legislature are harried business leaders who show up infrequently to vote.
By contrast, democracy advocates have held 21 seats in the current legislature, plus one independent with strong democratic leanings, Andrew Wong, and the two industry candidates who sometimes favor more democracy, David Li and Bernard Chan. 
Six seats previously filled by a Beijing-dominated committee were instead filled by direct election this year. 
So the Democrats were expected to do better than they did.
The success of more pro-Beijing candidates than expected might have the unexpected effect of making the Chinese Communist Party a little less leery of tolerating democratic changes here.
''It helps Beijing to have less consternation over Hong Kong's universal suffrage'' ambitions, said Choy So-yuk, a pro-Beijing candidate narrowly re-elected to the legislature on Sunday.
Tung Chee-hwa, Hong Kong's chief executive, said Monday evening at a news conference that he looked forward to meeting and working with all Legislative Council members. 
Mr. Tung and prominent Democrats barely spoke to each other last year during a showdown over Mr. Tung's plans for stringent legislation on internal security, but a thaw in relations has started in the past few months.
A last-minute appeal by the Democratic Party for voters to support its founding chairman, Martin Lee, backfired when so many voters in his multiseat district on Hong Kong island switched their support to him that an important Democratic Party ally lost her seat in the legislature.
Hong Kong's system of proportional representation essentially rewards political parties that get each candidate elected with the narrowest possible margin of victory, encouraging any additional voters to support another candidate from the same party or an allied party.
Christine Loh, the chief executive of Civic Exchange, said the maneuvering on Sunday could make it harder for the Democratic Party to forge alliances with pro-democracy minor parties and independents in the new legislature.
''This was a very selfish and stupid mistake, and it's going to cost them a lot of friendship,'' Ms. Loh predicted.
Democratic Party leaders said they would try to learn from the election, but mostly criticized the management of the vote. 
Ballot boxes were too small to hold all the votes cast on a day of record turnout by 55.6 percent of the 3.2 million registered voters, and long lines formed at some polling places as voters waited for more ballot boxes to arrive.
''I think it's stupidity'' not to have the mechanics of the election better organized, Mr. Lee said.
A more serious problem for the Democratic Party may be the public's broad disenchantment with all political parties after a nasty, scandal-ridden election campaign. 
While political parties have always been fairly weak here, a barrage of sex and financial scandals left many voters struggling for ways to explain how they went about selecting the candidates they disliked the least.
''There are lots of oranges, they are all bad, and we are just choosing the least bad,'' said John Siu, 21, a university student, after voting Sunday at a Kowloon Peninsula community center.
