
In Los Angeles, you don't expect to find someone like Christina Kim -- New York maybe, or Paris. 
She designs clothing, accessories and housewares under her label, Dosa, but her process is different from that of other designers. 
''In my dictionary, fashion means moment,'' she explains with a hint of Korean still in her voice. 
''The women I know don't really wear fashion as much as they think they do. 
They wear clothes.''
Christina isn't looking for the newest or the most unique -- her quest is for ''the essence, the most unadorned simple form of something.''
Dosa makes its home on two floors high above downtown Los Angeles across from the Eastern Building, a historic turquoise tile monument built in 1930. 
One floor is used as a gallery and retail space. 
The other is the office, showroom and factory that ships to 100 stores in 20 countries. 
It is not what you would expect in the middle of L.A.'s garment district. 
There are huge floor-to-ceiling windows, no receptionist, no offices or cubicles; there are no interior walls at all -- a bit like one of those ant farms where you can see the inner workings. 
There are rows of sewing machines with seamstresses in matching smocks and an open kitchen where everyone brings things to cook for lunch. 
''I didn't like the idea of people thinking that the clothing industry equals 'sweatshop,''' Kim says, ''so I decided to create a working place that is enjoyable.''
She continues: ''What I love about the West is we have space. 
You can see the horizon -- it's a horizontal way of looking at things. 
The East Coast is more vertical, you have to look up. 
The whole democratic ideal of what I do comes from the horizon, so we had to be in L.A.''
These spaces are her laboratories -- repositories for volumes of meticulously handwritten travel journals as well as tables filled with photographs, fabrics, yarns, beads, feathers and embroideries from Mexico, China, Chile, Turkey, Myanmar and on and on. 
Christina is sort of like Margaret Mead. 
She travels around the world working with indigenous people and artisans -- learning, cross-pollinating ideas and adapting traditional crafts to her modern needs.
In the last 20 years she has built a devoted clientele that appreciates not only her bohemian aesthetic and beautiful fabrics in simple comfortable shapes but also her gestalt.
For Christina there's more to it than just making products. 
As a child in Korea she'd spend hours with her grandmother, hemstitching linens that they would then dampen, spread over a hot piece of marble and beat with a couple of sticks to arrive at a shiny finish. 
She fell in love with the process of artfully making things that are labor intensive rather than resource intensive. 
''I'm always conscious of how we use natural resources,'' she explains. 
''I hate waste, and there's this incredible growth of human population. 
So if I use little resources and use a lot of human hands, maybe I'm balancing things a bit.''
Kim walks her talk. 
Home is a small Richard Neutra building in Silver Lake that is perfect in design and function. 
Everything she needs fits perfectly in this tiny space -- there is no excess -- no walk-in closets filled with shoes and handbags here. 
Out of a small kitchen filled with jars of herbs and spices collected in her travels, she cooks exotic vegetables she gets from her friend James Birch, an organic farmer. 
The food is all color and texture, and it's delicious -- seriously, like nothing you've ever tasted.
It's all about the hands for Kim. 
She's the connoisseur of handmade -- whether it's food, or jewelry, or sheets, or rugs, or clothing -- it's that one-on-one, on-site experience with the people growing it or making it that turns her on. 
''It's important for me to gracefully be the conduit between design and indigenous people,'' she says. 
''Keeping what they do alive. 
Ultimately it's the time you spend and relationships you create that make the projects successful. 
It isn't the speed of doing things, it is doing things with care and love.''
