
Anybody who follows sports has long become inured to the-dog-ate-my-homework stories emanating from athletes whose bodily fluids have yielded a trace of one substance or another. 
It tends to make us all a tad suspicious.
Back in 1998, for example, an Olympic snowboarder from Canada who tested positive for marijuana vaguely remembered walking into a party weeks earlier where somebody might have been smoking. 
The authorities took away his gold medal -- mostly for not being able to come up with a better story than that. 
(The snowboarder, Ross Rebagliati, eventually got his medal back after it was determined the rules were not specific enough about the consumption of marijuana.)
America's career home run leader, Barry Bonds, once reportedly tested positive for amphetamines and explained that he had borrowed them from a teammate's locker. 
The teammate called him on it and, fine fellow that he is, Barry recanted.
Some soccer countries lop a few years off players' ages so they can ace a junior tournament. 
Make the guy shave three times a day and hope he doesn't get caught.
The Beijing Games have had minimal drug busts, so far -- except for the traces of illegal chili pepper on four horses competing in Hong Kong, that is -- but the big question is whether the Chinese gymnasts were under age.
The gymnastics chickens still may come home to roost. 
On Friday, the International Olympic Committee said it was looking into accusations that a few medal-winning Chinese gymnasts might have been younger than 16. 
This minimum exists to keep little children from being exploited by manipulative coaches and twisting their bodies out of kilter. 
Over 16, it's fine.
At the end of July, The New York Times reported the possibility of evidence that He Kexin and Jiang Yuyuan were really 14 and not 16. 
One could argue that they both look 12, but the documents submitted by the Chinese federation says they are 16. 
There are also doubts about Yang Yilin.
After the gymnastics competition ended, the I.O.C. requested more information from the Chinese about the gymnasts. 
This is not an inquiry or an investigation, the I.O.C. insisted. 
Just a request.
''We have asked the gymnastics federation to look into a number of discrepancies,'' said Giselle Davies, the I.O.C. spokesperson, who said the federation was cooperating in the matter.
James Scherr, the chief executive officer of the United States Olympic Committee, said, ''We believe in fairness to all athletes.''
He said he did not know if there was a statute of limitations on potential chicanery, and he said the U.S.O.C. certainly had no plans to hire a gumshoe to pull birth certificates from town halls in rural China.
From the Chinese perspective, Wang Wei, a spokesman for the Beijing organizing committee, said: ''The athletes have been cleared. 
If they hadn't been, they would not have been allowed to compete.''
All well and good, but Beth Tweddle of Britain, who finished fourth in the uneven bars final, could theoretically be given a medal if He, who won gold, or Yang, who won bronze, should ever be busted for being under age. 
Ksenia Semenova of Russia finished fourth in the all-around finals, with Yang third. 
And the United States women finished second in the team competition, behind the Chinese team, which included He, Jiang and Yang.
Meanwhile, the Olympic sport that has generated the most bans, suspension and lost medals -- track and field -- has been thrilling this last week mostly because Usain Bolt of Jamaica broke world records in the 100- and 200-meter sprints.
There is no suggestion that Bolt, who has been tested a minimum of five times, is under suspicion of having used drugs. 
But in that sport, just about anybody who improves drastically is under suspicion.
Some of the Jamaican women, who have come from nowhere in recent months, train on their island, which does not have an international testing laboratory. 
Gaps like that leave everybody, including the innocent, under suspicion.
''I think we can never stop cheating, but I think 99 percent, or 99.9 percent, are clean,'' said Frankie Fredericks of Namibia, a member of the I.O.C. and chairman of the athletes' commission. 
Fredericks, who won double silvers in the sprints at the 1992 and 1996 Games, said, ''I'm happy with the testing.''
Most definitely not happy with the testing are four riders whose horses tested positive for chili pepper at the Olympic equestrian center in Hong Kong. 
The four horses and their riders were suspended from Olympic show jumping Thursday after preliminary tests indicated the presence of capsaicin, a mild stimulant widely used in ointments for horses. 
More tests are scheduled in the next month.
The imaginative explanation -- I can see a few cyclists I know coming up with this one -- is that the horses accidentally got downwind from a large tray of curry. 
But the more prosaic excuse is that the portion of capsaicin was slightly higher than normal in ointment used on the horses.
In past Olympics, athletes have been disqualified because of asthma or cold medicine they said they had used innocently, but lately the testing has been upgraded, with the support of many of the athletes.
Ramped-up testing is a good sign. 
Skeptic that I am, I am waiting for the ramped-up alibis as well.
