
THE bus was old, hot, cramped and slow as a herniated snail. 
A ride that should have taken 3 to 4 hours took a harrowing 13.
An international journey embarked on more than a quarter century ago, ignited by a young boy's fascination with round objects, mainly a basketball and the globe, took an unscheduled detour last month through a Middle East war zone.
''Only the most optimistic person alive would have called it intimate,'' that boy, now 57, said earlier this week during a telephone interview from a hastily arranged sanctuary in Amman, Jordan. 
Meet Paul Coughter, coach of the Lebanese national basketball team and citizen of the world, by way of Flatbush, Brooklyn.
Meet the American who engineered his players' escape from the mountains outside besieged Beirut, through a convoluted and imperiled passage north, to Syria, then south, to Amman, on the way to the World Championship of Basketball beginning next week in Japan.
''The crisis began five days after we started our training camp,'' Coughter said. 
''After two days, we sent the players home to be with their families. 
Then we realized if we didn't get out, we never would.
''I think we got the last bus in Lebanon. 
We were in our own mini-world, trying to block out everything, barely anything to eat, stopping at gas stations, places where people would say, 'Ten minutes ago, a bomb landed over there.'
They'd say, 'Look at that, it's still smoldering,' and then we're back on the bus, trying to convince ourselves that because one had already landed, it couldn't happen again.''
Do you think Larry Brown has had a peripatetic career?
Over 27 years, Coughter has coached on six continents, has stalked professional sidelines from Australia to Saudi Arabia to Taiwan, has also run the national teams of South Africa, Pakistan and Wales.
Do you believe Brown faced prohibitive odds with last season's Knicks?
Coughter's manager and trainer both stayed behind last month to tend to their families, and his American-born center, Paul Khoury, was marooned in Idaho, unable to renew his Lebanese visa, when the Beirut airport was bombed. 
His best player, Fadi El Khatib, wouldn't leave the country unless there was room on the bus -- which was made -- for his wife and young child.
Want to hear the N.B.A. soldiers of fortune whine about the wider lane and mysterious refs when the Lebanese are dealing with the rules of war?
For a team with aspirations normally no more grandiose than winning a game or two at the gathering of the world's basketball powers, there have been scant practices and serious sleep deprivation and incalculable stress.
Even Coughter, the globetrotting bachelor, the avowed adventurer who promises to retire soon and sail the world for the rest of his years on a custom-built yacht, called this latest chapter of A Coach's Life ''beyond bizarre.''
Lucky for him, he has never evaluated his career by the number of championships won, by the size of his paycheck. 
Ask for personal highlights and he tells of exploring an exotic island in New Zealand, of bunking with a Chinese family in Zimbabwe, of sipping coffee while gazing at the Mediterranean from the balcony of his most current address, the Zouk Hotel, 20 minutes from Beirut.
Coughter was born into a large Irish Catholic, basketball-loving Brooklyn family, his father having played at Erasmus Hall High School and his older brother for Joe Mullaney at Providence College. 
He remembers launching his first shot from his father's shoulders in Prospect Park, learning the game and using it to facilitate the ultimate road trip.
''It's like Larry Bird once said: 'Don't tell anyone, but I'd do this for free,' '' Coughter said. 
''For me, the whole thing is experiential.''
How else to describe the itinerary, from Lebanon to Syria to Jordan to Turkey to Slovenia, back to Jordan, on the way to the Philippines this week and then Japan to, as Coughter put it, ''carry the Lebanese flag at a time the country needs to be seen''?
When the United States is perceived in the Middle East to be the power behind the invading Israelis, here is an American at a helm, with an Iraqi assistant, Koussay Hatem, who is married to a Lebanese woman and said in a telephone interview that he ''must call home three, four, five times a day to see if everyone is O.K.''
In every direction is a political tinderbox that a wise and wandering Yankee, dependent on the kindness and employment of strangers, knows enough to leave alone. 
As Coughter said, ''One of my best friends in Beirut is from a family that is Hezbollah. 
We talk about basketball and women.''
On the road, the Lebanese players and even Joseph Vogel, an American who has played professionally in the country long enough to become nationalized, discuss the war, but mostly as it relates to the future beyond Japan.
''The way it's going right now, who knows if Lebanon will even be open when the world championships are over?'' said Vogel, a former player at Colorado State. 
''For me, it's a career at stake. 
For most of these guys, it's a country.''
The coach recommends focus on the task at hand, on the journey, always the journey.
Coughter, in fact, will leave Japan the day after the last game to meet the country's junior team, which he also coaches, for the Asian championships. 
He will take three flights to reach a Chinese city near the Mongolian border. 
The way things are going in Lebanon, he may not get paid, but don't tell anyone, he'd do it for free.
