
From his 16th birthday, Shang She Jung, a slight man with thick glasses, toiled in factories, making everything from ammunition boxes to women's hats. 
He is 67 now. 
His hair is graying. 
His face is wrinkled.
A former mechanic, he spent more than two decades working for the Otis Elevator Company in Yonkers. 
And he's still working full time, as a groundskeeper for the Port Chester, N.Y., schools. 
He's still working because he has been denied Social Security benefits.
The problem is that much of Mr. Jung's past remains a mystery. 
He arrived in the United States from China in 1947 and has no memory of the remote province where he was born. 
He has two younger siblings who were born in this country and a third in China, though he does not know them. 
He does not have a birth certificate, a passport, or any link to the abusive parents from whom he was separated in the 1950's with the help of the New York Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children.
In 2002, when Mr. Jung turned 65, he found out that he could not receive Social Security benefits because he did not have that birth certificate or other proof of citizenship. 
And so began his investigation into his own past, a frustrating quest for information from government agencies, where results often depend upon the mood of an employee on a given day.
''The system is problematic,'' said Norma Rios, a senior immigration counselor for Catholic Charities, Archdiocese of New York. 
''Often it's about who you see and who you know, and it shouldn't be like that.''
Though Mr. Jung was never officially adopted, he was taken in by the Gavin family, Irish-Americans from Port Chester.
''Apparently his father used to beat up on him,'' said Pat Gavin, who considers himself Mr. Jung's brother. 
''From the day he came in, he was family.''
Mr. Jung, who speaks heavily accented English, relied on Mr. Gavin, 71, to help explain the complex story surrounding his Social Security benefits.
''He's been paying since 1953,'' Mr. Gavin said. 
''All he's asking is to get back the money that he's put into it.''
Mr. Gavin, who is well suited for the role of older brother, sought help from Catholic Charities, one of seven charities supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
There, he met Ms. Rios, who filed requests under the Freedom of Information Act to obtain copies of Mr. Jung's records. 
She found proof that Mr. Jung had landed in the United States, but there was no indication of his immigration status on the forms.
She then went to the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services seeking more information about Mr. Jung, but found none. 
Her next stop was the National Archives and Records Administration on Varick Street. 
Officials there could not help, either. 
But they did suggest that she call the National Archives office in San Bruno, Calif., since that had been Mr. Jung's point of arrival in 1947. 
Several records were found there, including the passenger list of the ship on which he had sailed.
But it was on a form from the Immigration and Naturalization Service (the predecessor of the Citizenship and Immigration Services) that Ms. Rios found what she was looking for. 
Next to Mr. Jung's name were the words ''Admit as U. Citizen.''
It was dated Aug. 
4, 1947, and signed by an immigration inspector.
''If it wasn't for Norma we would have nothing,'' Mr. Gavin said.
Mr. Jung earns about $23,000 a year. 
His apartment in Port Chester costs $600 a month, and his car insurance is $1,400 a year. 
He has used all of his personal days to attend immigration meetings, and often works overtime to make enough money to pay his bills. 
It is time, he said, to slow down.
Catholic Charities, where Ms. Rios works, charges for its legal services, but Ms. Rios was able to get $300 from the Neediest Cases to spare Mr. Jung the expense. 
She is currently filing the papers to establish Mr. Jung's certificate of citizenship, which will cost him $240, plus $70 for fingerprints. 
It is likely to take eight months before Mr. Jung receives it.
''That will put us almost three years behind on him getting his money,'' Mr. Gavin said. 
But no matter how long it takes, he added, he is determined to help his brother get his benefits, including back payments.
''And we're going to fight for that, too,'' Mr. Gavin said.
Mr. Jung does not want to use any personal days during the holiday season next year. 
He is hoping that for the first time in more than half a century, he will be able to have all of his days free.
HOW TO HELP
Checks payable to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund should be sent to 4 Chase Metrotech Center, 7th Floor East, Lockbox 5193, Brooklyn, N.Y. 
11245, or any of these organizations:
BROOKLYN BUREAU OF COMMUNITY SERVICE
285 Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 
11217.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES OF THE ARCHDIOCESE OF NEW YORK
1011 First Avenue, New York, N.Y. 
10022.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES, DIOCESE OF BROOKLYN AND QUEENS
191 Joralemon Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 
11201.
CHILDREN'S AID SOCIETY
105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 
10010.
COMMUNITY SERVICE SOCIETY OF NEW YORK
105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 
10010.
FEDERATION OF PROTESTANT WELFARE AGENCIES
281 Park Avenue South, New York, N.Y. 
10010.
UJA-FEDERATION OF NEW YORK
Church Street Station P.O. 
Box 4100 New York, N.Y. 
10261-4100
Donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (212) 556-5851 (ext. 
7) or online, courtesy of CharityWave.com, an Internet donations service, at www.nytimesneediest.charitywave.com. 
For instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.
No agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
The Times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.
Contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.
To delay may mean to forget.
Previously recorded: $4,184,171.82
Recorded Tuesday: $125,434.13
Total: $4,309,605.95
Last year to date: $4,990,401.21
