
WITH Chinese clothing flooding the United States, Henry Fan foresees a huge shakeout in the Los Angeles garment industry, the nation's largest. 
''Companies will go to the wall,'' he said.
But not his, he says. 
Mr. Fan is confident that Basic Elements Inc., the apparel-importing firm that he leads, will survive the flood of apparel from China that is causing American retailers to demand discounted prices from importers, the ''middlemen'' of the worldwide garment trade. 
His company can thrive, Mr. Fan believes, and not by going upscale, the strategy that many firms are pursuing as their hope for salvation.
Rather, he expects growth from acquiring distressed apparel firms and gaining the size and strength to withstand the risks of supplying big retail companies even at the low prices that Chinese imports are dictating.
''Risks are substantial in working with large volumes of products that mass merchants require,'' Mr. Fan said. 
''If something goes wrong, you have to air-freight rather than ship to meet the schedule. 
The margin for error is thin.''
But Mr. Fan says he believes he can continue to compete by using the expertise he gained in the worlds of technology and finance to build an international supply network to handle the growing trade.
''We have overseas offices in Hong Kong and in many parts of China as well as Bangladesh and Thailand,'' he said. 
''We can design products here or overseas and ship them anywhere; we can tackle the job in numerous ways.''
In short, he wants to make Basic Elements a central part of the new supply equation of Chinese factories and American retailers.
That is a tall order. 
Employment in the Los Angeles area garment industry, which is made up of thousands of small firms, has fallen to 118,000 today from 142,000 in 1997. 
And if anything, the outlook seems even more dire.
With the elimination of most quotas this year, Chinese imports swelled into a torrent, increasing by more than 1,300 percent in some categories. 
With such an abundance of cheap clothing to choose from, American retailers have stepped up pressure on their supplier firms to cut prices on the goods they design, import and distribute.
The resulting cutthroat competition is expected to knock out hundreds of firms over the next few years, but Mr. Fan says Basic Elements is in a good position to come out of the storm even stronger. 
His optimism springs in part from the expertise and international connections that the company has accumulated in its 27-year history.
Basic Elements was founded in 1978 by Paul Hui, an immigrant from Hong Kong, back when it was exceedingly difficult for American companies to do business in China. 
They needed permits from the Chinese government and knowledge of China's factories.
Mr. Hui supplied the knowledge and contacts and was able to build his company to $50 million in annual sales, with headquarters in the Los Angeles suburb of Irwindale and offices in Hong Kong and Bangladesh.
Today, Basic Elements imports about 30 million garments a year, including children's clothing for the Toys 'R' Us chain and women's apparel for Chico's stores. 
Mr. Hui died of cancer this year, after passing on the chief executive title to Mr. Fan, a 33-year-old Taiwan-born professional manager with a background in finance and technology.
Mr. Fan faces a decidedly different global environment than Mr. Hui did more than a quarter-century ago. 
More large American retailers want to deal directly with Chinese factories. 
And Chinese factory executives and entrepreneurs are investing in Southern California companies. 
They do that, said Dominic Ng, chairman of East West Bank, a leading lender to the Chinese community, ''to qualify for visas to come to America'' as well as to gain a larger foothold in the American marketplace.
As Mr. Fan sees it, ''It's a classic case of squeezing the middleman, from above and below.''
He sees a bigger distribution pipeline as a way to squeeze back, but that is not the conventional strategy that many Los Angeles companies favor.
''Our industry must focus on fashion, as Italy has done for 500 years,'' said Ilse Metchek, executive director of the California Fashion Association, a trade group with more than 250 member companies. 
''The model for Los Angeles must be unique design and quality to warrant higher prices and protect profit margins.''
She recommends a boutique approach. 
A recent contemporary fashion show in the Los Angeles garment district, with wares like blue jeans that have a wholesale price of $150 and sell in stores for $300, featured company owners who were giving up the struggle to supply general department stores. 
For example, Orly Dahan, president of Tag Rag Inc., a maker of trendy denim clothing, saw his profits disappear as major retailers pushed him to discount his prices drastically. 
''So I stopped,'' Mr. Dahan said, ''and now I concentrate on fashion and supply specialty stores.''
To be sure, it takes ingenuity to compete in a time of falling worldwide prices, when ''a manufacturer in China can land a pair of jeans in the United States for $8.50 and make a profit,'' said George Rudes, an apparel industry veteran of five decades. 
Mr. Rudes's latest company, SLL Inc., features a design for a girdle-like Tummy Tuck Jean designed by his daughter, Lisa Rudes-Sandel.
''You must innovate, as we did,'' said Mr. Rudes, who has the specialized jeans manufactured in the United States and sells them wholesale for $44, with a recommended retail price below $100.
Mr. Fan of Basic Elements is all for innovation. 
He has hired a designer of children's clothing to offer fresh patterns to Toys 'R' Us. 
But he says his company must also play in the world market by fielding an efficient supply operation from overseas factories through the intricacies of transportation and customs and homeland security regulations to reliably deliver to retailers.
Mr. Fan is not an old-time apparel man. 
He studied accounting at the University of California, Berkeley and then worked in Silicon Valley's dot-com surge of the 1990's, including as a founder of an Internet software company that failed. 
One model he looks to for Basic Elements is Dell because of its skill at assembling computers from many locations and distributing them efficiently.
Among the companies he is in negotiations to acquire is one with licenses from the major sports leagues to make garments with team logos. 
''Their margins have declined because their manufacturing costs are high,'' he said. 
Basic Elements can improve that, he says, by using factories it knows in China and shipping through its supply chain. 
Mr. Fan says he has also just received an offer to buy a factory in China.
His vision for Basic Elements is to build an organization that is able to distribute many different products. 
Another model he sees for his company is Li & Fung (Trading) Ltd., a 100-year-old Hong Kong firm that pioneered the idea of distributing garments from many manufacturers to numerous retail companies. 
Li & Fung today has annual revenue of $5.5 billion from sending apparel, furnishings and accessories to 40 countries.
Accordingly, Mr. Fan says he can double Basic Elements' annual sales to $100 million and beyond by using debt and private equity investments to make acquisitions. 
''Henry can do it because he has the accounting background and understands how to do mergers and acquisitions, where most small firms do not,'' said Mr. Ng of East West, the bankerto Basic Elements and many other Asian apparel firms.
With operations in China as well as Southern California -- and part ownership by major Wall Street investment firms -- East West ''can introduce Henry to sources of equity investment capital,'' Mr. Ng said.
Say this for Mr. Fan, he is thinking big in a global market where China will be a permanent factor. 
China's apparel exports to the United States surged to $12 billion in the first half of 2005, from $8 billion in all of 2004, and now account for almost 20 percent of all apparel imports. 
In an immense and growing world market, Henry Fan is dealing with reality.
