
The torch relay that was marred by protests and controversy passed through a tightly controlled Tiananmen Square on Wednesday morning. 
It will wind through the city before it enters the Olympic Stadium during Friday night's opening ceremony.
The Chinese basketball star Yao Ming ran with the torch from the gates of the Forbidden City and handed it off in front of a portrait of Mao Zedong that overlooks the Avenue of Eternal Peace. 
Other torchbearers included Yang Liwei, China's first astronaut in space, and the movie director Zhang Yimou.
Crowds, all preselected, were well behaved. 
At times, it was eerily quiet inside the enormous square. 
The only sounds were a continuing tribal drumbeat and the buzz from a helicopter of the government-run television station.
The torch was passed from person to person every 30 feet or so, but there were no formal speeches in the colorfully choreographed program. 
Paramilitary soldiers marched in formation. 
Groups of dancers, tai chi performers and representatives of large corporations -- Coca-Cola, China Mobile, McDonald's, Lenovo -- all dressed as groups in different, bright-colored T-shirts. 
News media representatives had to register in advance, and their movements were limited to assigned positions.
The torch went into the square, which was lined with people yet empty in the middle. 
As it rimmed the square, people watched and waved flags and fans, yet made little noise.
''I'm just so happy; I couldn't sleep last night,'' Liu Yuzhen, a 54-year-old dancer, told The Associated Press. 
''It's our torch and it's in Beijing. 
It's a chance of a hundred years and it's finally here.''
The torch left Greece on March 24 and was met with protests as it toured the world. 
The protests have mostly been in response to China's crackdown in March on antigovernment riots in Tibet and to more general concerns about human rights in China.
During its three-day stay in the capital city, 841 people will get to carry the torch, which arrived in Beijing after a visit to Sichuan province, the site of a deadly May 12 earthquake that killed nearly 70,000 people.
REROUTING FUTURE RELAYS The International Olympic Committee president, Jacques Rogge, said Tuesday that future Olympics may forgo international torch relays to avoid the controversy, protests and disruptions that marked this year's relay. 
He said that the I.O.C. could limit the flame processions to domestic routes within the host countries.
''We respect protests and freedom of expression, but violence is against the Olympic spirit,'' Rogge said. 
''We believe in the strong symbolism of the torch relay.''
The Canadian Olympic Committee member Dick Pound said during the I.O.C.'s general assembly Tuesday that the global torch relay never should have taken place. 
''This came very close to becoming a disaster,'' Pound said. 
(AP)
'SYSTEMATIC DOPING' LAMENTED The head of the I.O.C.'s medical commission said Tuesday that seven Russian female track and field athletes, accused of tampering with their urine samples, appeared to be involved in a case of ''systematic doping.''
The women were provisionally suspended last week by the I.A.A.F. in the doping scandal. 
They included Yelena Soboleva, a world record-holder and world champion middle-distance runner who was favored to win the 800 and the 1,500 meters in Beijing.
''I think it is just frustrating to find that such type of cheating -- planned cheating -- is still going on,'' Arne Ljungqvist, the chairman of the medical commission, said. 
''That's very disappointing to find.''
Also Tuesday, a Russian race walking coach told a local news agency that two Russian Olympic walkers had been dropped from the team after failing doping tests. 
Vladimir Kanaikin and Valery Borchin tested positive for the banned drug EPO in out-of-competition tests in April, their coach, Viktor Chegin, said.
In other doping news, Russia's cycling federation announced that the cyclist Vladimir Gusev would not compete in Beijing after his professional team fired him last month on suspicion of doping. 
Gusev, 25, was scheduled to compete in the individual time trial on Aug. 
13 and was considered a favorite for a medal. 
(REUTERS, AP)
SHAKY VICTORY FOR U.S. 
MEN Undefeated but no longer unchallenged, the United States Olympic men's basketball team wrapped up its exhibition schedule with its toughest test, pulling away to beat Australia, 87-76, in Shanghai.
The United States led by only 4 points nearly halfway through the third quarter and was up by 7 midway through the fourth against an Australia team that was resting its best player, Milwaukee Bucks center Andrew Bogut.
''Nothing alarming for us -- it's alarming when you lose,'' said Dwyane Wade, who led all scorers with 22 points. 
(AP)
IRAQI ATHLETES ARRIVE The four athletes who make up the Iraqi Olympic team arrived in China late Monday, less than a week after the country's ban was reversed.
The reversal cleared four of the seven Iraqis who had originally qualified for the Olympics. 
The others who could get a chance to compete are waiting in Kuwait.
''I'm so happy I am here now,'' said the rower Haidar Nozad, who is in men's double sculls with Hamzah Hussein Jebur. 
''I am so excited. 
It is my dream.''
(AP)
