
The hotel industry is suffering almost as much as the airline industry from outbreaks of severe acute respiratory syndrome, as guests cancel trips and hotel managers take emergency steps to prevent guests and employees from becoming infected.
"Everyone has been affected by it, not only in Asia," said David Baffsky, the chairman of the Asian and Pacific operations of Accor S.A., the largest operator of hotels in East Asia. 
"It has some quite important consequences not just from a health point of view but a business point of view."
The industry received an additional blow today as Japanese tour companies and corporations, including JTB and Nippon Travel, suspended travel to Hong Kong and southern China for two weeks after a government official warned that 14 Japanese are suspected of contracting the deadly pneumonia. 
JTB said its reservations for overseas package tours for April and May have dropped by 35 percent and 40 percent, respectively, compared with the previous year.
Facing empty rooms and canceled reservations, hoteliers are trying to reassure guests and employees well beyond the affected countries in Asia. 
Accor has already sent detailed information on how to respond to the illness, known as SARS, to all of the managers of its 3,800 hotels worldwide, which include the Sofitel, Novotel, Red Roof Inns and Motel 6 brands.
The chain is asking every manager to watch for customers who may have the disease, using guidelines from the World Health Organization, and to improve hygiene and staff protection through steps like having the housekeeping staff wear gloves for more tasks.
Other chains, like Holiday Inn, are taking the same steps, especially in Asia but increasingly elsewhere as well. 
Accor has just decided to go one step further by having receptionists ask guests how they can be contacted in the 10 days after they check out in case another guest falls ill with SARS. 
Holiday Inn is a unit of Six Continents.
According to health officials, the disease began spreading around the world from the modern 487-room Metropole Hotel here. 
A doctor from mainland China checked into a ninth-floor room here on Feb. 
21, began to feel ill and infected six tourists and a Hong Kong resident on the same floor.
Since the outbreak began, some people have resorted to staying in hotels if they are unsure of their health and leery of staying with family members for fear of infecting them. 
Some doctors engaged in the hazardous task of treating highly infectious patients in pneumonia wards here initially moved into hotels to reduce the risk of infecting their families in the evening, although hospital officials have since provided temporary housing for such doctors.
Some companies with operations here are also using hotels as informal quarantine areas by asking employees from their Hong Kong operations to spend 7 to 10 days at a hotel or at home before entering company offices in other countries.
The Great Eagle Hotel here, an elegant, independent hotel in Kowloon that is a 25-minute walk from the Metropole, is a case study in how SARS is affecting the hotel industry.
So many buyers and executives from New York's fashion and garment industry stay at the Great Eagle while visiting factories across the border in mainland China that the hotel has what is probably Hong Kong's most authentic New York-style deli restaurant, complete with pickles and Reuben sandwiches. 
But now most of the clientele has disappeared, and daily occupancy levels have plunged, ranging from 10 to 20 percent, said Nigel Roberts, the general manager.
To reassure guests and other customers, the hotel has taken almost ostentatious precautions, in what is becoming a sort of hygiene chic here. 
Below the large, crystal chandeliers in the lobby, the furniture, telephones and especially the elevator buttons are all wiped with a bleach solution at least once an hour.
In the deli and elsewhere, workers do not just wear masks, which have become almost ubiquitous here in service jobs, but also latex gloves. 
The effort seems to be paying off -- the deli was half full at lunchtime today, more than many restaurants here these days, as people came in from the street to eat.
"If you'd asked me two weeks ago if I'd have the staff in masks and gloves, I'd have said, 'What?'
" Mr. Roberts noted. 
"As time goes on, we've realized that it's a very effective way to reassure people that everything has been done."
Three hotel employees live in a 19-building apartment complex where more than 200 residents have fallen ill from SARS in the last week. 
Although not one of the three lives in the building where the majority of the illnesses took place, all are now on paid leave.
Hotel employees try to keep a discreet eye on guests' health not just when they check in but during their stay as well. 
"We've had a couple guests in the last 10 days whom we've observed coughing and sneezing and we've encouraged them to see a doctor and get it checked," Mr. Roberts said. 
"They were fine."
The hotel has dismissed two newly hired employees who were still in a three-month probationary period. 
Many employees, unneeded with the hotel nearly empty, have been told to take their annual paid vacations now. 
On Thursday, Mr. Roberts ordered all employees, including himself, to take two days of unpaid leave within the next few days to cut costs.
While most reservations this month have been canceled, many regular clients have rebooked for later this year, Mr. Roberts said. 
That fits a pattern that other hoteliers have noticed, with some meetings being rescheduled in other cities while others are postponed but are to be held later this year in Hong Kong.
"Everything is now being squashed into the second half of the year," said Nelli Yong, a spokeswoman in Singapore for Starwood Hotels and Resorts Worldwide, which has the Sheraton and Westin brands.
For any hotel managers not yet paying attention to SARS, the Metropole stands as a warning. 
The hotel remains open and has been disinfected by workers and certified as free of disease by Hong Kong officials.
But the hotel is virtually deserted; the only people in the cramped, blue-tiled lobby this afternoon were three employees in face masks.
Anita Kwan, the hotel spokeswoman, said that the ninth floor was open for business but rooms there would be let only if all other rooms in the hotel were full. 
Like many hotels, the Metropole has not cut prices, concluding that even discounts will not help.
"The problem," she said, "is confidence, not the price."
Japanese companies, including Sony, Canon, Hitachi and Olympus Optical suspended travel to Hong Kong, China and much of Southeast Asia earlier this week. 
Honda is evacuating the spouses and children of its 55 Japanese workers in Hong Kong and southern China.
"Our employees are frozen in place -- if they are in Hong Kong, they are not to leave; if they are here, they are not to go to Hong Kong," the Japan director of a major American bank said today, fresh from a conference with his New York headquarters.
At Narita airport outside Tokyo, planes for Asia left today with rows of empty seats, while flights from Hong Kong and southern China were greeted by public health officers wearing surgical masks and barking into megaphones: "Please report to us if anyone feels sick."
Naoko Kanbara, a 35-year-old flight attendant, said she dreaded flying to Hong Kong next week.
"I really feel scared," she said today. 
"I have to buy a mask before going there. 
I'm supposed to stay one night, but I really hope the company will send us back in a day. 
I don't want to stay there."
