
From City Hall to city parks where the locals play mah-jongg and practice tai chi, the talk of this affluent Los Angeles suburb, known as the Chinese Beverly Hills, is of little else these days but the mysterious respiratory illness that has set off a global health alert.
While Monterey Park has no known cases of the disease, which appears to have started in southern China and been spread abroad by airline passengers, residents of this city, which was the first in the continental United States to have an Asian majority, are growing increasingly jittery and going to great extremes to avoid infection.
Aside from donning surgical masks and postponing trips to the Far East, some residents are avoiding shops and restaurants where patrons who recently returned from Asia are rumored to have gone. 
Mayor David Lau, citing the health risk, has canceled a long-scheduled trip this month to Monterey Park's sister city, Quanzhou, China. 
Local doctors are seeing an increasing number of patients who believe they may have been exposed to the disease.
"There are so many rumors circulating that this person or that person is sick with it and that they contracted it at this or that place that I'm trying to avoid any human contact, period," said Wendy Chen, a legal secretary who wore a white surgical mask and gloves as she headed into a Starbucks for coffee. 
"You may think I'm crazy, but I'm not taking any risk."
Seemingly for good reason. 
California, where more of this country's Asian and Pacific Islander population resides, has the highest number of suspected cases of severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS, in America. 
California's airports handle more flights on Pacific routes than those of any other state, increasing the chances that infected passengers going to the United States end up in the state.
To date, there have been 36 suspected cases of SARS reported in California. 
Of those patients, state health officials said that at least 17 traveled to Southeast Asia in recent seeks and that at least 3 shared homes with travelers to Asia and are considered secondary infections. 
The largest numbers of cases in California have been reported in Los Angeles and Santa Clara Counties, with seven each. 
The remaining cases are spread throughout the state in no significant clusters.
State and local health officials have urged the public not to panic and have stressed that the number of cases is extremely low relative to the state's population of about 34 million people. 
In addition, they said they were encouraged by the low rate of secondary infection and by the fact that no patients had died and all were responding well to treatment. 
They also noted that no health care workers had contracted the disease.
"We have to keep some perspective if you consider that we've had tens of thousands of people coming from the Far East to California in recent weeks and only seven cases in L.A.," said Dr. Jonathan Fielding, director of public health for Los Angeles County.
Health officials said that while the number of cases in California was likely to increase, not enough was known about the disease to estimate exactly how many people would contract SARS.
Diona Bonta, the state director for public health, said that California was well prepared to deal with a significant outbreak of SARS but that she did not anticipate that. 
Because of the increasing risk of chemical and biological terrorist attacks, Ms. Bonta said, the state had improved its ability to respond aggressively to public health risks.
She said that people should go about their daily routines as normal but also be aware of people with ailments like a cold or the flu. 
"Washing your hands goes quite a long way," she said.
Upon arrival at airports in California, passengers from mainland China, Singapore, Hong Kong and Vietnam receive multilanguage health notices advising them that they may have been exposed to SARS and should monitor their health.
Fear of SARS is also gripping other Asian enclaves in California. 
In San Francisco's Chinatown, pharmacists and health officials have reported a run on face masks and over-the-counter disinfectants.
Patrick Ng, a Chinatown pharmacist for 30 years, said he had sold 10,000 face masks to customers in the last three weeks. 
He has reordered another 12,000 masks, but the shipment will not arrive until next week.
There has been only one reported case of SARS in San Francisco.
Chinatown merchants said that since the disease reached the United States, business had declined, especially in restaurants and food shops.
At the nonprofit agency Self-Help for the Elderly, which serves a mostly Asian population, home health care workers have started wearing masks and gloves when visiting clients who are at risk. 
The agency has instructed janitors to use extra antiseptic wipes when cleaning, giving special attention to doorknobs, window handles and telephone mouthpieces.
"When the situation was not as serious as now, there were only a few people asking for masks," said Caroline Ng, the office manager. 
"Now all of the health care workers are asking. 
I have even seen bus drivers that drive the routes near Chinatown wearing masks."
