
In the nearly six years since its transition to China, this former British colony has endured two recessions, an outbreak of avian flu, slumping confidence in government and a collapse in government revenues. 
But these setbacks are being dwarfed by this year's explosive outbreak of a new respiratory disease, which is spreading panic and rapidly undermining confidence in the future of one of the world's most dynamic cities.
In a sign of just how far public confidence has fallen, crowds mobbed supermarkets today to buy up rice and other essentials in response to a rumor, spread partly by an Internet hoax, that the entire city would be labeled an "infected area" and face an international quarantine. 
The stock market fell, and the Hong Kong dollar came under pressure in currency markets as government officials went on television to deny the rumor and appeal for calm.
But such scenes, damaging to any locality, are devastating for a city that exists as the crossroads of Asia and a gateway to China.
Hong Kong has Asia's busiest airport for international passenger departures and international air freight. 
Its port handles more freight containers each year than any other port in the world.
The city's modern health, transportation and communications systems have helped induce nearly 1,000 multinational companies to put their regional headquarters here, creating an enormous service sector for the 100,000 expatriates who live here and even more who visit on business.
But it is precisely Hong Kong's position as a transportation hub and a desirable headquarters location that is now threatened by the outbreak of SARS, the severe acute respiratory syndrome. 
The disease has spread far faster here than anywhere else, partly because officials were slow to quarantine patients who then infected visitors.
Countries from Australia to the United States are actively discouraging their citizens from visiting, and a growing number are having doctors meet flights from here to assess the health of each passenger. 
(Today, an American Airlines flight from Tokyo was quarantined on the runway in San Jose, Calif., after two passengers and two crew members complained of SARS-like symptoms. 
A baby girl in Massachusetts was also thought to be suffering with the disease.)
At the same time, many expatriate business people and affluent local residents are sending spouses and children to less disease-ridden cities elsewhere. 
Mark Simon, an American businessman here, has been performing the same calculations as many people with the financial wherewithal to leave. 
His 18-month-old son briefly needed hospital treatment for a minor illness before the current outbreak, and he worries whether quality medical care would be available for his son at this city's increasingly overburdened hospitals if a similar incident were to occur now.
So Mr. Simon's wife and son have moved into a hotel in Manila, and he worries that some companies may be less eager to invest here if it becomes harder to persuade employees to move here. 
"My wife won't come back until this is cleared up," he said, adding, "The spouses say, 'You dragged me out to Asia, and it was supposed to be safe.'
"
Making matters worse, anyone who does fall ill with SARS is likely to be stuck here, most likely in one of the city's increasingly crowded pneumonia wards, where rows of patients lie curled up in balls on their beds, battling fever and chills. 
Medical evacuation, long offered by multinationals for overseas employees, has become virtually impossible. 
Commercial carriers are refusing to carry SARS patients under any circumstances, and even air ambulance services are now warning that they may not be able to move people with SARS.
International SOS, one of the world's largest medical evacuation and corporate security firms and the main provider of evacuations in Asia, is actively promoting its services now in Kuwait because of the war in Iraq, but it is virtually ignoring Hong Kong, a company spokeswoman said. 
Because of the difficulty in persuading governments and hospitals to accept SARS patients, as well as the uncertainty of how to transport them safely by air without infecting others, she said, "such patient movements are therefore unlikely."
A steady diet of similarly grim health news has emptied restaurants, hotels and shops as tourists flee and residents stay home. 
That has hurt the Hong Kong economy more than it would most Asian economies because most of the manufacturing that used to take place here has moved across the border to low-wage cities in mainland China.
