
Ge Gan-ru: 'Chinese Rhapsody,' 'Wu,' 'Six Pentatonic Tunes for Orchestra'
Margaret Leng Tan, pianist; Royal Scottish National Orchestra, conducted by Jose Serebrier. 
Bis SACD-1509; CD.
GE GAN-RU's career trajectory will be familiar to anyone fascinated by the stream of expatriate Chinese composers whose works have enlivened the American new-music world. 
Mr. Ge was born in Shanghai in 1954, spent his teenage years working on an agricultural collective, then studied music in China in the 1970's and the United States in the 80's. 
His style is an inventive, ear-catching blend of traditional Chinese sounds and styles with the languages and techniques of American modernism.
''Chinese Rhapsody'' (1992) and ''Wu'' (1986/91) are examples of the extraordinary power Mr. Ge can summon with a full orchestra fitted with Chinese percussion. 
Emotionally gripping works, they both seduce and pummel the listener.
In ''Wu'' (''Rising to the Heights''), the solo piano, played with characteristic deftness by Margaret Leng Tan, begins as an adjunct bass drum, with a pounding, repeated tone. 
Then the line weaves its way, in varying shades of delicacy and force, through a hazy, constantly shifting orchestral fabric.
Mr. Ge's marshaling of his orchestral resources is even more overtly virtuosic in the rhapsody. 
Alternately anxious and ecstatic, terrifying and celebratory, it includes passages in which the strings howl and the percussion writing is both vivid and complex.
The ''Six Pentatonic Tunes,'' based on Chinese folk melodies, are less arresting, but they clearly have nostalgic meaning for Mr. Ge, who composed them as piano pieces during his student years in Shanghai and orchestrated them in 2003. 
The simplicity of the themes and the sunny naivete of Mr. Ge's orchestration call to mind similarly folksy American works like Grofe's ''Grand Canyon Suite.''
The Royal Scottish National Orchestra plays this music vigorously for Jose Serebrier, and all three scores benefit from the presence of the surround-sound mix. 
ALLAN KOZINN
