
Keith Bradsher is right about the nasty, personalistic nature of Taiwan politics. 
In this case, the two candidates aren’t that far apart on the issues, so character becomes a tempting target. 
But two other factors are at play.
First, political culture in China and Taiwan emphasizes vigilance against “traitors in our midst.” The politicians of the Nationalist Party (the KMT) are particularly vulnerable to this suspicion of treason because the party is associated with China and used harsh methods to maintain its rule on the island into the 1980s. 
It doesn’t matter that Ma spent most of his adult life on Taiwan (and not a day in China). 
His opponents in the Democratic Progressive Party will play evidence of apparent or potential disloyalty for all its worth.
The second factor is the DPPs desire to the Taiwan public to think of something other than its dissatisfaction after eight years of Chen Shui-bian’s presidency. 
Polling indicates that 54 percent of the public are unhappy with Taiwan’s environment, and increasingly pessimistic about the future.
Fairly or unfairly, the public blames Chen and the DPP for the problems that Taiwan faces. 
Only a small share lay the blame at the door of the KMT. 
The public is also unhappy that the DPP, which came into office waving the banner of anti-corruption, fell victim to internal corruption itself. 
And 72 percent are specifically unhappy with the state of the economy. 
That’s good for the KMT, with its positive reputation for economic management.
But just because there is an anti-DPP public mood does not mean Ma Ying-jeou will win the election. 
It’s his job to translate that public mood into electoral victory. 
That is what campaigns are all about. 
But the DPP is more skilled at campaign tactics, and adept at seizing on issues like Ma Ying-jeou’s green card or Tibet and putting the KMT on the defensive. 
That’s why the KMT’s wide lead has apparently shrunk in the last week.
Richard C. Bush is the director of the Center for Northeast Asian Policy Studies at the Brookings Institution in Washington.
