
It was a lighter Apolo Anton Ohno who stepped onto the ice at the Palavela on Sunday to defend his Olympic 1,500-meter title. 
A strict diet was the tool he used to chisel his body, but in the four years since the Salt Lake Games, Ohno had also shed his bad-boy image and lost his appetite for celebrity.
He had one thing left to shed, and that was the label of disputed Olympic champion. 
If Ohno could sidestep controversy and claim another gold medal by beating a field that included the three-time world champion Ahn Hyun Soo of South Korea, his Olympic legacy would be incontestable.
It did not happen. 
In a semifinal, Ohno stumbled on the last curve before the bell lap and failed to advance to the ''A'' final.
In 2002, Ohno crossed the finish line after Kim Dong Sung of South Korea but was awarded the gold medal after Kim was disqualified for illegally blocking Ohno as Ohno tried to pass him toward the frenetic end of the 13 1/2-lap race.
The South Koreans reacted strongly to Kim's disqualification and tried to have it overturned. 
For a long time afterward, enmity for Ohno simmered in South Korea.
Ahn has succeeded Kim as the fastest skater in the world's foremost short-track speedskating nation. 
Ahn and Ohno going for the gold promised to be an intriguing storyline. 
At Salt Lake City, it was contact by Ahn that sent Ohno sprawling in the 1,000-meter final and cost him the gold. 
He slid across the finish line on his side to salvage the silver.
There would be no controversy Sunday, because there would be no showdown. 
Ohno won his qualifying heat with ease and had looked satiny smooth in his semifinal right up until the moment he jostled with Li Ye of China.
The top two finishers would move on to the ''A'' final. 
Ohno was second, behind Li, but decided not to play it safe. 
Some people thought he had skated too tentatively in the 1,500-meter final in 2002 after his spill in the 1,000. 
Determined to rewrite his Olympic history, Ohno went for broke. 
He skated wide to overtake Li, and they bumped. 
Ohno's left hand became tangled with Li's skates, and he nearly went sprawling.
''I thought I was in great qualifying position,'' he said. 
''I had a bit of contact with the Chinese skater, and it caused me to go too far forward on my skates. 
I lost a lot of speed, and that was pretty much the end of it.''
Ohno somehow regained his balance and finished fourth out of six skaters. 
Ahn went on to win the gold medal. 
Another South Korean, Lee Ho Suk, who has not finished lower than third in the event in World Cup competition this season, claimed the silver medal. 
Li JiaJun of China was third.
The 23-year-old Ohno was left to contemplate what might have been.
''I wanted to make that final,'' he said. 
''I've brought everything to the table at these Games. 
I've prepared myself physically and mentally the best I can. 
I was really looking forward to trying to get on the podium for the United States.''
Ohno's result was the final flake in a snowballing day of disappointment for the United States, which saw the skiers Daron Rahlves and Bode Miller finish out of the medals and the figure skater Michelle Kwan withdraw from the competition with a groin injury.
Ohno thought his night was over, but he was wrong. 
He was among the skaters who qualified for the ''B'' final. 
He almost missed the race, appearing on the ice as the skaters were being introduced. 
He frantically shed his blade guards and skated to a third-place finish in the ''B'' final and an eighth-place finish over all.
''I didn't even know I was racing,'' Ohno said. 
''I came sprinting out of the locker room with my skates on. 
They weren't even sharpened.''
He was held up near the entrance to the ice by an extra-vigilant security guard.
''They see some crazed skater come onto the ice, they're like, who is this guy?''
Ohno said. 
''It could have been a fan or something.''
No, just a former Olympic champion.
''What happened today doesn't change anything that happened four years ago,'' said Ohno, who will race in three more events. 
''I still feel like I'm a great skater and an Olympic champion.''
His girlfriend, Allison Baver, watched his race from the wings. 
She had just advanced to the quarterfinals of the women's 500 meters but was in no mood to celebrate.
''It really breaks my heart to see,'' she said when asked about Ohno's semifinal stumble. 
''Because I know he's the best skater in the world.''
Alex Izykowski of the United States had been eliminated in the semifinal immediately before Ohno's. 
He watched the race and felt, he said, ''the same as the whole country.''
And how would that be?
''A little disappointed,'' he said. 
''He's such a good skater, and he should be on the podium no matter what.''
He added: ''But I don't know. 
It's short-track. 
That's what they always say.''
(Photo by Goh Chai Hin/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)
