
WHY GO NOW
With Chinese from all over the country flocking to this city to fuel its booming economy, Guangzhou is pushing to reclaim its roots as the major trade and manufacturing center of China. 
It has countless new housing developments and the spectacular $2.4 billion Baiyun International Airport, which opened in August with a glass-walled swish of a main terminal and which will be large enough when completed to handle 80 million passengers a year, which would make it the world's busiest.
For centuries China's most important seaport and the starting point of the maritime Silk Road, Guangzhou (formerly Canton and now a modern city of 10 million just 75 miles up the Pearl River from Hong Kong) played host to merchants from Rome and India as early as the second century A.D. and has long been intertwined with Western powers. 
In 1514, the Portuguese arrived and Guangzhou became the first city in China to receive European visitors.
The British followed in the 17th century to establish trade; in the late 1850's, during the second Opium War, British and French forces finally established colonial rule over the city. 
After the Qing dynasty fell in 1911, Sun Yat-sen, a native son, made Guangzhou the headquarters of the Nationalist Party, then briefly, the nation's capital.
Everything glittery and shimmery there has its roots in this storied past. 
Since China reopened its doors over a quarter-century ago, Guangzhou has become one of China's richest cities, and the third largest, after Beijing and Shanghai. 
It is in the Pearl River Delta, southern China's most important trade zone and the producer of about a third of the country's entire economic output.
The Canton Fair, the country's largest trade event, brings such an influx of executives each fall and spring that those are the busiest seasons for international visitors. 
During the next one, starting April 15, traffic will come to a halt amid the skyscrapers downtown as taxis jockey for foreign guests, and at hotels and restaurants, signs will proclaim ''A Very Warm Welcome to Guests of the Chinese Export Commodities Fair.''
WHERE TO STAY
The 30-story Garden Hotel, 368 Huanshi Dong Road, Guangzhou; (86-20) 8333-8989, fax (86-20) 8335-0467, and at www.thegardenhotel.com.cn, is an 895-room hotel with a vast marble lobby, spiraling staircases and landscaped central gardens lined with orchids, koi ponds and three-story waterfalls. 
It has renovated its executive floors and several excellent restaurants. 
Doubles start at about $100, at 8.5 yuan to the dollar (the Web site offers specials.)
The Hotel Landmark Canton, Qiao Guang Road, Haizhu Square, Guangzhou; (86-20) 8335-5988, fax (86-20) 8333-6197, www.hotel-landmark.com.cn, is ideal for those who want to be close to the Haizhu Wholesale Market and the surrounding shopping plazas. 
The 672-room hotel has an indoor swimming pool, a business center, four restaurants and easy access to the subway; it's also just a short stroll from Shamian Island. 
Doubles start at $50.
In the suburb of Panyu, the Chime Long Hotel, Yingbin Road, Guangzhou, (800) 858-8471 in the United States, (86-20) 8478-6838, fax (86-20) 8479-1666, and www.chimelonghotel.com.cn, is popular with visitors who don't want to stay downtown (taxi service makes it an easy trip). 
It's a safari-style resort where crocodiles are mounted in the hallways and stuffed giraffes tower in the lobby -- there is even a pair of 4-year-old white tigers residing, somewhat languorously, in the hotel's central courtyard. 
All 333 modern guest rooms have balconies, satellite TV and broadband Internet. 
Doubles start at about $140.
WHERE TO EAT
Guangzhou is the birthplace of one of the most popular Chinese exports ever: Cantonese cooking. 
In the eyes of its residents, Guangzhou's dominance in Chinese cuisine has never been in doubt. 
The subtropical climate produces such exotic edibles as dragonfruit, a bright pink and green melon with white flesh the consistency of lemon sorbet. 
This is the home of dim sum, and locals will snort if you mention Hong Kong dim sum. 
They line up at 7 a.m. for a table at their favorite restaurant to get the first shrimp dumplings and barbecued pork buns fresh from the kitchen.
In typical Cantonese style, food comes first, not decor. 
In an unassuming cafe on one side of Haizhu Square called Yum Soon (Kind Trust) Seurng Pay Lai, (86-20) 8318-6113, customers savor steaming bowls of noodles and the house specialty: seurng pay lai, or double-skinned milk, a sweet, delicate custard. 
It's the best place in the city to indulge in this southern Chinese dessert, and while the menu is entirely in Chinese, it is a must-visit for foodies wanting to taste the real Guangzhou. 
Also worth trying are geurng jong lai (literally, ''ginger collides with milk,'' a ginger milk custard) and sweet red bean ice, each about 75 cents.
That's not to say that elegant dining establishments don't exist in Guangzhou. 
At the Peach Blossom, (86-20) 8387-7789, in the Garden Hotel, natural light streams through floor-to-ceiling windows into the main dining room, where hanging lanterns, tiled murals and polished hardwoods create a tasteful backdrop for excellent food and courteous service. 
The restaurant serves dim sum all day: top picks include savory crispy-skin chicken, plump shrimp dumplings and small glutinous rice balls steamed in bamboo leaves and served with sugar. 
Dim sum for two, including steamed barbecued pork buns, fried turnip cakes, shrimp dumplings, taro puffs, vegetable rice dumplings and jasmine tea, cost about $40.
WHAT TO DO DURING THE DAY
It's in the narrow, crowded streets of the historic Qing Ping marketplace that you can get a true sense of the city's commercial rhythm -- it's all about haggling, cajoling, buying and selling. 
Rows of stalls hawk everything from medicinal herbs and black pearls to ducks and miniature baby turtles. 
You can also eyeball tanks of tropical fish and baskets of snakes. 
It's a fascinating place, where locals bargain expertly and few foreigners venture.
Foreign visitors are less of a novelty at Shamian Island, just across a footbridge from the markets. 
Nineteenth-century European architecture, lush palms, landscaped parks and stone-lined pedestrian walkways characterize this picturesque neighborhood, once the site of the French and British concessions.
Out in Panyu is Xiang Jiang Safari Park, (86-20) 8478-3333, a popular Vegas-like animal safari show next to the Chime Long Hotel; admission is $14.50. 
At nightfall, visit the resort's Chime Long Night Zoo, (86-20) 8479-6600, open daily 4:30 to 11:30 p.m.; admission is $17.
WHAT TO DO AT NIGHT
For night-life reviews and the latest selection of bars and discos -- they open and close frequently -- pick up a copy of That's Guangzhou, a monthly English publication, free at hotels around the city (many popular lounges are in these hotels).
The Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hall, (86-20) 8355 2430, on Dong Feng Zhong Road, puts on a changing schedule of performances, including ballet and opera. 
Tickets can vary from $1.25 to $15.
On Shamian Island, the White Swan Hotel's River Room, (86-20) 8188-6968, has live music (mostly Western bands) and excellent river views. 
There is no cover and drinks go for around $6. 
Open 8 p.m. to 1 a.m.
WHERE TO SHOP
The Haizhu Wholesale Market, a mazelike main attraction for tourists just off Haizhu Square near Yanjiang Xilu on the river, is a heady mix of everything made in China today: Japanese-style tea and sake sets, Swatch watches, antique Chinese furniture, embroidered silk pillows, lamps, toys. 
The prices are low, so you don't have to bargain (but if you buy more than a handful of an item, chances are you can score an even more ridiculous discount).
Farther east along the Pearl, near Hai Yin Bridge, is the Hai Yin Fabric Market, four levels of multicolored silks and other high-quality fabrics. 
Even intricately embroidered patterns are affordable here, and tailors are available for custom-fitting. 
It's a popular stop for brides-to-be looking for traditional Chinese dresses, or qi pao.
HOW TO STAY WIRED
On Shamian Island, you'll find an outpost of the Canada-based Blenz Coffee, 46 Shamian Avenue, (86-20) 8121-5052; www.blenz.com. 
Complete with wireless Internet access and a computer station, it resides somewhat incongruously in one of the area's ornate historic buildings. 
Grab a table outside for the best people-watching.
YOUR FIRST TIME OR YOUR 10TH
In leafy Panyu, you'll find dirt-tracked roads, farmers and Yuyin Mansion, one of the four major Qing period gardens in Guangdong Province. 
A splendid gem of ancient Chinese garden history, it's quiet and untouristed, with immaculately tended koi ponds, clucking peacocks, bamboo and pagodas suspended over water. 
Entry is about $1.20. 
For 3 yuan (about 36 cents), visitors can feed handfuls of pellets to the golden, footlong fish and watch them rush up to the surface, open mouths snapping for food.
GETTING THERE
Visas are required for United States citizens to enter China; you must apply in person (or have someone go for you) at the embassy or the consulate general in the consular jurisdiction where you live. 
For more information, visit www.china-embassy.org.
Several airlines fly from New York to Guangzhou. 
Northwest Airlines, (800) 447-4747, www.nwa.com, goes daily through Tokyo; round trips in early April start around $960.
Trains run daily between Hong Kong and Guangzhou, as do various buses and ferries. 
The Guangzhou-Kowloon Through Train (GZTT), from Guangzhou East Station to Hung Hom Station in Hong Kong takes about one and a half hours (fares start at about $25 each way).
For a useful map of the city, including the markets, ask for the Ossimap-Guangzhou, put out by the Guangzhou Tourism Bureau and the Tourist Information Center (86-20) 8335-2856. 
It is available free at hotels around the city.
