
A freelance television employee has fallen ill 80 miles from here in southern China with what doctors suspect is SARS, health officials here and in mainland China said on Saturday afternoon.
The unidentified man has the clinical symptoms of severe acute respiratory syndrome, including a full-blown respiratory tract infection and fever, said Dr. Lam Ping-yan, Hong Kong's director of health.
But a laboratory test for antibodies against the virus was inconclusive, possibly because blood was drawn for the test early in the illness, while a genetic test for the virus has not yet been completed, Dr. Lam said.
"There is reason to believe it is SARS," based on the symptoms, but the evidence is not conclusive, he added.
The man is in a hospital in Guangzhou, 80 miles up the Pearl River from here and the capital of China's Guangdong Province. 
The first SARS cases occurred in November of last year in the suburbs of Guangzhou, and the disease infected more than 1,000 before spreading late last February to Hong Kong, from which air travelers then carried it to countries around the globe.
Peter Cordingley, a spokesman for the Western Pacific section of the World Health Organization, said China's Ministry of Health had notified the agency today that the man in Guangdong Province had begun experiencing a headache and fever on Dec. 
16 and been hospitalized and immediately isolated on Dec. 
20 as a suspected case of SARS.
Two genetic tests have proven negative for SARS, but other kinds of tests have produced mixed results, including at least one positive result, Mr. Cordingley said. 
The Chinese authorities are running more tests and the World Health Organization has offered its assistance, he added.
"We've seen similar incidents already this winter," in Hong Kong and elsewhere, that have proven not to be SARS, he cautioned, noting that the W.H.O. was only classifying the case in Guangzhou as a suspected case.
Dr. Lam said that Hong Kong officials had been told by their mainland counterparts that the man had not traveled recently outside Guangdong Province and that there was no epidemiological clue yet as to how the man could have contracted the disease. 
SARS disappeared around the world last June following stringent quarantines of victims and their close personal contacts.
There have been only two cases since then, a laboratory worker in Singapore who contracted the virus last summer and another lab worker in Taiwan who fell ill with SARS earlier this month. 
Neither worker is known to have infected anyone else.
Public health experts have been warning for months that SARS could return this winter. 
A previously unknown type of corona virus, a group of viruses also responsible for many common colds, causes SARS, and corona viruses tend to spread more easily during cool, dry weather of the sort that southeastern China has been experiencing in recent weeks.
Hong Kong has declared a "yellow alert" at all hospitals, requiring all hospital visitors to wear masks and taking other precautions, and the territory's infectious diseases committee will hold an emergency meeting on Saturday afternoon to review possible further measures, he said.
