
Jack Pan aspires to be the Larry King of China. 
It is a grandiose ambition for a budding Chinese television host who began his career as an engineer and propaganda official.
But Mr. Pan, like many other Chinese and international broadcasters, is betting that a gradual opening of China's television industry will bring lucrative opportunities. 
And he has already coaxed an eclectic list of international celebrities like Yoko Ono, Nicole Kidman, Arnold Schwarzenegger and Dennis Rodman to appear on his half-hour show, ''21@21,'' which began broadcasting weekly on Dragon TV in Shanghai on Jan. 
7.
''I believe we will make a lot of money,'' said Mr. Pan, who speaks in slightly stilted English but exudes the chatty confidence of a television professional. 
''In 10 to 15 years, as a host I won't make as much as Larry King, but if audiences still like me, I will make half as much as Larry King makes.''
Mr. King has a multiyear contract at CNN that pays him $7 million a year, plus incentives.
That Mr. Pan's show is broadcast at all underscores how reforms in the last decade, including new investment rules announced late last year, have opened China's state-controlled television production to domestic and international investors who have money, patience and the stamina to withstand mazes of bureaucracy.
The media remain one of the Chinese government's most tightly guarded investment areas, and many aspiring players have tales of frustration and disappointment, including Mr. Pan. His company, the Pan Media Corporation, is a minnow compared to multinational entrants like Viacom, Time Warner and the News Corporation, but its journey highlights the shoals that media investors here must navigate. 
''It's battle after battle after battle,'' said Steve Chung, the chief operating officer at Pan Media. 
''It builds character.''
Mr. Pan's television show is his latest stop in a frenetic career that began as an engineer and then propaganda official in China's ministry of construction. 
At 30, he moved to the United States, where he worked in New York as a dishwasher in a Chinatown restaurant and later as a jewelry salesman. 
He returned to China in 2000 to become a sales chief for Audi. 
During his hotel stopovers while selling cars, Mr. Pan watched the thin diet of television programs available to Chinese viewers.
''The more I watched, the more dissatisfied I felt. 
I saw a market opportunity,'' he said in a recent interview. 
In 2003, he set up his own production company.
Mr. Pan, now 46, is not alone in his faith in China's television future. 
Over the last decade, the television sector has blossomed from a few dozen to close to 300 stations with hundreds of different channels, many available nationwide on cable services. 
The number of households with televisions has grown from 310 million in 1997 to 350 million in 2004, including 105 million households with cable television.
From 2003 to 2004, the money advertisers spent for time on Chinese television grew by a third, to $24 billion, according to Rita Chan, the director of AGB-Nielsen Media Research in China. 
Judging from advertising presales for China's main television station, growth this year will be about 20 percent, and the 2008 Olympics in Beijing are likely to fuel continued double-digit growth, she said.
This swelling potential market has spawned an appetite for quality programs that the government-controlled channels cannot produce. 
Many of China's hundreds of channels recycle old films, both Chinese and foreign.
Jeanne-Marie Gescher, the founder of Claydon Gescher Associates, a company based in Beijing that advises companies about the media market, cited industry executives' estimates that the country makes about half of the television programs it needs.
The government has also cautiously allowed international media companies into the country. 
Last November, the State Administration of Radio, Film and Television announced rules that relaxed some controls on foreign investment in Chinese television production. 
The restrictions remain stringent. 
Foreign partners cannot hold more than 49 percent of a joint venture with a government-controlled Chinese partner. 
They must use Chinese themes in two-thirds of their programs and cannot produce news programs.
''The Chinese government's approach to the multinationals is, 'Let's let them in just far enough that they're interested in participating,''' said David Wolf, who analyzes the Chinese media for the public relations firm Burson Marsteller in Beijing.
Nonetheless, the prospect of China's market of 1.3 billion remains a powerful attraction to international media investors. 
Among the earliest of these was the News Corporation, Rupert Murdoch's company, which owns 38 percent of Phoenix TV and also holds Star TV, which is allowed to broadcast sports and entertainment into parts of China. 
Viacom, Sony and Time Warner have also sought to enter China's market by signing deals with local government-owned companies.
But even if broadcasters can get their foot in China's door, there are still many political and commercial obstacles to getting on air. 
In 2003, Time Warner sold its stake in China Entertainment Television, a co-production company with China Film, after expansion plans were stymied, leading to major losses. 
Viacom's chairman, Sumner M. Redstone, has made many visits to China to secure a foothold for his company's programs, including the MTV channel.
Even Mr. Pan's tiny company, with initial investments of $500,000, struck sensitive ownership issues. 
Pan Media began registered in Hong Kong to attract international investment, but Mr. Pan found Chinese partners were wary of dealing with a company not on the mainland. 
Now he is in the middle of transferring corporate registration to Beijing -- effectively changing from a foreign to a local company.
He may aim for the same status as a United States talk show host, but Mr. Pan interviews with a decorum rare on many American talk shows. 
Even his meeting with Dennis Rodman, the volatile basketball player and actor, was gentle, Mr. Pan said.
''I didn't expect to have such a nice, friendly conversation with him,'' said Mr. Pan. ''He said, 'Jack, you are a very, very nice brother.'''
