
With the start of the women's gymnastics competition less than one week away, questions are again being raised about the age of a Chinese gymnast scheduled to compete at the Beijing Games.
Yang Yilin, a top contender for gold in the all-around and the uneven bars, could be 14 instead of the minimum age of 16, The Associated Press reported Sunday.
She is the third of six Olympians on the Chinese women's gymnastics team whose age has been questioned in the lead-up to these Olympics.
Registration lists from 2003 to 2006, previously posted on the Web site of the General Administration of Sport of China, said Yang was born on Aug. 
26, 1993, which means she will turn 15 later this month. 
Gymnasts must turn 16 during the year of the Olympics to be eligible to compete in the Games.
On the 2007 registration list, Yang's birthday changed to Aug. 
26, 1992, suddenly making her old enough for the Olympics, The A.P. said.
Chinese gymnastics officials have not yet addressed the question of Yang's age. 
Jacques Rogge, the president of the International Olympic Committee, said in a news conference Saturday that age eligibility was not an I.O.C. issue, and that the International Gymnastics Federation, known by the acronym F.I.G., is in charge of making sure gymnasts are old enough to compete.
The F.I.G.'s secretary general, Andre Gueisbuhler, told The A.P. that he would not comment about Yang's age because he had not seen the paperwork.
Just last week, questions were raised about the ages of two of Yang's teammates. 
The New York Times reported that online records listed the gymnasts, He Kexin and Jiang Yuyuan, as being too young for this Olympics, perhaps as young as 14.
A national registry of gymnasts, which had been blocked online but was viewable through Google cache, listed He's birthday as Jan. 
1, 1994. 
That date was also listed for her on a registration for an intercity competition in Chengdu, China.
Jiang was born on Oct. 
1, 1993 and is not yet 15, according to a listing of junior competitors from the Zhejiang Province sports administration. 
The list of athletes included national identification card numbers into which birth dates are embedded. 
Chinese officials have produced passports showing that He and Jiang are 16, making them old enough to compete at the Games.
Giselle Davies, an I.O.C. spokeswoman, said on Saturday that the I.O.C. had been in touch with the F.I.G. and the Chinese Olympic Committee. 
''From our perspective, this has been cleared up,'' she said.
METS MINOR LEAGUER LEADS U.S. 
The Mets minor leaguer Brandon Knight struck out 10 batters and the United States Olympic baseball team hit four home runs in a 9-1 win over Canada in an exhibition game in Durham, N.C.
Knight, who at 32 is the oldest player on the United States roster, allowed two hits in five innings. 
He struck out six in a row before Emmanuel Garcia -- the last batter he faced -- flied out to center. 
(AP)
MEMMEL INJURES ANKLE The United States gymnast Chellsie Memmel hurt her right ankle while training on the floor exercise Sunday but is still expected to participate in the Olympic team competition next weekend.
The USA Gymnastics president, Steve Penny, said in a statement that Memmel's status was being monitored daily. 
The United States women will start team qualifying Sunday. 
(AP)
BRYANT SAVES U.S. 
MENKobe Bryant provided the offense in the United States men's basketball team's first defensive struggle of the pre-Olympic season, scoring 11 of his 19 points in the third quarter of an 89-68 victory against Russia in Shanghai.
The capacity crowd of 14,523 clearly favored the United States, and Bryant was clearly was the fans' favorite player. 
They chanted ''M-V-P'' when he went to the free-throw line and booed when he was called for an offensive foul in the second quarter.
Carmelo Anthony added 17 points in what was by far the United States' most competitive tuneup for the Olympics. 
(AP)
WOMEN STRUGGLE IN WIN Sylvia Fowles scored 8 of her 13 points during a late fourth-quarter run to lead the United States women's basketball team to an 84-74 victory over Latvia in the FIBA Diamond Ball tournament in Haining, China.
Unlike past United States women's teams, this group has not had much playing time together because of injuries, overseas commitments and the W.N.B.A. season.
''We're still a work in progress,'' United States Coach Anne Donovan said. 
(AP)
