
The Conference Board, a business research and consulting group that publishes some of the nation's leading economic surveys, has selected Jonathan Spector, a vice dean at the Wharton School, as its chief executive.
Mr. Spector, 50, will succeed Richard E. Cavanagh, former executive dean of the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard, who has led the group since 1995. 
Mr. Cavanaugh announced last March that he was retiring.
The selection of Mr. Spector, which is to be announced today by the Conference Board's trustees, came after a yearlong search in which some 250 candidates were evaluated.
The Conference Board, based in New York, releases monthly surveys on consumer confidence and global economic conditions, which analysts use to predict periods of growth and contraction in the economy. 
It publishes a monthly index of leading economic indicators, which includes a broad range of economic data like statistics on building permits, manufacturing activity, unemployment claims and consumer expectations.
It also offers consulting services for businesses, a field Mr. Spector entered after graduating from Harvard Business School in 1980. 
He began his career at McKinsey & Company, the management consultants. 
There, he helped the company broaden its reach into China and Southeast Asia and started an office on Taiwan.
In an interview, Mr. Spector said he would try to make similar inroads into Asia for the Conference Board, particularly in China and India, where the board already has operations. 
''We need to be thinking, and I know the organization is thinking, about ways we can add to our presence there,'' he said. 
''All of these would be extensions, not a change in direction.''
Mr. Spector said he also planned to focus the Conference Board's efforts on improving the preparedness of people entering the work force. 
He said this could include broadening the outreach to universities, executives and government to help identify the skills workers most lack when they start a job.
''The question is whether people are coming out of their formal education with the skills that are needed to succeed in the 21st-century economy,'' he said.
Mr. Spector's previous job experience has spanned nonprofit organizations, academia and private business. 
After leaving McKinsey in 2000, he worked for Darwin Networks, an Internet service provider, and later the Seurat Company, a marketing business.
He served as chairman of the Massachusetts March of Dimes from 2003 through 2006, and continues to be a director. 
And he is a member of the national board of advisers to the March of Dimes.
Mr. Spector will begin at the Conference Board on April 16. 
Wharton, which is part of the University of Pennsylvania, said it has not yet named his successor as vice dean for executive education.
