
SuGui Kriss always wanted to return to China to rediscover her roots and perhaps leave her mark on the country.
She marched into the Bird's Nest last weekend for the opening ceremony of the Beijing Paralympics, representing the United States as a member of its sitting volleyball team.
Her early life in southern China was that of an abandoned infant who was raised in an orphanage in Kunming until she was adopted at age 8 by the Americans Charles and Marilyn Kriss.
''SuGui goes from a forsaken situation to marching into the Bird's Nest in front of 90,000 fans,'' Charles Kriss said. 
''It's a great testimony.''
If Paralympic organizers were looking for an exemplar among the 4,000 athletes in these games, the 21-year-old SuGui Kriss would be among them. 
She has overcome her share of problems -- and she has a powerful serve.
According to her coach and parents, the Paralympics have taken a slightly shy girl and given her confidence, a more outgoing personality and a chance to return with a Paralympic medal to her home in Albany.
The United States team finished with a 2-1 record in pool play and will face the Netherlands on Friday in the semifinals. 
The Americans won the bronze four years ago in Athens, and a victory against the Dutch would put them into the gold medal game -- probably against China. 
The Americans' only loss was to China, the defending Paralympic champions.
In Wednesday's 25-12, 25-17, 25-11 victory over Latvia, Kriss had 4 points serving, her first of the tournament.
In other action Wednesday, Britain won three gold medals in track cycling, solidifying its spot behind China, the leader, in the medal standings.
China leads the medal table with 24 gold and 77 over all. 
Britain has 21 gold and 43 over all, followed by the United States with 15 and 34.
Britain has earned 12 gold medals in cycling, the most of any team. 
Sarah Storey of Britain won the individual pursuit cycling race for her disability class, and the American Barbara Buchan won in her class.
Britain's Anthony Kappes, Barney Storey and Ben Demery won the sprint final, and Darren Kenny, Mark Bristow and Jody Cundy took the team sprint.
Of the 12 medal events in swimming, Russia, Britain and the United States each won two gold medals.
TWO BARRED FOR DRUGS The German wheelchair basketball player Ahmet Coskun failed a doping test that was conducted before the Games.
German officials said Coskun's urine test on Aug. 
23 showed the presence of the banned substance finasteride. 
The substance is used as a treatment for baldness, but it can mask steroids.
Earlier this week, the Pakistani powerlifter Naveed Ahmed Butt was barred for two years after testing positive for steroids.
