
A bipartisan advisory group plans to deliver a report to Congress today that is sharply critical of China's trade practices and endorses sanctions including a tariff on imports unless Beijing takes forceful steps to allow its currency to move in line with market forces.
The 222-page report, by the United States-China Economic and Security Review Commission, has more than 50 recommendations, including urging closer cooperation with China on coal-related programs intended to help wean both nations from their dependence on imported oil.
But the overall portrait is of growing friction, especially on trade issues. 
The report comes at a time when Congress is increasingly ready to take action against China, as that country's rapid economic ascent and its fast-growing trade surplus with the United States stir anxiety that jobs and wealth are being lost, perhaps unfairly.
The commission's report could strengthen the hand of those in Congress who favor a tough stance on China matters. 
Congress holds the constitutional power to regulate foreign commerce, but it tends to become most involved when trade becomes a heated political issue. 
That happened in the 1980's when Japan's trade surplus with the United States surged, and it seems to be happening now with China.
Last summer, for example, the state-controlled China National Offshore Oil Corporation backed away from a bidding contest with Chevron to acquire an American oil company, Unocal, after fierce opposition in Congress.
''There is a real urgency in Congress to get progress on issues with China,'' said C. Richard D'Amato, chairman of the United States-China commission and formerly a senior staff member for Senator Robert C. Byrd, Democrat of West Virginia. 
''What we'd like to see is legislative actions that get at pieces of this problem.''
The commission report said Congress should consider ''an immediate, across-the-board tariff on Chinese imports,'' unless China moves quickly to allow its currency, the yuan, to rise in value by at least 25 percent against the dollar or a trade-weighted basket of currencies.
The recommendation amounts to an endorsement of the approach taken in a bill once sponsored by Senator Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of New York, and Senator Lindsey O. Graham, Republican of South Carolina. 
The bill called for a 27.5 percent tariff on Chinese imports unless China let its currency float more freely.
The Bush administration, which has adamantly opposed the legislation, was taken aback last spring when 67 senators voted against a motion to kill the bill.
Senators Schumer and Graham withdrew the bill after assurances by John W. Snow, the Treasury secretary, and Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, that China would soon move to let its currency fluctuate.
In July, China made a modest step toward adopting a more flexible currency policy. 
But the change has resulted in an appreciation of the yuan of only about 2 percent against the dollar.
Mr. Schumer and Mr. Graham met again last week with the Treasury secretary and the Fed chairman. 
Afterward, the senators issued a brief statement saying that the meeting had been ''very productive'' and that they were ''hopeful'' progress would be made soon. 
The senators have held out the option of introducing their bill again.
The commission seems to regard an import tariff law as a powerful negotiating weapon in the American trade arsenal instead of a policy goal in itself.
''It is a blunt instrument, but one intended to achieve a change in Chinese policy,'' said Michael R. Wessel, a commission member who was a staff lawyer for Richard A Gephardt when he was a Democratic representative from Missouri. 
''And it would be a blunt instrument that uses our market leverage,'' Mr. Wessel said, noting that a third of Chinese exports go to the United States, while China buys only 4 percent of American exports.
The United States-China commission, created by Congress in 2000, has 12 members. 
One of them, William A. Reinsch, dissented from the report's recommendations.
''It does a good job of defining the difficult issues we face with China, but its standard solution is to beat Chinese over the head until they comply,'' said Mr. Reinsch, who is president of the National Foreign Trade Council and was an under secretary of commerce under President Bill Clinton. 
''That approach runs the risk of undoing our policy of engagement with China, which has been the policy of the last five administrations.''
The commission's other recommendations include stepping up the pressure on China for what critics regard as its lack of enforcement of international laws governing intellectual property theft, and making changes in the administration task force that monitors foreign investment in the United States.
