
Five countries will seek to persuade North Korea to forsake nuclear weapons in talks opening on Monday, with negotiators wary over how the North Koreans will respond since their first atomic blast test more than two months ago.
The two Koreas, the United States, China, Japan and Russia have gathered periodically in Beijing for six-nation talks since 2003.
The negotiations have so far produced no results beyond a vague joint statement in September 2005 that North Korea would give up nuclear weapons in return for aid and security guarantees.
But in the aftermath of North Korea's nuclear test on Oct. 
9, the chief American negotiator, Assistant Secretary of State Christopher R. Hill, has said it is time for the North Koreans to make good on that promise or face isolation.
''If they want a future with us, if they want to work with us, if they want to be a member of the international community, they're going to have to get out of this nuclear business,'' Mr. Hill told reporters on Sunday.
Many officials say the talks this week are unlikely to draw swift compromise from the North Korean government, which some say has been emboldened by its nuclear test.
South Korea's chief representative, Chun Yung-woo, said the talks would be ''exploratory.''
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice said earlier that the talks were part of a process that could not be judged by one session.
The North's chief representative, Kim Kye-gwan, showed no softening on the eve of talks, telling Washington to drop financial restrictions if it wanted the 2005 statement carried out.
North Korea boycotted the six-nation talks for more than a year, angered over a financial crackdown by the United States, which accused the North Koreans of counterfeiting and money laundering.
Treasury officials from Washington will meet the North Koreans in Beijing this week to discuss those issues.
As Mr. Hill seeks concessions from North Korea, he has suggested that the United States has found a vigorous ally in China, where historical support for North Korea has dimmed.
''We're having a very good understanding with the Chinese about what we need to do,'' Mr. Hill said.
North Accuses Japan of Kidnapping
By The New York Times
SEOUL, South Korea, Monday, Dec. 
18 -- Japan has been pressing North Korea to answer for the abduction of more than a dozen Japanese citizens two decades ago. 
Now North Korea is apparently firing back with its own accusations that Japan kidnapped one of its citizens.
North Korea's state-run Korean Central News Agency said Saturday that the North Korean government had asked Tokyo to look into the 1991 disappearance of Kim Thae-yong, identified as a lecturer at a college on the Russian island of Sakhalin.
The report said Mr. Kim had been ''lured and abducted by Japan,'' and had been kept for a time near the northern Japanese city of Sapporo.
A spokeswoman for the Japanese Foreign Ministry said that the Red Cross in Japan had received a request from North Korea to look into the reported disappearance but that the ministry had dismissed the accusation. 
''It is impossible that Japan would abduct the citizens of another country,'' she said.
