
Intervening in a Security Council debate, Secretary General Kofi Annan urged the panel on Thursday to act quickly on a new resolution to curb the violence in Darfur, in western Sudan. 
He said he was eager to set up a commission called for in the measure to determine whether ethnic violence there had reached the level of genocide.
''It is urgent to take action now,'' he said, referring to a draft that the United States circulated Thursday in a third revision aimed at overcoming objections from several countries.
Mr. Annan noted that it was the first time that the 1948 Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide had been invoked and that he found it ''inconceivable'' that the Council would not respond. 
Arab militias loyal to the government have been attacking non-Arab communities throughout Darfur.
Mr. Annan said that he had started to identify people who might serve on the commission and that he was sending Louise Arbour, the high commissioner for human rights, and Juan Mendez, the newly named special adviser on the prevention of genocide, to Khartoum, the capital of Sudan. 
They are to arrive Saturday.
The resolution also threatens Sudan's leaders and the country's oil industry with penalties if they do not end the violence, which has killed 50,000 people and displaced 1.2 million others.
As debate on the resolution adjourned Thursday evening, John C. Danforth, the American ambassador, said Mr. Annan's statement had contributed ''very positively to a sense of urgency.''
He predicted a vote on Saturday.
A European diplomat on the Council said he thought the Secretary General's intervention would make it impossible for China to carry through on an earlier threat to veto the measure.
China and Pakistan abstained from voting on an earlier, less focused Sudan resolution, which passed the 15-member Council 13 to 0 on July 30.
Both countries had objected to the new measure's threat of penalties if Sudan's government did not comply with the resolution. 
Mr. Danforth said the United States would not agree to drop the language on penalties.
