
John B. Taylor, the Treasury Department's under secretary for international affairs, said Monday that he would resign on April 22, the latest in a series of top-level resignations at the department since the elections in November.
Administration officials are hoping to replace Mr. Taylor with Tim Adams, a former Treasury official who coordinated economic policy issues for President Bush's re-election campaign last year. 
Many of the other vacant posts have not been filled.
Mr. Taylor, a monetary economist who signed on at the start of President Bush's first term, had periodically been rumored as a candidate to lead the World Bank or even as a possible successor to Alan Greenspan as chairman of the Federal Reserve Board.
But Mr. Bush nominated Paul D. Wolfowitz, deputy secretary of defense, to run the World Bank. 
Administration officials said Mr. Taylor had made it clear for months that he wanted to resign.
After he leaves, Mr. Taylor is likely to resume his post as a professor at Stanford University, a friend of his said.
''I have been flexible about the date of my return to the private sector,'' Mr. Taylor said in his resignation letter to President Bush. 
''I would now like to set April 22 as the effective date of my resignation.''
That will keep him at his post until after this spring's meetings of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.
But his departure will add to the large number of empty positions at the top of the Treasury Department, which many specialists say has lost much of its power as President Bush has concentrated economic decision-making in a small circle of White House advisers.
The open posts include the No.2 spot of deputy secretary, which became vacant when Samuel Bodman was named secretary of energy; the assistant secretary in charge of tax policy; and the assistant secretary for domestic finance, who oversees the department's issuance of federal debt.
Treasury Secretary John W. Snow, who had appeared in jeopardy of being replaced shortly after the elections, has focused much of his time on promoting Mr. Bush's campaign to overhaul Social Security.
As under secretary for international affairs, Mr. Taylor has been responsible for the administration's dealings with the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, including the negotiations to provide a rescue package for Brazil in 2002 and talks with Argentina after its financial collapse in 2001.
The most important international issue for Mr. Taylor's successor is likely to be China, which had a trade surplus of $162 billion with the United States last year and has kept its currency, the yuan, pegged at a fixed exchange rate to the dollar for a decade.
Treasury officials have been prodding Chinese leaders for two years to adopt a more flexible exchange rate. 
Some economists say the existing rate is undervalued by at least 25 percent and makes Chinese imports to the United States cheaper than they would be otherwise.
Mr. Adams, who served as chief of staff to Paul H. O'Neill when he was Treasury secretary and to Mr. Snow before joining the Bush campaign, is expected to be nominated to succeed Mr. Taylor.
