
Commerce Secretary Donald L. Evans plans to give China its toughest warning so far that the administration is growing impatient with Beijing's refusal to fully open its markets to American goods and services.
Mr. Evans will deliver that message in a speech in Beijing on Tuesday, ratcheting up pressure that has been steadily building since September by a parade of top administration visitors, according to an advance copy of the speech.
In a blunt critique, Mr. Evans will accuse China of failing to keep the promises it made when it joined the World Trade Organization. 
They included reforming its markets, lowering its trade barriers and ridding itself of protectionism by the government and by its industries.
"China is moving far too slowly in its transition to an open, market-based economy," Mr. Evans will say in the speech. 
"We have been patient, but our patience is wearing thin."
Frustration over the weak economy and joblessness has focused increasingly on China and has become a campaign issue for Republicans and Democrats alike.
The United States imports five times more than it exports to China, leading to a trade deficit that could reach $130 billion this year.
Mr. Evans will warn of this growing tide of resentment toward China, repeatedly saying "we are already seeing signs of rising protectionist sentiments."
American manufacturers, some of whom are large donors to President Bush's campaign, have insisted that the imbalance is because of the artificially low value of the Chinese currency. 
They want the Chinese to float their currency on the open market, which would weaken the dollar and lower the price of American goods abroad while making Chinese imports more expensive in the American market.
Democratic and Republican lawmakers, responding to the closing of manufacturing plants in their districts, have introduced legislation that would impose a 27 percent tariff on Chinese exports to the United States if Beijing fails to embark on a market-based currency.
While saying that the administration opposes these measures, Mr. Evans plans to say that the "U.S. market will not remain open forever under unfair terms."
These themes will sound familiar to Chinese officials who heard similar, if more diplomatic, complaints from Robert B. Zoellick, the United States trade representative, when he was in Beijing last week. 
Mr. Zoellick told the Chinese that the United States needed a two-way street, to try to expand U.S. exports to China.
In September, Treasury Secretary John W. Snow had pushed China to raise the value of its currency. 
In response, the Chinese said they would take "interim steps" to loosen restrictions on the country's tightly controlled financial system.
The speech by Mr. Evans will pointedly say that is not enough.
"Time is running out," he will say. 
"We need to see results. 
There is friction and the slow pace of reform in the Chinese market is the source of the friction."
