
Blanc de Chine is the neglected stepchild of the Chinese porcelain family. 
Chinese porcelain experts have, by and large, ignored the fine, white-glazed porcelain known in the West as blanc de Chine. 
This all-white, largely undecorated porcelain has been made in and around Dehua, a pottery town in the maritime province of Fujian in southern China, since the Ming dynasty (1368-1644).
Now that neglect is coming to an end. 
The China Institute in Manhattan is exhibiting 77 luminous examples borrowed from museums and private collections all over the world. 
"Blanc de Chine: Divine Images in Porcelain" is on view at the Institute, at 125 East 65th Street, through Dec. 
7.
Most blanc de Chine porcelain is not utilitarian. 
There are a few vases, dishes and incense holders in the show, but most of the examples are sculptures of Buddhist divinities, animals mythical and real, and objects from the scholar's studio: water droppers in the shape of an exotic pomegranate or a spindly crab, a water pot in the form of a rocky landscape, brush washers and brush pots.
The figurines include representations of Damo, the curly-haired Indian monk who carried the Buddhist faith to China, and Guanyin, the goddess of mercy. 
They have delicate facial features and beautifully modeled wind-swept robes. 
Some display small firing cracks, but in general they are in incredibly good condition, considering that many of the figures have long tapering fingers that jut out into space, making them especially vulnerable.
"The clay in Fujian is very crispy when fired, which makes the pieces more fragile," said Willow Hai Chang, the director of the China Institute Gallery. 
"These pieces were not for daily use and would not have been moved around. 
They are ceremonial pieces and religious figures."
They range from milky to lily to lard white. 
There were Chinese nicknames for the various shades, like Ivory White and Pork Fat White. 
In the West, one shade was called Goose Feather White.
"There were a lot of kilns in Dehua, which may explain the variety in the color," Ms. Chang said. 
"The kind of wood, the heat of the firing, the minerals -- anything could have an effect on the shade of white."
The name Dehua means "virtuous cultivation," even though the area was poor, hilly and forested. 
But the kilns were not far from the port of Quanzhou, which Marco Polo called the richest city on earth, so Dehua wares were easy to export.
"The ware is characterized by the dense paste of its porcelain body and a high degree of translucency," Ms. Chang writes in the exhibition catalog. 
"The glaze is remarkable for its purity, shininess and softness -- like frozen fat -- and has a slightly pinkish or milky color."
The show includes a flute borrowed from the Ringling Museum of Art in Sarasota, Fla., and a model of a stringed instrument called a Qin from Robert H. Blumenfield, a West Coast collector. 
"No other kilns made musical instruments that work," Ms. Chang said. 
"It's very difficult. 
Out of 200 flutes that are fired, only one comes out that can be played."
The flute is molded to look like bamboo and is incised with a phoenix design. 
"It has a very beautiful sound," Ms. Chang said. 
"The courier from the Ringling Museum played it, and he said it's perfect."
Dehua became famous during the Ming dynasty for its molded sculptures of divinities. 
"Most of the images produced were meant for devotions, whether in public or domestic shrines," John Ayers, the show's guest curator, writes in his exhibition catalog. 
"The largely unrecorded sculptors who produced them had no doubt learnt their craft at the feet of model makers in other materials such as wood or clay or even soapstone, ivory or rhinoceros horn."
Probably the most charming, if not necessarily the most accomplished pieces in the show (to Western eyes) are the export wares. 
An adorable Qing dynasty dog, from the late 17th to early 18th century, sits on a plinth with a taper holder at its side. 
Like the hawk, crane and elephant in the show, the dog is animated and full of personality. 
The Chinese have always been gifted at portraying animals in porcelain.
Such sculptures explain why Europeans like Augustus the Strong, King of Saxony and Elector of the Holy Roman Empire, had 1,249 Dehua wares in his palace in Dresden. 
Blanc de Chine also shows up in a 1688 inventory at Burghley House, the home of the aristocratic Cecil family of Britain, and at Hampton Court, the English royal palace. 
It was an early collectible; then it seems to have faded from fashion.
The China Institute has organized public gallery talks, a Nov. 
26 lecture on the Fujian kilns and a study tour to England in conjunction with the show. 
From Dec. 
10 to 12 Mr. Ayers and Rose Kerr, chief curator of the Far Eastern section in the Asian department at the Victoria and Albert Museum in London, will lead a tour of London's best blanc de Chine collections. 
Mr. Ayers and Ms. Kerr are also authors of a new book on the Hickley collection in Singapore, "Blanc de Chine: Porcelain From Dehua," published by Art Media Resources in Chicago.
Through Nov. 
2 there is a second blanc de Chine show in Manhattan. 
"The Colors of White: A Thousand Years of Chinese White Glazed Ceramics" is at E. & J. Frankel, 1040 Madison Avenue, at 79th Street. 
With more than 100 pieces, including 19 on loan from a private American collection, this exhibition includes both blanc de Chine and its predecessors, white glazed ceramics in ritual bronze vessel shapes from the Five Dynasties period (907 to 960) and the Song (960 to 1279).
The show has blanc de Chine bowls, divinities, scholar's objects and export wares as well as some unusual pieces: a crucifix made for the Western market, a pair of Ming panels that depict scenes from the Peking opera, a dish for throwing dice, a pair of three-legged toads, an exotic depiction of the Montgolfier hot air balloon, and the so-called He He Twins, two young Chinese boys with big smiles.
According to legend, the twins were modeled after a pair of eccentric Chan Buddhist monks who lived during the eighth century. 
"One is shown on the moon and carries a banana leaf, which represents money from Southern China; the other carries a basket with a bat, symbol of happiness," Mr. Frankel said. 
"The basic forms are molded. 
Then additions are applied, incised or sculpted. 
White monochromatic glazes required supreme technical excellence, beyond that of decorated wares, as flaws could hardly be masked."
There is a lot of blanc de Chine for sale on the Internet, beginning at a few hundred dollars apiece. 
Nonetheless, it is advisable to buy porcelain in person from a reputable dealer. 
Look for harmony of form and decoration, quality of glaze and modeling, condition and rarity of type.
It seems that the neglected stepchild is starting to get some attention, after all.
