
"Antiques pay no dividends or interest," said Benjamin F. Edwards III, the chairman emeritus of the St. Louis brokerage firm A. G. Edwards & Sons. 
"I have to have something to live on in my retirement."
Mr. Edwards is only half joking. 
The fourth direct descendant to manage A. G. Edwards since its founding in 1887, he is explaining why he is selling his Chinese export porcelain at Christie's on Jan. 
22. "I offered the collection to the firm, and they properly turned me down."
The Christie's sale has 242 lots, many of which comprise more than one piece. 
Becky MacGuire, the Chinese export specialist at Christie's, said it would sell more of the Edwards collection in 2003 and 2004. 
The estimates for each lot range from a few hundred dollars to $120,000. 
Mr. Edwards and his wife, Joan, collected 18th-century antiques for decades for their Georgian house in St. Louis. "After the furniture, I got into antique Oriental carpets," he recalled. 
"Then I got into porcelain."
He speaks about his passion for porcelain with Midwestern understatement. 
Ms. MacGuire said he had bought three or four pieces a week for 15 years and now has the largest Imari collection in the world.
Mr. Edwards first collected 19th-century Japanese Imari porcelain, then moved into Chinese Imari, then to English and Dutch Delftware. 
"I just went nuts," he said, buying thousands of pieces.
"After there was no place left to put anything else at home," he said, he formed a second porcelain collection in his office; that is the one he is now selling. 
In 1989 he moved the headquarters of the firm, which has 18,000 employees and 703 offices in 49 states, into a new office tower in St. Louis. The top floor became a museum, where he showed his porcelain in floor-to-ceiling bookcases.
"As I collected, I went up the scale," he said. 
"I started getting picky and wanted just the best."
Technically, Imari refers to white translucent porcelain decorated with underglaze cobalt blue that the Japanese started producing in the 17th century. 
It is named after the Japanese harbor town of Imari on the northern coast of Kyushu. 
At the time, the Japanese restricted foreign traders to Deshima Island, just offshore, so the merchants associated the porcelain with the port of Imari. 
Japanese Imari became widely popular in Europe. 
Over time the Japanese began to add gilding and over-glaze enamels in different colors, especially red and blue. 
Noting the success of Japanese Imari, the Chinese copied it. 
They sold boatloads of it until the taste for Imari waned in Europe in the late 1700's. 
Most of the current sale is Chinese Imari. 
"I like it better," Mr. Edwards said.
"One enduring test of connoisseurship is to distinguish the differences in body, color and painting style between Japanese and Chinese Imari," Rose Kerr, a curator at the Victoria and Albert Museum in London, writes in Christie's catalog. 
"Chinese porcelain of the late 17th and first half of the 18th century tends to be whiter and more finely potted than Japanese. 
The underglaze cobalt is controlled, and of brighter, purplish color, for Japanese blues were applied in thick washes of inky-dark tone."
She points out that the Chinese overglaze red often has a more orange tone than the Japanese red.
Chinese Imari comes in many shapes, some of them imitations of European silver forms. 
The sale includes sets of dishes, punch bowls, soup tureens, chargers, barber's basins, tea pots and precious "soldier vases."
These are five-foot-tall baluster-shaped pots, often decorated with lively hunting scenes and colorful floral festoons. 
They are considered a tour de force of the potter's art. 
The nickname derives from the time Frederick Augustus the Strong (1670-1733), Elector of Saxony, King of Poland and patron of Meissen and Chinese porcelain, reportedly traded 600 soldiers for 18 such vases.
For the Edwards sale preview, opening Jan. 
12, Christie's asked Nina Campbell, a noted London interior designer, to create a room at Christie's by combining the porcelain with antiques from Christie's "British Interior" sale on Jan. 
23 and 24, to show how easily the porcelain can be incorporated into any decor.
"I want to take the mystique out of porcelain," she said. 
"It's not priceless; it can be used."
She said she plans an arrangement of large armorial plates, soup tureens, double-gourd-shaped vases and pots on a long mahogany table. 
"If someone is afraid of color, it's quite good to have portable color," she said. 
She plans to mount some of the dishes on brackets on the wall. 
"If you don't have paintings, an arrangement of colorful porcelain is quite a cheap way of doing something smart on your walls," she said. 
"If you have masses of these plates, there is no reason not to use them."
Coincidentally, porcelain collectors will have a chance to do some serious comparison shopping this month. 
There are 138 lots of porcelain, mostly Chinese and Japanese export, in Sotheby's "Important Americana" sale on Jan. 
17. There is also, for the third year, the New York Ceramics Fair, from Jan. 
17 through 20 at the National Academy of Design Museum on Fifth Avenue at 89th Street. 
Forty dealers will offer early European and English glass and pottery, antique Asian wares and contemporary pottery.
The fair is presenting a loan show from the Peabody Essex Museum in Salem, Mass., of its Chinese and Japanese export porcelains from the 15th to 20th centuries. 
It was organized by William Sargent, for the last 22 years the museum's curator of Asian export art, who will lecture on the Chinese export collection at the fair on Jan. 
17 at 1:30 p.m. (The lecture fee is $10, plus the $15 show admission; reservations: 301-933-6994.)
He is the author of "The Copeland Collection: Chinese and Japanese Figures" (1991). 
Lammot and Pamela du Pont Copeland donated their porcelain to the Peabody Essex. 
Sotheby's is selling American antiques from the Copelands' house in Wilmington, Del., Mount Cuba, on Jan. 
19.
Sotheby's Institute of Art has organized an afternoon seminar on the Copelands and their collections of Chinese and Japanese porcelain figures on Jan. 
13, with lectures by Mr. Sargent, Morrison H. Heckscher, a curator at the American Wing at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, and John A. H. Sweeney, curator emeritus of the Winterthur Museum in Wilmington, Del. 
Tickets are $100. 
(Information: 212-606-7000, Extension 1111.)
This year Winterthur, founded by Mr. Copeland's cousin, Henry Francis du Pont, is celebrating its 50th anniversary as a museum, garden and library. 
Nine antique masterpieces from the museum will be put on view as a loan show at the Winter Antiques Show, which opens on the evening of Jan. 
19 at the New York Hilton and continues through Jan. 
27. New York is famous for its Americana Week each January, but this year porcelain is also taking center stage.
