
Investors are showing signs of losing interest in Chinese stocks just as investment banks are preparing a long list of Chinese initial public offerings. 
That combination could make it hard to sell all the shares coming to market and could slow China's efforts to privatize its state-owned industries.
Delays in Chinese initial public offerings could also set back big banks like Citigroup, Deutsche Bank, Goldman Sachs, HSBC, Merrill Lynch, Morgan Stanley and UBS. 
China has become the world's second-largest generator of investment banking fees for such offerings, ahead of Europe but behind the United States. 
All of these banks have been successful lately in winning the right to sponsor such offerings, most of them done in Hong Kong.
The world's largest initial public offering so far this year, the China Shenhua Energy Company, a big coal mining concern seeking to raise $3.6 billion, attracted lukewarm demand as bidding closed Tuesday, with lower oversubscription rates than seen on big China issues last year. 
It was expected to be priced toward the low end of expectations at a meeting in New York.
Earlier Tuesday, the China Minsheng Banking Corporation, the largest bank in China organized by private investors, unexpectedly canceled meetings here to promote its $800 million offering to investors. 
The stock sale was previously planned for early July. 
And on Monday, the Bank of Communications, China's fifth-largest state-owned bank, disclosed a lower price range than expected for its $1.9 billion initial public offering on June 23.
Even money managers at funds specializing in China stocks are expressing worry about a glut of offerings. 
''I really think it's too much, particularly given that the market is not performing that well,'' said Romeo Dator, the portfolio manager of the U.S. 
Global China Region Opportunity Fund in San Antonio. 
''We're not planning to participate in any of these.''
Some money managers see a broad decline in enthusiasm for China. 
Wary of trade disputes with the United States and possible Chinese interest rate increases, and weary of stagnant prices here and eight-year lows on the Shanghai stock market, investors are steering more money toward other emerging markets.
''By and large, the fascination with China has waned'' in the last several months, said Choo Yoon-lai, the portfolio manager of the Comgest Growth Greater China Fund here.
Leaders of the biggest investment banks in Asia, all based here, said in interviews over the last week that they knew the risks of bringing big initial public offerings to market now, but still thought they could find buyers.
''Investors love China. 
These offerings are the growth of China, and when priced appropriately, can be'' completed, said Robert Morse, the chief executive of Citigroup's corporate and investment banking operations in Asia. 
But Mr. Morse also acknowledged that some investors, large and small, were looking at the China stakes they had accumulated after years of large initial public offerings by Chinese companies.
''Investors want to make sure they don't put too many eggs in one basket,'' he said. 
''Individual investors have to define what aggregate exposure they want for China relative to other Asian opportunities.''
Gokul Laroia, the head of Asian capital markets for Morgan Stanley, said investors were cautious about some companies but still interested in Chinese stocks.
''It's entirely deal-specific,'' he said. 
''We don't sense China fatigue.''
Some investment bankers say it is not new for Chinese companies to be selling a lot of shares, as the country's gradual transition from central planning to capitalism has inevitably meant putting many shares into private hands.
''There is a lot of Chinese paper, but historically there has been a lot of Chinese paper coming to the market,'' said Matthew Koder, UBS's head of Asian equity capital markets. 
''Is there too much paper coming?
Not really.''
The Shenhua Energy deal was oversubscribed by at least four times by institutional investors and by at least 15 times by retail investors, bankers said. 
That was easily enough to get the deal done and quite adequate by international standards, especially for a large deal for a stock in an unglamorous industry.
But it was a far cry from the 60 or more times oversubscriptions by institutional investors on Chinese initial public offerings early last year, and even higher oversubscription ratios for retail investors. 
And with money managers leery of Chinese stocks, the fairly modest subscription rate for Shenhua means bidders for shares will have to pay for large allotments, so they will have less cash for future Chinese stock deals.
Deutsche Bank, Merrill Lynch and the China International Capital Corporation were the lead advisers to Shenhua. 
Goldman Sachs, Citigroup and Deutsche are handling the Minsheng deal, while Goldman Sachs and HSBC are sponsoring the Bank of Communications offering.
More big deals are ahead. 
The China Cosco Holdings Company, the country's biggest container line, is planning an initial public offering of up to $2 billion in the next month, but a recent plunge in shipping rates could make its shares harder to sell.
The biggest offering of all, a $5 billion transaction by the China Construction Bank, is supposed to happen later this year, sponsored by Citigroup and Morgan Stanley. 
But the deal has had difficulties as China Construction has struggled to curb corruption and find a big foreign bank willing to take a strategic stake as part of the initial offering.
This has prompted some investment bankers to predict that China Construction will have to reduce the number of shares sold; accept a fairly low price for the shares; delay the deal until next year; or all three.
Raising money is often not the top priority of Chinese companies that hold initial public offerings. 
Chinese banks are famously generous with loans to large state-owned enterprises, one reason the banks have so many nonperforming loans.
The biggest reason Beijing officials encourage many companies to sell stock is to improve corporate governance in China, said Rodney G. Ward, the chairman of UBS's Asian investment banking operations.
''It's only once you're in the public eye you're subject to public pressure, to analyst pressure and to investor pressure,'' he said.
While some investors seem to be losing their enthusiasm for placing bets on stocks in Hong Kong, others remain intrigued by the potential to buy stocks on Chinese exchanges, which may rise in dollar terms if the yuan is revalued as the Bush administration demands.
This interest has persisted even though the Chinese government has strictly limited such investments; even though Chinese exchanges have reputations for listing troubled companies and tolerating irregular trading practices; and even though Chinese investors have pushed prices to eight-year lows.
UBS has gathered $800 million from investors to buy stocks on the mainland, and Mr. Ward said, ''If we were given the chance to open the spigots, we could double that in as little as 24 hours.''
