
THE ancient Chinese were probably right to insist that their mirrors were magical. 
The lustrous, reflective bronze surfaces delivered wondrous illusions that could easily be seen as supernatural. 
The backs were fascinating, too, awash with circular patterns and reliefs of mythological images that told powerful stories of deities. 
And the calligraphic maxims on them carried messages of good fortune and happiness for their owners.
If nothing else, the producers of these artifacts were wizards at marketing. 
Throughout the 3,500 years that bronze mirrors were produced in China, from the Shang Dynasty in 1600 B.C. to the Qing Dynasty in the late 18th century, they were never treated as merely cosmetic tools. 
Rather, they were valued, even revered, as cultural objects and often incorporated into rituals, making them status symbols for merchants and aristocrats at court.
"If you lived at a time when there were no reflective surfaces, the first mirrors must have seemed magical," said Thomas Lynn Carter, a 69-year-old retired radiologist in Madison, Wis., who acquired 143 mirrors with his wife, Martha Limback Carter, 66, an art scholar. 
Amassed over 30 years, the Carters' collection, while short on masterpieces, is one of the finest and most comprehensive outside Asia. 
It documents the golden age of these artifacts, from 475 B.C. in the Warring States period to about A.D. 1800 in the Qing Dynasty. 
Once the couple had completed the collection in 1995, they donated it to the Cleveland Museum of Art.
Now, 90 of the objects are on view in "Circles of Reflection: The Carter Collection of Chinese Bronze Mirrors" at the China Institute. 
The show originated in 2000 at the Cleveland Museum and was organized by its curator of Chinese art, Ju-hui Chou, who also wrote the catalog.
Mrs. Carter has been a passionate collector, mainly of metal objects, since childhood. 
She began buying Chinese bronze mirrors in 1969, when they were still available for as little as $100 to $200 each. 
"Bronze was always my favorite metal," she said. 
Already owning some Luristan bronzes, she became interested in Chinese bronzes in 1962, when she began working on her Ph.D. in Asian art history at Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland. 
She studied with Sherman E. Lee, an Asian art expert who was the director of the Cleveland Museum of Art. 
Mrs. Carter grew up a few blocks from the museum, which she visited often until she was a teenager and her family moved to Michigan. 
She returned to the city in 1955 with her husband, who worked there at the Lewis Laboratory of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
In 1969 the couple moved to Madison when Mr. Carter changed jobs. 
They searched for bronzes mostly on holidays and business trips. 
While building the collection, they kept in touch with Mr. Lee, and when they gave it to the museum it was in his honor.
The Carters say they got the most pleasure from the hunt for their treasures. 
But handling the objects deepened their understanding of how the mirrors, as well as all Chinese bronzes, evolved. 
The basic disc form of Chinese mirrors remained unchanged for 3,500 years: on one side was a reflective surface, on the other a decorative surface cast in relief, with a knob in the center for holding the mirror or carrying it with an attached cord.
Some mirrors were square, and, from about A.D. 1100 in the Song Dynasty, a small number were fitted with handles. 
Most were palm-size, though the diameter ranged from a few inches on miniatures to more than 15 inches on those made for dressing tables and ceremonial use.
The decoration on mirror backs changed many times over the centuries, as did the imagery on massive vessels and sculpture. 
In the Warring States period, ending in 221 B.C., geometric and abstract motifs were mixed with stylized leaves, serpents and dragons. 
Under the Han, from 206 B.C. to A.D. 8, geometric designs reigned. 
Tang artists (818 to 907) stressed boldness by combining crouching animals with abundant grapevines and phoenixes with flowers. 
With the Song (960 to 1279), restraint was restored in stylized forms and in scenes of legendary gods and men. 
The Ming (1368 to 1644) preferred plain surfaces, calligraphy and, on occasion, vigorous abstractions of dragons and birds.
While scholars and archaeologists have made great advances in the knowledge of Chinese bronzes, many mirrors continue to defy explanation. 
A dark and shimmering one from the Warring States period, for example, bears four boldly graphic slanted T's that remain a mystery. 
The T's seem to relate to the Chinese ideogram shan, for mountain. 
But until the Rosetta Stone for Chinese bronzes is found, no one will know for sure whether four mountains are depicted on this artifact and others like it.
Bronze mirrors were eclipsed in the 18th century when the looking glass was introduced from the West. 
But traditional objects lingered in rituals, as is seen in the only mirror in the exhibition that boasts a handle and is not bronze but brass, now faded to gray. 
Produced about 1800, it was probably made for use at a wedding, judging from the calligraphy emblazoning the back, which delivers the Hallmark-like message "double happiness" and is circled by images of five bats, signifying good fortune.
Mirrors, whether made of metal or glass, have retained their talismanic power in Chinese culture. 
Into the late 19th century, the Imperial guards wore polished silver discs as amulets on their uniforms instead of decorations. 
And the Carters have seen late-20th-century evidence that mirrors are still mystical.
"We were in Singapore's old town in the 1990's and saw a huge convex mirror hung on a building at a busy corner," Mrs. Carter said. 
"I thought it was a modern touch, allowing drivers to see the traffic ahead coming around the corner. 
But our guide corrected me, saying that it was there to keep all the evil spirits that came whizzing down the street from turning the corner. 
It was there to frighten them with their own reflections, forcing them to turn back."
For today's viewers, bronze mirrors pose a more practical problem. 
"Most people, when they saw our collection, asked us, 'How in the world could anyone see their reflection in these?'
" Mr. Carter said. 
"Looking at them must have been, at best, like peering into clear dark water and seeing an image softened as if viewed through gauze. 
Perhaps that was part of the appeal: images that are less accurate might seem more mystical."
Circles of Reflection: The Carter Collection of Chinese Bronze Mirrors
The China Institute, 125 East 65th Street.
Through June 2
