
Feng Mengbo is killing me. 
Repeatedly. Each time my corpse crumples to the ground after a blast from his rifle severs my limbs and splatters my blood, he cries "niubee," a Chinese expression for fantastic.
Although Mr. Feng is attacking me, what he sees on his screen is his own likeness. 
The Chinese digital artist's new work is an adaptation of the ultraviolent Quake III Arena computer game, in which the sole goal is to slaughter one's foes. 
But in "Q4U" Mr. Feng has replaced all the combatants with animated versions of his own image. 
So while I am targeting the bare-chested, bespectacled artist, so too is Mr. Feng aiming at himself.
"This is strange for me," Mr. Feng acknowledged. 
But, he said, "after the first shot, I don't care. 
I just play the game like normal."
Mr. Feng (rhymes with lung) and I are competing in cyberspace. 
Owners of the Quake III game can log onto the Internet to clash against remote enemies. 
Once I download and install a file containing his digital double, we find each other online and start to skirmish. 
Within seconds, he eliminates me but is immediately ready to play again.
"I am very good," Mr. Feng said in a telephone interview from the Renaissance Society, a contemporary-art museum at the University of Chicago. 
"Q4U" will be on display there from Sunday through Feb. 
24. During the exhibition, Mr. Feng will battle all challengers, from either a computer in the museum's galleries or, when his United States visit is over, his Beijing home. 
More information on how to play "Q4U" can be found at www.Q4U1.uchicago.edu beginning on Sunday.
The gratuitously gory "Q4U" is an especially vivid example of an emerging genre: the artist-made computer game. 
Some, like Mr. Feng's entry, are modifications of existing titles. 
Others, like Natalie Bookchin's upcoming "Metapet" project, start from scratch. 
All accept that electronic games are as ripe for creative exploitation as other forms of popular culture.
This makes sense. 
With $8 billion in annual sales, the electronic game industry is now as large as Hollywood. 
A generation of artists weaned on arcade games and Nintendo consoles instead of Bob Dylan and "Star Trek" is coming of age. 
Lara Croft, heroine of the "Tomb Raider" series, has supplanted Farrah Fawcett as a first love. 
The result is a growing roster of artist-made game modifications.
Quake III is an easy mark for such efforts. 
The developers of the two-year-old game have made its underlying computer code freely available, hoping that player-built tweaks will extend its lifespan. 
Visitors to the PlanetQuake.com site learn that the game's futuristic settings can be replaced with, for instance, a Wild West theme. 
Predictably, after Sept. 
11, Osama bin Laden became a popular target in several games.
At one level, what Mr. Feng has done with "Q4U" is no different from these fan-made "mods."
But he has more on his mind than souping up a shoot-'em-up.
As in Mr. Feng's other digital artworks, there is a strong autobiographical element in "Q4U."
A Beijing native who turns 36 this week, he endured the state-imposed art of the Cultural Revolution and invariably views creative endeavors through a political prism.
So, when Mr. Feng's game character appears on-screen toting both a weapon and a video camera, the artist is mocking his childhood aspirations. 
He said, "When I was a young boy, I wanted to be a soldier in the Chinese Army, and I wanted to be an artist, too."
The best solution, he said, would have been to become a military painter. 
Updating this ideal for the game, he has evolved into a moviemaking warrior. 
It is a digital portrait of a young man as an avenging artist.
There is a more serious agenda, as well. 
Mr. Feng is not alone in being both attracted to and repulsed by the violence found in many electronic games. 
Such games can be fun, Mr. Feng insisted, but their broad popularity also reveals a darker side to human fantasy. 
Hence the symbolic camcorder. 
"I want to do the documentation of all the terrible things," he said. 
"If something happens, I want to be there."
As a digital artist in China, Mr. Feng is a large carp in a tiny pond. 
Barbara London, associate curator of film and video at the Museum of Modern Art in New York, recalled visiting his Beijing studio in 1997: "He was really a generation ahead. 
Everybody was just barely working with video, and here was this guy doing all of this computer work."
(As part of the museum's "Video Viewpoints" lecture series, Mr. Feng will discuss "Q4U" next Monday at 6 p.m. at the Modern.)
In his previous game-based creations, Mr. Feng seemed more concerned with the uncomfortable balance between revolutionary ideals and the new consumer culture in contemporary Chinese society. 
In his earliest works, the Nintendo character Mario was replaced by Mao. 
In "The Long March Goes On," the goal was to beat the enemy and get the cola. 
A 1997 CD-ROM, "Taking Mount Doom by Strategy," used the game Doom as a device to blend his personal history with an opera from the Cultural Revolution.
Since he created them, however, the Internet has reached into China. 
"China is becoming more international," Ms. London said. 
"When I was there, there was no Internet. 
Nobody had a computer. 
Now every Chinese artist I know has e-mail."
Thanks to this global connection, "Q4U" is Mr. Feng's first work to incorporate live online interaction. 
Not surprisingly, the work also carries a more universal message: the artist is everywhere, representing all of us, and he will continue to fight no matter how many times he might be destroyed.
Mr. Feng said he has never had an exhibition in China but was aware that Quake III was popular there, too. 
He intends to contact player groups so he can fight them and simultaneously introduce them to his work.
But Mr. Feng already knows that he will be unable to convert one player to the joys of "Q4U": his 2-year-old son. 
After months of working on the project, it was finally time to try it out, and he blasted away at his image. 
"My son, he sat on my lap to see what happens," Mr. Feng recalled. 
"He said: 'My father. 
You kill my father.'
"
Niubee!
