
In the malls and parks of central Guangzhou, where the vanguard of China's youth culture shops, skateboards and gawks to the thump of hip-hop music, the Communist Party's prospects might appear to be dim.
"Party Congress?
What Party Congress?" said Ben Luo, a 24-year-old hairdresser strolling a flashy underground mall, when asked about the crucial meeting opening on Friday that will select China's next generation of leaders. 
He turned with a puzzled look to the woman with him.
Still in her university, she had heard about the congress and even knew that Jiang Zemin had presented an important new theory, intended to adapt Marxism to the modern era. 
But like a dozen other young shoppers, she had no idea what that theory actually said -- and she clearly did not care.
People both young and old, in this jazzy coastal city and across the nation, say in conversation that the Communist Party, which once insinuated itself into every cranny of society, now seems almost irrelevant to their daily lives.
As party mandarins gather for their five-year congress, the deepest challenge may be how to reinvent their moldy institution and foster the continued acceptance, if not love, of an increasingly diverse and assertive population.
Among those who do pay the party attention, nearly all agree that it has lost its ideological soul and that it is now groping for new ways to justify its monopoly on power.
Twelve years of spectacular economic growth have so far kept most Chinese focused on enrichment and willing to accept leadership's the argument that stabilityI, enforced by Communist rule, is the only safe path for now.
This is true even among elite students, a group that not long ago agitated for greater democracy. 
Today they are often eager to join the party for the prestige and access that it still provides, and they have helped swell its ranks to a record 66 million, just over 5 percent of the population. 
Private business people, too, are entering the party for the first time and are prospering as never before.
But the benefits of party membership and of the economic boom have not been evenly shared. 
Factory workers and peasants -- the party's traditional base -- are feeling more and more alienated by corruption, joblessness and the fraying of the social safety net.
Under Jiang Zemin, the party has tried to attack these problems and broaden its appeal, but it is not clear how the party can be all things to all people.
Mr. Jiang's answer has been to redefine Marxism itself and promote his theory of the "three represents" -- that the party must represent "the most advanced forces of production, the most advanced forces of culture and the fundamental interests of the broadest number of people."
It is an awkward -- some say hopelessly tangled -- effort to reconcile the party's historical role as guardian of workers and peasants with its new aim of ruling an advanced market economy.
"The theory says that the party can represent both the exploited and the exploiters," said an official of a leading party institute in Beijing. 
"How do you do that?
Just because you say you do?"
The party is by no means in danger of losing its grip. 
It keeps tight rein on the government, the police and the military. 
It remains the vital gatekeeper of routes to advancement for managers of the state enterprises. 
It controls the patronage that makes things happen in villages and small towns.
But Beijing officials are well aware that, particularly in rural areas, the party is rotting under the weight of corruption and nepotism and that the popular view of it is increasingly jaundiced.
"They should add a fourth 'represent' to Jiang's theory,' " said a retired security agent and party member in a small town of Hubei Province in central China. 
"That is, 'The party represents official wining and dining at the people's expense.'
"
A visit to the decaying smokestack city of Zhangjiakou, in northern China, like many other old state factory cities, demonstrates the ambivalent view of the party held among the millions of common floor-hands and managers who run the machine plants that were once considered the "pillars of the nation."
The faith of many, like Zhu Feng, a 30-year-old machinist, has been badly shaken. 
Two-thirds of Mr. Zhu's shop-floor comrades have been laid off, he said. 
He makes about $80 a month -- better than many -- but has little faith that his job will last.
Mr. Zhu said it had "never occurred" to him to join the Communist Party, even though his father had, and his interest in the party congress this week was entirely practical.
"These days, young people like me aren't interested in the party unless they want to be a manager," he said, cradling his young daughter as he spoke in an interview at home. 
"When the factories are doing so badly, nobody's becoming a manager anyway."
The Zhangjiakou City Hall is frequently besieged by protests and petitions over unpaid wages.
"We're not so concerned about who the next leader will be," Mr. Zhu said. 
"What we care about is whether they will help workers with social welfare and medical insurance, because that's what everyone here worries about."
By contrast, Ji Zhanlei, a 25-year-old accountant in a large machinery plant in the same city, will marry later this month and is about to enter the party.
In the short term, he said, membership will not mean any difference in his salary of $60 a month. 
"In some ways it's the opposite," he said. 
"You're expected to make more sacrifices."
He continued: "But the party does give you more opportunities for training and leadership. 
And of course it's essential if you want to join senior management."
Fan Guojie, 25, who earns $120 a month as a mechanical engineer at the same factory, smiled as his friend spoke, then disagreed.
"We've all been educated to believe in the party, but that doesn't mean we all have to join," he said. 
"I don't think it will affect my career."
In rural China, disaffection with the party may be even more widespread, even though most villages remain in the firm clench of local party officials.
In the village of Liangzhuang in Hebei Province, the farmers were all too aware of the imminent party congress as they labored in their fields recently, preparing the ground for planting next spring.
In late October, officials had announced that the normal burning off of corn stubble would be forbidden. 
The leaders gave no explanation but the farmers, with much grumbling, said they were sure they knew the reason: to prevent smoke from wafting to Beijing, 100 miles to the south, where the party leaders would be meeting.
Numerous accounts, even in official journals and newspapers, describe village or township party organizations that have been hijacked by a family or clan, leaving others alienated or bitter. 
Corruption makes many people angry.
"Especially in the countryside, the image of the party has declined terribly over the last 20 years," said an expert on rural politics based in Hong Kong. 
"Party cadres used to get respect, but now they are often looked down upon. 
People question their motives: why would you join if you aren't seeking power, and for what reason other than to get money for yourself?"
Despite the recent spread of elections for village administrators, real power nearly always remains with the appointed party secretaries. 
A regenerating influx of dedicated younger officials has often been stymied, researchers say, because village party leaders do not want to foster competitors for their power and corrupt benefits.
If you want in to the party, one young farmer in Liangzhuang said, you must get an introduction. 
"The village secretary introduces people he knows already," he said.
And what advantages accrue from membership?
"I really don't want to talk about that," the man said, walking away quickly.
In the larger cities, the story is different, particularly among the youths who are the country's most ambitious and elite students and who still consider party membership a vital credential.
At Qinghua University in Beijing -- known as China's M.I.T. and the alma mater of several top national leaders -- more than one-third of students have expressed interest in joining, school officials say. 
Among undergraduates there, 12 percent are already party members; among graduate students 30 percent are members.
Students tend to offer idealistic reasons for their pursuit of a party card, though classmates may call them naive or dissembling.
The well-educated youths who flock to join the party almost universally say they expect more democracy over time, but they also tend to give the national leadership a great deal of slack.
"China has a one-party system and decisions are made through the party organization," said Jiang Ji, a sophomore at Qinghua University who has applied for party membership because, she said, her parents and grandparents were proud Communists and because "it's seen as an honor and a noble thing."
"In a place as big and diverse and China," she said, "if everyone were allowed to have a say in choosing the leader, the country would fall into chaos."
Their yearning for change -- the same students avidly surf the Web and watch American films -- is tempered by the same cautions that party leaders express.
Guo Weian, a political science student and party member at People's University in Beijing, said a "smooth changeover" in leadership at the party congress would be "a healthy development," a sign of institutional maturity.
"But I think we have to accept that any political change has to come from within the party itself," he said. 
"The 'three represents' may help to transform the party from within, and I think that has to be the next step."
