
AS HURRICANE IKE LASHED GALVESTON, A MEMORY OF THE GREAT STORM OF 1900
More than a million Texans had fled their homes by Friday night as Hurricane Ike churned toward Galveston and Houston. 
The storm rekindled memories of the hurricane that struck Galveston on Sept. 
8, 1900, killing more than 6,000 people.
In his book ''Isaac's Storm: A Man, a Time and the Deadliest Hurricane in History,'' Erik Larson tells of the fate of St. Mary's Orphanage.
The 10 sisters who ran the place herded all 93 children into the chapel. 
Sister M. Camillus Tracy, 31 years old, the mother superior, ordered the other sisters to tie lengths of clothesline to the youngest children, then tie one end around their waists. 
They formed chains of six to eight children each, roped together like miniature climbing parties. 
A few older children, among them Will Murney, Albert Campbell and Francis Bulnavic remained free. 
Sister Camillus led the children in hymns, including the children's favorite, ''Queen of the Waves.''
The water rose. 
The children felt the concussion of each breaker as it struck the front of the building. 
The sisters drew the children to the girls' dormitory at the back of the building, away from the beach. 
They heard the crash of wood and brick behind them as the boys' dormitory fell into the Gulf. 
The storm advanced through the building quickly and systematically, as if hunting the children. 
The chapel disappeared. 
Windows shattered. 
Hallways rose and fell like drawbridges. 
The children sang.
The sea and wind burst into the dormitory. 
In seconds, the building failed. 
Ninety children and all 10 sisters died. 
Only Will, Albert and Francis survived, all by catching hold of the same floating tree.
Later, a rescuer found one toddler's corpse on the beach. 
He tried lifting the child. 
A length of clothesline leaped from the sand, then tightened. 
He pulled the line. 
Another child emerged. 
The line continued into the sand. 
He uncovered eight children and a nun.
Sister Camillus had hoped the clothesline would save the children, but it was the clothesline, rescuers saw, that caused so many to die, tangling them in submerged wreckage.
WHO NEEDS A PC?
The Economist finds an interesting twist to the explosion of Internet use in China and other developing nations.
The number of mobile phones that can access the Internet is growing at a phenomenal rate, especially in the developing world. 
In China, for example, over 73 million people, or 29 percent of all Internet users in the country, use mobile phones to get online. 
And the number of people doing so grew by 45 percent in the six months to June -- far higher than the rate of access growth using laptops, according to the China Internet Network Information Center.
This year China overtook America as the country with the largest number of Internet users -- currently over 250 million. 
And China also has some 600 million mobile-phone subscribers, more than any other country, so the potential for the mobile Internet is enormous. 
Companies that stake their reputations on being at the technological forefront understand this. 
Last year Lee Kai-fu, Google's president in China, announced that Google was redesigning its products for a market where ''most Chinese users who touch the mobile internet will have no PC at all.''
THE MEANING OF PORN
Ross Douthat, in the October issue of The Atlantic, discusses the greater realism of modern pornography.
Over the past three decades, the VCR, on-demand cable service and the Internet have completely overhauled the ways in which people interact with porn. 
Innovation has piled on innovation, making modern pornography a more immediate, visceral and personalized experience. 
Nothing in the long history of erotica compares with the way millions of Americans experience porn today, and our moral intuitions are struggling to catch up. 
As we try to make sense of the brave new world that VHS and streaming video have built, we might start by asking a radical question: Is pornography use a form of adultery?
THE TOOTH FAIRY, SQUEEZED
Lewis Carter, writing in The Telegraph of London, reports that the economic downturn has put a crimp in the tooth fairy's generosity.
The average amount left under a pillow for a tooth has dropped from $:1.22 to 87 pence in the past six months, according to research.
The figures, from milk producer Cravendale, also show that 38 percent of British children do not get any money from the tooth fairy. 
...
Dr. Nigel Carter, chief executive of the British Dental Health Foundation, said: ''The tooth fairy's visits are part and parcel of growing up for most children so it's disappointing to learn that she's not been able to fulfill her duties lately. 
...
''Hopefully the tooth fairy can weather the current economic climate and we'll see her return to top form soon.''
