
As diplomats and political leaders in Beijing and Washington traded testy statements today, investors here traded shares, in seeming disregard of the mushrooming dispute over a collision between American and Chinese aircraft over the South China Sea last weekend.
That ho-hum reaction pervaded stock markets across Asia, and stood in sharp contrast to the United States, where markets have been buffeted by fears of the increasing tension between Beijing and Washington.
Analysts here said investors were confident that neither government would allow the incident to escalate into a more dangerous dispute. 
They also expressed belief that the crisis would not affect China's economic relations with the United States nor derail its quest to enter the World Trade Organization.
"The market is expecting that the patrol plane issue will be resolved quickly," said Richard Margolis, first vice president for strategy and planning at Merrill Lynch in Hong Kong. 
"It's assuming, quite correctly, that the whole W.T.O. issue is being handled on a different track."
Mr. Margolis said Asian investors were resilient in absorbing political shocks. 
Stock markets in Hong Kong, Tokyo and Taipei have performed as well or better than United States markets since the beginning of the year, even as the region weathers a period of political turbulence.
"There is a sense that we're the jam in the sandwich between the U.S. and China," Mr. Margolis said. 
"But in this part of the world, political events very seldom create a new secular trend in the market."
In Hong Kong, a small crowd massed in front of the United States Consulate to demand an apology from Washington for the collision, in which a Chinese fighter jet was brought down. 
The consulate closed for an hour.
Yet the protests barely registered at the stock exchange nearby, where shares fell 1.12 percent, weighed down by an 11 percent drop in Pacific Century CyberWorks.
In Taiwan, where political sensitivities are more acute, the benchmark index dropped 2.87 percent. 
But again, the decline was caused mainly by domestic concerns. 
Several big corporations on Taiwan are about to report earnings, which are likely to be hurt by the American slowdown in technology spending.
The market in Taipei, Taiwan's main city, had risen in recent weeks as the Bush administration neared a decision on whether to sell advanced weapons to Taiwan. 
Many there think that President Bush is leaning toward selling some weapons, while deferring the sale of the sophisticated Aegis radar system, which China has said it does not want Taiwan to have. 
"From a stock market point of view," said Peter Kurz, chairman of Insight Pacific, a research advisory group in Taipei, "this would be the best outcome because it would supply Taiwan with necessary weapons but at the same time defuse tensions between China and the United States."
Mr. Kurz thought it was too soon to say whether the dispute over the surveillance plane would affect the arms sales. 
But he noted that heightened suspicion between the two powers would inevitably spill over into Taiwan-China relations, which would drag down the stock market.
American business leaders in Hong Kong and Beijing expressed some optimism that the dispute would have little effect on Chinese-American trade ties. 
Some expressed the view that Beijing had to some degree eschewed the strident tone it used after NATO planes bombed the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade in 1999.
China has ample economic incentive not to rupture American ties. 
It shipped $100 billion of exports to the United States last year, a 22 percent increase over 1999.
"There are two things that will stay China's hand," said Simon L. Ogus, an independent economic analyst in Hong Kong. 
"They want to win the Olympics in 2008, and they want to get into the W.T.O. this year."
Despite the general equanimity in Asian markets, there were a few pockets of concern. 
Shares of companies based in mainland China and listed in Hong Kong fell more sharply than the broader Hang Seng index. 
China Unicom, the No. 2 Chinese telephone company, reported earnings for 2000 that were far higher than analysts' expectations. 
But its stock still declined 1.2 percent.
And some fund managers said they were watching nervously as United States officials struggled to retrieve the surveillance plane and its crew from Hainan, the Chinese island 400 miles southwest of Hong Kong.
"I think people are underestimating the potential it has to turn into a protracted issue," said Henry Lee, a director at Hendale Asset Management here. 
"It certainly doesn't set the right tone for the new administration and China."
