
The stark sell-off that sent share prices plummeting around the world early this week brought renewed concern that the equity markets in China and India might be overvalued. 
But while Chinese investors and analysts worried this might be the case and fretted over the potential social consequences, in India the market chaos was often greeted as a buying opportunity.
The Chinese markets closed before the Federal Reserve's three-quarter-point interest rate cut on Tuesday. 
The Shanghai composite index had dropped 7.2 percent, to close at 4,559.75; the Shenzhen composite fell 7.7 percent; and Hong Kong's benchmark Hang Seng index plummeted 8.65 percent, to 21,757.63, way below its high near 32,000 in October.
In Japan, the blue-chip Nikkei index of 225 stocks fell 9.3 percent over two days, its worst such loss in 17 years.
On Wednesday morning, though, some Asian markets recouped losses. 
The battered Hang Seng index advanced 4.5 percent in early trading and the Australian stock market, which tumbled 7.1 percent on Tuesday, its worst single-day loss in nearly two decades, was ahead 3.9 percent. 
Japanese and Chinese equity indexes rose, then fell back.
Before the embryonic rally, Kwong Man Bun, chief operating officer of KGI Asia, a big futures broker, said: ''At this stage, you can say there is panic selling in the market. 
We don't think the Hang Seng index has found its bottom yet; the index will continue to go down and will only find its bottom when external markets, namely the U.S. market, stabilize.''
The major indexes in China, after reaching record highs in recent months, have plunged 15 to 30 percent.
Jing Ulrich of JPMorgan said, ''Looking back, it must have been 10 years since I saw this kind of thing happen during the Asian financial crisis.''
Indian markets have been on a tear for the past year -- with a few stomach-turning drops and leaps along the way. 
The Sensex opened at a record of 20,970 on Jan. 
8, some 51 percent higher than the year before. 
But by Tuesday's close, it had lost 20 percent from that high. 
At one moment during the day, some of the biggest Indian blue-chip companies' stocks were trading down 30 percent or more.
Wild daily swings of several hundred points have become common in Indian markets because of a growing number of momentum investors, an influx of foreign cash and highly leveraged domestic players. 
While such gyrations might drive some in other markets to store their cash in the mattress, in India they seem to be whetting investors' appetites.
Neera Mathur, 61, a homemaker in New Delhi who is investing her husband's savings, said Tuesday that her stock portfolio had lost 20 percent of its value in the recent downturn.
''I'm not worried because it will come back again,'' she said. 
Ms. Mathur has experience on her side -- she estimates that her investments have grown 500 percent in the last 10 years.
In fact, she planned to invest further in stocks over the next day or two. 
''The Indian economy is so robust,'' Ms. Mathur added, ''that it will overcome any impact of U.S. recession.''
Her outlook is common in India, where the booming equity markets have been propelled by annual economic growth around 9 percent.
While China and other Asian countries rely heavily on the United States to buy their exports, most of India's growth is linked to domestic infrastructure construction and consumption.
Strategists in India say the recent stock market plunge has more to do with one-time factors than fundamental problems. 
The combination of fears of an American recession, margin calls by futures and options traders and a liquidity shortage because of huge public offerings led to the downturn, said Nipun Mehta, chief executive of Unitis Tower Wealth Advisors in Mumbai.
The appearance of the largest initial public offering in India could have contributed to the painful drops Monday and Tuesday, some investors say. 
The billionaire Anil Ambani sold 10 percent of his Reliance Power to the markets in a $3 billion stock issue that closed last Friday, a deal oversubscribed more than seventyfold. 
Indian investors seized on every bit of liquidity they could find to buy the stock, equity strategists said.
When the market starts to decline, there is normally enough money to encourage more purchases, but ''because of the large public offering, the money was blocked,'' said U. S. Roy, chief executive of SBI Life Insurance.
The Indian growth story ''has been as strong as ever, and is gaining strength with every passing month,'' he said.
Not everyone is so optimistic. 
India has recently been the ''flavor of the month'' for international investors, and domestic players have poured cash into the markets, said Abhay Aima, head of portfolio and wealth management at HDFC Bank.
UBS said in a report on Jan. 
4 that India had replaced China as the most overvalued market in Asia. 
While the price of Hong Kong-listed mainland China companies had dropped since October to 28.7 times earnings from a high of 38, price-earnings ratios are at a record high of 28 times earnings in India, UBS noted, implying that cash from outside the country was artificially inflating stocks.
Net foreign buying in India exceeded $17 billion in 2007, UBS said, while in Asia over all, foreign investors were net sellers by $3.6 billion.
Chakri Lokapriya, head of India equities at BNP Paribas Asset Management UK, estimates that Indian corporate earnings will grow 22 percent in the next fiscal year, even if there is a global slowdown.
''What it comes down to is there has been a certain amount of panic selling, which is unwarranted,'' Mr. Lokapriya said. 
''For a long-term fund, it's a good buying opportunity.''
In a similar vein, Ms. Ulrich of JPMorgan and other experts were not willing to say that this was the end of the bull market in China. 
But they sounded gloomy about the prospect of stock gains in a weakening global economy that could damp Chinese growth.
Indeed, some analysts hint that the Beijing government might be forced to step in and restore confidence in a market susceptible to wild swings.
On Tuesday, Chinese officials issued no major statement about the plunge in stock prices. 
(Last year, they repeatedly warned investors that prices could fall sharply.)
A huge sell-off in the 1990s led to a nearly decade-long bear market, which persisted even after 2002, when China's economy turned red hot and new investment money poured into the country. 
Many angry investors even picketed government offices, saying they had been cheated out of their retirement or life savings.
That situation began to change only in 2006, after a series of government measures helped reignite stocks, fueling a rush to buy equities -- especially hot initial public stock offerings.
Before long, retirees were camping out at brokerage houses, college students were quitting school to play the market and maids were calling themselves day traders. 
Insider trading and stock schemes multiplied, and many analysts began referring to the markets as the nation's biggest gambling den. 
Early in 2005, the Shanghai composite index was close to 1,000. 
Today, even after the recent huge sell-off, it remains above 4,500.
