
The basement of Cobo Center, where newcomers to the Detroit auto show are relegated, is drawing bigger crowds than usual this year.
That is the spot where Chinese automobile manufacturers like Geely International and Guang Ming are showing their vehicles, with names like Hifun and The Book of Songs.
These newcomers -- along with Tata Motors of India, which did not even have an exhibit at the show -- came up in dozens of conversations at the Detroit show, whose formal name is the North American International Auto Show.
While the vehicles have yet to go on sale in the United States -- and it is unclear whether they ever will -- they have succeeded in stealing thunder from the array of cars on display upstairs.
''In the next year to three years, Chinese automakers don't really pose any significant threat,'' said Jesse Toprak, director of industry analysis at Edmunds.com, which gives car-buying advice to consumers. 
''But the learning curve for the Chinese automakers will be much, much faster than what we experienced with the Korean and the Japanese automakers.''
Five manufacturers from China are showing cars here this year, up from one in 2007 and 2006, when Chinese vehicles were first displayed in Detroit.
They are still learning the finer points of auto-showmanship. 
Their displays tend to be plain and dated. 
Changfeng Motor's name was misspelled on trinkets the company gave journalists this week, and it proclaimed in a press release that its display ''steps on'' the auto show for the second consecutive year.
Guang Ming, meanwhile, suggests on a placard that its tiny, yellow electric cars, with names like The Book of Songs and A Piece of Cloud, are suitable short-range transportation for ''renowned environmentalists'' like President Bush.
On Monday, the head of a battery maker called Build Your Dreams, which started making cars just five years ago, offered to show a hybrid sedan to a writer from the blog Jalopnik.com. 
Instead, he provided a mini-test drive, right through a news conference going on nearby.
To be sure, Chinese cars are not yet ready for American consumers. 
Many of the vehicles on display here have wide gaps where doors should meet side panels, and they do not have cup holders. 
Most also would not satisfy American safety and emissions regulators.
Still, one company, ZXAuto, insists that it will begin selling a sport utility vehicle and pickup truck at 150 dealerships across the country later this year.
Even before the Chinese arrive in the United States, Tata's $2,500 car is rattling industry executives in Detroit. 
Called the Nano, it is designed to make owning a car affordable to billions more people in India and other developing nations.
While not destined for North America, the Nano signals to today's major automakers how much downward pressure on prices they can expect from emerging rivals.
''Today we don't have anything to compete with that,'' said Frederick A. Henderson, chief financial officer of General Motors, which sells cars in China under the Wuling brand for as little as $3,500.
But Toyota Motor has an early prototype of a low-priced car under development, its president, Katsuaki Watanabe, said Monday, although Toyota does not expect its car to compete directly with the Nano.
The Nano even concerns the Chinese. 
Although it might be a positive development for India, Li Guangming, chairman of the electric car maker Guang Ming, said Tuesday through a translator, it is ''a bad one for the world.''
Tata could be part of the 2009 show here, as it may soon buy the Ford Motor premium British brands, Jaguar and Land Rover.
Changfeng, which displayed vehicles at the show in 2007, is considerably more advanced than its rivals in its plans to enter the United States market. 
Last year, Changfeng brought only a peculiar array of concept vehicles, including a rhomboid sedan with a bamboo dashboard and four wheels distributed over three axles.
But the company said all of the models it is showing this week will begin rolling off assembly lines this year. 
Changfeng's chairman, Li Jianxin, said the company expects to begin selling cars in the United States in 2009 and is considering building a plant in this country.
''We are very ready to enter this international competition,'' Mr. Li said, through a translator.
Asked how many he hopes to sell in the company's first year here, Mr. Li replied, ''At least one.''
He was joking, but other Chinese companies acknowledged being nervous about competing in the United States, particularly in light of recent problems with lead paint in Chinese-made toys.
''I'm not sure if Americans will welcome us yet,'' Li Shufu, chairman and owner of Geely International, said in response to a question at his company's news conference, according to a translator.
''In significant volumes, they're still seven years away, or something like that,'' said John Hoffecker, managing director of the consulting firm AlixPartners.
''Putting together a dealer network and getting vehicles that are appealing to the American consumers will take a while. 
But the lesson from the Koreans and Japanese is that even small volumes can have a significant impact on pricing and other factors.''
