
Born in Hawaii and raised in Germany, the martial-arts champion Mark Dacascos plays an American Indian in the French film "Brotherhood of the Wolf."
That's one working definition of globalization, but Mr. Dacascos, who lives in Los Angeles with his wife and year-old son, is a modest man who sees nothing very strange in his resume.
"My mother and father are both kung-fu teachers," Mr. Dacascos said, "and most of my free time was spent at their kung-fu school, either training or doing my homework in one of the back rooms. 
When I was 9, we moved to Hamburg, Germany, and I lived there until I was 18. 
However, when I was 17, I did spend 6 months in Taiwan."
"My mother is half-Irish and half-Japanese, and my father is Spanish-Chinese-Filipino," he added, by way of explaining his global dimensions. 
"When I was going to school in Hawaii almost 30 years ago, I looked very different from everyone else. 
I was really a fish out of water. 
I wanted to be like all the other kids, but there was no way I could. 
I was searching for an identity, and I think I found it at my dad's martial-arts school, where I took on more of my Chinese heritage."
"Brotherhood of the Wolf," which opens today (review, page 30), is a period adventure film, set during the reign of Louis XV when a mysterious beast was terrorizing southern France. 
It was a huge hit in France last year, and opens stateside today, in the hope of joining "The Closet," "Amelie" and "The Crimson Rivers" in what has become an unexpected surge of French films finding mainstream acceptance in the United States.
Mr. Dacascos plays Mani, an Iroquois warrior brought back from the New World by Gregoire de Fronsac (Samuel Le Bihan), a naturalist assigned by the king to track down the rampaging beast. 
The resourceful Mani befriends the wolves of the forest, who lead him to the beast's lair.
"I'm not Native American," Mr. Dacascos said. 
"However, I feel the belief systems of the Native Americans are very similar to the people from Hawaii, in that we really respect nature. 
Just having those senses definitely helped me. 
And I worked with a Mohawk cultural teacher, Alex Rice, who tried to explain the values of her people to me.
"Of course, we wanted to make Mani a person of flesh and blood, too -- not just this noble sage guy walking around with a straight face," Mr. Dacascos said. 
"I wanted to find a sense of humor and give him some flaws. 
He's very highly evolved, but in spite of that, he can still get drunk and go to a brothel and have a good time."
Pasadena Scribbler
"I didn't grow up in Orange County, but all of my family lives there," said Mike White, the screenwriter of the engaging teenage comedy "Orange County," which opens nationally today (review, page 32). 
"I grew up in Pasadena, which is just splitting hairs. 
I was a young scribbler, and for some reason I always wanted to be a writer, but I grew up in a world where that didn't seem like an option. 
I had idealized fantasies of higher education, the idea that somewhere outside my homeland there'd be a place that would take me where I wanted to go."
The main character in "Orange County," Shaun Brumder (played by Colin Hanks, son of Tom Hanks), is a scribbler, too, and he has placed his hopes on going to Stanford, where his favorite novelist (Kevin Kline) is on the faculty. 
But when an incompetent high school counselor sends someone else's transcripts to the university, Shaun finds himself rejected. 
With the help of his girlfriend (Schuyler Fisk, daughter of Sissy Spacek) and his stoner brother (Jack Black), he sets out to correct this gross injustice, only to create further problems along the way.
The film was produced by the theatrical division of MTV, and for Mr. White, "the fun of the movie was making an MTV movie that in some lighthearted way subverted the MTV childhood that I had."
Mr. White's scribblings went on to include several scripts for the popular television series "Dawson's Creek" and the independent film "Chuck and Buck," in which Mr. White played one of the title characters, a sweetly eccentric young man who has been harboring a secret crush on his best friend from grade school for 20 years. 
He also plays a small but telling role in "Orange County," as an English teacher with an uncertain understanding of Shakespeare. 
"The acting thing is just kind of a whim," Mr. White said. 
"It's not really my focus; it's just fun. 
What's frustrating is when you write stuff and then you hand it off, and you're not a part of the production side of it. 
Acting has been a way of being part of the production of the movie, even if I'm not directing it."
Directing is definitely on the horizon for Mr. White, who last year had a television series of his own devising, "Pasadena," on the air. 
"It was the first time I had creative control, and now I'm feeling like it would be cool to direct," he said. 
"There comes a time when you're tired of being a backseat driver, and you're ready to succeed or fail on your own terms."
Japan Noir
The winter film series at the Japan Society (333 East 47th Street, Manhattan) is called "Dark Visions: Japanese Film Noir and Neo-Noir."
Though it concludes with a couple of well-known films by Akira Kurosawa -- the 1948 "Drunken Angel" (March 19) and the 1963 "High and Low" (March 22) -- most of the movies in the series won't be familiar to western audiences: they include work by less celebrated masters like Yoshitaro Nomura ("The Chase," Jan. 
25), Kiyoshi Kurosawa ("The Guard From Underground," Feb. 
1) and Sogo Ishii ("Labyrinth of Dreams," Feb. 
8).
For Daisuke Miyao, a film historian and doctoral candidate at New York University who will introduce the series with a lecture next Friday at 6:30 p.m., the significant difference between American and Japanese film noir is one of time frame: at their height in the late 1940's and early 50's, the Hollywood noirs expressed the despair and disillusionment of a generation returning from war, while the Japanese noirs were a phenomenon of the late 50's through the 60's, when, Mr. Miyao said, "people were losing faith in the new economic and political systems, and looking for other values."
For Mr. Miyao, one quintessential Japanese film noir is the movie that will be shown after his lecture, at 7:30: Seijun Suzuki's "Branded to Kill" (1967). 
"Its use of a complicated narrative and complicated points of view, its use of the femme fatale figure and its very nihilistic, cynical, thematic motifs make it a classic of the golden period," he said.
Information: (212) 752-3015.
