
Australia's track and field authorities announced they will not allow their team to march in the opening ceremony at the Beijing Olympics because of fears the city's smog may harm the athletes.
Instead, the team will spend the first week of the Games in Hong Kong because track and field events do not begin until the second week, The Associated Press reported Monday. 
Australian authorities portrayed the decision as a logistical rather than a health issue, but nevertheless expressed their concerns about the smog.
''Anything more than five or six days and they inevitably end up with some sort of respiratory problem,'' the Athletics Australia performance manager, Max Binnington, said of his athletes.
The Chinese press, including the official government news agency Xinhua and the official Olympics Web site, has so far kept mum about Australia's decision.
Some Australian athletes are unhappy about missing the opening ceremony.
''It would have been nice to come to some intermediary solution,'' the heptathlete Kylie Wheeler told The Sydney Morning Herald.
Slow Time for Pistorius
At the German International Championships for Disabled Athletes in Berlin on Saturday, the South African double-amputee sprinter Oscar Pistorius ran the 400 meters in 49.16 seconds. 
That was more than three seconds slower than the 45.95 he needs to qualify for a provisional spot at the Beijing Games, and well short of his personal best of 46.34, set last year.
Pistorius, who uses special carbon-fiber blades, last month won the right to compete for an Olympic berth. 
He said after the race that he was not discouraged by the result.
''This is normal at this stage of training,'' Pistorius said, referring to his push to return to form after devoting several months to his successful appeal after track and field's governing body barred him from competing for an Olympic spot.
''My Olympic effort may be postponed, but it won't be ended,'' he told Reuters. 
''If I don't make it in 2008, I'll go for 2012.''
An American for Russia
The decision of the American W.N.B.A. star Becky Hammon to play for Russia at the Olympics is causing a ruckus.
The United States Olympic team coach, Anne Donovan, told ESPN, ''If you play in this country, live in this country, and you grow up in the heartland and you put on a Russian uniform, you are not a patriotic person in my mind.''
And yet, Donovan had not listed Hammon as a prospect for the United States team, even though Hammon was a runner-up for the Most Valuable Player award in the W.N.B.A. last season.
In the summer, Hammon plays for the San Antonio Silver Stars of the W.N.B.A., but in the winter, she plays for a Russian pro team, CSKA Moscow.
Earlier this year, she applied for and received dual American and Russian citizenship so that CSKA would not have to use one of two allotted ''import'' spots on its roster, a common move in international sports.
United States sports federations routinely allow foreign-born and -trained athletes to apply for citizenship and compete for Olympic spots.
Donovan said she found Hammon's switch ''unfathomable.''
Hammon told The Seattle Times: ''I know how I feel about my country. 
I'm very proud of what America represents to the world. 
But this is a basketball game. 
This is not life or death.''
Israeli Tests Positive
One of Israel's top hopes for a medal at the Summer Games, the sailor Udi Gal, faces a possible suspension from the International Sailing Federation after testing positive for finasteride, the main ingredient in the antibaldness drug Propecia. 
To receive a waiver, athletes must seek permission in advance from the World Anti-Doping Agency.
The Israeli newspaper Yedioth Ahronoth reported Gal's test result. 
If a follow-up test is also positive, Gal would face disciplinary action that could include suspension from the Games.
Gal, 29 , is also head of Israel's Olympic Sportsmen Committee. 
Although finasteride is not classified as a performance-enhancing drug, it is restricted because it can mask steroid use. 
Gal said he was taking the drug to treat hair loss.
