
China said today that it had chosen Australia to supply it with $11 billion to $13 billion of liquefied natural gas over the next 25 years. 
The Australian bid won the contract, one of the largest and most politically contested energy deals this year, over rival proposals from Indonesia and Qatar.
Indonesia received a consolation prize: Chinese officials said today that they had begun negotiations for a second contract, to import $8 billion to $10 billion of liquefied natural gas from a field in Indonesia owned by BP and Pertamina, the Indonesian state energy company.
As recently as last week, energy analysts were picking Indonesia as the most likely winner of the main contract, in part because BP was already helping China build its first port terminal for liquefied natural gas in Shenzhen, a city near Hong Kong. 
That terminal will now be supplied from an Australian gas field in which the Royal Dutch/Shell Group has the largest stake, 22 percent, but BP will still be in the picture: it owns 17 percent of the Australian field.
Indonesia had pressed hard for the contract, emphasizing that its gas field would be the closest to China of the three offered, reducing shipping costs. 
President Megawati Sukarnoputri of Indonesia sent a team of her top advisers to China earlier this year to make a case that her country could be a politically stable, low-cost supplier.
But its gas field lies in a bay off the Indonesian part of New Guinea, Irian Jaya province, which has a history of separatism. 
Gas compression and ship-loading centers have not yet been built there. 
And Indonesia has been struggling to restore its reputation for reliability as a gas supplier after an enormous Exxon Mobil gas operation across the country in Aceh province, at the western tip of Sumatra, was shut down last year for nearly four months by a secessionist rebellion.
Indonesian officials had no reaction to today's decision by China except to say that they were actively involved in negotiations for the second project, to supply Fujian province on the Taiwan Strait, several hundred miles north of here.
The Australian prime minister, John Howard, also took a direct hand in lobbying the Chinese. 
He flew to Beijing on May 21 to make his country's case, pointing to Australia's political stability and noting that it is already producing and exporting huge quantities of gas from the offshore field that will now supply China.
Mr. Howard was jubilant today at a news conference in Australia , saying the deal would cement Australia's relationship with China. 
"This is the kind of outcome that will underpin the economic strength of this country, especially in the Asian-Pacific region, for years into the future," he said.
Under today's deal, CNOOC Ltd., a publicly traded subsidiary of the state-owned China National Offshore Oil Corporation, will acquire a stake in the already developed Australian gas field. 
Details of the acquisition are to be worked out by the end of this month, said Mark Qiu, the chief financial officer of CNOOC Ltd. 
The company is also negotiating to take a stake in the BP and Petromina field off Irian Jaya, and recently bought some other Indonesian gas fields.
Mr. Qiu declined today in a telephone interview to discuss why the contract selection, made by the corporate parent of CNOOC Ltd., China National, went in Australia's favor, except to say, "Pricing is an important, but not exclusive, factor."
Mr. Qiu said that, given today's contract and the plans for Fujian province, CNOOC Ltd. 
"will branch out to become a regional energy player."
China's expanding influence in Southeast Asia, especially in energy production, has begun to make American officials nervous, and these concerns have begun to appear in some public documents from the State Department. 
But American diplomats were silent through the bidding for today's contract, in which all three finalists were American allies, and they had no comment today.
Qatar, a Persian Gulf nation with immense reserves of natural gas developed in a partnership with Exxon Mobil, came away from the bidding empty handed. 
Though it was a finalist, it was seen as a long shot by energy analysts, because it was farthest from China and because Chinese leaders were said to have been worried about their growing dependence on oil imports from the politically volatile Middle East.
