
Renhui Tian wept tears of happiness last year at Kennedy International Airport when he saw two of his sons for the first time since they were infants.
Xiaoxian and Xiaoqin, then 5 and 7, were born in Manhattan's Chinatown. 
But they were arriving from Fujian, a rural province in southeastern China, because Mr. Tian, in a practice common among illegal Chinese immigrants, sent them there as infants to be raised by their grandparents.
As illegal immigrants who owed smugglers more than $40,000, Mr. Tian and his wife could not afford to take time off from seven-day-a-week jobs in restaurants and garment factories to care for their sons or spend the $700 a month asked by Chinatown's day care centers.
But the Tian boys' reunion with their parents has been difficult, even though the boys are old enough to go to school. 
Indeed, children like the Tian boys pose a significant challenge for New York City's public schools.
Speaking only Fujianese, a dialect that few teachers -- even Chinese-language bilingual teachers -- can understand, raised by doting but often illiterate grandparents who neglected their early schooling, sometimes sick with contagious diseases, the Fujianese children frequently lag behind academically.
At schools, Fujianese children are placed with other students in regular classes or bilingual classes taught in Mandarin or Cantonese. 
Since Fujianese students understand none of these languages, they often keep quiet, talk among themselves in Fujianese, or simply look lost. 
Fujianese is as different from Cantonese or Mandarin, the two languages that New York's bilingual teachers of Chinese speak, as Yiddish is from German.
"The Fujianese children in general have very poor academic backgrounds," said Lily Woo, principal of Public School 130 on Baxter Street.
"It's very hard for us to help them, because they speak only Fujianese."
In Fujian, most grandparents do not send their American-born grandchildren to local schools, even if the children stay in Fujian until they are 9 or 10, said Peter Kwong, a professor of Asian-American studies at Hunter College who has studied Fujianese immigrants for many years.
"Their grandparents are very soft on them," said Dr. Kwong, noting that the grandparents know the children will return to the United States. 
"The grandparents believe these kids, who are American citizens, have it made already. 
They also think America's education is different; why bother teaching them stuff in Fujian?"
As a result, he said, many Fujianese children fail to grasp some of the basic concepts that other children have mastered by the time they enter elementary school, like the ability to count to 10.
Jeannie Lau, a caseworker at Lower East Side Family Union who is herself a child of Fujianese immigrants, said that after the children return to New York, "when their parents want to discipline them, the Fujianese kids' attitude in general is, 'Who the heck are you?
You were never there, and all of a sudden you are giving me orders?'
"
In addition, American schools are disorienting for these children. 
Ms. Woo said: "They get scared at school, they cry, and they don't feel they can turn to anyone, not even their own parents. 
The people who took care of them when they were little are gone."
In a way, the challenge posed to the Board of Education by the shifting waves of Chinese immigrants reflects the fact that administrators are always one step behind immigration trends. 
More Fujianese children are returning to New York every year. 
The enrollment trend at P.S. 
184 on East Broadway is similar to the other half-dozen schools in the Chinatown area. 
In 1998, one-fifth of all new students at P.S. 
184 were categorized as Fujianese. 
In 1999 and 2000, their number increased to one-third, and last year, it was half. 
Based on figures provided by principals, more than 1,000 Fujianese students attend Chinatown's elementary schools.
The Board of Education, which now supplies enough Cantonese-speaking bilingual teachers -- two decades after large waves of Cantonese-speaking children entered the city's public school system -- does not yet offer Fujianese as an option on the survey forms it sends to parents about languages spoken at home.
Mr. Tian laments that his sons' scores on tests in their kindergarten and first-grade classes are in the 50's and 60's. 
He also said that neither of the pair liked their cramped new home much, and that each cried for at least a month, asking for their grandparents. 
"They didn't know we are their parents," Mr. Tian said, speaking Mandarin. 
"They thought Grandma and Grandpa were Mom and Dad."
Many parents seem at a loss about how to deal with children who are not entirely familiar to them. 
"Just the other day, my son came home and lied to me," said Mrs. Chen, whose 7-year-old child returned from Fujian last year and now attends P.S. 
184. (Mrs. Chen would not give her first name because of her illegal status in America.)
"He told me he didn't have homework, but he actually did. 
I wanted to hit him, but he said he would call A.C.S. and send me to jail," fumed the mother, referring to the Administration for Children's Services. 
"Calling A.C.S., that's the first thing he learned here."
Occasionally, Fujianese children face problems that go beyond schooling. 
Some Fujianese children return to New York sick with tuberculosis or hepatitis B, both endemic in rural China, where health care is inadequate. 
"The mom would come to me with her sick child and cry, saying she should never have sent the child back," said Selina Chan, the head nurse of the Chinatown clinic of St. Vincent's Manhattan Hospital.
Often, they are overweight or too skinny, because their grandparents did not enforce balanced diets.
After years of unremitting work, Mr. Tian has his family together, almost. 
He toiled 12 hours a day as a cook at Chinese restaurants and his wife equally long hours as a seamstress. 
They paid their last installment to the smuggler last year, 12 years after Mr. Tian arrived, and later in the year, they sent for Xiaoji, 4, after his older brothers settled in. 
But their oldest children, 13 and 14, are still living in Fujian with Mr. Tian's parents.
Mr. Tian crossed the border of southern China to Cambodia, where he made it to Thailand, almost 13 years ago. 
He was caught by the Thai police and beaten in jail, he said, but he eventually flew to the United States on a fake passport. 
Two years ago, Mr. Tian successfully applied for political asylum in a New York court, claiming he feared prosecution under China's one-child policy.
Mr. Tian, laid off from his job as a cook after Sept. 
11, is looking for ways to apply for government-subsidized housing. 
Sharing a 400-square-foot two-bedroom apartment with another family in a tenement on East Broadway, Mr. Tian, his wife and their three sons sleep on a full-size bunk bed. 
The lower layer of the bed doubles as a desk for Xiaoxian during the day.
Mr. Tian's grueling life here has made him desperate for his children to succeed. 
On a recent Tuesday evening, Mr. Tian went to the weekly parents' class at P.S. 
184, which teaches the Chinese parents some basic English and a few American customs. 
Mr. Tian, who had never attended school, stared at the principal, confused, as the other parents hesitantly followed her to pronounce the word "horse."
"I want my sons to make it here," Mr. Tian, 35, said, smiling apologetically. 
"Living as I do is too hard."
