
Tawdry details of lax banking practices at China's most prominent state bank, the Bank of China, have been accumulating on both sides of the Pacific in the last month, their weight leading recently to the dismissal of one of China's most influential bankers.
First came a report from China's National Audit Office, which found that $320 million of bank funds had been diverted from several branches of the bank through "unlawful loans, off-the-books business and the unlawful granting of letters of credit and issuing bank bills."
Days later, American bank regulators said an investigation begun in 1999 had turned up the same kinds of irregularities at Bank of China's United States operations. 
The bank was fined $20 million in the case.
But these official findings appear to have just been the tip of the iceberg. 
Details of questionable lending and business practices have been spilling out in a cluster of lawsuits in the United States.
According to court documents and lawyers involved in the suits, officers of the bank's New York office made large loans to politically connected customers with no credit history or collateral and to shell corporations existing only on paper. 
Some of the loans apparently were meant to pad the bank's client roster, while others were meant to serve Beijing's political ends, the papers say.
In a separate case, four people were arrested in Hong Kong recently in connection with what police in Kaiping, China, said was a scheme to launder $73 million originating at a branch there. 
In another, the Royal Canadian Mounted Police said they were looking into whether money illegally taken from the Bank of China might have ended up in Canada.
The unfolding troubles at the bank provide a rare look at mismanagement and corruption inside China's ordinarily secretive state-dominated banking sector.
In part, the revelations are a sign of government efforts to clean up its banks: the Chinese government either initiated or cooperated with all the recent investigations of the bank. 
But they also show how far China still has to go to prepare to compete globally in the World Trade Organization, which it has just joined. 
A banking system run on sound business principles and sober assessment of credit, rather than politics and connections, is seen as vital.
Bankers here said the Bank of China was in so much trouble not because it was more poorly run than its peers -- in fact, it is probably the best run of the large state banks, they said -- but rather because its extensive overseas operations subject it to the close scrutiny of foreign bank regulators.
"Every bank in China has problems like this," said one Chinese banking expert who spoke on condition of anonymity. 
"Even within the Bank of China I think you can find worse abuses going on. 
This sort of problem is a product of the system, and unless the system changes, these kinds of problems may decrease but they won't disappear."
The Bank of China refused to comment on any specifics of the investigations and lawsuits concerning its employees and practices. 
A spokesman for the bank said only that it "adheres to the strictest accounting principles in accord with international practice and will appropriately deal with cases like this one."
The inherent problem for China's big commercial banks is that they are strange hybrids, charged by Chinese law both with responding to the needs of the market and with supporting the government's "political goals."
Top officers of China's four big banks are appointed by the state, and part of every loan officer's job is handing out "political loans" with little or no likelihood of ever being repaid -- to shore up a dying state enterprise, for example, or to satisfy the demand of a powerful local official who needs cash.
"These bankers have very close ties to the government, and the management is not appointed for professional skills but for loyalty and for links to the government or the party," said one Western banker who has worked closely with many Chinese banks. 
"There's a lot of lip service to commercial concerns, but in the end they're not being paid to act commercially. 
When you ask why they made a loan, they'll often say, 'We know it's wrong, but we were told to do this.'
"
Political loans amount to a "second budget" in China, bankers say, financing pension payments and health insurance plans for cash-short state companies and other social welfare needs that have no other source of funds in China today.
But the power -- and habit -- of doling out money with little oversight easily leads to abuses and even outright theft.
"If you're the head of a local bank and I'm a government official, and I ask for a loan, it's hard for you to refuse," the Chinese banking expert said.
One result is that an estimated 40 percent of loans by state banks are not being repaid. 
Another is that small, innovative private companies often have trouble getting loans.
Before the mid-1990's, the state banks merely extended credit to state enterprises on government order, and they had little experience with standard financial practices like risk assessment, due diligence and securing collateral. 
Today, Chinese economic officials, many with Western educations, feel a "sense of crisis" about the banking system, but are unsure how to solve the problem, financial experts here say.
"They are trying very hard to turn their banks into commercial banks, but it's a huge task," said Bruce Murray, the Asian Development Bank's representative in China. 
"Old habits die hard."
Doing business the old way is what got the bank in trouble in New York, where the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, a unit of the Treasury Department involved in bank supervision, began its investigation in 1999. 
Misconduct at the bank, the office said in a statement last month, "included showing preferential treatment to certain customers of the New York branch who had personal relationships with some members of the New York branch's prior management."
Investigators said they found evidence that the bank had facilitated fraudulent letters of credit and had allowed borrowers to sell assets that had been pledged as collateral for loans.
The office and the bank settled the charges of misconduct with the $20 million fine -- half paid to the Treasury and half to the People's Bank of China, the Chinese central bank -- and with a consent decree requiring the bank to take a number of corrective steps. 
Among them was to cease doing business permanently with a list of eight individuals and some two dozen businesses, some of them among the bank's biggest customers in the 1990's.
The Bank of China and some of these former clients are now embroiled in a complicated tangle of litigation in New York, in which each side asserts that the other is responsible for financial improprieties.
The bank is suing some of the clients, claiming they obtained loans fraudulently. 
The clients are countersuing the bank, saying essentially that the bank put them up to it.
The court papers describe a climate where major customers at the branch were coddled, dined frequently with senior bank officers, and were offered privileges for themselves and their families that would drop jaws at American banks -- like advancing $50,000, no questions asked, to a customer's father-in-law.
But the favors flowed both ways, the suits say. 
One group of clients asserts that the bank asked them to take out loans and put the proceeds into shell companies that the branch could count as new customers to impress bosses in Beijing.
They also say they and others were solicited by the bank to help support the value of the Hong Kong dollar with money borrowed at zero interest. 
A year later, they said, the funds were routed back through the Cayman Islands to take advantage of favorable tax laws.
Steven L. Kessler, a lawyer who represents some of the clients in the case, said they took part merely to stay in the bank's good graces, because it had no license to trade currency itself. 
The clients did not learn until afterward that some aspects of the bank's plan violated American law, Mr. Kessler said.
The claims and counterclaims concerning the New York branch are endless, but the activities they describe are almost certainly not unique, experts in Beijing said.
Liang Xiaoting, a former top bank official in Hong Kong, was arrested in Beijing on corruption and embezzlement charges. 
Chinese investigators are cooperating with counterparts in Hong Kong, Macao and Canada in dissecting a suspected money laundering scheme.
If there is a silver lining to the gathering clouds, analysts say, it is that the Chinese government is at last showing some determination to clean up corruption, even if it involves high-ranking party figures.
Two years ago, China doubled the budget of its national auditing office, which has become increasingly aggressive in scanning the books of government units and state companies. 
Reports from the auditing office this year detailed illegal use of a staggering 160 billion renminbi -- about $20 billion -- belonging to state-run banks, insurance companies, health inspection stations and other organizations.
Liu Mingkang, the new head of the Bank of China, went as far as to say that the bank welcomed the imposition of the American fine, calling it "conducive to the healthy development of the branch."
In China, the most immediate public casualty has been the highly influential banker Wang Xuebing, who was dismissed as president of the China Construction Bank on Jan. 
11. Mr. Wang had been president of Bank of China from 1993 to 1999, when he was transferred to the construction bank to make way for a government investigation, an official here said. 
He had run the New York branch in the early 1990's, and had enjoyed strong support from China's prime minister, Zhu Rongji.
