
The 10 teenagers had already survived rigorous exams and months of training under the tutelage of foreign coaches.
They had practiced dawn to dusk for weeks on end. 
And now, with their first big test just three days away, everyone in the studio at the state radio station was naturally nervous.
Their moms looked on as the coaches put the group through its paces. 
They clucked and ran to buy fruit and cold medicine for a teenager who was feeling ill.
The gangly kids chatted, mouthed their lines, and stole frequent glances at their newly minted selves in a big wall of mirrors: 10 teenagers, many just out of high school, now in matching silvery car coats, big baggy pants and Nikes. 
Ten teenagers -- on the verge of stardom?
-- with newly dyed hair in clashing shades of red, blue, yellow and orange.
"Our goal is to develop hip-hop and R & B with Chinese characteristics," said Chen Xu, 19, the charismatic chief rapper of the new group, T.N.T., wearing tinted glasses and red dreadlocked hair. 
"I hope to make this a career."
In the United States, rap and hip-hop grew out of the streets. 
But here, a campaign to create home-grown hip-hop performers is, like so much in China, the product of scientific planning, government intervention, expert input, and, of course, tests.
The results of the six-month effort are the boy band T.N.T. and a girl band, Tinkerbell, as well as a soloist, Annie. 
They recently made their debut at the Workers Stadium auditorium, clad in clothes that would have done Puff Daddy proud: silver track suits, oversized white tuxedos and Goth black tunics and pants.
The impulse to create a home-grown boy band a la America's Backstreet Boys evolved from a strange mix of nationalism and economic opportunity.
China has a small indigenous hip-hop scene, mostly centered on clubs in Shanghai. 
But far more influential is a Korean hip-hop band called H.O.T. 
(High Five of Teenagers), probably the most popular group among Chinese teens. 
Their CD's are best sellers, and Chinese teenagers hang on H.O.T. gossip and news.
Under the influence of "Korean hip-hop" culture, Chinese teenagers have started wearing baggy jeans and getting neon hair rinses. 
In the Xidan district of Beijing, the store of the moment is Korea Fashion City.
So last year, state-run China Radio International teamed up with a South Korean music company to create a home-grown band that could catch this wave, using a method that has worked so well for other Chinese industries: they copied.
"Our company knew that hip-hop and R and B were popular in China, but there is no real expertise in these areas," said Chay Bok Nyeo, a Korean manager of the China New Millennium Dance Group, which is sponsoring the new bands. 
"Still, we knew there were talented kids out there, so we put an ad out and thousands answered."
The talent hunt was largely directed and financed from Seoul. 
Applicants came to Beijing, where Korean experts systematically evaluated their singing and dancing as well as their looks, image, personality and "basic skills."
Xu Yuhua, who works for the Chinese partner company, said, "It was not a talent contest; it was an exam."
In successive rounds of testing, the judges narrowed the field from more than 5,000 to just 10, all 16 to 19 years old, from places as varied as Beijing, Hong Kong and rural Hebei Province. 
One was a student at Beijing's No. 2 Middle School. 
Mr. Chen, the rapper, was a freshman at a Beijing university. 
Another was in flight attendant school.
Of course, this was not the kind of exam success that Chinese parents traditionally fantasize about, and some were less than thrilled.
"My mother thought that after three years of study I should become a flight attendant," said Li Miao, 18, who now looks very unstewardessy, with a bulky two-tone sweatshirt and shaggy, blond-streaked hair.
But China and its aspirations are changing fast.
"We're very open-minded, so we felt he should be able to chose," said Xiao Lijie, Mr. Chen's mother.
She said, proudly, that in Harbin, the family's hometown in China's far northeast, Mr. Chen is known as the "dance king" on the club circuit and has his own successful band.
"He's got innate talent," she said. 
"He can study any time, but this is a rare opportunity."
After the exam results were announced, the 10 winners were whisked away to Seoul for three months of "intensive training," which included lessons in singing and dancing, fashion, makeup, etiquette and public speaking. 
Composers wrote songs for them; image consultants made over their dress and their hair.
They trained as if preparing for an Olympic event, with nine hours of practice a day. 
Though few had ever been outside China before, they were allowed just one day of sightseeing during their stint at hip-hop boot camp.
"'I learned to be more polite, how to sing and dance better -- and also developed a new style," said Zheng Xin, 18, who last year was attending performing arts school in Hebei and now, in the studio, was wearing baggy jeans and a fuzzy pink sweater, with bright red streaks through her yellow hair.
Three days later the 10 were making their debut on stage, skipping and strutting through clouds of fake smoke, rapping and singing of lost love and other teenage cares.
The crowd clapped along enthusiastically as a traditional Chinese tune, "Kangding Love Song," was performed in rap style. 
Light sticks sailed down onto the vast stage, and balloons scribbled with the new stars' names filled the air.
"You're seeing for the first time our own Chinese Korean-style hip-hop band," an announcer thundered.
The performance was not exactly Eminem, Chen Xu's favorite artist, or even Backstreet Boys. 
T.N.T. has its own style, though it most resembles H.O.T. 
But it was clearly hip-hop with Chinese characteristics in other ways too:
The emcee for the evening was a middle-aged radio announcer in a conservative suit and red tie, who asked the audience to vote on which they preferred, the girl band or the boy band. 
Officials watched the concert from a row of tables, set with cups of hot tea, arranged between the audience and the stage.
In a country where rock concerts still enjoy an uncertain status, often deemed a threat to public order, the first row of the stands was fully occupied by uniformed members of the People's Armed Police.
But the mood was hardly subversive. 
When T.N.T., Tinkerbell and Annie finished rapping and took to the stage for the night's encore, their song was not about sex or drugs, but a paean to Beijing's glorious bid to play host to the 2008 Olympic Games.
Has Eminem mentioned that?
