
The mayor of Beijing ordered all Internet cafes in the city today to shut down temporarily after at least 24 died in an early-morning fire in an unlicensed cafe in the university district.
The fire, said to be the deadliest here in more than 50 years, started at 2:40 a.m. in the Lanjisu Internet cafe in northwestern Beijing. 
Like many similar establishments, the Internet cafe was crowded with students who cannot afford personal computers and visit the cafes at night to take advantage of lower rates as they surf the Web, play Internet games, dawdle in chat rooms and exchange e-mail.
And like many similar cafes in Beijing and around China, it was a firetrap.
Dozens of computers were crowded into a second-story room with barred windows and just one door that witnesses said was bolted shut, requiring customers to knock to be let in or out.
Neighbors described hearing the screams of students pressed against the windows, unable to escape. 
Firefighters broke into a back window and rescued several patrons, according to a report by the state-run New China News Agency, and had the blaze under control within about two hours.
The authorities released no information today about the cause of the fire, and the police were reportedly trying to find and arrest the owner.
Past efforts by Beijing and other cities to regulate the proliferating Internet bars have involved more threats than effective action. 
In Beijing alone, there are some 2,400 computer cafes, only 200 of them licensed, the news agency said.
But the new tragedy evoked unusually strong vows from Beijing leaders, who know that the country's widespread problems with fire and building safety have become politically sensitive. 
In December 2000, when a disco fire killed 309 in the central city of Luoyang, official careers were derailed and 23 people deemed directly responsible for the unsafe conditions in the building were sent to prison.
Today, after an emergency meeting, Mayor Liu Qi said all Internet cafes, legal or not, must close down immediately, the news agency reported.
No new licenses will be granted to Internet cafes, the mayor reportedly decreed, and those previously licensed will have to reapply and certify that they "meet relevant requirements."
Any illegal cafes, the mayor said, "will be severely punished."
The mayor also announced a special three-month inspection of fire safety in all the city's enterprises and commercial buildings.
Officials have been frustrated not only by safety lapses in the cafes, but also by their alleged use to spread pornography, provocative rumors and unapproved political ideas or information.
School officials have also fretted that computer rooms are luring teenagers away from their studies and are a bad social influence.
But the demand for computer services is huge and growing, and officials did not say how they will stamp out the thousands of establishments, which range from store-fronts with a few machines to large-scale operations like the one that burned today.
By this evening, a computer bulletin board run by People's Daily, the newspaper of the Communist Party, carried several messages criticizing the Beijing authorities.
The underground Internet bars are so popular, one writer said, because the local police and officials make it so difficult to obtain a license.
Another person, noting the city government's urgent new safety measures, wrote, "Everyone is asking what they were doing before this happened."
