
Even if you have 20-20 vision, it takes a moment to focus when you first enter Beijing Eyeglass City. 
The endless display cases (below), the mirrors, the Chinese characters and the pretty sales girls -- it all adds up to a slightly kaleidoscopic effect. 
Things settle down a bit when a motherly optician in her white smock approaches. 
''Looking for a match?'' she asks.
Here, within a four-story mall of nearly identical small shops in downtown Beijing, you can have prescription lenses tested and fitted in 45 minutes. 
The selection of glasses is so varied and so cheap -- seven pairs for, say, $100 -- you can adopt several different personas. 
Some shops even offer buggy ''swimming glasses.''
Contact lenses are on the fourth floor.
And if you begin to feel overwhelmed, take a breather and walk across the street. 
A new and smaller eyeglass market called Mingjingyuan sells exactly the same stuff (at the same prices) in a more spacious, less crowded environment. 
Whichever market you go to, take your prescription. 
And be patient. 
If you don't speak Chinese, prepare to punch numbers into a fat calculator, and offer a third of the price that was just proposed.
But you can forget about finding good deals on authentic brands like Versace and Prada. 
They are there, but China levies high tariffs on foreign brands and they won't be cheap. 
Cheap Prada is fake Prada. 
Besides, inside those glass displays, you may notice that China has gazillions of its own brands, some of which sound faintly familiar -- Titanic, Noble Playboy, Hollywoods, Pepsi.
''These days we are seeing more and more new products and styles,'' said Ye Changqing, a cheerful dealer who owns shops in both Eyeglass City and Mingjingyuan. 
In the 1980's, Mr. Ye, along with other budding eyeglass merchants from Wenzhou and the surrounding area, lived in tiny rooms under a nearby traffic bridge, working the margins.
Then, in 1992, two state-owned eyeglass factories went bankrupt. 
Mr. Ye and the bridge dwellers made a deal to rent the space. 
''Friends brought friends, relatives brought relatives,'' Mr. Ye said, and that's how Eyeglass City came to be.
Now he owns his own business: Beijing New Land Glasses Company. 
So do hundreds of others.
Beijing Eyeglass City, East Third Ring Road, No. 64 Nanlu. 
Mingjingyuan Eyeglass Market, No. 43 Huaweibeili, north of Panjiayuan; (86-10) 8773-0786. 
JAKE HOOKER
