
China is stepping up its detention of North Koreans living illegally in China, diplomats and aid workers along the border say. 
The move is apparently a response to the defection of 25 North Koreans who stormed the Spanish Embassy in Beijing last week, demanding political refugee status and safe passage to South Korea, which they reached after being allowed to go to the Philippines.
The scope of the detentions is unclear. 
Dr. Norbert Vollertsen, a German who had helped the group of 25 North Koreans hatch their plan, said that "several hundred refugees" had been rounded up and sent home from the Chinese border cities of Hunchun and Tumen.
He also said he had heard that aid workers on the border had seen North Korean security agents, some in uniform, taking part in the sweeps inside China. 
But Asian diplomats said it was highly unlikely that China would allow that to happen.
Caught in a bind, the Chinese government allowed the people who stormed the embassy to leave for the Philippines on "humanitarian grounds."
On the one hand, China did not want to offend North Korea, its neighbor and friend by allowing the group to go directly to South Korea, the North's archenemy. 
On the other hand, as a rising power in international politics, China did not want the bad publicity that would result from returning the 25 people -- some of whom threatened suicide -- to North Korea where they would almost certainly have faced punishment.
After the group stormed into the Spanish Embassy last week, the office of the United Nations high commissioner for refugees said that "under no circumstances" should they be sent back.
China wants to discourage the hundreds of thousands of North Koreans living illegally in China from following this potential new escape route. 
With this week's sweeps in the border area, diplomats said, China is also trying to discourage others still in North Korea from entering China.
In speeches, Chinese officials have continued to say that the 25 North Koreans were economic migrants who, by law, should have been sent home, not political refugees entitled to protection. 
They did not explain what "humanitarian" grounds prompted their release, although there were some ill people in the group, a Japanese human rights group that assisted them said.
Today, the Chinese ambassador to South Korea, Li Bin, said at a news conference: "No refugee problem exists between China and North Korea. 
China views such people as illegal immigrants."
Most of the North Koreans who sneak across the shallow river that forms the border between North Korea and China do so in search or food, to escape a famine in North Korea. 
But once they flee, the North Korean government views them as criminals. 
Migrants who have been sent home by the Chinese but escape into China again report horrific tales of torture and imprisonment.
China often turns a blind eye to the North Koreans who live illegally within its borders. 
But the Chinese government also orders periodic sweeps and repatriation campaigns, sometimes for political reasons or when the number of border crossers becomes too big. 
When the North Korean leader, Kim Jong Il, visited China for the first time, in 2000, the number of repatriations jumped.
Even in the best of times, the terrifying threat of being sent back is omnipresent for the North Koreans in China. 
Many are sheltered by local churches and work in low-wage jobs for ethnic Korean Chinese citizens sympathetic to their plight.
