
The Standing Committee of the National People's Congress in Beijing on Tuesday approved new rules interpreting how far Hong Kong can go in pursuing greater democracy.
Jiang Zhenghua, the committee's vice chairman, said in a telephone interview that the new interpretation of Hong Kong's mini-constitution required the government here to work with the congress before making any changes regarding how leaders are chosen. 
But the new interpretation, which is legally binding under Chinese law, does say that changes can be made ''if necessary'' before the next chief executive is chosen in 2007, he added. 
''If we don't give the explanation, then Hong Kong will trapped in endless arguments, which will be harmful for Hong Kong's development,'' Mr. Jiang said.
Hong Kong's mini-constitution, the Basic Law, says that chief executives elected after 2007 can be elected by more democratic means. 
But there has been considerable debate here over whether that would include the elections in 2007 itself.
Current laws only allow a committee of 800 prominent citizens, mostly loyal to Beijing, to select candidates among whom the public is allowed to choose in the general election.
But democracy advocates here also contend that the city should be allowed to work out changes in election laws on its own and only then submit them to the congress in Beijing for final approval, with Hong Kong's legislature, half of it elected democratically, playing a central role. 
Mr. Jiang said that the National People's Congress would deal with the chief executive on the issue, adding that the Standing Committee had approved the new interpretation with no dissenting votes and only one abstention.
Democracy advocates here find themselves divided even as Beijing is castigating them as unpatriotic and reinterpreting the law.
On one side of the split are the pro-democracy political parties, which have a lot of political savvy but few members.
On the other side is the Civil Human Rights Front, a coalition of civic and Christian organizations that can bring thousands of supporters into the streets but has a wide range of agendas that encompass not just democracy but also the rights of gay men, lesbians, women, workers, the poor and the disabled.
While the front supports the introduction of universal suffrage, there remains some ambivalence among its leaders about the virtues of majority rule. 
They are especially concerned that greater democracy may result in fewer protections for minorities, given the conservatism of much of Hong Kong society.
The Civil Human Rights Front organized a march last July 1 that drew 500,000 people, nearly one-tenth of the population of this autonomous Chinese territory, and forced the local government to withdraw a stringent internal security law. 
On July 1 this year, the front will hold a commemorative march to promote women's rights, gay rights and other civic causes, as well as democracy, Ms. Hung said. 
''We are not a political organization; we are a coalition of civil groups coming together to build civil society,'' said Rose Wu, a longtime campaigner for liberal Christian causes here who is the leader of the Civil Human Rights Front.
The political activism of nonprofit groups here, coupled with their exclusion of actual politicians, could have broad implications for the rest of China, according to China experts.
China has tolerated the rapid expansion of nonprofit groups on the mainland in recent years, but strictly bans them from engaging in political activity.
