
Beijing shifted its response on Friday to new Taiwanese legislation on national referendums, expressing concern about the law and repeating previous warnings to this island against seeking formal independence but stopping short of any threats.
The official New China News Agency had initially posted a commentary on its Internet site noting that the referendum legislation removed "the imminent danger of Taiwanese independence."
By Friday evening, a separate brief statement was added, quoting a spokesman for the Chinese government's Taiwan Affairs Office. 
"We are deeply concerned about relevant things concerning 'referendum legislation' in Taiwan and are paying close attention to the development of the issue," he said, adding no specifics.
The statement closed with a warning that any attempt to separate Taiwan from China "will not be tolerated absolutely."
But in contrast with three warnings earlier this week of the possible use of force if a broad referendum law passed, the statement made no explicit threats.
Beijing has regarded Taiwan as a renegade province ever since the Nationalists lost China's civil war to the Communists in 1949 and retreated here.
The return on Friday to vague, albeit critical statements, was read by experts here as a sign of easing tension. 
A Chinese statement earlier this week had referred to Taiwan as a "shen sheng," or sacred, part of China, a term seldom used in recent years and viewed in Taiwan as a signal of great anger and intransigence in Beijing.
"I had goose bumps coming up when I saw it," said Su Chi, an influential Nationalist Party adviser on Taiwan Straits issues and a former minister for relations with China.
President Chen Shui-bian and his Democratic Progressive Party backed away on Thursday afternoon from previous demands by the party's pro-independence wing for broad legislation authorizing the use of referendums to pursue changes in the Constitution and sovereignty. 
In the end, the legislature approved a narrow version supported by the Nationalist Party and People First Party, which favor eventual political reunification with the mainland.
Politicians here said in interviews on Friday that a new consensus seemed to be emerging that the presidential campaign now getting started should be fought more on economic issues than on the potentially inflammatory sovereignty issue.
The more moderate tone follows several strong statements from American officials to Taiwanese reporters in Washington in the last week that the Bush administration does not want a crisis in the Taiwan Strait.
A senior Taiwanese government official spoke Friday of an acute wariness of angering the United States by allowing any crisis to develop with China when the Bush administration was already preoccupied with Iraq and North Korea.
