
The Chinese government today accused a United States-based sociologist who has been held in isolation for more than six weeks of being a paid spy for "overseas intelligence agencies."
But a government spokesman offered no details of the allegations, in a case that has caused puzzlement and outrage among American officials and scholars.
The sociologist, Gao Zhan, a research fellow at American University in Washington, had come to China with her husband and 5-year-old son for a three-week visit with relatives, her husband said. 
They were detained at the Beijing airport on Feb. 
11 as they checked in to fly home.
The son, who was born in the United States and is an American citizen, was separated from both parents and kept in a government nursery for 26 days before he and the father were released and allowed to return to their home in Virginia.
The Chinese authorities did not tell the American Embassy of the boy's detention, in violation of an agreement requiring notification within four days when a citizen is held for any reason, and the embassy has protested. 
The parents have permanent resident status in the United States but are Chinese citizens.
State security agents ignored the parents' plea to let the boy stay with his grandparents, who live in China. 
In Washington last week, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell called the boy's treatment outrageous, and General Powell and President Bush urged a visiting Chinese official last week to secure Ms. Gao's release.
At a news briefing today, a Foreign Ministry spokesman, Sun Yuxi, said, "Evidence has shown that Gao Zhan accepted missions from overseas intelligence agencies and took funds for spying activities."
Asked whether Ms. Gao had spied for the United States, a State Department spokesman in Washington said, "There is no substance to these allegations," and repeated the call for her immediate release.
Ms. Gao's husband, Xue Donghua, a computer engineer with Electronic Data Systems, said he was mystified. 
"I totally believe that all her activities were academically related," he said today in a telephone interview.
Ms. Gao's research is focused on women's and family issues and the only money she received was research grants from American foundations, Mr. Xue said. 
He said he had been blindfolded and taken to a house outside Beijing, where he had been kept for 26 days.
