
In the late 1950's, Mao notoriously put sparrows on a hit list of natural pests to be exterminated as China made its Great Leap Forward into communism.
After pleas from scientists that whatever damage sparrows were thought to be inflicting on grain harvests was more than outweighed by their consumption of harmful insects, the surviving birds were given a reprieve and went on to thrive.
But now China's rising tide of pesticide pollution and appetite for wildlife may achieve what caused even Mao to flinch: the extinction of these small, unprepossessing birds in many parts of the country.
Jin Caimin, a cigarette vendor who spent his childhood on a farm west of Beijing, remembers that in the 1970's the fields teemed with wildlife: frogs, fish, dragonflies and sparrows. 
Now the remaining fields around his village are silent.
"Thinking about it," he said, "you just don't see any sparrows around these days. 
Just occasionally. 
Not all the time like when I was a kid."
His experience is echoed across large swaths of China. 
Scientists and China's small band of amateur bird watchers say that in recent years they have seen a sharp fall in the number of sparrows.
They estimate that around the northeastern port of Tianjin the sparrow population has declined by more than 90 percent since the 1950's and that in many parts of southern and central China sparrows have virtually disappeared. 
They say the implications for China's environmental health are disturbing.
Chu Guozhong, the director of the government-financed National Bird Banding Center, a burly, cheerful man, says he is especially disturbed that sparrows are disappearing fastest from the countryside. 
His hands still and voice slows when talk turns to sparrows.
"In the cities you can still find them," he said. 
"It's in parts of the countryside that they have totally disappeared. 
So the problem here is different from Europe and North America -- here the problem of declining numbers is worse in the countryside, not in the cities."
This trend has been so alarming that in late 2000 he and seven other ornithologists were able to push the sparrow onto the government's protected species list, which bans their unauthorized killing.
No recent systematic studies have been made of the sparrow population. 
Mr. Chu recalled that when he started counting sparrows 20 years ago he would catch hundreds of them in one morning. 
"But now there are far fewer," he said. 
"You can see it with your eyes."
Recent environmental studies show that the sparrow's deadliest enemy is Chinese farmers' haphazard and extravagant use of pesticides, including some banned in other countries.
China is now second only to the United States as a producer of farm pesticides, making 400,000 tons of active ingredients last year, mostly for its own use. 
Since the 1970's, when pesticide use took off, wildlife that once held its own in the intensely farmed countryside has been dying off.
Scientists here say sparrows are especially vulnerable to these chemical drenchings. 
The grain and grubs that they snap up from fields come laced with the poisons, and because of their small size they are hit sooner and harder than larger birds.
"Some of the sparrows may die immediately from pesticide poisoning," Mr. Chu explained. 
"But more commonly the buildup of pesticides in their bodies steadily damages their health and reproduction, and this is what is leading to the sharp fall in numbers."
China's missing sparrows are thus a harbinger of broader environmental damage. 
"If sparrow numbers are falling because of pesticide buildup in the environment," Mr. Chu said, "it may not be too long before larger birds are also endangered."
Pesticides, though, are not the sum of the sparrow's woes. 
The sparrows disappearing from trees often reappear on sticks, skewered and roasted or fried. 
Once a source of meat for hard-up farmers, the sparrow is now enjoyed by city dwellers as a crunchy, rustic-tinged snack often eaten between gulps of beer at streetside stalls.
On a recent night at the Wangfujing snack market in downtown Beijing, customers were enjoying fried sparrows, despite the official ban on their capture. 
Sparrows have become scarce enough around Beijing that traders often pass off freshly hatched chicks as the more valuable sparrows.
Ma Zhao, an environmentalist who runs the newsletter "China Bird Watch," said that since the addition of sparrows to the protected animals list, wildlife protection officers had tried to stop the culling, but it is not easy.
"The public can understand that, say, swans or black neck cranes are precious, but sparrows or crows aren't seen as special, so why not eat them?" she said.
Ms. Ma said part of the problem also lay in China's fragmented, underfinanced bureaucracy. 
Environmental protection agencies are in charge of industrial pollution control, but protecting birds is the job of forestry bureaus, and controlling pesticide use comes under agriculture departments.
In the late 1950's, when Mao began his assault on sparrows, he lumped them together with rats, mosquitoes and flies as the "four pests" to be killed off.
Millions of citizens were mobilized to clang pots and pans until frightened birds dropped to the ground in exhaustion and were beaten to death. 
Up to 18 million birds were killed before scientists persuaded Mao to replace the sparrow with the bedbug on his list.
Mr. Chu hopes that ordinary Chinese will mobilize to protect sparrows, and that agricultural officials will place stricter controls on pesticides. 
But he warns that it may take decades to wean many Chinese off a taste for wildlife, wryly reciting a joke about southern Chinese dining habits: "Eat anything that flies except airplanes; eat anything with legs except the table."
