
China's bid to join in the development of rich oil and gas fields in Kazakhstan stands a good chance of being thwarted by the existing partners in the project, industry executives and analysts here said.
Rather than allow two Chinese state-controlled oil companies to buy the one-sixth interest now held by the BG Group of Britain in the North Caspian Sea oil development project, which includes the giant Kashagan field, BG's partners will probably exercise their first-refusal rights and buy the stake themselves, the executives and analysts said.
"Most companies will pre-empt," said a senior executive at one oil company with a share in the project.
The last time companies taking part in the project decided to sell -- BP Amoco and Statoil of Norway in 2001 -- the remaining partners bought and divided the stakes proportionally. 
The consortium's rules give participants 60 days to match any offer.
But an oil industry expert in East Asia who insisted on anonymity said that it was highly unlikely that any of the partners would make a decision to pre-empt the sale to the Chinese bidders until just before the deadline, which is still 40 days away.
CNOOC Ltd. agreed on March 7 to pay $615 million for half of the BG Group's stake, or one-twelfth of the total; the Sinopec Group agreed to the same terms for the other half on March 11. 
Both are controlled by the Chinese government, though CNOOC Ltd. is publicly traded.
In effect, each of BG's current partners has been given an option to buy BG's stake at the same price, which CNOOC and Sinopec negotiated before war broke out in Iraq. 
If the war ends quickly, the price of oil drops and a flood of cheap Iraqi oil seems likely to reach markets soon, then the partners would be less inclined to pre-empt CNOOC and Sinopec because oil reserves would be obtainable more cheaply in other countries, analysts said.
But if the war goes badly and oil production in the Middle East seems likely to be disrupted by terrorism or other problems for years to come, then the value of oil under the Caspian Sea would climb and the partners would have a strong financial incentive to buy BG's stake at the Chinese bidders' prewar price.
Balanced against that financial incentive, however, would be the desire of many of BG's current partners to build pipelines, refineries, gas stations and make other investments in China. 
The Chinese government has strongly supported the CNOOC and Sinopec deals as strategic alternatives to its growing dependence on Mideast oil.
Despite China's entry into the World Trade Organization in November 2001, Beijing still has considerable latitude to reward foreign multinationals by providing access to its market. 
Companies that offend Beijing tend to encounter considerable red tape.
As for why the BG Group is selling, the company was the odd man out in the North Caspian consortium, which is known as Agip KCO because the Agip unit of Eni of Italy is the lead partner. 
BG is primarily a gas company (the former British Gas) and it is much smaller than most of its partners, including Exxon Mobil, Royal Dutch/Shell and TotalFinaElf. 
Those three, the BG Group and Agip each own one-sixth of the project now, with Inpex of Japan and Philips Petroleum sharing the remaining one-sixth.
Having so far spent just $200 million to $300 million on a stake that it can now sell for $1.2 billion, analysts said, BG has long been expected to take its profits and concentrate on gas fields elsewhere.
For their part, the Chinese oil companies are actively seeking new supplies abroad to feed the rapidly growing economy of China, where domestic oil production is flat and there is little prospect of major new discoveries. 
Taking part in developing the Kashagan field would help justify a planned oil pipeline from the Caspian basin across the empty western part of China to the densely developed east.
All things being equal, the partners in the existing consortium would prefer not to add partners, analysts and executives said. 
The unusually large number of major partners already in the group has made for cumbersome decision making, and the BG Group's departure is seen as an opportunity to streamline it a bit.
"Reducing the number of partners would make their life easier," said Laurent Ruseckas, Caspian analyst at Cambridge Energy Research Associates.
At the same time, the Kashagan field presents an array of technical challenges found nowhere else, industry experts said. 
The oil is deep in the ground and under extremely high pressure, and wells to reach it must be drilled in a shallow, environmentally fragile landlocked sea that is covered with thick, drifting ice in winter. 
In Soviet times, the technical difficulties led officials to defer work on the field in favor of more accessible deposits in Azerbaijan and Russia.
Still, Kashagan is thought to be the fifth-largest oil field in the world, with a potential to yield 1 million barrels a day, after 15 years and an estimated $20 billion in development. 
The first commercial production at the field is expected in 2005.
By then the consortium will have to have begun answering the question of which way to send the field's oil to market. 
Competing proposals are on the table for pipelines through Russia to the Black Sea, through Turkey to the Mediterranean or through Iran to the Persian Gulf.
China would add a fourth potential outlet route, if the partners let BG's sales to Sinopec and CNOOC Ltd. go ahead.
David Chin, an investment banker at UBS Warburg who represented Sinopec in its transaction with BG, said that having the deal pre-empted by the existing partners was still a distinct possibility.
"This risk has always existed," he said. 
"We would not take anything for granted."
