
In early March, top BHP Billiton executives traveled to Beijing to sign a deal to sell $9 billion of iron ore to Chinese steel mills for 25 years. 
Iron ore prices were skyrocketing, and the deal seemed a good way to bond the fortunes of the world's largest mining company to those of its fastest-growing market.
A month later, China moved to slow its economy, including its red-hot steel sector, sending commodity prices, and the shares of BHP Billiton and other resource companies, reeling. 
BHP Billiton executives, however, predict that demand in China for raw materials will survive the government's efforts to cool economic growth. 
To feed the demand it expects there and elsewhere, the company plans to invest roughly $5.4 billion in the next five years to expand production of leading commodities like copper, nickel and alumina.
''In the long haul, we believe that China is a strong and robust story,'' said Christopher J. Lynch, the chief financial officer of BHP Billiton, in a telephone interview from London. 
''We fully expect bumps and hiccups on the way.''
Still, questions about what impact slower growth in China, the engine for growth across much of the Pacific Rim, will have on the global economy have been roiling commodity and financial markets everywhere. 
Nickel prices have plunged from 15-year highs; copper has tumbled from 8-year highs. 
The currencies of commodity-driven economies like Australia, Canada and New Zealand have also suffered. 
And markets in Asia's other export-driven economies have trembled amid concern that China might buy fewer semiconductors from Taiwan and fewer steel rods from South Korea, as well as less Thai rubber, Vietnamese rice and Malaysian tin.
The most pessimistic appraisal comes from analysts and economists who say that China cannot slow its economy without a partial derailment. 
Past efforts to slow the economy have brought it to a screeching halt. 
Others say China has created such a vacuum in commodities supplies that anything but complete stagnation in China's economy would do little to ease emerging shortages. 
''The demand for raw materials is still very much going to be there,'' said Neil Goodwill, a resources analyst at Goldman Sachs JBWere in Melbourne, Australia, where BHP Billiton, a British-Australian company, has its headquarters.
Few companies are in as good a position as BHP Billiton to gauge China's potential impact on the global commodities market: from Australia to South Africa, Colombia to Canada, BHP Billiton digs up all kinds of materials: alumina, nickel, copper, iron ore, even diamonds. 
And increasingly, it sells more to China.
BHP Billiton recently disclosed that China accounts for 10 percent of its total sales. 
But that understates the country's importance to the company. 
China accounts directly for more than 20 percent of BHP Billiton's sales growth. 
And indirectly, it counts for much more, since a lot of what BHP Billiton sells to other Asian countries is turned into something else, like steel, that is subsequently shipped to China.
Even as China attracted manufacturing investment that once went to other parts of Asia, it became a crucial source of demand for the region's agricultural and commodity exports. 
China is now, for example, the world's largest copper consumer and accounts for roughly a third of the world's steel exports.
Now, China has ordered banks to cut lending for iron, steel, aluminum and automobile manufacturing. 
Some economists fear that Chinese factories, faced with slowing demand at home, will start shipping more of their product overseas, worsening price declines.
Before BHP merged with Billiton of Britain in 2001, it learned the hard way not to rely on commodity-price bonanzas. 
In 1996, it bought copper mines in Arizona and Nevada that cost it $2.5 billion in write-offs when metals prices plummeted after the 1997-98 Asian financial crisis.
Since the merger, BHP Billiton's new management has ushered in some important changes, analysts say. 
First, it shifted its focus toward developing only large, low-cost, long-life mines, like the Escondida copper mine in Chile, where BHP Billiton owns a majority stake. 
Part of that strategy stems from its factoring in a more pessimistic commodity price outlook when determining whether it can build and run a potential project cheaply enough to return at least 15 percent profit. 
Moreover, BHP expects technological advances will drive down costs.
In China, BHP Billiton decided to ditch the local sales agents that BHP and Billiton had been using to steer them. 
''You'd be at the mercy of feedback from agents as to what the true demand side is,'' Mr. Lynch said.
Instead, the company hired a team of Mandarin speakers to deal directly with clients and see firsthand what impact economic trends were having.
In February, BHP Billiton said sales to China in the six months ended Dec. 
31, the first half of the company's fiscal year, had nearly tripled, to $1.1 billion, almost as much as it sold there the entire previous year and contributing to the best half-year results since the merger.
This posed a surprising challenge to BHP Billiton. 
Rather than worry that demand had peaked and that a glut would emerge, executives began to wonder how they were going to keep up when the time between opening a mine and selling its product can be 10 years.
Economists and analysts say that commodities are already in dangerously short supply worldwide, with shortages emerging in cobalt, cadmium, chromium and nickel. 
This is, in part, because so few companies bothered to invest in new production after last decade's slump.
China's emergence as a major customer has added a new dimension to demand, they say. 
All the planned expansions by the world's largest iron ore producers combined fail to meet China's projected demand for 2010, said Peter G. Harris, senior materials analyst at Commonwealth Securities in Melbourne.
The same goes for copper and other commodities. 
''If China continues to grow, you can throw in every copper project we know and you still come up with a deficit,'' Mr. Goodwill of Goldman Sachs JBWere said.
So Alcan, Rio Tinto and other metals giants have set about increasing production, but none so aggressively as BHP Billiton, analysts say.
In March, it announced it would spend $1.1 billion to dig a new nickel mine in Western Australia and $300 million to expand a nickel refinery in Queensland. 
Then in April, BHP Billiton approved an $870 million expansion of Escondida, already the world's largest copper mine. 
Next came a plan for a $192 million expansion of an alumina refinery in Western Australia that it controls.
BHP Billiton is even more confident that demand in China for its iron ore will remain strong, largely because the quality of the Australian ore -- actual iron per volume of ore -- is so much higher than that produced in China. 
The company has committed $213 million to increase production at its iron ore mines in Western Australia and an additional $351 million to expanding port and rail facilities to handle the increase.
Commodities only rarely move in lockstep, Mr. Lynch said, so the broad range of BHP Billiton's products helps insulate it from big moves in any single resource. 
If prices for metals should undergo a sustained decline, BHP Billiton can always fall back somewhat on one of its newest areas of business, oil, where prices are near their highest ever.
So far, Mr. Lynch said, members of the Shanghai staff were seeing no signs of a slowdown from Chinese clients.
''Our stuff,'' he said, ''is flying through there.''
