
RISING interest rates are an obvious concern for bond investors this year. 
But rising rates were also a threat in 2004 and turned out to be only that -- a threat. 
In fact, Wall Street forecasts of bond market trouble have been wrong since 2002.
Still, as 2005 begins, the bond market faces a disturbing list of potential negatives -- including a weakening dollar, expectations of rising inflation and growing deficits -- that could undermine bonds and send interest rates unexpectedly high. 
Uncertainty about these and other factors is reflected in the wide range of interest rate forecasts for 2005.
The yield on the Treasury's 10-year note is predicted to average 5 percent in the fourth quarter of 2005, up from 4.22 at the end of 2004, according to the consensus forecast from Blue Chip Economic Indicators. 
But the forecasts range from 5.5 percent for the average of the 10 highest to 4.3 percent for the average of the 10 lowest.
In the Blue Chip consensus forecast, the Federal Reserve's short-term interest rate benchmark is expected to rise 1.25 percentage points to 3.5 percent. 
But the range is from 2.75 percent to just over 4 percent.
Thomas H. Atteberry, a manager of the First Pacific Advisors New Income Fund, a mutual fund, is worried about rising rates because he predicts that economic growth will be faster than generally expected and that inflation will be higher.
But he is quick to acknowledge that the bond and stock markets are providing contradictory readings. 
The bond market, with its unexpectedly low yields, is indicating that inflation is contained and growth modest, he said, which means that interest rates may not rise too much. 
But stocks and the high-yield bond market are performing as if the economy is healthy and inflation will be higher, which would push up interest rates.
''One of these guys is going to be wrong,'' Mr. Atteberry said.
In 2004, the overall bond market, including Treasuries, corporates and mortgages, had a positive return of 4.3 percent, according to Merrill Lynch bond indexes. 
That was behind the 10.9 percent total return for the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index. 
But the total return for high-yield junk bonds, at 10.9 percent, matched the S.&P.
The rally of the Treasury's 10-year note, which finished 2004 at 4.22 percent, just below the 4.25 percent a year ago, was a big surprise. 
And it was hard to explain after the Federal Reserve had raised its benchmark short-term interest rate to 2.25 percent, from a 46-year low of 1 percent.
The billions of dollars of Treasury securities bought by foreign central banks, especially Japan and China, was one explanation for why yields stayed low and why Treasury notes and bonds had a total return -- yield plus price appreciation -- of 3.5 percent.
The Fed's slow, measured pace of rate increases in five steps of one-quarter point each was another explanation.
Many institutional investors also used the carry trade, in which they borrowed at low, short-term interest rates to buy Treasury securities with longer maturities and higher yields. 
They pocketed the difference, and that helped keep rates from rising. 
The spread between the yield on junk bonds and comparable Treasuries also narrowed to record lows at year end, showing surprising complacency about the bond outlook.
As for 2005, the obvious pressure on interest rates will come from the Fed's anticipated increases in short-term interest rates.
The dollar's weakness is another concern. 
The currency has been falling for three years and many analysts expect the fall to continue this year, especially if China decides to relax the fixed relationship between its currency, the yuan, and the dollar. 
If the dollar's decline suddenly appeared to be getting out of hand, both the bond market and the stock market could suffer.
The two large American deficits -- the federal budget deficit and the current-account deficit, the broad gap between exports and imports of goods and services -- also pose a problem. 
Borrowing needed to cover the federal deficit, which was $413 billion in the year ended Sept. 
30, could put upward pressure on interest rates. 
And the growing current-account deficit, which is expected to exceed $600 billion in 2004, could put downward pressure on the dollar and upward pressure on interest rates so the United States can attract the foreign investment it needs to cover the shortfall.
Inflation, while still low, is rising and could suddenly become a worry for bond investors. 
The Consumer Price Index was up 3.5 percent for the 12 months through November. 
And Treasury Inflation Protected Securities, known as TIPS, show that longer-term inflationary expectations are rising. 
(Still, TIPS were one of the best performing fixed-income securities last year, with a total return of 8.5 percent.)
Purchases of Treasury securities by foreign central banks also could slow, especially if China relaxes its currency tie.
And if interest rates suddenly rose sharply for any or all of these reasons, the popular bet of borrowing to buy Treasury securities would be unwound quickly, putting even more upward pressure on interest rates.
One comforting fact is that the advice for investors is about the same, regardless of how much interest rates rise: Steer away from Treasuries in favor of higher-yielding investment-grade corporate debt and high-yield junk bonds.
Michael Roberge, chief fixed-income officer at MFS, a mutual fund company, predicts inflation would remain contained and that the yield on the Treasury's 10-year note would rise to only a little over 5 percent. 
Still, he is advising investors to have some money in high-yield junk bonds and even foreign emerging bond markets.
Investors could take advantage of the rise in short-term rates and move some cash into money market funds. 
That is where 43 percent of the FPA New Income fund is.
