
A 1-year-old boy was killed and three of his relatives were critically injured yesterday morning when a fire broke out in an illegal basement apartment in Brooklyn, the authorities said.
Firefighters, who responded to the blaze at 2252 East 15th Street at 7:30 a.m., found the basement of the two-story brick building engulfed in flames. 
The four family members were taken to Coney Island Hospital, where the 1-year old boy, Ivan Liu, was declared dead.
The injured victims were the boy's 2-year-old brother, their mother and an uncle. 
All three surviving relatives were taken to specialized burn centers at hospitals in the city, officials said.
The names of the three survivors were not released, and their conditions could not be determined late yesterday. 
Fire marshals said that the blaze had been accidental, and that no criminal charges would be sought. 
Investigators said the fire was caused by a frayed extension cord in a bedroom at the back of the basement.
Neighbors described the fire victims as a reserved family that had immigrated from China. 
The section of Brooklyn where the fire occurred has become a magnet for Chinese immigrants since the early 1990s, with some living in basement apartments that the authorities say violate city building codes.
Yesterday, the Department of Buildings cited the owner of the two-family building where the fire victims lived for maintaining an illegal basement apartment and blocking a stairway from the basement to the ground floor with a partition. 
The violations could result in fines of up to $17,500, officials said.
The Buildings Department identified the owner in a press release as Ping Li Xiao. 
The department said it believed the owner lived in the ground-floor apartment of the same house. 
No one by that name was listed in phone records at that address, and no one who could be identified as the owner was found during visits to the building yesterday. 
Because of the fire damage, the department ordered the building vacated.
One neighborhood resident, who identified herself only as Mrs. Liu, said she came upon the fire scene as she walked her children to a school bus about 8 a.m. She described a woman lying in the street and emergency workers removing two children on gurneys. 
Other witnesses said the mother and uncle were both unconscious when they were taken out of the home.
Jean Martino, 53, who has lived all her life in a house three doors away from the one that burned, said she had been awakened by smoke. 
''There was a raging fire,'' she said.
Ms. Martino said she did not know the fire victims, but had frequently encountered the two children as she walked her dog.
''They would say 'woof, woof' at the dog,'' she said. 
''They were just so cute.''
