
On Monday a federal prosecutor and a Drug Enforcement Administration chief each said that international law enforcement actions to cut off the flow of steroid powder from China to the United States were ''aiming at the head of the dragon.''
But that is the wrong metaphor, said Anthony Roberts, a New Jersey man who has written three books on steroids and bodybuilding and operates a blog.
''It's not a dragon, it's a hydra,'' Roberts said in a telephone interview yesterday. 
''Once there's a gap in the market, people fill that gap.''
Indeed, federal officials said that one crackdown after another had shown how difficult it was to break up the sprawling market for illegal performance-enhancing drugs.
''We're cutting off many heads,'' Steve Robertson, a special agent and spokesman for the D.E.A., said yesterday.
''Will new heads grow back?
Yeah. That's the nature of the drug business.''
In 2002, the D.E.A. knocked out the biggest supplier of illegal steroids to the United States to date in Operation TKO against Laboratorios Ttokkyo, a Mexican factory marketing steroids and ketamine as veterinary products.
In 2005, Operation Gear Grinder, billed by the D.E.A. as the largest steroid bust in history, led to the prosecution of eight other Mexican factories that supplied an estimated 82 percent of illegal steroids in the United States.
This week the D.E.A. announced a new record for the largest steroid enforcement action: Operation Raw Deal against the more than 124 people and 56 underground laboratories that had been buying steroid powder from China, the source of 99 percent of the chemicals entering the illicit market, according to the D.E.A.
Enforcement officials trumpeted their successes at news conferences in five cities Monday, aimed at warning the youth of America about the physical and criminal dangers of steroid use. 
But they would never say they had won.
''Drug trafficking organizations and the individuals they supply will attempt to adapt to the success of Operation Raw Deal,'' John P. Gilbride, special agent in charge of the New York office of the D.E.A., said in an interview Thursday.
''What we will do is to be diligent in terms of identifying any new trends.''
Two investigators who worked on the global steroid cases, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because their investigation was continuing, described each case as comparable to plugging holes in a dike.
''We figured we would have a big impact if we shut down Mexico,'' one of the investigators said. 
''What we didn't see coming is we created a much larger and more complex problem for the D.E.A. 
We didn't hit the source.''
The Chinese steroid powder suppliers and American underground laboratories became blatant in advertising and selling through password-protected Web sites, anonymous e-mail services and secretive financial transactions. 
Surveillance and federal subpoenas scooped up all those avenues of information, the investigators said.
In February, officials for the D.E.A. and the Food and Drug Administration traveled to Beijing to tell their counterparts about the flood of different steroid powders coming from China. 
They wanted to give the Chinese ample time to fix the problem before the 2008 Olympics, the investigators said. 
Within a week, the Chinese government posted a new list of chemicals that were illegal to export.
That helped dry up the supply to underground laboratories for a while and accelerated the evidence gathering against dealers who thought they could ''wait out the storm,'' the investigators said.
Operation Raw Deal was brought home with an international takedown date in 27 states and 9 foreign countries.
Federal authorities have given the Chinese government their dossiers on 37 companies involved in the steroid trade. 
''Hitting China we hope will have more impact than anything we have done domestically,'' one of the investigators said.
Web sites that advertised steroid powder are still under investigation. 
Robertson said the largest distributors would be targeted.
Federal agents are also trying to identify tens of thousands of buyers through shipping, financial and e-mail records and say they plan to pursue many of them.
''We haven't even scrubbed the surface yet,'' one investigator said. 
''We're essentially dismantling the industry.''
