
With the dollar plummeting against the euro, the pound and the yen, a budget-minded traveler might assume the only option for 2005 is to stay home. 
But there are still places where the dollar holds some clout, including Argentina, Brazil, China (where the exchange rate is soothingly predictable) and areas of Central and Eastern Europe that lie beyond the forbidding euro-zone -- and where Ljubljana, the capital of Slovenia, is already being called ''the new Prague.''
Speaking of which, Shanghai might indeed be ''the new Paris'' -- with ominous Paris-like prices -- but a two-and-a-half hour train ride away is Nanjing, a bustling riverside city that has maintained much of its historical fabric. 
An elaborate Ming tomb complex, a traditional Chinese park and smaller crowds are among the attractions. 
The comfortable Hilton, near a restored section of the city wall, costs about $80 a night.
Pingyao, a Han merchant city in north-central Shanxi province, is a Unesco World Heritage Site, and, with its traditional architecture and crimson lanterns hanging everywhere, one of the few historically intact cities in China. 
A room with private bath in a centrally located two-star hotel will cost about $50, while accommodations in small, clean family-run inns cost as little as $15 a person.
With its many parks and temples, Kunming, in southern Yunnan province, is one of the most pleasant big cities in China. 
Here you will find lodgings ranging from about $15 a person at a two-star hotel to $110 at the five-star Harbour Plaza. 
From Kunming, many travelers make side trips to Lijiang, another World Heritage Site, and the mountainous village homes of ethnic minorities like the Dai and the Naxi (expect to pay $20 to $50 for a room in a homey guesthouse in Lijiang). 
A proposal for a huge dam project near the region's two-mile-deep Tiger Leaping Gorge -- a project that would displace thousands of people -- provides further inspiration for a visit.
For a completely different Chinese travel experience, join the Asian and Russian tourists who flock to Hainan Island in the South China Sea. 
Near Sanya, a city on the southern coast, the beaches are broad and white. 
A five-star hotel costs less than $150 a night, and a three-day package at a comfortable, Western-style hotel called Resort Intime goes for as little as $250, with air fare from Shanghai. 
A recent visitor to the area reports spending $25 for an excellent dinner -- and that was for six people.
For those who refuse to give up on the idea of a European vacation, there are affordable alternatives to high-priced capitals such as Paris and London. 
Situated on the Ljubljanica River, Ljubljana, the small, sophisticated capital of Slovenia does not want to be known as just a bargain-hunter's dream destination. 
(A new crop of sparkling four-star hotels attests to that sentiment.) Nevertheless, there are bargains to be found. 
A cozy double room with private bath at the Park Hotel, (386-1) 4331306, www.hotelpark.si, in the city's center costs about $80, while a visit to the nearby Snovik Thermal Spa,   www.zarja-kovis.si/snovik/terme.htm, costs about $11. 
Visitors will find an architectural style that leans toward the baroque and Art Nouveau, and a varied cuisine, which ranges from hearty Germanic to light Mediterranean fare.
Every year, more and more Europeans are crossing the Adriatic for vacations on the immaculate beaches of Croatia, where they spend roughly 30 percent less than they would on the French Riviera. 
Opatija, the northern coastal city known as the Nice of the Adriatic, includes a lovely waterside promenade and a sprawling park with an extensive collection of exotic trees and plants. 
Expect to pay about $75 at the Hotel Opatija.
Near Porec, another Istrian resort town with cobblestone streets and the Euphrasian Basilica, which houses a collection of Byzantine mosaics, a night at the Hotel Neptun starts at around $90; cheaper lodgings (under $40) are available at several establishments a few miles from town.
Sarajevo has emerged from the Balkan wars as a surprisingly vibrant city. 
There are stark reminders of the devastation that took place: pock-marked walls, bombed-out buildings. 
But there has also been extensive reconstruction, and along with it, new hotels, new restaurants, new nightclubs and a renewed appreciation of Sarajevo's long history as a melting pot of Islamic, Jewish and Christian traditions. 
Small inns cost around $10 a night while full-service hotels, like the Villa Orient, (387-33) 232702, in downtown Sarajevo, can get $100 or more a night. 
Dinner in Bascarsija, Sarajevo's old town, costs as little as $5. 
And a day pass at the nearby ski slopes that were the site of the 1984 Winter Olympic Games costs $10.
Kiev was always considered one of the prettier cities in the Soviet Union, but like many places in former Soviet states, it has struggled against the economic and political tumult following independence in 1991. 
Fueled by one of the fastest-growing economies in the world, Kiev -- with its forested hills, glorious churches and monasteries -- has been transformed. 
The Orange Revolution that followed the disputed presidential election in November could well do more, turning Kiev into the next Prague or Belgrade. 
For now, Kiev's restaurants, cafes and bars remain inexpensive. 
And while some hotels have reached European standards -- and prices -- many more still charge around $100, including the Domus, the Kiev and the Ukraina, which overlooks Independence Square, where hundreds of thousands gathered to protest the November election.
In Latin America, Buenos Aires, the capital of Argentina, is already on the budget traveler's short list, but there is, of course, much more to this country. 
In the southern Patagonian town of El Calafate -- which serves as a base for visits to the ice-blue Glaciar Moreno -- there is a wide range of inexpensive accommodations, from hostels that charge as little as $10 to family-run inns like the Hosteria Kelta, www.kelta.com.ar, where a room costs around $40 a night. 
Even four-star hotels are often in the $100 to $150 range.
In northern Brazil, Belem, a former rubber boom town, resembles New Orleans with streets of pastel-colored Portuguese- and Italian-style houses, many covered in hand-painted tiles. 
The food here is a fascinating mix of indigenous and Portuguese style cuisines. 
A double room at the Belem Hilton, (55-91) 4006-7000, starts at around $90; at the three-star Regente, a double room is $76. 
Recife, Natal and Fortaleza are among the resort cities near the long stretches of spectacular beaches and sand dunes in northeastern Brazil. 
Here, you'll find good restaurants, vibrant nightlife and reasonable hotels. 
The Vila Rica Hotel in Recife, (55-81) 2121 5111, for example, offers a sweeping view of Boa Viagem beach and light, comfortable rooms starting at $53. 
Seven-night packages, with round-trip air fare from Rio de Janeiro or Sao Paulo, cost as little as $400 a person, double.
