
The brewing giant Anheuser-Busch has offered a sharply raised bid of $720 million aimed at countering one by SABMiller in a contest to buy the Harbin Brewery Group of China.
Late Tuesday, Anheuser-Busch offered 72 cents a share for all the shares of Harbin that it does not already own, a third more than the 55 cents a share SABMiller offered last week.
Investors and economists have followed the contest as the first example of international investors fighting for full control of a listed Chinese company.
Harbin Brewery, which is based in the northeast Chinese city of Harbin, is listed on the Hong Kong stock exchange. 
On Monday, Anheuser-Busch, which is based in St. Louis, paid $50 million to raise its ownership of Harbin Brewery to 36 percent from 29 percent.
Under Hong Kong rules, a shareholder who acquires more than 30 percent of a listed company must offer to buy all the other shares in it. 
SABMiller, which is listed on the London exchange, owns 29.4 percent of Harbin.
It is unclear whether SABMiller will retreat from the fight or raise its previous bid. 
A spokeswoman for the company in Hong Kong declined to comment, citing Hong Kong stock exchange rules. 
The Reuters news agency said SABMiller would decide its next move in the coming days, quoting people close to the company.
Outside bankers, however, said SABMiller was not known for doing hostile deals to begin with, and the rival offer, for about 50 times Harbin's earnings, is a very robust price.
''I don't think they are going to get into a spat with Anheuser-Busch,'' said one investment banker who specializes in beverage deals, but is not representing either side on this contest. 
Although the Harbin Brewery would dovetail nicely with SABMiller's existing assets in northeast China, ''they are not going to overpay,'' the banker said.
''We think there is little room for either party to bid up from here,'' said Grace Mak, a Merrill Lynch vice president, in a note to clients on Wednesday. 
She said a more likely outcome was that SABMiller would back off and then step up competition nationwide in China, perhaps through its Xuehua brand.
The steep premium built into Anheuser's bid, especially given China's fragmented, low-profit beer market, does not bother the American brewery. 
Stephen Burrows, chief executive of Anheuser-Busch International, said buying Harbin would give his company a crucial foothold in northeastern China and complement its stake in Tsingtao Brewers, China's biggest and best-known beer maker.
''China is the world's largest and fastest-growing beer market,'' he said in a telephone interview from Hong Kong. 
''It represents a good opportunity to leverage our strengths and capture our fair share of the market.''
Anheuser-Busch hoped to broker stronger formal cooperation between Harbin and Tsingtao, Mr. Burrows said, adding that Tsingtao endorsed the Harbin deal. 
He likened China's beer sector now to that of the United States in the 1940's, when several nationwide brewers emerged to dominate what had been a mostly local market.
''We're taking the long-term view in China,'' he said.
In 2003, Anheuser-Busch signed a deal with Tsingtao that would expand its stake in that company to 27 percent by 2010 from the current 9.9 percent.
In Hong Kong, traders seemed to be betting on a new, higher bid from SABMiller, pushing up the price of Harbin Brewery stock 17 percent.
