
When President Bush arrives for the annual meeting of Asian and Pacific nations this weekend, he will be met by Asian leaders newly fearful that the United States is veering toward protectionism at home and losing sight of its role as leader of global trade.
In this first major economic gathering since the breakdown of global trade talks in Cancun, Mexico, last month, Asian leaders will tell the United States that the developing world has not forgotten its desire to win more concessions to open the American and European markets for its agricultural products and textiles.
Above all, leaders of countries in the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum will be looking for an American vision of world trade that is greater than its current focus on two-way and regional trade agreements.
"First, we will want to hear that the U.S. joins us in wanting to make the Doha round work," said Heng Chee Chan, Singapore's ambassador to the United States, referring to the current global trade talks known as the Doha round. 
"We want a strong statement promising to push the talks forward in December, when we meet again in Geneva," she added.
For his part, Mr. Bush will be carrying a message to the meeting, in Bangkok, that security is at the heart of economic prosperity and that his war on terrorism must be at the forefront of the group's agenda. 
He will hold discussions with a number of countries on their contributions to the war in Iraq and to Afghanistan.
He will also address what he sees as imbalances in the trading world, notably asking China and Japan to let their currencies float freely in the open market.
The potential for misunderstanding is considerable.
In this, the fastest-growing trading region in the world, nearly every nation -- including India, China, Japan, the Southeast Asian countries and Australia -- is opening its borders to more trade with its regional partners, negotiating agreements with each other and throughout the area.
And while they are all too aware of the threats poised by terrorism, they are insistent that expanded markets and trade are essential to chip away at the roots of poverty.
Before leaving Washington, the President and his senior aides set out an agenda for the Asia-Pacific meeting that failed to erase some of these fears. 
To the Asian giants -- Japan and China -- Mr. Bush said this week that he would push them to let the markets determine exchange rates for their currencies, a goal heavily promoted by Republican and Democratic lawmakers who say that tens of thousands of American manufacturing jobs have been lost because of cheap Chinese imports.
His national security adviser, Condoleezza Rice, said that the trade agenda included individual discussions with Thailand, completing an agreement with Australia, regional talks to encourage Southeast Asian nations to further open their markets, and a commitment to continue global trade talks when the president thinks that countries "are ready to be serious about moving forward."
"There's a lot going on in the region," Ms. Rice said at a White House briefing this week. 
"This fits nicely into the president's multitiered approach on trade."
To Charlene Barshefsky, the former United States trade representative who negotiated China's entry into the World Trade Organization for the Clinton administration, this agenda looks suspiciously like an attempt to use China as "an excuse for their own failed economic policies."
"China's currency isn't going to solve our economic problems," she said in an interview, "and telling people to go into their own corners and create their own trading blocs isn't going to help global trade."
Robert B. Zoellick, the current United States trade representative, met with Thai officials on Thursday to prepare for the talks and will travel to China once the Asia-Pacific meeting is over to continue discussions with Chinese officials on several trade issues.
Robert Kapp, the president of the U.S.-China Business Council, said that Mr. Bush should be given credit for attending this meeting, given the security concerns in the region, and that it should come as no surprise that the war on terrorism is at the top of his agenda.
But he also said that Asian leaders would be eager to see whether the United States adopts a unilateralist tone with them, expecting them to follow the American lead on a series of issues.
"If the administration takes the 'my way or the highway' approach, then I suspect the APEC nations won't take it very well," he said.
The winner in that case could be China. 
With its expanding markets and increased foreign investment, China is poised to eclipse the United States in economic influence in the region.
In a report issued by the World Bank, Asia was given high marks for its strong growth and for "increasing integration of the region, evident most strikingly in booming trade with China."
Cambodia, the newest nation to join the World Trade Organization and among its poorest members, is one of the countries that sees expanded trade as essential for its survival.
"We need to catch up very fast, with no time to waste," said Roland Eng, the Cambodian ambassador to the United States. 
"That means we need to build up trade and investment. 
And the trend now is that the market opening up is China."
China and India are members of a new group of developing nations formed at the Cancun talks to win concessions from the United States, Europe and other wealthy nations to reduce their agricultural subsidies and open their markets to farm products from the developing world.
Both these countries have begun negotiations with the Association of Southeast Nations for a regional free trade agreement. 
And in the preliminary negotiations, China has already offered to open its market to some farm products.
Nancy Birdsall, president of the Center for Global Development in Washington, said that the United States would have the opportunity at this weekend's meeting to show that it wants to help the developing world in global trade talks that would open rich markets for agriculture, or it could continue pursuing two-party trade talks with Asian countries.
"The APEC summit," she said, "may consolidate a major shift in American policy away from taking leadership in the world stage of trade toward a new tactic of ticking off countries one by one in bilateral talks. 
The weak nations can only lose in those kind of negotiations."
