
As the Chinese police try to block an underground railroad that funnels North Koreans to northern China, human rights advocates appealed today to President Bush to press Chinese leaders for relief when he visits Asia next week.
Escaping famine and a totalitarian government, about 200,000 North Koreans, about 1 percent of the population, have fled to northern China in recent years. 
There they live clandestine lives, fearing discovery, deportation and disappearance into North Korea's prison camps.
Refugee advocates, gathered here for a conference on human rights in North Korea, say they were heartened when President Bush included North Korea as part of an "axis of evil" with Iran and Iraq. 
They hope Mr. Bush, who is scheduled to arrive here Sunday at the start of a trip to Japan, South Korea and China, will urge concrete measures to help the refugees. 
Among the steps the advocates are promoting are these:
*Orderly transit camps should be set up with international financing in China and Mongolia.
*Residence status should be offered to North Korean refugees, starting in countries with large ethnic Korean populations, like the United States, China, Russia, Japan and Brazil.
"Twenty years ago, the world was confronted with a similar problem with the mass exodus of boat people from Vietnam," Marcus Noland, a Korea specialist for the Institute for International Economists, said in a keynote speech at the meeting, the Third International Conference on North Korean Human Rights and Refugees. 
"The international community underwrote the establishment of temporary resettlement camps in surrounding Asian nations with the promise that these would be way stations to permanent resettlement."
With South Korea a multiparty democracy and China and Russia increasingly open societies, North Korea now sticks out in the region as a Stalinist throwback. 
At the same time, North Korea has taken steps to open up to the world, increasing air links, seeking foreign investment and establishing diplomatic relations over the last two years with Australia, Brazil, Canada and most of the European Union.
Rights groups now feel they have some leverage with a government that depends heavily on food and oil donations from the United States, Japan and South Korea. 
Last fall, a bipartisan group of prominent Americans formed the privately financed Committee for Human Rights in North Korea.
While rights promoters disagreedhere over tactics, many agreed that the opening of protected refugee camps in China and Mongolia could destabilize North Korea. 
"We would try to create a flood, spreading information about the camps through the underground railroad across North Korea," said Norbert Vollertsen, a German doctor who was expelled from North Korea a year ago for trying to show American reporters the underside of the nation.
But China, Russia and South Korea fear that a collapse of the North Korean government would unleash a mass exodus from the North. 
Last month, military officials from the three countries gathered in Seoul for a week of simulated computer scenarios based on a hypothetical flood of 100,000 refugees into the South.
About 200,000 North Koreans are confined in a prison camp system where conditions are so harsh that an estimated 400,000 have died over the last 30 years, said Jack Rendler, a human rights advocate from Minneapolis, who is vice chairman of the new American committee.
Mr. Rendler said North Korea's government had stratified society into 51 different loyalty classifications, with foreign food and medical aid going to the most loyal. 
"The people who are dying are considered less loyal to the regime," said Carl Gershman, president of the National Endowment for Democracy, a pro-democracy group financed by the United States government.
On a recent visit to Japan -- a major food donor to North Korea -- Catherine Bertini, the executive director of the United Nations World Food Program, said her agency had improved monitoring of food deliveries. 
Over the last five years, she said, the World Food Program had won access to about 80 percent of North Korea's 211 counties.
"Today we feed literally one-third of the population of North Korea," Ms. Bertini, an American, said. 
"Tens of thousands of children are alive today, and will be alive because of this rice."
