
President Bush always said he wanted to attend the Olympics in Beijing to celebrate sport and American sportsmanship, and on Saturday, he did so with zeal.
He hit the sand with the American women's beach volleyball team, dropped in on softball practice and took his own ride through the Olympic mountain biking course -- all before attending his first event, the American women's basketball game versus the Czech Republic on Saturday night.
''Mr. President, want to?'' said Misty May-Treanor, half of the dominant American beach volleyball team, turning her backside toward the president for the sport's traditional method of encouragement: a slap.
Bush complied, though with a discreet flick of the back of his hand on her lower back. 
Dressed in a casual blue shirt, khakis and a visor, he was even enticed to try a few volleys himself, quickly working up a sweat in the Beijing swelter (and comporting himself rather well).
The president -- college cheerleader, baseball team owner, sports enthusiast -- is clearly enjoying his immersion in the American Olympic effort.
''I wasn't exactly sure what to say to you, except to start with, God, I love our country and I love what we stand for,'' he told the team during a greeting at the Fencing Hall, where he mugged and posed for pictures for a full hour on Friday. 
(His daughter Barbara scored a picture with LeBron James.) ''And I love being with you.''
The morning after attending the opening ceremony, Bush managed his typical weekend workout on his mountain bike, only this time at the Laoshan Mountain Bike Course. 
It was his second time on the course, having ridden it with the Chinese team during a visit in 2005. 
''Biking was really, really difficult,'' he acknowledged. 
''That's why they call it an Olympic course.''
At a practice of the women's softball team, Bush expressed his support for keeping the sport in the Olympics.
''It's good for the world to have girls playing softball,'' Bush said, his back marked by a chalk handprint, a prank by the center fielder, Laura Berg, ''and these women are going to show girls how to win.''
Bush strolled into the arena for the women's basketball game about midway through the second quarter of the United States' easy victory. 
He briefly wore a navy USA Basketball hat and chatted with USA Basketball's president, Val Ackerman.
On Sunday, he is scheduled to attend men's and women's swimming and the men's basketball game against China, after squeezing in a bit of work: meetings with President Hu Jintao and other Chinese leaders.
NBC GETS HIGH RATINGS NBC can feel satisfied that it carried Friday's opening ceremony on a 12-hour tape delay rather than streaming or broadcasting it live. 
The 21.5 overnight rating was the best on record for a nondomestic Summer Games opener, with the closest being an 18.5 from Sydney in 2000.
Twelve years ago, the ceremony that opened the Atlanta Games produced a 27.2 overnight rating for NBC. 
In other foreign-based Summer Games, NBC's overnights were an 18.0 in Athens in 2004, a 16.5 for Barcelona in 1992 and an 18.3 for Seoul in 1988.
Each overnight rating point currently equals 787,659 television households. 
But overnight ratings, a quick snapshot from urban metered markets, usually go down when the national ratings are calculated. 
So the 21.5 rating from Beijing may fall 2 or 3 points.
NBC also reported that its Web site, NBCOlympics.com, had 70 million page views on Friday, 10 times the figure for Athens's opening ceremony, with 4.2 million unique users, nearly 500 percent above Athens. 
NBC will subsequently announce how long each unique user stayed on the site. 
NBC will subsequently announce how long each unique user stayed on the site.
RICHARD SANDOMIR
