
The United States proposed tough new United Nations sanctions on North Korea on Monday after its reported test of a nuclear device, and President Bush warned the North that he considered its activity a potential threat to American national security.
At an emergency meeting of the United Nations Security Council, the United States pressed for international inspections of all cargo moving into and out of North Korea to detect weapons-related material, and a ban on all trading in military goods and services with the country.
At the White House, President Bush called the North Korean test ''a threat to international peace and security'' and condemned it as a ''provocative act.''
But Russia and China, which have veto power and have consistently opposed tough sanctions, did not signal that they were ready to go along with the American proposal. 
Britain, France and Japan said they were also pressing for strong sanctions, which the Council is expected to debate in the coming days.
Coming just a month before the November elections, North Korea's reported test on Monday morning had immediate political ramifications. 
Democrats were already using their campaigns to argue that the Iraq war had made the United States less secure by diverting attention away from threats like North Korea; now they are using the North's claim to hammer away at their theme.
Mr. Bush also issued a pointed, albeit carefully worded, warning to the North not to export any nuclear technology it might have. 
In the past, North Korea has sold its weapons systems to other countries.
''The transfer of nuclear weapons or material by North Korea to states or nonstate entities would be considered a grave threat to the United States,'' Mr. Bush said. 
''And we would hold North Korea fully accountable of the consequences of such action.''
The president has not used the phrase ''grave threat'' in the past with respect to North Korea, and analysts interpreted the remark as a signal that the White House was, in effect, stating new boundaries for what it would accept from the North, given that diplomacy has not worked.
''He has finally drawn a very clear red line, which is essentially: we know you have nukes, don't even think about proliferating,'' said Mike Chinoy, an expert on Korean security at the Pacific Council on International Policy, a research institution in Los Angeles.
''It's kind of always been the unspoken administration red line,'' Mr. Chinoy said, ''because the reality is that, whatever the harshness of their rhetoric, the Bush administration has not been able to actually stop North Korea from staging this nuclear breakout.''
Democratic Party strategists quickly circulated a ''talking points'' memorandum to Democratic candidates, urging them to cast the reported North Korean nuclear test as ''a colossal foreign policy failure of the Bush administration.''
Several picked up on that theme.
Claire McCaskill, a Democratic candidate for the Senate from Missouri, convened a previously scheduled conference call with Richard Ben-Veniste, a member of the commission that investigated the Sept. 
11 attacks, and used it to raise the issue of North Korea. 
Representative Harold E. Ford Jr., the Democratic Senate candidate in Tennessee, issued a statement to reporters, as did Senator Robert Menendez, the New Jersey Democrat in a tough re-election fight.
''Today's nuclear test by North Korea confirms our worst fears and illustrates just how much the Bush administration's incompetence has endangered our nation,'' Mr. Menendez said in the statement, adding, ''While George Bush bogged our military down to topple a regime that had no weapons of mass destruction, a brutal dictator in North Korea has strengthened a nuclear arsenal that has the potential to threaten the West Coast of the United States.''
Republicans were more muted in their reactions; Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the Republican whip, issued a brief statement calling North Korea's claim a ''confrontational move designed only to destabilize the region.''
White House officials insisted that despite the talk of sanctions at the United Nations, the administration's goal remains persuading North Korea to return to the six-nation talks and give up its nuclear program. 
Those negotiations have dragged on for more than two years with no substantive results, and North Korea left them 13 months ago.
Mr. Bush spent more than an hour on the telephone Monday morning in separate calls to leaders of the four nations, aside from the United States and North Korea, that are participating in those talks: Japan, China, South Korea and Russia.
Asserting Washington's determination to protect Japan and South Korea, its principal allies in the region, Mr. Bush said the United States ''will meet the full range of our deterrent and security commitments.''
He was careful to say that intelligence officials were still working to confirm North Korea's statement about its test. 
But he said that ''such a claim itself constitutes a threat to international peace and security.''
China, North Korea's closest supporter and neighbor, called the action a ''flagrant'' violation of international opinion and said it ''firmly opposes'' North Korea's conduct. 
Russia's president, Vladimir V. Putin, said his country ''absolutely condemns'' the test.
John R. Bolton, the American ambassador to the United Nations, reported that the 15 members of the Security Council were ''solid'' in deploring the North Korean move, and he said he hoped for swift action. 
But by Monday evening the Council adjourned its deliberations and set further meetings for Tuesday while, Mr. Bolton said, they received instructions from their capitals.
Richard A. Grenell, Mr. Bolton's spokesman, said that the United States was merging its suggestions with those from Japan and that a draft resolution was being composed on that basis.
In its 13-point proposal, the United States urged the Security Council to require North Korea to dismantle its nuclear program, suspend its building of ballistic missiles, freeze assets and transactions associated with the development of unconventional weapons, impose a ban on trade in luxury goods and prevent abuse of the international financial system, a reference to North Korean counterfeiting activities.
According to a draft amendment, the Japanese want to place additional restrictions on North Korean ships, aircraft and products, and prevent North Korean officials from being able to move outside the country's borders.
Japan is also suggesting that the secretary general ''actively engage in this matter.''
Earlier Monday, the Security Council formally nominated Ban Ki-moon, the foreign minister of South Korea, as the new secretary general, succeeding Kofi Annan when he retires Dec. 
31. Mr. Ban had said in a Seoul news conference that he intended to make peace on the Korean Peninsula a high priority.
Mr. Bolton said the new resolution ought to be drawn up under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter, which makes sanctions mandatory and militarily enforceable.
It is a procedure that China and Russia, both permanent members, traditionally resist. 
It was eliminated from the resolution passed in July condemning North Korean missile launchings.
While Wang Guangya, the Chinese ambassador, said Beijing condemned the North Korean action, which it had warned North Korea against taking, he turned aside questions on whether China would now support a sanctions resolution.
He said only that the Council should ''react firmly, constructively and prudently,'' adding that ''the door to solve this issue from a diplomatic point of view is still open.''
Vitaly I. Churkin, the Russian ambassador, also declined to state whether Moscow's view on sanctions had changed. 
''I think the North Koreans will be facing a very serious attitude on the part of the Security Council,'' he said, without elaborating.
Moscow and Beijing would be particularly affected by the American call for border inspections of shipments in and out of North Korea because the borders involved are theirs.
