
The Bush administration announced plans Monday to seek a broad agreement with China to limit its clothing exports to the United States.
The announcement was a partial payoff of promises that the administration made last week to House Republicans from Alabama and North Carolina to win approval of the Central American Free Trade Agreement. 
But some trade experts said the announcement was broader than they had expected and could lead to higher prices for socks, shirts, skirts, trousers, swimwear and many other categories of clothing.
Carlos M. Gutierrez, the Secretary of Commerce, announced the plan, saying that the administration would consult with American textile companies about seeking a broader agreement with China on nearly a dozen categories of clothing. 
The administration was already weighing restrictions for many of those products, but it made additional promises last week to two Republicans who abandoned their opposition to the Central American trade pact at the last minute.
The House approved the Central American trade pact by a two-vote margin shortly after midnight Wednesday night.
Representative Robin Hayes, Republican of North Carolina and a staunch opponent of the trade pact, switched his vote after House Republican leaders promised that new safeguard quotas would be approved for products like men's trousers, knit fabrics and brassieres.
Representative Robert B. Aderhol, Republican of Alabama, abandoned his opposition a few hours before the vote when the administration promised to seek new protection against imported socks. 
Mr. Aderholt represents Fort Payne, Ala., which, with nearly 100 local sock mills, has called itself the sock capital of the world.
Chinese exports of socks and many other products have skyrocketed this year, ever since the expiration of global trade quotas for a wide variety of textile products. 
Imports of Chinese socks soared 1,859 percent in the first five months of this year compared with the same period in 2004, according to the Commerce Department. 
Imports of Chinese skirts were up 1,100 percent and imports of sweaters were up about 898 percent.
''Today's decision will allow us time to engage in substantive discussions with our domestic textile and apparel industries and members of Congress on whether there is interest in a broader textile agreement with China,'' Mr. Gutierrez said in a statement on Monday.
But Gary Hufbauer, a senior fellow at the Institute for International Economics, said the administration was in danger of paying too high a price for a victory on the Central American trade pact.
''This is truly a payoff for Cafta, and it is potentially a bigger payoff than I had expected,'' Mr. Hufbauer said, noting that the Bush administration had long made it clear it did not want to create a new version of the textile trade restrictions that had just expired.
''I suspect we are on the edge of creating a new kind of quota system that is pretty comprehensive for China,'' Mr. Hufbauer said. 
''Certainly from the standpoint of someone who favors trade liberalization, which is me, it's a setback.''
But several questions remain. 
The first is how severely Mr. Bush will try to limit the growth in Chinese exports. 
The second is how much Chinese leaders will agree on.
China reached an agreement earlier this summer with the European Union that restricted the growth of many clothing categories to an annual pace of about 10 percent.
But within the United States, there are likely to be sharply differing views between clothing producers and clothing retailers, such as Wal-Mart and Gap.
Erik O. Autor, vice president and international trade counsel for the National Retail Federation, said retailers would not be happy about restrictions but could benefit simply from having less uncertainty about the volumes of imports allowed.
Mr. Autor declined to say whether his association would support restrictions similar to those that China worked out with Europe. 
''We would have to see the entire package,'' he said.
