
President Bush said Friday that he believed the nation's nascent missile defense system would have had a ''reasonable chance'' of shooting down a long-range missile launched by North Korea had it come close to the United States, and he said he was determined to use the United Nations to set ''some red lines'' for future behavior by the North Koreans.
Mr. Bush said the launching of a prototype long-range missile that tumbled into the Sea of Japan showed why missile defenses were needed, but he acknowledged that the abilities of the unproven missile defense system based in Alaska and California were ''modest,'' and he said it was ''hard for me to give you a probability of success.''
''I think we had a reasonable chance of shooting it down; at least that's what the military commander has told me,'' he said at a news conference in Chicago.
Although defensive sensors and missiles, while not fully tested, are theoretically available for use in an emergency, Pentagon officials have said there was little reason to think they would have been used this week, as the North Korean test missile was not thought to carry a live warhead.
In an hourlong news conference here that was part of a new White House strategy to bolster Mr. Bush's sagging popularity around the country, the president sounded mildly frustrated that diplomacy to disarm North Korea and halt Iran's nuclear program was so ''slow and cumbersome.''
But he sidestepped questions about conditions under which he might be tempted to use military force, saying he was determined to find diplomatic solutions.
And, in a sharp contrast to the kind of less cautious statements he made about Iraq before the invasion in 2003, which were based on sometimes contradictory intelligence reports, he cast doubt on North Korea's claim that it possesses what it calls a ''nuclear deterrent.''
Mr. Bush challenged a reporter who, in posing a question, asserted that the North Korean leader Kim Jong Il had increased the size of his nuclear arsenal during Mr. Bush's presidency. 
''I don't think we know that,'' the president shot back. 
But, in what may have been a sign of his wariness about intelligence assessments of opaque nations, he pointedly declined to say what assessment he believed was correct.
''Maybe you know but you're not telling,'' one reporter said. 
Mr. Bush said, ''That's an option,'' and then, to laughter, added, ''Or maybe I don't know and don't want to tell you I don't know.''
A new national intelligence estimate of North Korea's capabilities was completed earlier this year, but the administration has declined to publish a declassified version of it. 
According to officials who are familiar with its contents, it concludes that North Korea probably produced enough fuel for six or more nuclear weapons, from a supply of 8,000 spent reactor fuel rods that the country boasts it reprocessed after throwing inspectors from the International Atomic Energy Agency out of the country three years ago.
''What we don't know is whether they turned those into weapons,'' said one senior intelligence official in a recent interview who asked not to be named because he was discussing intelligence issues. 
''You can assume it, but it is just an assumption.''
Mr. Bush's discussion of ''red lines'' -- a term drawn from the cold war limits over steps the United States and Soviet Union agreed not to take for fear they could spiral into outright war -- was important because until now his aides have said such limits do not work in North Korea's case. 
Three years ago, one of Mr. Bush's senior aides said it would be useless to tell North Korea that turning its spent fuel into plutonium was a ''red line'' because the United States had no effective way to enforce the threat. 
The North Koreans went ahead anyway, lines or no lines.
It was the ambitious North Korean program to extend the reach of its missiles -- along with its work on producing nuclear warheads -- that many proponents of the missile defense plan cited to justify the Pentagon's huge expenditures on the new defensive system, which is costing about $9 billion a year and is still in the early stages of a long and complex development process.
After deciding to field a first batch of interceptors without fully testing them, in what commanders have called a ''thin line'' of defense against a small-scale attack, the Pentagon interrupted its testing for more than a year after a series of failures. 
The testing of missiles and radars has now resumed, with an important set of test shots expected to begin as early as this summer. 
If they succeed, officials have told Congress, there will be better ground for confidence that the system would be able to intercept a missile launched from North Korea or from Iran.
As things stand now, though, there is considerable uncertainty over both sides of the technology race: How long it will take North Korea to produce a missile capable of posing a serious risk to the United States, and how long it will take to build a reliable defensive system?
Though North Korea and the struggle over responding to the missile tests dominated the news conference, Mr. Bush denied that the United States was trimming back on its search for Osama bin Laden by disbanding a unit within the Central Intelligence Agency that focused on that hunt.
''We got a lot of assets looking for Osama bin Laden,'' Mr. Bush said. 
''So whatever you want to read in that story, it's just not true, period.''
He added later: ''In my judgment, it's just a matter of time, unless we stop looking. 
And we're not going to stop looking so long as I'm the president, not only for Osama bin Laden, but anybody else who plots and plans attacks against the United States of America.''
He repeated his conviction that the United States would prevail in Iraq, but also seemed intent on dampening speculation about significant reductions of forces in coming months. 
''An artificial timetable of withdrawal and early withdrawal before this finishes sends the message to the enemy: 'We were right about America,' '' Mr. Bush said, repeating his argument that Al Qaeda seeks to turn Iraq into a haven for training.
But when the subject turned back to North Korea, Mr. Bush by turns argued that Mr. Kim was untrustworthy -- he cited the country's violation of a 1994 accord with the Clinton administration -- and that the only path was to negotiate with him. 
But he rejected conducting one-on-one negotiations, insisting that he needed China and other neighbors at the table so that Mr. Kim did not make the United States to appear the blockade to an agreement.
''One thing I'm not going to let us do is get caught in the trap of sitting at the table alone with the North Koreans,'' Mr. Bush insisted, rejecting the criticism by Democrats who say such talks would be the only way to break the logjam.
''If you want to solve a problem diplomatically, you need partners to do so,'' Mr. Bush said, adding later that his worry about ''handling this issue bilaterally is that you run out of options very quickly.''
But in citing anew the need to team up with China and South Korea, Mr. Bush was skipping past the warnings of members of his own administration that neither country would agree to sanctions. 
Both are worried about a North Korean collapse, and both have continued supplying North Korea with food, energy and investment -- even while Japan and the United States try to turn off the spigot.
Mr. Bush has been careful never to criticize either country publicly. 
But he seemed to do so obliquely when he said, with some frustration in his voice: ''The problem with diplomacy, it takes a while to get something done. 
If you're acting alone, you can move quickly. 
When you're rallying world opinion and trying to, you know, come up with the right language at the United Nations to send a clear signal, it takes a while.''
