
President Bush suggested yesterday that a letter from Iran's president to him failed to address the most important issue in the international community: when Iran would ''get rid of'' its nuclear program.
In an interview with seven Florida newspapers, Mr. Bush made his first public comments on President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad's letter, which was 18 pages in its translated version and dwelt on topics including religion, economics and politics.
While the letter is believed to be the first direct communication from an Iranian president to an American president since ties between the countries were severed in 1979, Bush administration officials have said it is not a serious diplomatic overture.
''It looks like it did not answer the main question that the world is asking, and that is, 'When will you get rid of your nuclear program?'
'' Mr. Bush said, according to an article written from the interview and posted on The St. Petersburg Times Web site.
Iran says that its nuclear program is only for electricity generation and that it will continue with its uranium enrichment program, while the United States and its allies believe it is a cover for developing a nuclear weapons capacity.
Mr. Bush said his administration was trying to find a diplomatic solution to the Iran standoff. 
He said Britain, France, Germany, the United States, Russia and China had agreed that the Iranians should not have a weapon or the capacity to make one.
''There is a universal agreement toward that goal, and the letter didn't address that question,'' he said. 
''Diplomacy takes a while when you are dealing with different nations like those that sat around the table with Condi Rice the other night.''
Mr. Bush was referring to a meeting between Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice and the other envoys of the United Nations Security Council countries, as well as Germany, this week in New York to forge a common position on Iran. 
It came in response to a report last month by the United Nations nuclear monitoring agency, the International Atomic Energy Agency, that declared that Iran had failed to meet a deadline to halt the program.
Ms. Rice said yesterday that there were ''tactical differences'' over what to do about Iran's nuclear activities and that negotiators would take several weeks to fashion an offer that would allow the Iranians to have a civil nuclear program.
''We agreed that we will continue to seek a Security Council resolution, but that we would wait for a couple of weeks while the Europeans design an offer to the Iranians that would make clear that they have a choice that would allow them to have a civil nuclear program -- if that is indeed what they want,'' Ms. Rice said in an interview on ABC's ''Good Morning America'' after the talks.
American officials say the discussions in New York failed to break an impasse over their drive with the British and French for a United Nations Security Council resolution that would make it mandatory for Iran to suspend its uranium enrichment activities, stop construction of a heavy-water nuclear reactor and resume talks with the West. 
Russia and China oppose such a resolution as too threatening and say it could provoke Iran to abandon all cooperation with international nuclear inspections.
Yesterday, Mr. Ahmadinejad reiterated that Iran would reject any Security Council decision that restricted the country's nuclear activities, which he said his country, like others, had the right to pursue.
''The Iranian nation has decided,'' he said at a news briefing in Indonesia that was carried by the Iranian news agency IRNA. 
''It will defend and never renounce its rights.''
Mr. Ahmadinejad also cast the tensions over Iran's nuclear program as an unfair struggle against technological advancement in Muslim countries.
''Iranians are strong enough to defend their rights,'' he said. 
''But it should also be stressed here that resistance of the Iranian nation will not only be for Iran but for all independent-minded states including Indonesia, Malaysia, Turkey, Egypt and other Muslim countries.''
