
President Bush said today that evidence of China's aid to Iraq in building radar systems to use against American and British warplanes had "risen to the level where we are going to send a message to the Chinese," a statement that put Mr. Bush at odds with Beijing only four weeks into his presidency.
Mr. Bush made the comments during his first solo news conference at the White House, called somewhat hastily today so Mr. Bush could sum up his first month in office before an address to Congress next week.
While he repeated his call for tax cuts and his education program, he also used the moment to declare that last Friday's bombing of the radar sites -- which the Pentagon said was timed to avoid killing Chinese workers there -- was intended to send a "clear signal" to Saddam Hussein and to reduce the capacity of Iraqi radar. 
Excerpts, Page A10.
"I believe we succeeded in both those missions," Mr. Bush said, although new indications from the Pentagon suggest that the bombing was not as effective as American officials had initially stated.
While Mr. Bush's harshest words were reserved for Iraq, he struck a tough tone with China saying, "It's troubling that they'd be involved in helping Iraq develop a system that will endanger our pilots."
Two hours later, Mr. Bush's national security adviser, Condoleezza Rice, softened the president's statement a bit. 
She said the White House and Secretary of State Colin L. Powell had sent inquiries to Beijing through the new Chinese ambassador here, Yang Jiechi. 
"I want to make clear that we are not accusing, at this point, the Chinese of anything," she said. 
"But we are telling them that we have tremendous concerns about what's going on."
Ms. Rice said that China had not yet responded to the inquiries. 
But in Beijing a Foreign Ministry spokesman, Zhu Bangzao, said, "China, as a permanent member of the U.N. Security Council, has always strictly and seriously implemented all the resolutions of the Security Council concerning Iraq."
American military and intelligence officials say that Chinese workers are helping Iraq build a fiber optic communications network that links the radar stations and other targets attacked by American and British warplanes last Friday.
The Chinese actions could violate United Nations sanctions imposed on Iraq after its invasion of Kuwait in 1990, administration officials said.
The confrontation with Beijing puts a chill on Mr. Bush's first high-level exchanges with the Chinese leadership. 
Only a week ago he exchanged polite introductory letters with President Jiang Zemin in which both leaders described in the most general terms their goals for their relationship.
The Chinese know the Bush family well: Mr. Bush's father was the American representative in Beijing before the two countries opened diplomatic relations, and Mr. Bush spent six weeks there in the 1970's, his longest stay abroad.
Now Mr. Bush's stance suggests that the United States and China may be headed to tougher exchanges, after the Clinton administration had finally succeeded in repairing most of the diplomatic damage done by the accidental American bombing of the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade during NATO's air war against Serbia in 1999.
In its first weeks, the new administration has signaled that it will sponsor a resolution condemning China's human rights violations at an annual conference in Geneva. 
And it has promised to go ahead with a national missile defense plan despite China's vehement opposition and its promises to build up its own nuclear forces to defeat the system.
In his appearance today, Mr. Bush seemed by turns relaxed and somewhat uneasy, especially when the subject turned to problems in foreign policy. 
He also used the event to argue anew for his tax cut proposal, which will be the subject of an address to Congress on Tuesday.
While Mr. Bush claimed that the raids on Friday against Iraqi air defenses served as a warning on Mr. Hussein, Iraqi forces appear undaunted. 
They continued to fire at American and British jets patrolling the no-flight zones over southern and northern Iraq, including those that flew today.
In fact, an American fighter jet attacked a missile defense battery today near Mosul, in northern Iraq. 
The strike was carried out against a French-made mobile antiaircraft battery purchased before the gulf war. 
It was not specifically authorized by President Bush but was carried out under standing orders that the pilots can defend themselves when they feel threatened by Iraqi forces in the no-flight zones.
Pentagon officials have said last week's attacks -- against 20 to 24 radar sites and five to seven command or communication centers at five sites ---- disrupted Iraq's air defenses, but they acknowledge that the damage was moderate.
The mixed success was attributed to problems with the Joint Standoff Weapon, or J-SOW. 
Navy F/A-18's fired more than two dozen of the relatively new J-SOW's at radar stations but "the vast majority" missed their precise targets, a military official said.
That was in sharp contrast to the early reports from Lt. Gen. Gregory S. Newbold, director of operations for the Joint Chiefs of Staff, who said on Friday after the raid, "We have no indications that there were any of the strikes that might have gone amiss."
Pentagon officials said the strikes had weakened Iraq's air defenses, and a spokesman said today that only two of the radars attacked had resumed tracking allied patrols.
He said the Pentagon had still not completed an assessment of the damage, but other officials said the raids had severely damaged five command or communications sites. 
In the case of the radar sites, which included some mobile systems, the success was less clear. 
One official said only that more than half showed damage visible from aerial or satellite photographs.
General Powell leaves for the Middle East on Friday, and the president said today that piecing together a consensus on how to rebuild a coalition to isolate Iraq is high on the agenda.
"The secretary of state is going to go listen to our allies as to how best to effect a policy, the primary goal of which will be to say to Saddam Hussein, 'We won't tolerate you developing weapons of mass destruction and we expect you to leave your neighbors alone.'
"
But he conceded, as he did in an interview last month, that "the sanction regime is like Swiss cheese."
