
For advice on the best remedy for minor ailments, people often turn to experts outside the medical establishment -- to a bartender, say, for a hangover cure, or to a hypochondriac for the pros and cons of various cold or flu medications.
So it is not surprising that for tips on combatting two of the most maddening afflictions of business travel, insomnia and jet lag, business travelers turn to other business travelers.
Or that for treating those infirmities, they sometimes visit drugstores abroad to buy tonics that are cheaper, more exotic or just plain more available than they are back home.
Matt Brodlie, a senior vice president for acquisitions with Miramax Films in Los Angeles, relies on both the guidance of fellow fliers and the shelves of foreign pharmacies for stocking his medicine cabinet. 
To help him fall asleep on frequent flights to Europe and Asia, he takes a -- well, an under-the-counter pill recommended by a colleague in Sydney. 
"It's this purple pill that I've only found in this one drugstore in the Sydney airport," Mr. Brodlie said. 
"You have to ask for it and they take it from under the counter."
Despite that somewhat illicit-sounding origin, it turns out the purple pill, marketed as Dozile in Australia, contains the antihistamine doxylamine succinate, the same active ingredient found in Unisom SleepTabs in the United States.
"Really?"
Mr. Brodlie said by phone from South Africa, where he was on vacation. 
"Because I just found it here, too."
Among the other concoctions he has collected on the road: a caffeine and vitamin C pill from South Africa "that gives a pick-up when you need it," a Chinese watermelon rind mist from Australia "for a sore throat" and antibiotics from China "where you don't need prescriptions for most drugs."
"I get bronchitis all the time," Mr. Brodlie said, "But if I'm in the middle of Sundance or Cannes, I don't really have time or know a doctor in the area, so it's great to have a course of antibiotics to take."
For a pilot for a commercial airline, who insisted on anonymity because the Federal Aviation Administration regulates what medications pilots take, it is not a matter of knowing the right doctors, it's a matter of avoiding them.
The pilot occasionally takes Ambien, a prescription sleeping pill, to adjust to a new time zone. 
Although the F.A.A. does not ban the use of Ambien by pilots, there are rules about how soon they can take it before flying, so rather than get a prescription from an F.A.A. doctor, he skirts the issue by buying it overseas.
"India is the only place I've been where I've seen it, and it's very common there," he said. 
"As far as I know, it's safe, and of course it's much cheaper" than it is in the United States. 
He said he did not fly to India much anymore, so he asks acquaintances who do travel there to buy Ambien for him.
Among those who fly overseas, he said, "There's always sort of a rumor mill about what works best; I'd say right now that Ambien is sort of the drug of choice."
It is certainly one of the most commonly used prescription sleeping pills, according to Dr. James Walsh, executive director and senior scientist at the Sleep Medicine and Research Center in St. Louis and president of the National Sleep Foundation. 
One reason, he says, is that it is shorter acting than most over-the-counter sleep aids.
Typically, he says, Ambien stays in the system for six to eight hours, depending on weight and the potency of the pill. 
(A newer medication, Sonata, moves out of the system even faster, in five hours or less, he says.)
In contrast, over-the-counter remedies like Tylenol PM, Sominex and Benadryl contain diphenhydramine hydrochloride, which is longer acting, according to Dr. Walsh, a psychologist who has done research on Ambien. 
"If you use a longer-acting drug, carry-over sedation is a problem," he said. 
In other words, you risk showing up bleary-eyed at that all-important meeting at 8 o'clock on your first morning in Paris.
That is why Jonathan King, a producer with Laurence Mark Productions in Los Angeles, says he generally avoids over-the-counter sleep aids when traveling. 
"They make you really dehydrated and groggy the next day," he said.
He has tried Ambien and a sleeping pill a friend brought back from France. 
He conceded he showed a certain insouciance about popping that one. 
"They're rectangles and you can break them into little squares," he said. 
"I don't know anything about what is actually in it."
More often, Mr. King tries a more natural method to fight jet lag when he flies from Los Angeles to New York or London: "A week in advance, I start going to bed earlier and getting up earlier. 
I start shifting my clock gradually. 
People think it's strange."
Not Diana Fairechild, a former flight attendant who now speaks and writes about air travel health and safety and is rather emphatic about her preference for natural methods of dealing with jet lag. 
"I find it's just best not to be medicated," Ms. Fairechild said, noting that when she tried melatonin, a hormone that plays a role in setting the body's sleep cycle, "it dropped my consciousness into a thickness like the air wasn't easy to move through or breathe."
(Although melatonin has become a popular alternative to sleeping pills, it is not regulated by the Food and Drug Administration; there is some debate about its effectiveness as a sleep aid.)
So what does she do on long flights?
Her strategy may raise a few eyebrows, but these days it has the added benefit of helping ward off germs, suddenly a preoccupation of many long-distance air travelers. 
"One thing I've been recommending is that you wear a handkerchief over your nose and mouth on the plane," she said. 
"It creates humidity and it makes it so much easier to sleep on the plane."
Ms. Fairechild said she also wore an eye mask, "And I put masking tape on it that says, 'Do Not Disturb.'
"
On the opposite end of the spectrum are people who have no problem with whatever medication they grab off a drugstore shelf. 
"I'm a very simple man; I always favor over-the-counter sleep aids," said Seth Matlins, who works in the marketing group at Creative Artists Agency in Beverly Hills. 
"Cold medicine, Tylenol PM -- any of that is good with a nice glass of Scotch to wash it down," he said, though he did add, "You have to have enough time to get through it."
The wide range of remedies that travelers experiment with illustrates a point that Dr. Walsh likes to make: There is no one solution that works best for everybody. 
"One thing that people need to understand is that the strategy to deal with jet lag depends on a number of factors," he said, like how long the flight is, how many time zones are crossed, weight and how someone reacts to a particular medication.
In some cases, he said, "the most important thing to do is avoid sleep deprivation before you go."
And, he advised, "It's best to take a sleeping pill in your home environment for the first time."
