
WELCOME to tropical Singapore, where the temperature is the hottest topic in town. 
Not the air temperature, but your temperature.
The first sight that greets many visitors arriving in this city-state nowadays is a phalanx of nurses and army medics in yellow gowns, gloves and masks on the airport jetway. 
Since last week, passengers arriving from areas affected by the atypical pneumonia known as severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS, have been obliged to walk single file past the nurses, who inquire about their health and look for any telltale signs of fever, cough or malaise.
As SARS spreads from southern China and Hong Kong to the rest of the world in the bodies of infected travelers, fear and stigma travel with it. 
In Singapore, where as of Friday 140 people had been found to be infected and 9 had died of SARS, a collective anxiety reminiscent of the advent of AIDS has filled the city. 
Every sneeze arouses suspicion; every cough raises alarm.
Most sizable businesses here have already called off all nonessential travel by employees to or from affected areas, and leisure travelers have become scarce as well, devastating the travel industry. 
For the intrepid few who still brave the airports of southeastern Asia, air travel involves not only the risk of infection but also the risk of being ostracized by co-workers or, worse, being identified by immigration authorities as a potential SARS carrier.
"Of course, I said no," said Sharon Chan, a flight attendant arriving from Hong Kong, about her grilling by airport nurses about whether she felt ill. 
"If I said yes, I'd still be in there."
She had not worked on the half-empty flight; she caught the flight just to get out of town. 
"Singapore isn't safe, but Hong Kong is worse," she said, pulling down her surgical mask for emphasis.
Anyone who admits to feeling unwell or who seems ill gets a more thorough exam from the airport nurses and is whisked off by ambulance if SARS is suspected. 
As of Friday evening, two travelers, both Singaporeans returning from China, had been sent to the hospital as suspected SARS cases. 
On Friday, as an added precaution, the nurses started taking the temperature of each passenger arriving from Guangdong Province in China or Hong Kong.
Singapore's aggressive approach may not be welcomed by travelers, but it has been applauded by the World Health Organization as a reason SARS has not spread as fast here as it has in Hong Kong and China.
And Singapore's shrouded nurses may be a glimpse of what is in store elsewhere as the disease spreads. 
Thailand has also deployed nurses to inspect passengers arriving in Bangkok, and it has ordered that anyone from SARS-affected areas wear a surgical mask for two weeks after arriving. 
Malaysia went even further on Wednesday, announcing an indefinite ban to keep people from China or Hong Kong from entering the country and requiring visitors from other affected countries to produce medical certificates saying they are free of the disease.
Such restrictions are as chilling for travel as the threat of actual infection, travel agents say. 
Bookings from Singapore to Thailand are plummeting, said Samantha Wong, an agent at Misa Travel, as she took yet another cancellation over the phone for a reservation to China.
Singapore Airlines has cut capacity by 15 percent, stopping flights not only to affected areas like Hong Kong, Guangzhou in Guangdong Province and Hanoi, Vietnam, but also to big tourist markets like Japan, Australia, the United States and Thailand.
The fear of SARS has eclipsed concern over the war in Iraq and the potential for attacks by militants in the region. 
"SARS is more dangerous than terrorism," said Chona Balasta, who flew home to Singapore with her two youngest children from her native Manila on Tuesday.
Mrs. Balasta said she had needed to visit Manila, SARS or no SARS, to attend her eldest daughter's high school graduation.
Some business travelers also say their trips are too important to skip. 
"Business is essential as far as our company is concerned," Pek Chong Guat said as he waited to board a flight to southern India on Tuesday to market a Singapore weapons maker's products.
Those who must fly will not necessarily fly on just any airline, or on just any flight. 
Anthony D. Salzman, who returned home to Singapore last week from Vietnam, where he runs his business, changed his reservation from Vietnam Airlines to Singapore Airlines because he thought that the plane would be cleaner.
When Tehmasp Parekh flew home to Australia after a business trip to Singapore on Friday, he tried to be strategic, booking a seat on a British Airways flight from London that was stopping over in Singapore rather than a point-to-point flight. 
"I specifically took that with the assumption that there'd be less passengers boarding the aircraft from Singapore," he said.
Even so, his employer told him to take an increasingly common precaution: work at home in isolation for 10 days after his trip.
AS they sit breathing recycled air on a jetliner, some passengers say they have doubts whether the plane's air filters will weed out viruses. 
As more of them take extra precautions by wearing their own masks, some flights are coming to resemble surgical suites.
Some travelers are turning to masks as a badge of respiratory conscientiousness, a sort of diplomatic passport for a new biological checkpoint. 
"I wanted to make it look like I was making an effort not to get infected or to pass it on," said Luke Sargent, a British designer, as he came off a plane from Hong Kong wearing a mask. 
"We've been hearing all these horror stories of people being quarantined."
Not everyone is sure that the nurses at the airport will look at it that way. 
"I bought myself a mask and slipped it on as I got off the airplane, figuring it would make me look like a health-conscious traveler," Mr. Salzman said. 
"But then I looked around and realized I was the only one wearing a mask, and that it might create the wrong impression, so I pocketed it."
Masked or unmasked, people who travel in Asia now may come home to a a cold shoulder, even if they have stayed away from SARS-affected areas. 
When To Chee Eng, a Singapore telecommunications analyst, went to work after a trip to Bangkok last week, his office was empty. 
"Some of my colleagues have disappeared," he said. 
"They don't want to sit next to me."
