
China's Foreign Ministry called in a senior American diplomat in Beijing on Wednesday to denounce a Pentagon report on China's military strength. 
The United States report, released Tuesday, was ''groundless'' and based on ''reckless accusations,'' the vice foreign minister, Yang Jiechi, told David Sedney, the deputy chief of mission at the United States Embassy in Beijing.
''This report ignores the facts and tries its utmost to spread the notion of a China threat,'' the state-run New China News Agency quoted Mr. Yang as saying. 
''It's a crude meddling in Chinese internal affairs, and it tries to sow discord between China and other countries.''
Mr. Sedney was representing the ambassador, Clark T. Randt Jr., who was away from Beijing on official business, a spokeswoman at the American Embassy said.
The annual Department of Defense report on China's military muscle said the nation's real military spending may be two to three times higher than the officially reported figure, which China said was $26 billion last year.
The report ''clearly points up the reason that the president and the United States government have been urging the E.U. to not lift the arms embargo on the People's Republic of China,'' Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld told reporters in Washington on Tuesday.
The Pentagon report also said that China's growing military reach might threaten the regional military balance and that China's military modernization was ''focused on preventing Taiwan independence or trying to compel Taiwan to negotiate a settlement on Beijing's terms.''
China does not yet have the ability to occupy Taiwan, the self-governing island of 23 million that Beijing says must accept full Chinese sovereignty or face possible war, the report said.
The United States' military budget is 17.8 times the size of China's, said Mr. Yang, who previously served as China's ambassador in Washington. 
He contended that the American report exaggerated China's military strength ''in order to find an excuse to sell advanced weapons to Taiwan.''
But he added that China has the right to ''renew some armaments'' in order to protect itself. 
''China expresses its deep dissatisfaction and determined opposition,'' he said of the Pentagon's findings.
A commentary issued by the New China News Agency said the report showed that American officials had turned to China as their next enemy after occupying Afghanistan and Iraq. 
''This must make us wary of certain people in the Pentagon,'' it said.
