
BLAME the foreigners. 
That is a time-tested political tactic in America, and this year is no exception.
With the job outlook uncertain, protectionist winds are blowing. 
President Bush this week blasted European subsidies for Airbus, which has replaced Boeing as No.1 in commercial jets. 
Senator John Kerry has focused more of his fire on ''Benedict Arnold C.E.O.'s,'' executives who send American jobs overseas.
Those campaign positions both reflect and obscure a reality that neither candidate shows much sign of addressing seriously, the large American trade deficit.
In going after Europe, Mr. Bush may be on to something. 
The United States' trade position with Europe has deteriorated almost as much as its position with China since President Bush's father was in the White House. 
But no one claims cheap labor is Europe's secret.
In 1992, the United States had a trade surplus of almost $9 billion with the 15 countries that formed the European Union until it expanded earlier this year, and a deficit of $18.3 billion with China. 
The latest figures, for the 12 months through June, show a deficit of $99.8 billion with the European 15 and $138.7 billion with China.
Between them, the deteriorating trade positions with China and the European 15 account for 46 percent of the overall deterioration in the trade balance since 1992.
The differences are that Europe tends to supply higher-quality things -- machine tools and Mercedes-Benz autos, for example -- and that it has not been piling up huge amounts of Treasury securities. 
The numbers this week show China has $164.8 billion in Treasuries, second only to Japan's $689.3 billion.
In the second quarter, the American trade deficit exceeded 5 percent of gross domestic product, a record amount. 
That would sound alarm bells in other countries, but the United States sails along, buying whatever it wants and paying with newly printed dollars.
Some argue the trade deficit is a sign of strength. 
It must be made up by foreigners buying dollar-denominated assets, and those purchases supposedly show how foreigners crave American investments.
But during the first half of this year, foreigners put $270.5 billion in Treasuries, twice what they put in higher-yielding but riskier corporate bonds. 
They sold American shares. 
So much for wildly attractive investments.
Many of those Treasury purchases are less than voluntary. 
Central banks in China and Japan buy Treasuries not because the rates look good but as a way of supporting the dollar to maintain American demand for their exports.
Now the Federal Reserve is starting to worry about the trade deficit. 
It was the subject of a long discussion at the June meeting of the Open Market Committee, including a number of research papers that have so far not been made public. 
According to the minutes, ''The staff noted that outsized external deficits could not be sustained indefinitely,'' but it did not forecast when the end would come.
Steve Roach, the chief economist of Morgan Stanley, suggests the end will be no fun. 
When it happens, he says, the first casualty will be the value of the dollar. 
Then foreigners owning all those Treasuries will demand to be compensated for the currency risk, causing real interest rates to rise. 
That will lead to strains for highly leveraged consumers and to a cutback in consumption, which will in turn help bring down the trade deficit.
Just how to bring that about with as little pain as possible might be a reasonable subject of discussion for the presidential campaign. 
But it will not be. 
Neither party wants to focus on such unhappy prospects.
Instead, there is a risk they will look for scapegoats, whether in successful foreign companies or in American ones that invest abroad rather than at home.
