
IF you're looking for cafes serving bubble tea or herbalists offering dried lotus blossoms or purveyors of waving-cat trinkets, downtown Flushing, the city's second-biggest Chinatown and the largest urban center in Queens, has them in large quantity. 
But in the next few years, the area may also welcome a host of more mainstream retailers.
Almost 1.3 million square feet of retail space is planned in at least three major mixed-use developments -- about the same area as at the renowned Mall at Short Hills in New Jersey -- and a few hundred thousand feet of office space is also being developed. 
The first new stores are to open by the end of this year.
Flushing is already a pan-Asian enclave that is a first stop for many immigrants from China, Korea and Malaysia, among other countries.
Developers are hoping it will soon be a stop for American shoppers. 
''You have to make this area a destination,'' said Michael Meyer, president of TDC Development L.L.C., which is involved in two of the mixed-use projects.
Mr. Meyer is relatively new to the community. 
But the chairman and chief executive of TDC, Michael Lee, an immigrant from Taiwan, arrived in Flushing two decades ago and has purchased a substantial portion of the area's properties. 
TDC is a subsidiary of the F&T Group, a real estate company.
Mr. Lee owns the Flushing Mall, a longstanding collection of boutique shops and restaurants on 39th Avenue, where signs are in Chinese and Korean. 
He also developed the nearby Prince Center in 2003; it is a complex of ground-floor retail space, now full of restaurants, and office condominiums that netted about $500 a square foot.
Office condos are fairly unusual for New York City, but the market is receptive in Flushing. 
''What drives a lot of this is the whole ethnic tradition and culture; the Chinese mentality is very much an ownership mentality,'' Mr. Meyer said.
Mr. Lee is building another office condominium project: Queens Crossing, a 12-story building being framed at the corner of Main Street, Flushing's main shopping artery, and 39th Avenue. 
It will have 190,000 square feet of office space in about 80 office condominiums, and 86,000 square feet of parking.
The building has a waiting list of more than 200 businesses, Mr. Meyer claimed. 
''Queens Crossing sales, on a net square footage basis, are now estimated at $750,'' he said.
The development will also have about 110,000 square feet of retail space, which has not yet been leased. 
It will open by the end of this year. 
''We're looking for mainstream retailers like bookstores and health clubs and restaurants and apparel stores,'' Mr. Meyer said.
But Queens Crossing would be dwarfed by another proposed development a block away called Flushing Commons, which envisions having a total of almost two million square feet. 
Flushing Commons is expected to be completed in about four years on the site of a municipal parking lot that now has space for about 1,100 vehicles.
That development, with 500 residential units and about 350,000 square feet of retail space, will aim to attract more upscale retailers than currently operate in Flushing. 
While the city has given approval to the general concept of this project, it is still going through public hearings.
Thus far, the developers of Flushing Commons -- Mr. Lee and a partner, the Rockefeller Development Corporation -- envision that much of the retail space will be used by a multiscreen cinema, a national-chain bookstore and a supermarket like Whole Foods, along with some smaller stores. 
Roughly 15,000 square feet of space dedicated to office condominiums is being envisioned for professionals like doctors and lawyers.
Flushing Commons will also include a 200-room hotel, where developers would like to see a Westin, Mr. Meyer said.
Alan L. Stein, a senior vice president at Rockefeller, said the developers, which won a bid to develop the city-owned property a year ago, had promised not to introduce any ''big box'' stores into the complex.
Robin Abrams, an executive vice president of the Lansco Corporation, a commercial real estate brokerage firm that consulted on the project, said she envisioned retailers like Scoop, Cole Haan and Sephora setting up shop in the development.
Stores like those ''are all over Manhattan, but don't have a presence in Flushing,'' Ms. Abrams said. 
''Frankly, the thought is there's a huge Asian population that has disposable income that is currently shopping in Manhattan or even in Manhasset'' on Long Island.
Mr. Meyer said that some retailers might be intimidated by the ethnic nature of the market, but that the developers believed they could convince them that they had nothing to fear.
Also, retailers that already have outlets in Asia would be comfortable in downtown Flushing, said Josh Segal, owner of the Segal Realty Group, a commercial real estate firm that also consulted on Flushing Commons. 
''It's like Shanghai on the Flushing River,'' he said.
Already going in alongside the Flushing River is one of the largest mixed-use developments. 
The Muss Development Company is building 1,000 residential units in several towers on a 14-acre site. 
The $800 million project will also include an 800,000-square-foot shopping center anchored by national retailers.
The first phase of the project will not be completed until 2008 at the earliest, said Jim Jarosik, a senior vice president at Muss.
Flushing residents are watching the explosion of commercial development closely. 
Real estate professionals say Home Depot and Target are rumored to be anchor tenants at the Muss project, which is called Flushing Town Center, although the developer would not identify the stores it was negotiating with.
Some Flushing residents say they believe that if retailers of that sort go into the development, there may be traffic backups along Roosevelt Avenue, said Chuck Apelian, vice chairman of Community Board 7, which represents downtown Flushing.
Downtown Flushing, a transportation hub that has 24 bus lines and the terminus of the No. 7 subway, is an area that is used by nearly 100,000 commuters daily, according to the Downtown Flushing Transit Hub Business Improvement District, and has become synonymous with traffic congestion. 
A group called Save Our Flushing Community has formed to protest the Flushing Commons project. 
Others maintain that additional traffic snarls would not hurt business.
Even if retail rents head far north of the $100 a square foot paid at certain locations on Main Street, the owner of Pho Vietnamese on Prince Street, Tai Ma, who has lived and worked in Flushing for 29 years, said he welcomed the new commercial development. 
''The rent here is going high anyway,'' he said. 
''If you want to develop Flushing, you need something big.''
