
A popular Western-run newsletter that has written about Chinese social and economic development for more than a decade was ordered to cease operations by the Chinese police, its British editor said Wednesday.
The newsletter, China Development Brief, has 11 employees in Beijing who monitor a range of news about poverty alleviation, environmental protection, family planning, international aid programs and Chinese civil organizations. 
It was established in 1996 and publishes Chinese and English editions in print and on the Web.
Nick Young, who founded the newsletter and edits its English-language edition, said a dozen officials representing the Beijing police and the local statistical bureau told him last week that the newsletter had conducted ''unauthorized surveys,'' which they deemed a violation of a 1983 law on gathering statistics.
Mr. Young said the authorities provided no specific reason for issuing the order after allowing the publication to operate for more than a decade. 
He said that the newsletter did not conduct polls or surveys and that the order was vague enough to prohibit almost any kind of information gathering that required interaction with local citizens.
The decision to close the operation may reflect China's growing concern about the role of local and foreign-financed civil organizations that have proliferated in recent years. 
Some civic groups have helped people on the lower rungs of Chinese society defend their legal rights, and some Chinese officials contend that the groups have contributed to a surge in social unrest.
China's central government has generally tolerated such groups if they affiliate with a government sponsor and do not engage in overtly political activities. 
Officials say such organizations can provide crucial help in detecting and combating corruption, labor abuses and violations of environmental laws.
But President Hu Jintao has warned that China's security forces must guard against the emergence of a ''color revolution,'' referring to Western-backed social movements that have helped cause political change in Georgia, Ukraine, Kyrgyzstan and Lebanon.
China Development Brief had no license to publish in China, and its employees were not registered as news correspondents, meaning the newsletter had long operated without the permits required of larger publications. 
But Mr. Young said local authorities had monitored his business for years, and he believed they understood that providing objective information to foreign aid agencies served China's interests.
He said the newsletter had frequently defended China against what he called stereotypes perpetrated by the American government and Western reporters who wrote about it.
''I have spent the last decade telling foreigners that China is not as repressive and totalitarian as Western media often portray it to be,'' he said. 
''At the end of the day, I hoped that if we had an open, intelligent conversation, we would be accepted.''
''But I think we miscalculated, or they miscalculated,'' he said.
