
Alibaba.com, China's leading e-commerce company, is planning to go public later this year in what could be the biggest initial public offering ever for a Chinese Internet company, according to people briefed on the deal.
Alibaba.com, which is controlled by the Alibaba Group and partly owned by Yahoo, could raise $1 billion, making the stock offering bigger than those of other high-flying Chinese Internet companies in recent years, including Baidu.com, the Chinese Internet search engine, and Tencent.com, which runs the popular QQ instant messaging service.
Three Wall Street investment banks, Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley and Deutsche Bank, are advising Alibaba on the public offering, which would involve only the Alibaba Group's biggest unit, Alibaba.com, a business-to-business site that helps entrepreneurs, suppliers and businesses from around the world find one another and buy and sell goods.
The offering could hatch another huge public Internet company in China, which already has more than 137 million Internet users, second only to the United States. 
The shares are expected to be offered overseas, most likely in Hong Kong or New York.
Google, Yahoo, eBay, MySpace and other Internet giants are all trying to break into the fast-growing China market. 
But home-grown Internet players like Baidu, NetEase, Alibaba and Alibaba's Taobao auction site have largely dominated their Western rivals.
In 2005, Yahoo paid $1 billion in cash for a 40 percent share of Alibaba and handed its China operations over to the Alibaba Group and its chairman and chief executive, Jack Ma, a former English teacher from Hangzhou, where Alibaba is based. 
At that time, the Alibaba Group was valued at about $4 billion.
Now, people who have been briefed on the public offering say that Alibaba.com alone could be valued at more than $4 billion when it goes public. 
Other divisions of the Alibaba Group, like its online marketplace, Taobao.com, and the Yahoo China operations, will not be included in the stock offering. 
Those units will remain part of the privately controlled Alibaba Group.
A spokesman for Alibaba declined to comment Monday.
Spokesmen for Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley also declined to comment. 
A spokesman for Deutsche Bank could not be reached late Monday.
