
A Pentagon report that voiced concerns about China's buildup of land- and sea-based ballistic missiles ''misleads international opinion'' and tries to spread false fears of a China threat, Chinese state news media said Sunday.
A sharply worded commentary in The People's Daily, the main newspaper of the ruling Communist Party, said the Defense Department's annual report to Congress on China's military capacity had exaggerated the extent and sophistication of China's military modernization.
''The report pays no attention to the actual state of affairs, and in a premeditated fashion exaggerates the so-called Chinese military threat,'' it said.
The Pentagon assessment, released Friday, suggested that new missiles, submarines and aircraft could give China the ability to project power far beyond its shores.
Defense Department officials said last week that they had intended to give the report a balanced tone so that it could form the basis of a dialogue with the Chinese about their military intentions.
But, as it has done before, the Pentagon dismissed China's official defense budget as an inaccurate view of its true spending. 
The report said China's coming deployment of mobile land- and sea-based ballistic missiles with the range to hit the United States had potentially given China ''new options'' in a conflict.
It also cited what it called the unexpectedly speedy development of a new Jin-class submarine equipped to carry missiles with a range of more than 5,000 miles. 
It also says China is preparing to deploy a land-based intercontinental ballistic missile, called the DF-31, with the range to hit parts of the United States.
Jin-class submarines and the DF-31 missile are part of China's nuclear forces, and the Pentagon raised the possibility that with enhanced abilities China may seek to change its policy of maintaining only a minimal nuclear deterrent.
Analysts have said Washington's efforts to develop a comprehensive nuclear missile defense system have prompted China to improve its nuclear missile forces.
China has said repeatedly that its policy of ''no first use'' of nuclear weapons remains unchanged.
The People's Daily commentary did not address directly the specific assessments in the Pentagon report, but it said China's military spending satisfied ''objective self-defense requirements.''
