
A Chinese company is poised to make one of the country's largest foreign purchases, a deal worth approximately $5 billion for Millicom International Cellular, a Luxembourg-based mobile phone company with far-flung operations.
The state-controlled China Mobile Communications, already the owner of the world's largest cellphone company by subscribers, is close to concluding an agreement for Millicom, which put itself on the block in January, two people involved in the negotiations said Wednesday.
A deal may be announced as soon as Thursday, one of them said. 
The second cautioned that it might not be announced until next week. 
Millicom is controlled by Kinnevik Investment of Sweden.
If an agreement were reached, the purchase would mark the latest in a series of telecommunications deals structured to provide well-established companies access to fast growth in new markets.
Millicom has nine million customers in 16 emerging-market countries of Asia, Latin America and Africa. 
The combined population in the countries where it has operations is 390 million, of which only a small percentage have cellphones.
The Standard, a business newspaper based in Hong Kong, reported that China Mobile had closed the deal with Millicom on Wednesday. 
A person involved in the negotiations said last-minute details were still being worked out on Wednesday night.
The negotiations come after China Mobile failed in an attempt to buy a stake in the Pakistan Telecommunication Company, where it was thwarted by Emirates Telecommunications.
Last summer, the China National Offshore Oil Corporation withdrew an $18.5 billion bid for Unocal amid fierce opposition in the United States.
China Mobile already dwarfs its competitors in terms of the number of subscribers, with 416 million in China at the end of April, according to the Information Ministry; analysts estimate that China Mobile has about 65 percent of that market. 
By contrast, the Vodafone Group of Britain has about 150 million subscribers.
Mobile phone operators looking for growth are passing up expensive investments in high-technology gadgetry in favor of expansion into emerging markets, after video phones and third-generation technology proved less attractive to consumers than expected.
Vodafone, for example, increased its stake in the southern African cellular company Vodacom last year, to 50 percent. 
Just 14 percent of Africans use cellphones, compared with 80 percent in Western Europe.
