
In its first admission that its security forces had injured Tibetan protesters, China said that the police had shot four demonstrators in a village in Sichuan Province on Sunday.
Reports by the official Xinhua news agency on Thursday said the police opened fire only in self-defense.
China admitted using deadly force after days of insisting that it had used ''maximum restraint'' in putting down unrest in the capital of Tibet, Lhasa, where it broke out last week, spreading quickly to heavily Tibetan areas in other provinces.
Earlier Chinese news reports spoke only of violence against members of the Han ethnic majority, including 13 ''innocent civilians,'' and nightly news broadcasts have repeatedly shown Han victims recovering in hospitals or crying over their injuries or commercial losses in the rioting.
China has come under increasing international pressure over conditions in Tibet, with a group of Nobel laureates led by Elie Wiesel condemning government violence against protesters and urging Beijing to halt what the group called ''the unwarranted campaign waged by the Chinese government against our fellow Nobel laureate, His Holiness the Dalai Lama,'' Tibet's spiritual leader.
In a conversation with her Chinese counterpart, Yang Jiechi, Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice also urged dialogue with the Dalai Lama, who lives in exile in India. 
Ms. Rice called the Dalai Lama ''an authoritative figure who stands against violence and who also stands for the cultural autonomy of the Tibetan people but has made very clear that he does not stand for independence,'' Reuters reported.
In a briefing with the international news media on Thursday, however, a Chinese foreign ministry spokesman continued to blame what he called the ''Dalai clique'' for the recent Tibetan unrest. 
The spokesman, Qin Gang, repeatedly refused to provide evidence of involvement by the Dalai Lama in the protests, and rejected his recently repeated statements that he does not seek independence. 
''He has said that he is not a separatist,'' Mr. Qin said. 
''But all of his propositions and actions prove that he has never stopped his splitist words and deeds.''
Tibetan rights groups said that dozens of people were killed during the police crackdown in Lhasa, and that others were killed or wounded in Sichuan, Qinghai and Gansu Provinces.
In the first announcement of details of arrests in the wake of the protests in Lhasa, Tibetan authorities said Thursday that 24 people would be charged with ''endangering national security as well as beating, smashing, looting, arson and other grave crimes.''
On Saturday, the government announced a deadline for the surrender of people involved in protests and looting the Tibetan capital, saying that those who turned themselves in within the next day could receive lenient treatment.
By Wednesday, Xinhua said that 150 Tibetans had surrendered. 
On Thursday, a Chinese television news broadcast showed the first images of those who the government said had turned themselves in. 
Most appeared somber as they lined up against a wall.
Since then, Tibetan TV has repeatedly shown images of suspects said to be wanted by the police.
On Thursday, the last foreign journalists were expelled from Tibet, Reporters Without Borders said. 
Chinese security forces blocked foreign press access to many Tibetan areas in other provinces, making it impossible to independently confirm casualties or security conditions. 
In recent days, foreign journalists have reported seeing large truck convoys of Chinese troops heading for deployment in Tibetan areas.
The press freedom advocacy group said China's official Internet Surveillance Bureau had also warned Tibetans against sharing news about the disturbances.
''We inform Internet users that it is forbidden to post news about Tibetan events,'' the notice read. 
''From today, the Internet Surveillance Bureau will carry out filtering and censorship.''
The bulletin, obtained by Reporters Without Borders, also warned that ''anyone infringing this ban will have their I.P. address sent to the police who will take the necessary steps.''
