
Less than two years after many of the world's cargo ships lay idle and were worth no more than the scrap value of their steel, shipping lines around the world are enjoying one of their most profitable booms ever, and they have the rapid expansion of the Chinese economy to thank for it.
China has become a ship line executive's dream. 
It is importing huge and growing quantities of oil, iron ore, coal and other bulky raw materials from the Persian Gulf, Australia, Brazil and Canada, and exporting rising quantities of furniture, consumer electronics, toys and other finished goods to American and European markets.
Shipowners and operators essentially measure their living by the tons of cargo they haul multiplied by the miles they carry it. 
By providing big cargoes that have to travel long distances, China offers a bonanza of ton-miles, as this measure is known, keeping ships so busy around the world that for some kinds of vessels on some routes, daily charter rates have tripled in the last year.
"Now is one of the best times ever seen" in the shipping industry, said K. H. Koo, chairman of the TCC Group, a big Hong Kong shipping company. 
"China is the main thing that is helping the shipping industry."
The China shipping boom is driving up freight rates all over the world, not just on Pacific Ocean routes. 
For companies that need to ship their products by sea, the boom means higher costs. 
For consumers, though, there will probably not be any discernible effect on price tags in stores, because sea shipping is generally a tiny part of the cost of most goods.
Still, at a time of rising trade friction between China and the United States, the newfound prosperity of ship lines illustrates how a big global industry can become dependent on the Chinese economy in just a few years.
Nor are ships the only example. 
China is now the world's largest market for cellphones and color television sets, and the second largest for personal computers after the United States. 
Some technology stocks now trade as much on how the companies' sales are faring in China as in the United States.
Because computers and communications are the biggest users of computer chips, Intel announced today that it would build a $200 million semiconductor assembly and testing factory in China. 
"It is the fastest-growing market for us," Craig R. Barrett, Intel's chief executive, said in a telephone interview.
Yet a growing dependence on the Chinese market is a two-edged sword, making more industries susceptible to China's sometimes vertiginous economic booms and busts. 
Now that the Chinese central bank has begun trying to slow the economy gently without pushing it into recession, and trade and currency friction with the United States is becoming evident, few industries are as vulnerable as shipping.
With the development of China as the world's factory, its ports have become the biggest departure points for container ships, which carry finished goods like furniture and toys in standardized 40-foot-long steel boxes stacked high on their decks. 
The ports in the Pearl River delta of southern China now handle almost as many containers a year as all the ports in the United States combined.
Chinese ports are also the fastest-growing destinations for dry-bulk carriers -- freighters that haul commodities like coal and iron ore -- and for tankers. 
Though the United States still imports more oil by ship than China does, the Chinese reliance on Middle East oil is growing. 
As the output from its own aging oil fields has stagnated, the energy to sustain China's 8 percent annual economic growth has had to come from abroad.
But some ship line executives are nervous about how dependent their industry has become on the health of Chinese industries like construction and steel making. 
"If China stopped importing iron ore, the market for dry carriers would drop like a stone," warned George Chao, chairman of Wah Kwong Shipping Holdings, also of Hong Kong.
Low interest rates have fed a construction boom in China, contributing to a doubling of China's enormous steel output in the last four years, with many more mills still being built. 
Chinese mines have been unable to keep up with the demand for iron ore to be melted into steel, so China has tripled its iron ore imports since 1999.
These imports -- nearly 150 million tons this year, enough to fill the Louisiana Superdome to the roof 30 times -- come by sea, much of it from Australia's giant iron mines. 
But not even they have been able to expand output fast enough to meet all of China's needs, so the mills are now importing iron ore from Brazil, a monthlong voyage in each direction.
Long trips are keeping so many dry-bulk freighters busy that the cost to charter one from Brazil to China has soared to $46,000 a day, from $15,000 a day just last year, according to Tim Huxley, managing director of Clarkson Asia, a big ship broker. 
Daily rates for container ships have also risen sharply, he said.
Charter rates were briefly this high in 2000, when Western economies were at the peak of long-term expansion, especially in the United States. 
This time, though, China's dynamism has single-handedly driven up shipping rates even though the American economy is only starting to show signs of renewed vigor and European economies are struggling.
Tanker charter rates depend heavily on oil prices and on political stability in the Middle East; the usual late summer lull in shipments and the end of large-scale ground combat in Iraq have recently brought rates down. 
But in general, growing demand from China has greatly improved the long-term market for tankers, Mr. Huxley said.
Dry-bulk carrier rates have soared so high this year that they are starting to distort world markets for some commodities. 
A ton of coal costs less to mine in Australia than in China, but power plants in Japan and South Korea increasingly rely on Chinese coal because getting it requires only a three-day voyage, compared with 14 days from the Cairns, Australia, region, according to William Randall, the coal-shipping director at the Noble Group, a big shipping and logistics company here.
Likewise, the cost of sending a 40-foot container from Asia to the United States or Europe -- already much more expensive than going the opposite way -- has climbed an additional 20 to 30 percent in the last year, depending on the route, as Chinese exporters clamor for deck space.
"Everything comes back to how China is growing," said Steen B. Lund, the vice president for China at Maersk Sealand, a unit of A. P. Moller-Maersk of Denmark, the world's largest shipping company.
The growth of the Asian shipping market is also changing the ownership of the global fleet of freighters and tankers. 
While Greek, Italian, Belgian, Danish, German and Norwegian companies remain important and have many vessels in service on Pacific routes, Asian shipping lines now own 40 percent of the world's fleet. 
Events like the annual meeting of the Asian Shipowners Forum, which ended here today, have become increasingly important.
The fat profits coursing through the industry for the first time in nearly a decade are also starting to draw investment bankers, as shipowners see room for mergers and acquisitions. 
"There's definitely some interest in consolidating some of the routes" between ports, said Robert A. Morrice, chairman and chief executive of Barclays Capital Asia.
Previous shipping industry booms have tended to end quickly, with executives glutting the market by ordering too many new vessels. 
But the world's shipyards were already booked solid through 2005 before the latest China boom began, because of the need for new double-hull tankers to replace single-hull vessels, which are being banned for safety and environmental reasons.
The lack of shipyard capacity to build more dry-bulk carriers and container ships means that rates in these categories could stay high into 2005, said Rajaish Bajpaee, president and group managing director of the Eurasia Group, the Asian arm of the Bernhard Schulte Group, a privately held German shipping company that is among the world's largest.
Many shipping lines are privately owned and do not release sales or profit figures. 
But publicly traded lines have recently reported that their profits leaped in the first half of the year, especially in Asia.
The shipping lines posting improved results included two late last week, Neptune Orient Lines in Singapore and Orient Overseas International here, as well as Sinotrans in Beijing on Monday, and China Shipping Development and A .P. 
Moller-Maersk on Tuesday.
Despite the risks of financial troubles or trade wars involving China, most shipping executives seem to believe that, for now, trade with the mainland has brought them the prosperity that so long eluded them. 
"The times are good," Mr. Bajpaee said, "as they have not been in a long time."
