
China is preparing to reduce incentives for exporters, increase purchases of Treasury bonds and loosen controls on foreign currency holdings to blunt mounting pressure from the United States, where its growing trade surplus has come under heavy political scrutiny, Chinese officials and analysts say.
The steps are expected to be among concessions Chinese leaders offer Treasury Secretary John W. Snow on his visit to Beijing this week, although they fall well short of meeting Mr. Snow's demand that China begin allowing market forces to set the value of its currency, the yuan.
With Democratic presidential candidates, influential American manufacturers and even Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve, pressing China to overhaul its currency system, officials here are eager to head off trade tensions. 
But they are also determined to maintain the current exchange rate, set at roughly 8.3 yuan to the dollar, for some time to come.
"People do not want Mr. Snow to go away disappointed," said a financial expert affiliated with China's State Planning Commission who has been involved in preparations for the visit. 
"But the decision on the yuan has been made. 
There will be no change at this time."
The issue reflects the growing sensitivity of China's trade surplus in the United States and its robust economic growth, which some critics say is coming at the expense of American jobs.
It is also an early test for the new generation of China's leaders, who will be called upon to handle inevitable diplomatic frictions as the country attracts tens of billions of dollars annually in foreign investment and posts year-on-year export growth of more than 20 percent, much faster than other major economies.
China passed Japan last year as the country with the largest trade surplus with the United States, at $103 billion. 
That has made it a prime target for producers of textiles, auto parts and other ailing industries, which say China is stealing their business by currency manipulation.
The situation is reminiscent of economic tensions with Japan in the 1980's. 
China today and Japan then had rapidly growing trade surpluses and currencies that many analysts said were kept artificially cheap to promote exports. 
On his first stop today in Tokyo, Mr. Snow took veiled aim at both the weak yen and the weak yuan. 
Page C1.
Yet China's economy now is more open to foreign investment than Japan's was then, and multinational companies like Dell and Wal-Mart influence China's low-cost production as big employers and purchasers. 
China's leaders know this makes it less likely that they would face heavy trade sanctions, as any penalties would raise the price American consumers pay for goods as diverse as socks and laptop computers, analysts say.
"Like it or not, China and the U.S. are married," said Andy Xie, chief Asia economist for Morgan Stanley. 
"China is very sensitive to U.S. concerns. 
But the leaders also know that there isn't really that much the U.S. can do about China's trade power."
Mr. Snow, who arrives in Beijing on Tuesday for two days of meetings with top financial officials, has said he intends the press the Chinese to at least widen the tiny band within which the yuan is allowed to fluctuate in currency market trading. 
Most currency traders think such a move would quickly cause the yuan to rise in value against the dollar, increasing the dollar cost of Chinese-made goods.
His hosts are prepared to tell him that China intends to loosen currency controls in the long term and allow the yuan to find its market value. 
But they have no intention of doing so immediately because they do not want to alter the formula that has produced a decade-long run of fast economic growth and helped protect the Communist Party's political power.
Prime Minister Wen Jiabao has all but ruled out any significant change in the exchange rate, calling the stable yuan a "cornerstone of China's sustained economic and financial stabilityI and development."
Mr. Wen, who became prime minister in the spring, has not yet laid the political groundwork to confront a contentious issue like the exchange rate, officials and analysts said.
"This kind of decision is made very slowly in China, after many interested parties have had a chance to express their views," said Zhang Yaxiong, a senior economist at the State Information Center, a Beijing research group, who wrote a widely circulated study that advocated a freer exchange rate. 
"The direction is toward more liberalization," he said. 
"But no one is prepared to give a date for when it will happen. 
It depends on too many factors."
Instead, Chinese officials are preparing short-term measures to channel more of the country's export earnings into the international economy without changes in the exchange rate.
One step is to cut or eliminate some export subsidies that give its industries a further competitive edge. 
Among the possibilities under discussion are steps to cancel or sharply reduce tax rebates paid to exporters in sensitive industries like textiles, shoes and furniture.
Mr. Xie estimates that a reduction in rebates could force companies in the industries involved to raise their prices by about 5 percent. 
That could eliminate some of the gain from recent swings in the value of the dollar, although given the enormous cost advantages of producing such goods in China, it would probably do little to stimulate manufacturing in the United States.
China is also using its large pool of foreign currency reserves, which now total $356 billion, to buy more United States Treasury bonds. 
In the first six months of this year, it bought a record $41 billion of Treasuries, less than Japan but far more than any other foreign country.
Officials are expected to promise that they will continue to use currency reserves this way, which helps reduce interest rates in the United States, even though some analysts say the money could be better invested domestically.
The Beijing authorities have already begun publicizing rules that would allow individuals to take more foreign currency with them when they travel abroad. 
The government also may revise regulations on the amount of foreign currency that companies can retain when they sell their goods overseas. 
Both steps are expected to stimulate spending on foreign-made products and services, potentially reducing the trade surplus.
On the potent issue of the yuan's value, however, stabilityII is the watchword.
The yuan was fixed at 8.28 to the dollar in 1994 and has barely budged in value since then. 
Chinese officials argue that for much of the last decade, the fixed currency was a disadvantage because the dollar rose steadily against most other currencies, making the yuan more expensive and working against the sale of Chinese products in foreign markets.
Yet exports did well anyway, benefiting from a seemingly boundless supply of low-wage labor and a proliferation of foreign-financed factories. 
And China-made products have received a big boost over the last year, after the dollar reversed course and fell against many major currencies, making Chinese goods more competitive.
Some domestic and international economists have argued that China should seize the opportunity presented by its trade and financial surpluses to begin liberalizing the yuan. 
They argue that it will eventually have to take this step anyway and should do so from a position of strength.
Fred Hu, chief China economist for Goldman Sachs, says the currency peg is contributing to an overheating of the domestic economy. 
The influx of foreign investment and foreign trade earnings have helped fuel rapid increases in the money supply and raised fears of inflation, even as the fixed exchange rate has created tension with trading partners. 
By freeing the exchange rate, he said, China could solve two problems at once.
"This is a golden opportunity for China," Mr. Hu said. 
"This is something they will have to do eventually, and if they wait until they are forced, it's too late."
Yet the political pressure from outside China to revalue the yuan has been countered by domestic lobbying to maintain the current system. 
Some officials fear that any adjustment in currency policy could threaten Chinese banks, which by some estimates have nearly one in three of their loans unpaid. 
Banks are arguably ill prepared to withstand exchange-rate volatility.
The issue, Mr. Hu said, is bogged down in bureaucratic inertia that may take much more time, and perhaps considerably more outside pressure, to dislodge.
