
This past week, Jiang Zemin, China's former Communist Party chief and departing president, spent hours on the phone with leaders in the United States, Britain, France and Germany, discussing the fate of a possible United Nations resolution on Iraq as well as the standoff over North Korea's nuclear program.
Today, Mr. Jiang stepped down as president, and Hu Jintao -- the party leader since last fall and a man with little foreign policy experience -- was elected to succeed him in a vote by China's legislature. 
That has left diplomats and scholars wondering how China's foreign relations will be affected by Mr. Jiang's departure while the world is in crisis.
During his decade-long tenure, Mr. Jiang evolved into a skilled diplomat. 
His primary legacy will almost certainly be seen as raising China's profile on the international scene and, especially in the past couple years, developing relations with the United States. 
Once a large but relatively isolated country, China has stepped firmly onto the world stage.
Of course, no one expects Mr. Jiang to fade into the woodwork. 
Today, he was re-elected as chairman of the state Central Military Commission -- he already headed the party's military commission -- and one of his chief allies, Zeng Qinghong, was elected vice president, giving Mr. Jiang a continuing government power base. 
In internal speeches and meetings with foreign diplomats, he has made it clear that he expects to be directing foreign policy, especially in dealings with the United States and Taiwan.
But now he must as least coordinate that message with China's official new leaders, and exercising his influence on international issues may prove more difficult without his official seat of power. 
"Will Jiang try to keep the foreign policy and military all to himself for a long time, and who do we talk to when we have something to say?" asked a Western diplomat. 
"That is a question now."
Wu Jiaxiang, a Chinese political commentator, said, "If I were President Bush, I'd first give Jiang Zemin a call and then place a second one to Hu Jintao, because Hu Jintao is clearly now the highest civilian authority and formally China's top leader, but Jiang Zemin remains China's most senior de facto leader."
In recent months, Mr. Jiang has publicly positioned himself as an arbiter of crisis situations whose continued input is sorely needed.
He has developed a personal friendship with President Bush, visiting his ranch in Crawford, Tex., in November as one of his last acts as party leader. 
American officials have repeatedly described China as being extremely helpful in fighting terrorism and have said they doubted that China would veto an American-sponsored resolution on Iraq, out of respect for the relationship.
In the last week, the Chinese news media have been filled with reports of Mr. Jiang's late-night phone talks with Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain and Mr. Bush, as he joined Germany and France in diplomatic efforts to stave off a war with Iraq.
In a speech in January, Mr. Hu expressed appreciation to Mr. Jiang for staying on in the military role and has emphasized the importance of maintaining "harmony between the generations."
But as Mr. Hu matures as a politician and makes his own contacts, it is unclear how the two men will work together.
From today's voting, it was clear many in China wish that Mr. Hu would be allowed to develop his own foreign policy sooner rather than later. 
Though there were no other candidates, almost 10 percent of legislative delegates opposed Mr. Jiang as chairman of the Military Commission.Almost 20 opposed Mr. Zeng's assuming the vice presidency.
Those were distinctly dissenting votes in a legislature where the norm is unanimity. 
"Often these days, you get 10 or a dozen votes opposed," said Mr. Wu, the commentator. 
"But 10 percent, that's really not a small number. 
I think it clearly reflects the public opinion that Jiang Zemin's decision to hang on to power this way has damaged his reputation."
Of course, there remain many indirect routes for Mr. Jiang to retain his influence on foreign policy, notably through Mr. Zeng, who has accompanied Mr. Jiang on many overseas trips, including one to the United States. 
Many government observers say that he will be placed in charge of the important Taiwan Affairs Leading Group, overseeing policy toward the island.
China regards Taiwan as a breakaway province that must be eventually reunited with the mainland, by force if necessary. 
But the United States has vowed to provide Taiwan with the means for its defense, leaving the Taiwan issue as a huge sticking point in relations with Washington.
The new official foreign policy team has not been announced. 
A new foreign minister is to be named on Sunday.
But some political observers here guess that Mr. Hu may be happy for the moment to have his predecessor calling the shots with so many foreign policy minefields on the horizon.
The Parliament today also chose Wen Jiabao, a longtime party functionary and technocratic manager, as prime minister, giving him primary responsibility for managing the world's sixth largest economy.
The largely rubber stamp legislature confirmed the Communist Party's choice of Mr. Wen, 60, a former vice premier, to suceed his boss, Zhu Rongji, who guided China into the World Trade Organization during his five years in China's top administrative post.
Mr. Wen's promotion has been assured since he was elevated to the third-ranking member of the new Communist Party Politburo in November. 
He will inherit responsibility for keeping China's long streak of rapid economic growth on track and for tackling the growing and politically sensitive gap between incomes of urban and rural residents.
