
China imposed broad new restrictions Sunday on the distribution of foreign news in the country, beefing up state regulations on the news media.
Under new rules that were said to take effect immediately, the state-run New China News Agency said it would become the de facto gatekeeper for foreign news reports, photographs and graphics entering China. 
The agency announced in its own dispatch that it would censor content that endangers ''national security.''
If enforced as drafted, the regulations could have a major impact on news agencies like The Associated Press, Reuters and Bloomberg News that sell news-related products to a wide range of Chinese clients.
More generally, the step appears intended to further restrict the information that news media in China, including news-oriented Web sites and financial, cultural and sports publications, can receive and convey to viewers or subscribers. 
Many such media outlets have skirted censorship procedures that old-line media must follow in China, a one-party state.
Party leaders have been alarmed by the increasing assertiveness of the domestic and the foreign news media. 
After a period of relative openness, officials now seem determined to make sure that the Chinese public does not have easy access to information that could provoke popular discontent or weaken the governing party's grip on power.
President Hu Jintao has intensified a crackdown on all kinds of news media in recent months, arresting and harassing journalists, tightening regulation of Web sites and online forums, hiring tens of thousands of people to screen and block Web content deemed offensive and firing editors of state-run publications that resist official controls.
Chinese authorities promise that they will allow thousands of outside journalists to visit China during the 2008 Olympics in Beijing and allow them to report freely on developments here.
Some Western media watchdog groups say the new restrictions and a sharp increase in the number of journalists being prosecuted for their work have raised doubts about whether Beijing will honor those promises.
The New China News Agency has long played a dual role in China's media world. 
It acts both as the official distributor of state news and information, selling its products much as any Western news agencies would do. 
But it also regulates outside news agencies, a power that Western news providers say it seeks to use to enhance its own bottom line.
A decade ago, the New China News Agency sought to take control of the lucrative business of providing live news and data feeds to banks and financial firms in China, determining pricing, policing content and collecting the revenue.
The industry, dominated by big Western agencies like Reuters and Bloomberg, successfully fought those restrictions. 
They have continued to market their products directly to brokers and traders in China rather than providing all services through the New China News Agency.
It was not immediately clear if the new restrictions are a fresh attempt by the Chinese agency to take over that business, which is valued in the tens of millions of dollars. 
The dispatch said the new rules replace those promulgated in 1996 and subsequently watered down after vigorous protests.
The wording of the announcement is broad enough to include all forms of foreign news and information, including those from Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan.
''Foreign news agencies shall not directly solicit subscriptions of their news and information services in China,'' the New China News Agency said in announcing the rules, adding that it had ''the right to select the news and information released by foreign news agencies in China and shall delete any materials'' it deemed harmful.
Among the categories of news that will be banned is anything that may ''endanger China's national security, reputation and interests.''
China will also censor news articles that violate religious policies, promote cults or superstition, or ''incite hatred and discrimination among ethnic groups.''
The prohibition on distribution means that the New China News Agency itself intends to act as the sales agent for foreign news providers that want to sell information or services to Chinese clients, likely taking a big cut of the revenue.
In the past, Western media companies have said that such strong-arm tactics may violate China's obligations under the World Trade Organization.
