
The rise of protectionist sentiment in the United States over a $202 billion trade deficit with China could hurt the Chinese economy, Commerce Secretary Carlos Gutierrez said Wednesday.
Mr. Gutierrez said at a business forum here that protectionist measures could lead to a decline in Chinese exports to the United States, its biggest international customer.
That would hurt the United States, but be even more damaging for China, he said.
Mr. Gutierrez said China could help the Bush administration counter that threat with improved market access for United States products and stricter enforcement of intellectual property rights.
He acknowledged that Chinese tariffs had fallen since the country's entry into the World Trade Organization in 2001, but he said a wide array of barriers remained that restricted sales of products from companies in the United States and other foreign countries.
''It is important for our colleagues in China to realize that the voices in the U.S. calling for protectionist policies are very real,'' he said. 
Mr. Gutierrez was on the last day of a four-day visit to China.
While Mr. Gutierrez was in Beijing for trade talks, one looming threat to its exports to the United States appeared to have eased. 
Senator Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of New York, and Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, delayed plans for a bill that would have threatened steep tariffs on Chinese imports if Chinese leaders refused to let their currency, the yuan, rise in value against the dollar.
The senators said they had become more optimistic as a result of their trip to China last week when Chinese officials emphasized their willingness to let the yuan float more freely and to address other aspects of their country's growing trade deficit with the United States.
Senator Charles Grassley of Iowa and Senator Max Baucus of Montana, respectively the top Republican and Democrat on the Senate Finance Committee, are pushing a separate bill that would focus more attention on currency policies but would stop short of threatening tariffs on imported goods.
Mr. Gutierrez, in earlier talks with senior Chinese officials, including Prime Minister Wen Jiabao; the vice prime minister, Wu Yi; and the commerce minister, Bo Xilai, urged China to accelerate moves to open its markets.
In a statement posted on the Web site of the Commerce Ministry, Mr. Bo said ''global economic trends,'' not Beijing, were to blame for the deficit.
He also said that United States consumers enjoyed the benefits of cheap high-quality goods from China.
The Bush administration is pushing China to make tangible progress on market access at the next meeting of the Joint Commission on Commerce and Trade, to be held in Washington on April 11.
The outcome of the talks could set the tone for President Hu Jintao's visit to the United States later in April, according to United States and Chinese officials.
Mr. Gutierrez did not publicly raise concerns about the value of the yuan, in keeping with a longstanding policy that only Treasury officials deal with currency issues.
