
China cut off oil exports to North Korea in September during heightened tension over North Korea's nuclear and missile programs, Chinese trade statistics show.
The unusual move -- the figures show China sold no crude oil at all to its neighbor in September -- reduced sales for the year by about 7 percent from the similar period in 2005. 
China's oil exports to North Korea, though uneven, had been averaging about 12,300 barrels a day.
North Korea depends on China for up to 90 percent of its oil supplies, much of which is sold on credit or for bartered goods, according to Chinese energy experts. 
Any sustained reduction could cripple its isolated and struggling economy.
There is no clear indication that the September figures represent a policy shift by China on providing vital food and fuel supplies to its neighbor and ally in the Korean War. 
North Korea conducted a nuclear test on Oct. 
9, after the period covered by the latest customs data.
But North Korea tested ballistic missiles in July, defying sharp warnings from Beijing. 
China supported a United Nations resolution condemning the missile tests, and urged that North Korea not take any steps that might ''worsen tensions.''
China did not announce a reduction in oil exports. 
The figures were released normally by the customs administration, and the drop in supplies was first reported by Reuters.
It remains possible the statistics are an anomaly or that supplies were cut because North Korea did not need more oil in September. 
Officials at the China National Petroleum Corporation, which sells oil and manages an oil pipeline to North Korea, declined to comment.
But several analysts said the reduction suggested that Beijing was using crude oil as leverage to press North Korea to resume negotiations over its nuclear program.
''It is a sharp and sudden reduction at a sensitive time, so political considerations cannot be ruled out,'' said He Jun, a Beijing-based energy expert and consultant. 
''China could be sending a clear signal.''
If that analysis is correct, it suggests that Beijing may seek to punish North Korea in a variety of ways, both open and unspoken, in the aftermath of its nuclear test.
Although China has long protected North Korea against outside pressure, analysts said the nuclear test surprised and angered the Chinese leadership. 
Many here considered North Korea's nuclear technology primitive and argued that the country was using the threat of developing atomic bombs as an economic bargaining chip.
China took the unusual step of supporting United Nations sanctions on North Korea after the test. 
The sanctions restrict sales of military equipment to the North and allow inspections of North Korean cargo.
Both China and South Korea, North Korea's main trading partners, have opposed restrictions on economic ties. 
They have interpreted the United Nations sanctions narrowly and declined to intercept North Korea cargo at sea, as the Bush administration suggested might be necessary to prevent exports of nuclear material.
But last spring Beijing followed Washington's lead in freezing North Korean assets that the Treasury Department identified as connected to money laundering, according to Bush administration officials. 
Chinese officials never announced that they had done so, suggesting that they take some tough actions quietly.
Chinese experts on North Korea who took part in discussions of the nuclear issue this month said officials had discussed reducing oil shipments if North Korea continued to defy the outside world. 
Beijing's response would be especially sharp if North Korea conducted more nuclear tests or declined to resume negotiations about dismantling its nuclear program, these experts said.
If Beijing was already using oil to warn North Korea in September, its response to the October test could be more severe.
''I doubt you would see them cutting down on grain shipments, because that affects directly the lives of North Korea's people,'' said Han Xiaoping, who follows China's energy industry for the Beijing Qunying Enterprise Company. 
''My own feeling is that North Korea cannot expect normal supplies of crude in this environment.''
China's crude oil exports, once robust, have fallen sharply in recent years, as it uses more domestic oil to power its surging economy. 
Beijing has already become the world's second largest oil importer after the United States, but still exports a small part of what it produces.
North Korea has remained a consistent customer even as China has stopped selling oil to some other countries. 
Volumes of oil shipped to the North varied in the past year from as low as 7,400 barrels a day to as high as 24,600.
The exception this year and last was February, when China celebrated its extended lunar New Year holiday. 
North Korea and other customers, including Japan, Malaysia, Thailand and Australia, got no Chinese oil supplies during that month in either year, customs figures show.
In September, China exported 125,185 tons of crude, the equivalent of 30,780 barrels a day, for a reported value of $62 million. 
All of that was exported to the United States, with North Korea receiving nothing.
For the first nine months of 2006, China exported 370,000 tons of crude to North Korea, valued by customs data at $176 million. 
That represented a 7 percent decline in volume but a 21 percent increase in value, according to the export prices recorded by Chinese customs.
Oil industry experts say the published price for the oil does not reflect discounts that China offers.
North Korea also buys small amounts of oil from Iran.
