
Days before President Bush arrived in China, American intelligence agencies told him that despite China's pledges to help battle terrorism Beijing continues to supply missile technology to Iran and Pakistan, the two countries that are also North Korea's primary missile customers.
While President Bush has repeated his accusation that North Korea is "evil" -- citing its missile sales, its efforts to develop weapons of mass destruction and its treatment of its own starving populace -- his aides say this his tone about China's continued sales of missile parts and technology will be more muted.
In briefings for reporters before Mr. Bush left Washington, White House officials declined to say who buys from China. 
They noted that Beijing had signed an agreement in November 2000 to halt missile-related sales that could help any country deliver nuclear, biological or chemical weapons. 
So far, China has not carried out that accord.
"There is a tremendous skittishness about discussing this plainly," said one senior administration official who has seen much of the intelligence about China's sales.
"But the important point," the official said, "is that the Chinese profess to have a policy of nonproliferation, they insist they don't export missile technology and yet we still keep seeing evidence of shipments to countries that are also seeking weapons of mass destruction."
Mr. Bush plans to raise these issues with President Jiang Zemin during his two-day visit to Beijing, officials say, but in general terms and probably without specific reference to Pakistan or Iran.
Pakistan has long depended on both nuclear and missile technology from China, which Beijing has readily supplied as part of its effort to build a counterforce to India.
Iran has also been a major customer of Chinese missile technology, and it is eager to obtain more of China's solid-fuel rockets, which are considered more reliable and more mobile than the liquid-fuel rocket technology that Iran has acquired from North Korea.
More than a year after taking office, the administration remains deeply divided about how to deal with China -- as an economic and counterterrorism partner or as a strategic competitor. 
Its reluctance to make details of the Chinese arms sales public reflects that tension, administration officials and outside experts said.
Bubbling just beneath the surface is the question of China's continuing relationships with Iran and, to a lesser degree, Iraq and North Korea. 
"There there is a continuing debate," one official said, "over how to deal with friends of the 'axis of evil.'
"
According to several government officials who have monitored China's missile sales, the shipments to Pakistan and Iran continued unabated after Sept. 
11, and after a trip by Mr. Bush in October to Shanghai, where he briefly raised the issue in a meeting with Mr. Jiang.
"The situation didn't get worse," one official said. 
"It just didn't get better."
In talks with the Chinese, Bush administration officials have repeatedly asked them to issue comprehensive export control regulations, under the agreement struck by the two countries in the last months of the Clinton administration. 
So far, no such regulations have been published, though the Chinese have told American officials that they will be issued soon.
Ten days before the Sept. 
11 attacks, the administration imposed sanctions against a Chinese company, the China Metallurgical Equipment Corporation, that it said was involved in missile exports to Pakistan.
It was never clear whether the Chinese leaders knew of the transaction or whether it had emerged from the complex of unregulated Chinese enterprises, many of which have connections to the military. 
President Bush never mentioned the case, or North Korea's sales to Pakistan, when he met with President Pervez Musharraf at the White House last week, aides said.
Nor is Mr. Bush expected to discuss directly with China another case in which the United States recently imposed sanctions, this one involving two Chinese companies and one person for shipments to Iran of equipment that could be used to make chemical weapons.
Because Chinese officials regularly deny knowing of such transactions, Mr. Bush and Mr. Jiang can be a bit elliptical in their talks. 
Mr. Bush can press Mr. Jiang to crack down, and Mr. Jiang can argue that he is trying, with the usual condition that China is a big country and its leaders are often the last to know.
"This is one of the big differences between North Korea and China," said Robert J. Einhorn, the former assistant secretary of state for nonproliferation, who negotiated the missile agreement with China. 
"North Korea sells the technology for hard currency, and the government is involved in every sale."
"The Chinese system is more complicated now," added Mr. Einhorn, now a scholar at the Center for Strategic and International Studies here. 
"They have made political commitments to nonproliferation, but they also have some longstanding commitments to old customers, and some in China say, 'We're going to honor them, no matter what the Foreign Ministry signed.'
"
But within the administration, some still complain that Mr. Bush has softened the strong language he used about Beijing during the campaign, when he frequently referred to China as a "strategic competitor."
That language disappeared from the presidential lexicon before Mr. Bush's trip to Shanghai in October.
A few officials have argued unsuccessfully that the president should put China on notice about its proliferation, the way he has notified Iraq, Iran and North Korea that he would not tolerate the spread of missile technology or weapons of mass destruction.
But tangling with China, officials point out, is far more complex than denouncing the other three. 
American businesses have virtually no dealings with Iraq, Iran or North Korea, by law. 
But such relationships with China are blossoming, especially since the country's recent entry into the World Trade Organization.
Moreover, administration officials talk eagerly these days about the steady liberalization of life in China, of the country's gradual moves toward the rule of law and the spread of elections for local offices.
Proliferation, they argue, is an important issue, but as Secretary of State Colin L. Powell noted recently, it is just one issue in a broad relationship with China. 
With North Korea, in contrast, it is, as one of Mr. Bush's aides said today, "the main event."
