
China's top arms-control negotiator, reiterating the country's opposition to American development of a national missile-defense system or a smaller "theater" system in Asia, said today that China was willing to discuss the proposed antimissile shields with the United States in order to "narrow our differences."
Sha Zukang, director of China's Arms Control and Disarmament Department, called the national missile-defense plan an American attempt "to seek its own absolute security" at the expense of other countries. 
He also said the presence in Asia of a smaller shield would hurt stabilityI in the region.
But he said China was heartened by the Bush administration's recent assurances that a national missile shield is not meant to neutralize China's ability to defend itself against attack. 
"China welcomes the statement," he said, "and we are ready to have dialogue and discussions with the Americans."
Mr. Sha's remarks come just days before China's deputy prime minister, Qian Qichen, goes to the United States to meet President Bush, where he is expected to deliver a similar message. 
China experts said the softer tone may be an attempt to lay the groundwork for that meeting and appears to be part of a broader effort to build trust with the new administration.
"This statement appears to mark a shift from full-on opposition to a willingness to engage in a more open dialogue about the U.S.-China strategic nuclear relationship," said Bates Gill, a Chinese military specialist at the Brookings Institution, a research group in Washington. 
Mr. Gill was part of a nonofficial delegation that recently met with Mr. Sha and heard similar conciliatory remarks.
James Lilley, formerly an ambassador to China who is now with the American Enterprise Institute, said Mr. Sha's remark "is consistent with other feelers we've seen coming out and we should examine them very carefully."
The United States and Japan have already agreed to joint research of a theater missile defense, which would be used to intercept missiles over a more limited area. 
Such a system, China fears, could be used to shield Taiwan, over which Beijing wishes to regain sovereignty.
China has urged the United States to stop selling arms to Taiwan and it is particularly distressed by the island's request for Arleigh Burke-class destroyers equipped with Aegis radar systems, which Beijing regards as potentially a piece of a theater missile-defense system.
Mr. Sha repeated the country's warnings against the Aegis sale and those warnings were also delivered today to Adm. Dennis Blair, the commander of United States forces in the Pacific, who is visiting Beijing. 
Mr. Qian is expected to repeat those warnings to Mr. Bush when he visits Washington next week.
"Among the arms they have sold or proposed to sell to Taiwan, Aegis is the worst," said Mr. Sha.
Mr. Sha also said that if Japan put in place a theater system, China would consider it the forward deployment of a potentially larger missile defense for the United States. 
But China would not object to a theater system that is limited to protecting American troops or ships, he said.
American proposals for a system that would protect all the United States have drawn strong opposition from many countries, most notably Russia and China. 
The Russians, though, have softened their opposition and last month proposed an alternative missile-defense system to Washington. 
Now China may be following Russia's lead.
Mr. Sha said China feels particularly disadvantaged because of its limited nuclear arsenal and inability to develop more advanced nuclear warheads because of its adherence to the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, which prohibits countries from testing nuclear bombs.
He said a national missile defense, if pursued, would be tantamount to a unilateral expansion of the United States' nuclear weapons capability because it would neutralize other countries' ability to make defensive strikes in response to an American attack. 
He also warned that it could trigger a new global arms race.
