
China's southern business capital, Guangzhou, a city of seven million people 60 miles north of Hong Kong, rushed to ensure water supplies on Thursday as a toxic spill into the Bei River from a smelter flowed toward the city. 
A smaller city nearby stopped drawing drinking water from the contaminated river.
It was China's second environmental disaster in a month and occurred as the authorities were trying to minimize the impact of a chemical spill in the Songhua, a northeastern river nearly 2,000 miles away. 
That toxic slick disrupted water supplies to millions of people in China, and reached Khabarovsk, in eastern Russia, on Thursday.
The Khabarovsk government, however, said it would continue to supply running water from the river to the city of 580,000 because pollution levels were within an acceptable range. 
Earlier, officials warned people against drinking tap water.
Guangzhou and Foshan, a nearby manufacturing center, were ordered to ''start emergency plans to ensure safe drinking water supplies to their residents,'' the official New China News Agency said.
The area is one of China's most densely populated and is a center for the factories that supply its booming export industries.
The spill into the Bei River north of Guangzhou forced Yingde to stop using river water on Wednesday, the news agency reported. 
Yingde, a city of 210,000 people, north of Guangzhou, was drawing supplies from a nearby reservoir through a hastily installed mile-long pipe. 
Officials in Yingde were dumping reservoir water into the river to dilute the pollutants.
Shaoguan, a city about 50 miles upstream from Yingde, cut running water for eight hours on Tuesday. 
The Bei flows into the Pearl River, which passes through Guangzhou and empties into the South China Sea west of Hong Kong.
A Guangzhou water department spokeswoman, who would only give her surname, Zheng, said that only one of the city's seven water plants was close enough to the river to be affected. 
Phone calls to the city government and environmental bureau on Thursday morning were not answered.
The government said the spill from a smelter in Shaoguan pushed levels of the heavy metal cadmium in the Bei to 10 times acceptable limits.
The disaster occurred a month after a chemical plant explosion in China's northeast spewed 100 tons of benzene and other chemicals into the Songhua River, forcing Harbin to suspend running water for five days.
The Songhua merges into two other waterways, eventually reaching Khabarovsk to become the Amur. 
Khabarovsk residents crammed their apartments with bottles, pails and bathtubs full of fresh water as their governor, Viktor Ishayev, appealed for calm. 
He said the authorities had ''done everything we could to safeguard and filter the water, and we do not plan to cut off water to Khabarovsk.''
The spill could take four days or more to pass through Khabarovsk, but specialists warn that the ecological effects will last longer. 
Benzene and nitrobenzene are heavier than water and they are settling on the river bottom or sticking to the ice.
Come spring, melting ice will pollute not just the river water, but also the banks, said Yevgeny Rozhkov, an engineer from the Far East Meteorological Agency.
