
A consortium led by Haier, a large Chinese conglomerate, abandoned its $1.28 billion bid for the appliance maker Maytag late yesterday, according to people involved in the negotiations. 
Haier's decision to drop its bid came just two days after the Whirlpool Corporation made a $1.36 billion offer for Maytag.
The move ends the prospect of a three-way battle for Maytag. 
In May, the company agreed to be sold to Ripplewood Holdings, the private equity firm, for $1.13 billion, but Haier's unsolicited offer put it into play.
The decision by Haier, which was backed in its bid by the Blackstone Group and Bain Capital, may also temporarily calm some anxious nerves in Washington about the possibility of a second American corporate brand name falling into the hands of the Chinese.
Haier's bid came just as Cnooc, a Chinese-owned oil company, made a $18.5 billion offer for Unocal, stirring a spirited debate about United States economic ties to China.
People close to Haier suggested that it abandoned its offer after the group determined, once it reviewed Maytag's confidential records, that it would have to change some of its financial projections, and also that the group was not prepared for a takeover battle with Whirlpool.
Without Haier, the battle for control of Maytag is between Ripplewood and Whirlpool. 
Whirlpool has already clearly outbid Ripplewood, though its offer is a mix of stock and cash and may present some risk of being blocked by regulators because the combined company would dominate the home appliance industry.
There is some question whether Maytag is allowed to provide Whirlpool with its confidential records under its already agreed-upon deal with Ripplewood.
It is also unclear whether Ripplewood is prepared to raise its offer. 
Ripplewood at one point suggested that Maytag pay it a $40 million fee to terminate their deal while Maytag was engaged in talks with Haier.
Ripplewood will have five days to match Whirlpool's offer under the agreement the companies signed in May.
