
A little-known Muslim group from western China that the United States recently branded as terrorist had planned attacks on Western embassies in neighboring Kyrgyzstan, an American official asserted today.
Last Monday, during a friendly visit to Beijing, Deputy Secretary of State Richard Armitage disclosed that the United States had placed the group, the East Turkestan Islamic Movement, on the American terror list, freezing any United States-based assets it might hold. 
The group has killed civilians, he said.
The group is one of several that have emerged among Uighur Muslims of Xinjiang province to seek an independent Muslim state or to challenge China's social and economic domination. 
The group's leader abroad, Hasan Mahsum, has admitted to using violence, contending that the movement has no choice because peaceful opposition is outlawed.
But the group is also accused by China's government of having close ties to Al Qaeda, Osama bin Laden's terrorism network. 
In an interview last January, the leader denied this, though he acknowledged that some individual followers may have trained or fought with Al Qaeda forces in Afghanistan.
The American condemnation of the group was a propaganda coup for China, which had sought to blunt criticism of its repressive tactics in Xinjiang, saying that it faces an organized, global terrorist threat.
Human rights groups say that much of the unrest in Xinjiang is more spontaneous, and they charge that China is using the post-Sept. 
11 climate to justify suppression of Uighur identity and substantial violations of civil rights.
Just before Mr. Armitage's visit on Monday, China met a longtime American demand, issuing rules to control export of missile technologies.
Stung by questions about the timing of the terrorism listing of the Chinese group, American officials provided new details this week in support of the charges, particularly citing evidence provided by Kyrgyzstan, in central Asia.
In May, Kyrgyzstan deported two Chinese Uighur members of the group to China because they were "planning attacks against embassies, trade centers and public gathering places in Kyrgyzstan," an American Embassy spokesman said today.
