
One of China's state-owned oil companies may still be smarting from its failure to acquire Unocal this summer. 
But another Chinese oil giant showed on Monday that this country is still snapping up assets to satisfy its hunger for energy.
China's biggest state-owned oil company, the China National Petroleum Corporation, announced on Monday that it would pay $4.18 billion for a Canadian oil company with shares traded in New York and substantial reserves in Kazakhstan.
It is China's largest foreign acquisition yet, and more than twice what a Chinese computer company paid for I.B.M.'s personal computer business.
China National Petroleum outbid India's state-owned Oil and Natural Gas Corporation in reaching a deal to acquire PetroKazakhstan, and it is not clear whether the Indian company will step up with a counterbid. 
Still, the process underlines the growing competition for oil resources by the world's two most populous countries, each of which is rapidly increasing oil imports.
Monday's transaction shows that the great game, once a competition between imperial Russia and Britain for influence in Central Asia, lives on with new players, as China increasingly challenges Russia and the United States for access to the region's energy riches.
PetroKazakhstan's fields are in north-central Kazakhstan, an area where Russian businesses, especially Lukoil, have been active.
American companies have been more interested in oil reserves of the Caspian Sea, along Kazakhstan's western border, where the region's giant deposits are located, and have invested more than $8 billion there.
China National Petroleum's willingness to pay a steep price of nearly $8 for each barrel of estimated oil reserves in the ground, with considerable further costs to pump and ship the oil, contrasts with prices as low as $1 a barrel of reserves in Central Asia in the 1990's.
American oil companies have voiced growing alarm that they may be unable to compete with deep-pocketed state-owned oil companies worried about national security. 
These state oil companies appear more willing to pay high prices for reserves on fears that today's high oil prices will endure.
PetroKazakhstan's acceptance of the Chinese bid is a consolation prize for China's oil industry. 
Another state-controlled Chinese company, Cnooc, withdrew its $18.5 billion offer for Unocal on Aug. 
2 after strong opposition in Congress.
But the tangled history of past Chinese oil investments in Kazakhstan casts a possible shadow on the deal.
Kazakhstan has passed a law declaring its right to pre-empt the sale of any oil property in the country, which means the deal cannot be fully accomplished without government approval. 
That law was the basis for many questions from analysts during a PetroKazakhstan conference call on Monday with investors, analysts and journalists.
Bernard F. Isautier, the company's chief executive, said that Kazakhstan could pre-empt the sale of assets within the country but could not block the sale of PetroKazakhstan itself.
''We are not speaking about a sale of assets where pre-emptive rights would apply,'' he said. 
''We don't expect any problem in that regard.''
In Astana, the capital of Kazakhstan, Mikhail Dorofeyev, head of the media department of KazMunaiGaz, the state oil company and industry regulator, said in a telephone interview that the company would have no comment on the announcement.
Cnooc and the third of China's three state-owned oil giants, Sinopec, had tried and failed to buy a share in the Kashagan field sold by British Gas two years ago.
Their initial agreements to buy stakes were pre-empted by foreign operators in the field, who invoked their right to split up British Gas's share among themselves -- only to have the government step in and take half of British Gas's share for itself.
PetroKazakhstan, based in Calgary, Alberta, but managed from London, is also a considerably smaller company than Unocal, and without Unocal's extensive natural gas reserves or Unocal's reputation for high technology.
It nonetheless commanded a steep price of $55 a share in Monday's deal, a premium of 21.1 percent to the stock's closing price on the New York Stock Exchange on Friday, partly because PetroKazakhstan's oil will help fill a pipeline to China now under construction.
In the oil industry, ''China has consistently been willing to overpay for assets -- it's more of a security issue for them than the absolute price,'' said John T. Kuzmik, a partner and China specialist at Baker Botts, a big Houston energy law firm. 
The Oil and Natural Gas Corporation reportedly bid $3.6 billion.
PetroKazakhstan's main asset lies in its full ownership of one oil field, Kumkol South, and half-ownership of two smaller ones, Kumkol North and Germunaigaz.
''It is a jewel -- you look at the way they increased production,'' said Vincent Noual, a specialist in Central Asian oil in the Geneva offices of IHS Energy, a big consulting firm, referring to a fourfold increase in production in nine years of Canadian ownership.
PetroKazakhstan has highly strained relations with Kazakhstan's regulators, as well as with Lukoil of Russia, its main partner in the oil field. 
Monday's deal, announced before the opening of trading in New York, represents a huge payday for PetroKazakhstan's investors and the company's chief executive, Mr. Isautier.
PetroKazakhstan used to be Hurricane Hydrocarbons, which was in bankruptcy protection in 1999. 
But the company still held one superb investment: its stakes in the Kazakh oil fields, purchased for just $120 million in 1996 when Hurricane bought the assets of Yuzhneftegaz, a Kazakh state-owned oil company.
Oraz Jandosov, a former head of Kazakhstan's antimonopoly commission who is now an opposition politician, voiced a commonly held view when he said he expected that KazMunaiGaz would eventually acquire the refinery from China National Petroleum and Lukoil would eventually acquire the Turgai oil field, which produces about 35,000 barrels a day.
Mr. Jandosov and many Kazakhs have frequently asserted that Hurricane Hydrocarbons must have paid bribes to acquire Yuzhneftegaz. 
''The price offered by the Chinese proves that the initial was too low and they were cheating the state,'' Mr. Jandosov said.
Terrance Powell, PetroKazakhstan's spokesman, said that at the time, the field was producing much less oil than now, that Kazakhstan was in a state of financial crisis and that the price was fair.
After the bankruptcy filing, Mr. Isautier joined the business, led the company out of bankruptcy, bought 88 percent of a large Kazakh refinery for $51 million, and began investing $143 million to develop the oil fields.
Citigroup advised China National Petroleum on the deal while Goldman Sachs advised PetroKazakhstan. 
Citigroup has agreed to provide the Chinese company with a letter of credit for the entire value of the deal; the state-owned Chinese oil company will not borrow any money from other Chinese government agencies.
China National agreed to pay $54 in cash for each share and put $76 million, worth another $1 a share, into a new company that is to be spun off to PetroKazakhstan shareholders and led by Mr. Isautier.
The deal is subject to approval by two-thirds of PetroKazakhstan's shareholders at a meeting to be held in the first half of October, the exact date of which has not been set. 
PetroKazakhstan agreed to pay a breakup fee of $125 million to China National if PetroKazakhstan later accepts a higher offer.
