
China's most prominent advocate for AIDS patients, Dr. Wan Yanhai, was unexpectedly released today after nearly a month's detention by China's State Security apparatus.
The release came after an international outcry over his arrest, with an extraordinary range of voices, including the State Department, United Nations officials, and Act Up, the protest group concerned with AIDS issues, expressing their concerns.
Human rights advocates said they could not recall anyone detained by China's secretive State Security apparatus having been released so quickly and with so few apparent restrictions; many detainees have been placed directly on planes out of the country. 
But in a telephone interview tonight on his cellphone, Dr. Wan said that he had been released at noon today, and he vowed that "my work against AIDS in China won't be hindered."
"If this incident helps attract more concern and support for victims of AIDS and their families and children here in China, then it can be considered an opportunity we should grasp," he said. 
"I'll be considering how to best continue my work in the future."
Dr. Wan's four-week detention has probably done more to highlight China's AIDS problem and to press the government to act than his years of hard work that came before it. 
Although China has recently begun to acknowledge its AIDS crisis, government officials view independent advocates like Dr. Wan as a threat.
With President Jiang Zemin's visit to the United States only a month away, high-level State Department officials expressed their concern about Dr. Wan's disappearance. 
Chinese health authorities were warned that their pending $90 million application for financing from the Global Fund for AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria would not be approved with Dr. Wan in detention.
Within the past week, there have been angry protests at the Chinese Embassy in France, where protesters splattered the Chinese flag with fake blood. 
In New York on Thursday, demonstrators held banners in Chinese proclaiming "Silence = Death" -- the slogan that galvanized the United States government to act against AIDS 15 years ago.
Protests have flooded into the Chinese Foreign Ministry from foreign diplomats and scholars. 
In the end, Chinese authorities apparently realized that they were losing far more than they were gaining by holding the doctor.
"They really want -- they really need -- the money from the Global Fund," said a person familiar with the application. 
"There was just too much at risk."
That application is to be submitted next week, and some drafts have even included an allocation for Dr. Wan's group, the Aizhi Action Project, the person said.
Dr. Wan, who disappeared on Aug. 
24, is a former health education official. 
His group has long operated a Web site about AIDS in China and has more recently started to organize small support and advocacy groups for people who have H.I.V. 
In recent years, the soft-spoken but determined Dr. Wan has split his time between China and the United States, where he is completing a project on a Fulbright grant and where his wife is a student.
Dr. Wan confirmed that he had been detained by State Security for posting on the Internet a classified health document concerning an AIDS epidemic among people who sold their blood under unsanitary conditions in central China's Henan Province. 
"It was marked 'classified,' and I should have been aware of that. 
It was a mistake and I behaved recklessly," he said, in a rare moment of contrition.
The English language service of the New China News Agency said Mr. Wan had been detained on suspicion of leaking state secrets and had confessed. 
He "deserved leniency according to the law," it said. 
There was no mention of his case on the Chinese language wire.
Through his Internet postings, Dr. Wan helped expose the scandalous epidemic in Henan, and his writings contain far more information than the document that got him in trouble, even though it was marked "secret."
Doctors here estimate that one million poor farmers in Henan were infected with H.I.V. in the 1990's after selling their blood to government-affiliated collectors.
In some villages where selling blood was common, more than half of adults are now infected, villagers said. 
Most have no access to medicines and are now dying, leaving behind many orphans, some of whom were also infected.
The document posted by Dr. Wan showed that provincial health authorities were well aware of a serious H.I.V. problem in Henan by the mid-90's, even though they publicly denied it for years afterward.
Dr. Wan said he was treated "cordially" in prison and was in good health. 
He said he was not told to leave the country, but said it would be inappropriate to discuss any conditions that might have been imposed. 
He said he was unaware of the campaign to secure his release.
"I'm extremely moved and grateful," he said. 
"I was also extremely moved that all my friends here involved in fighting AIDS did not back down or give up because of my case."
