
China said Friday that it had agreed to talks with the United States about a tax Beijing imposed on imported semiconductors that Washington contends gives Chinese producers an unfair advantage.
The United States started a complaint with the World Trade Organization last week over the 17 percent value-added tax China places on semiconductors, the chips that power electronics from cellphones to supercomputers.
China has ''accepted the U.S. demand and agreed to hold discussions on the issue of drawing back the semiconductor value-added tax,'' the Commerce Ministry said.
It said the time and place for discussions was still to be decided.
American chip companies and United States officials have said that China gives its producers an unfair advantage in the $19 billion Chinese semiconductor market by providing big rebates.
Last week, China said it was puzzled by the United States complaint, a mild response free of any hint of retaliation. 
At the time, the Commerce Ministry said China and the United States had held several rounds of talks on the issue.
The United States case was the first against China since it joined the W.T.O. in December 2001. 
It followed criticism by Senator John Kerry, the presumptive Democratic presidential candidate, that the Bush administration had not done enough to enforce the commitments Beijing made when admitted to the trade body.
It came one month before Vice Premier Wu Yi was expected to go to Washington for the first round of talks with the United States trade representative and commerce secretary under a new joint commission on trade aimed at smoothing Chinese-United States trade ties.
Last year, American companies exported $2.02 billion worth of semiconductors to China and paid about $344 million in value-added taxes. 
Chinese semiconductor companies, which receive a tax rebate of about 80 percent, had an effective tax rate of as little as 3 percent, United States trade officials said.
Washington's action formally started a 60-day period for the two countries to try to resolve the issue. 
Nations usually do not initiate action at the W.T.O. until attempts to negotiate a resolution have failed.
