
For the last few years, Li Xiangen has refused to live in the countryside and work as a farmer -- even though his registration at birth as a rural resident allows him few legal alternatives. 
Instead, he has made his home in Santai, a small city near this provincial capital, working as an itinerant fountain pen repairman.
But because of his household registration, or hukou, he remains tethered to his distant land. 
His residence status requires him to continue paying farm taxes, even though his fields have lain fallow for years. 
But in cities, he is considered an illegal immigrant, barred from most jobs and social services. 
He must pay special fees for medical care or to send his daughter to school.
Increasingly irate at being locked into what he calls his "second-class status," Mr. Li published an extraordinary letter in a Chinese newspaper earlier this year. 
"The Hukou System: Racial Discrimination with Chinese Characteristics" was a fiery essay giving expression to the growing resentment among the 74 percent of China's population -- 1 billion people -- who are officially registered as rural residents.
" 'Farmer' shouldn't be a label, it should be a profession like any other, which people have the freedom to leave," Mr. Li said in an interview. 
"The hukou system is a source of great inequality here."
Now, at least partly in response to voices like Mr. Li's, this outdated system seems finally to be changing.
This year, the central government announced its intention to conduct a gradual overhaul of the hukou system, which is a holdover from the 1950's when the Maoist command economy required tight controls over the flow of labor.
In the meantime, the system is being slowly undermined from below. 
A handful of smaller cities and even provincial capitals have begun offering residency rights to outsiders, both to attract skilled workers and to cope with the increasing dissatisfaction of rural migrants who are already there.
There is enormous pressure for change. 
For several years now, economists, government planners and businesspeople have complained that residency restrictions on labor are impeding economic development, forcing businesses to hire more expensive laborers just because they have the right permit and preventing them from hiring skilled professionals who do not.
More recently, scholars and even migrants like Mr. Li have been attacking the system as violating a basic right of freedom of movement, maintaining what is in effect a form of apartheid, dividing the relatively privileged cities from the poorer countryside.
And then there is the practical matter: Since the 1980's, millions of migrants like Mr. Li have left the land in search of a better life in China's cities. 
Today, in virtually every Chinese city, they form a large and potentially restive underclass.
"The system has become one of the main focuses of conflict in Chinese society," said Zhong Dajun, an independent scholar and business consultant in Beijing. 
"The government should change it fast."
Indeed, as Mr. Zhong held forth in a restaurant on Beijing's west side, a bevy of waitresses in long red traditional dresses gathered round to express their appreciation for his denunciation of the system's inequities. 
All the women were illegal migrants from the countryside.
"The Chinese government probably wouldn't be considering reform if it weren't for the influence on business development," Mr. Zhong said. 
"But more important are the humanitarian concerns. 
From the perspective of equality and of human rights, the hukou system just isn't fair."
The hukou system has persisted largely because officials fear that major relaxation would result in a flood of poor farmers to cities, straining resources and producing crime. 
Until recently, most Chinese did not protest, accepting the system as a fact of life. 
A person's hukou was immutable unless he was moved at the government's behest, typically through job assignments that did not always allow spouses and children to come along. 
Even students who attended top universities in Beijing had to return to their registered homes after graduation.
Today, the Chinese government plays to a more knowledgeable rural population. 
Living in cities, illegal rural migrants become increasingly aware of the discrimination and increasingly vocal about their rights.
Mr. Li said he started to appreciate and resent the hukou system only after he began traveling to repair students' fountain pens in 1998.
"I hang around schools and universities a lot, which gives me a chance to read newspapers," he said, citing stories in the state media that criticized the residency system.
In Santai, Mr. Li and his wife cannot work legally and are ineligible for the social benefits, like medical insurance and pensions, that most urban residents take for granted. 
Each year, they pay hundreds of dollars in fees that their neighbors with legal residence do not, and their daughter, at 6, is something of a displaced person.
"My daughter has a rural hukou, but she has grown up in the township and when we go to the village she doesn't feel like she belongs there," he said. 
"The roads there are bad, the people are poor and she complains that there's nothing to do."
To date, most cities have opened their gates just a sliver, letting in only those who already have local homes and jobs, though a handful have gone much further.
With the hukou reforms that have already crept into Sichuan Province, Mr. Li said he could switch his household registration, making his family legal urban residents in small cities like Santai. 
It would mean filling out forms and paying a fee. 
But he feels he should not have to.
"The system is a violation of United Nations human rights covenants," he said. 
"I don't want it reformed. 
I want it abolished."
