
IN preparation for the Olympic Games later this summer in Beijing, the Chinese government has released an official list of suggested English translations for Chinese dishes, a road map through idiosyncratic nomenclature that officials fear will spook or confuse thousands of tourists.
''Sometimes it's scary how they translate the names,'' said Frank Wong, an owner of Trey Yuen, a well-known Chinese restaurant outside New Orleans. 
''They translate it word to word, and when you translate it to English it doesn't mean something -- like 'ants climbing up a tree.'
''
The official list recommends eliminating the entomological reference from that name, and calling the dish ''sauteed vermicelli with spicy minced pork'' instead.
The list of some 2,000 menu items, built over the last two years through feedback at a government Web site, serves as a useful guide to restaurateurs not just in China, but in the United States.
While the vast majority of names of dishes in American Chinese restaurants are fairly descriptive -- ''beef with broccoli'' and ''chicken with cashew nuts,'' for example -- there are a number of traditional Chinese dishes that for generations have presented quandaries for chefs who want to list them on their menus.
''Happy family,'' for instance, has been rechristened a more descriptive (if less joyous) ''assorted stewed delicacies.''
The ''red-roasted lion's head'' -- braised pork served with a mane of bok choy leaves -- is now ''stewed pork ball in brown sauce.''
''Husband-and-wife lung slices'' is now described more precisely, but no more invitingly, as ''pork lungs in chili sauce.''
(''Husband-and-wife'' is a common description for pairings.)
The list attempts to clear up confusion about dishes with less unusual names. 
''I have struggled with 'fish-fragrant eggplant' my entire career,'' said Ed Schoenfeld, a long-time Chinese restaurant consultant based in Brooklyn. 
The dish, so named because its flavorings are common in Sichuan fish dishes, is known as ''eggplant with garlic sauce'' on menus in the United States. 
But the government's suggested name is ''yu-shiang eggplant,'' freeing it of connotations of garlic or fish in English.
''One of the things that happens is that a lot of dishes got poorly translated into English, and the English names stuck, so yu-shiang sauce became garlic sauce,'' said Mr. Schoenfeld, who pointed out that there is a lot more ginger than garlic in the sauce.
Like yu-shiang eggplant, a few Chinese dishes were given a simple transliteration of their Chinese name. 
Mapo tofu, a spicy bean curd stew with pork, is a more appetizing name than its loose English translation, ''pock-marked old lady's tofu.''
But neither transliteration nor translation seem to satisfactorily describe the wide varieties of Chinese cooking techniques. 
Many subtleties of Chinese cuisine have been funneled into catch-all terms.
The word ''spicy'' is used for chili-infused dishes, those flavored with five-spice powder, and for the fiery ''ma la'' taste of Sichuan peppercorns. 
''Braised'' has become an umbrella term to encompass ''red roast,'' ''iron pot'' and other styles of cooking.
''Sweet and sour'' is heavily used, sometimes for the better. 
''Squirrel Mandarin fish'' is now ''sweet and sour Mandarin fish.''
The Chinese fondness for numbers manifests itself on the list. 
Some of the official translations use numbers (''eight delicacies rice'' is a literal name).
Some spell out the constituent ingredients: ''three fresh things from the ground'' has become ''sauteed potato, green pepper and eggplant.''
Some ignore numbers completely (''three-color shredded beef'' has become ''stir-fried shredded beef with vegetables.'')
In other cases the official list simply helps iron out combinations that might have resulted in awkward Chinglish: ''Saliva chicken'' (so named because it's mouth-watering) has become ''steamed chicken with chili sauce.''
''Special flavored shredded chicken'' sounds tastier than ''strange flavored shredded chicken.''
The standardization is an important step. 
''Uniformity is important so that people know what it is we're talking about,'' Mr. Schoenfeld said.
The list is a reminder that the quirkiness of translation goes both ways: cocktails are known as ''chicken tail alcohol'' in Chinese. 
Another popular American mainstay is listed on Chinese menus as ''warm canine'' -- in other words, ''hot dog.''
