
Chinese automakers, under pressure from the government to produce more fuel-efficient cars, unveiled an unexpectedly broad array of prototypes for fuel-cell cars, gasoline-electric hybrid cars and electric battery cars at the Shanghai auto show on Friday.
The variety and sophistication of the cars showed a striking improvement not just since the last Shanghai auto show two years ago, when Chinese automakers demonstrated scant technological innovation, but even in the months since the Beijing auto show last November.
Universities and technical institutes across China have started advanced vehicle propulsion research programs, combining strong government financial backing with China's growing ranks of skilled engineers.
China, worried about severe air pollution and rising dependence on imported oil, has already imposed more stringent fuel economy standards than the United States -- although not as strict as the semi-voluntary standards in the European Union.
China plans to tighten its standards considerably next year. 
It has raised its consumption tax to as much as 20 percent on gas guzzlers, while cutting it to 1 percent for cars with small fuel-sipping engines. 
And it is studying the possibility of tax incentives for buyers of hybrids.
Multinational automakers like General Motors and Volkswagen have begun cooperating closely with Chinese joint venture partners on the development of hybrid gasoline-electric vehicles. 
Larry Burns, G.M.'s vice president for research and development, said the company was in talks with a Chinese joint venture partner on sharing hydrogen fuel-cell technology as well.
Xu Liuping, the chief executive of Changan Automobile in Chongqing, said the Chinese auto industry was hard working to save energy.
''The speed will be accelerated because available energy supplies are dwindling and because of the environmental protection aspect,'' Mr. Xu said in an interview at the Shanghai auto show.
Changan showed a hybrid gasoline-electric minivan here. 
Mr. Xu said that he had lined up local governments that promised to use it, making it possible for Changan to start manufacturing the vehicle next year.
Rick Wagoner, G.M.'s chairman and chief executive, and Nick Reilly, the president of G.M.'s Asian and Pacific regional operations, met on Thursday with senior Chinese officials in Beijing to discuss the company's energy efficiency plans, Mr. Reilly said. 
The Chinese government has not chosen among options like electric battery cars, fuel cells, hybrids and ethanol combustion, but wants the industry to move quickly to find the best approach and adopt it.
''It's absolutely at the top of the agenda'' of the Chinese leadership, Mr. Reilly said.
Western environmentalists have long speculated whether China may actually leapfrog the West in personal transportation by embracing new automotive technologies before the country's oil and auto industries can become too wedded to internal combustion engines.
The odds of such a leapfrogging have eroded because nobody has yet surmounted the technological obstacles that prevent a broad switch from gasoline technology to hydrogen fuel cells, said An Feng, the executive director of the Innovation Center for Energy and Transportation in Beijing.
Japanese companies, particularly Toyota and Honda, are already far ahead in the hybrid gasoline-electric designs that have proved more attractive lately to Chinese companies than fuel cells, said Kelly Sims Gallagher, the director of the Energy Technology Innovation Project at Harvard. 
Japanese companies also control many crucial patents on hybrid technology.
Multinational automakers face repeated demands from Chinese joint venture partners to share the most advanced technology available. 
Katsumi Nakamura, the president and chief executive of Dongfeng Motor, a joint venture in Hubei Province between Nissan and the Dongfeng Group of China, said the Dongfeng side had tried to negotiate an agreement that would require the sharing of the latest technology.
But at Nissan's insistence, the final pact calls only for the sharing of ''appropriate'' technology.
Auto executives are reluctant to mention the illegal copying of technology in China, a problem that discouraged Chrysler from even trying to build minivans in China in the 1990s. 
China's vehicle market is now the second largest in the world, after the United States, and still expanding. 
It grew another 34 percent in the first two months of this year compared with the period a year earlier. 
Automakers have decided to risk the occasional piracy of existing designs but are still wary of sharing future technologies.
G.M. has been the multinational automaker most willing to share designs with Chinese partners, and Mr. Wagoner reaffirmed in an interview with reporters on Friday that G.M. plans to maintain this policy.
Mr. Burns said that G.M.'s lawyers believe that the automaker can share fuel-cell technology with a joint venture partner, the Shanghai Automotive Industry Corporation, even though G.M. had collaborated with the federal government in the United States on fuel-cell research. 
American export control laws are aimed only at preventing the transfer to foreign powers of technology with potential military applications, while not restricting the transfer of purely civilian technology.
Mr. Burns said, ''It's in the best interest of the United States for China to diversify its energy resources.''
Brushing aside a question about the possibility of illegal copying, Mr. Burns added, ''We have a good partnership with S.A.I.C. and a lot of trust -- at some point you just have to rely on your relationships.''
Mr. Wagoner announced at the auto show on Friday that G.M. was far enough along in designing fuel cells that it could spend the next three or four years doing engineering work on a production process for them. 
G.M. showed a fuel-cell vehicle here that in some ways is more advanced than a model shown at the Detroit auto show three months ago. 
The prototype here relies more on hydrogen and, unlike the Detroit show prototype, does not include a small gasoline engine as a backup.
China ''may very well be the first country to develop a broad-based fuel cell infrastructure,'' Mr. Wagoner said.
S.A.I.C. and Chery each showed prototypes here of fuel cell cars that they said they had developed on their own. 
Haima, a less-known Chinese automaker, showed an electric battery car.
Mr. Burns said that China was especially well suited for fuel-cell technology because the cities are densely populated and there is little driving between cities.
China is also the world's leading steel producer, and the production process for steel produces a significant amount of hydrogen gas as a byproduct, which could be stored and used for cars. 
Steel mills currently vent the hydrogen into the atmosphere.
