
Alarmed by high world oil prices and sporadic shortages of gasoline and diesel fuel in big cities this summer, China's leaders are drafting plans to impose steep taxes on cars and sport utility vehicles with gas-guzzling engines.
The taxes would add as much as 27 percent to the price of vehicles with big engines, notably sports cars and S.U.V.'s, auto industry officials and people advising the government on the plan said. 
At the same time, taxes may be cut slightly for models with the smallest, most efficient engines, though the details of these cuts are still under discussion, they said.
The taxes follow China's adoption on July 1 of fuel economy standards that are more stringent than those in force in the United States. 
The Bush administration announced plans on Tuesday to phase in tougher fuel economy rules for light-duty trucks in the 2008-11 model years, but the Chinese have already imposed stiffer standards to take effect in 2008-9.
Since the 1970's, the United States has had a so-called gas-guzzler tax up to $7,700 on cars that get very low gasoline mileage. 
The tax falls mainly on sports cars with huge engines, like Ferraris, because S.U.V.'s, pickup trucks and minivans are exempt from the tax -- an exception that has contributed to a shift away from cars and toward these trucklike vehicles in the American market.
The planned taxes in China are part of a much broader effort to improve the nation's energy security. 
Efforts by state-controlled oil companies to buy foreign businesses have drawn the most attention, particularly Cnooc's unsuccessful $18.5 billion bid this summer for Unocal, and China National Petroleum's $4.18 billion deal on Monday to buy PetroKazakhstan.
But China has also been focusing on energy efficiency. 
Zhang Guobao, vice minister of the State Development and Reform Commission, said last week that China's next five-year plan, for 2006 through 2010, would put energy conservation ahead of expanding supplies, the official New China News Agency said.
The State Council, or cabinet, is in the final stages of drafting the new automobile taxes, a complex process involving many government agencies, said He Dongquan, the transportation program official in the Beijing office of the Energy Foundation, a nonprofit group that has worked with the government on the issue. 
''I'm quite sure it will be adopted in the next one or two months,'' he said.
Feng Fei, director of the industry department at the State Council's Development and Research Center, said in June that his agency had submitted a plan calling for steep increases in excise taxes from automakers on vehicles with big engines that burn more gasoline, The China Daily reported then.
''The taxation change is mainly aimed at encouraging car owners to consume less oil and at cushioning environmental pressures,'' Mr. Feng said in June. 
A call to his office on Thursday was not answered.
With rising gasoline prices already pushing consumers toward more fuel-efficient models, auto manufacturers appear to be offering little resistance to the planned new tax.
''The move is consistent with energy conservation plans, and we believe it is the right way to go in achieving energy efficiency in society,'' said Li Fengzhen, chief financial controller of Great Wall Automobile Holding, a manufacturer of medium-size S.U.V.'s that would face slightly higher taxes under the plan.
China currently imposes an excise tax of 3 percent, 5 percent or 8 percent on cars -- those with larger engines pay higher rates -- while taxes on S.U.V.'s and minivans are 3 percent or 5 percent. 
Under the new rules nearing completion, the taxes would range from 1 or 2 percent for vehicles with the smallest engines to 20 percent for vehicles with engines of four liters or more, said An Feng, director of the Auto Project on Energy and Climate Change. 
That group is a nongovernmental organization in Beijing that has advised officials on fuel economy policy, though it has not been directly involved in drafting the new tax regulations.
(While a four-liter engine is considered quite large in most of the world, it is typical for an American sport utility vehicle. 
For example, the standard six-cylinder engine of the Ford Explorer, the best-selling S.U.V. in the United States, displaces 4 liters, though a larger 8-cylinder, 4.6-liter engine is available.)
In addition, the Chinese government has been working on a gas-guzzler tax similar to the American tax but covering S.U.V.'s and minivans in addition to cars, Mr. An said. 
Mr. He of the Energy Foundation said that the tax would vary from 5 percent to 15 percent, depending on engine size, and would apply to vehicles that fell short of the fuel economy standards imposed on July 1.
Chinese vehicle taxes largely exclude pickup trucks, which are separately regulated and sell in tiny numbers. 
Minivans in China tend to have medium or small engines and may not face much of a tax increase.
The track record of gas-guzzler taxes on vehicles in promoting energy efficiency has been mixed in other countries, said Paul Blokland, director of Segment Y, a consulting firm in Bangalore, India, that tracks automakers in Asia. 
Very affluent consumers who can afford big vehicles with large engines tend not to be discouraged by extra taxes on the initial price of the vehicle, he said.
Yale Zhang, an analyst in the Shanghai office of CSM Worldwide, a global automotive consulting firm, said that most Chinese buyers, unlike Americans, already chose vehicles with smaller engines. 
So increased taxes will fall on just a small share of the market.
The multinational company that may face the biggest burden from the taxes is likely to be DaimlerChrysler, which sells Jeeps and big Mercedes sedans in China. 
Grand Cherokees with 4-liter and 4.7-liter engines, not especially large by American standards, would fall in the highest category of excise taxes. 
Trevor Hale, a DaimlerChrysler spokesman in Beijing, said the automaker had not seen the details but supported the government's general desire to improve fuel economy.
Chinese officials had talked earlier this year of imposing a fuel tax once world oil prices started to decline, so as to hold domestic gasoline and diesel fuel prices at whatever peak they might reach. 
High prices would then encourage long-term attention to efficiency, the officials reasoned. 
But they have lately been silent on the matter of a fuel tax, having had to cope with dissatisfaction from taxi drivers in particular over fuel price increases that have already occurred.
The government-regulated retail price for gasoline in China has risen to $1.73 a gallon this month from $1.29 a gallon two years ago, an increase that has lagged behind the steep climb in global crude oil prices.
Many service stations in southeastern China ran out of gasoline and diesel fuel a week ago, shortages the government attributed to shipping disruptions resulting from a passing typhoon and a tropical storm.
But shipping executives said that the storms had no effect on deliveries by tankers. 
China's main refiner, Sinopec, has blamed hoarding for the shortages, as businesses and drivers keep an eye on oil prices and top up tanks now in anticipation that Chinese retail prices, adjusted only once a month, will rise next month.
