
Chinese authorities moved to contain a widening slave labor scandal with an apology from a provincial governor for abuses that have shocked the country, and the arrest of two labor officials, state news media said Friday.
Yu Youjun, the governor of Shanxi Province in northern central China, took responsibility for the failure to protect hundreds of farmers, migrant workers and children forced to work without pay in brick kilns and other businesses, the official Xinhua News Agency said.
''As Shanxi governor, I'll take the blame for the scandal that infringed the rights of farm workers and children,'' Mr. Yu was quoted as saying. 
''I feel guilty and heart-stricken over the scandal. 
It has infringed the rights of migrant workers and children, hurt them both physically and mentally, and had a shocking effect both in and out of China.''
The outcry over forced labor is a serious blow to the ruling Communist Party under the leadership of President Hu Jintao and Prime Minister Wen Jiabao, who are trying to promote their vision of a harmonious society sharing the benefits of the country's extended economic boom.
The reality for many workers in remote provinces, far from the booming coastal cities, is that they are vulnerable to exploitation without any protection from the government or unions, labor activists say.
Those abuses contribute to widespread dissatisfaction and anger in rural areas, where protests and demonstrations are now common.
On Thursday, the police arrested two labor inspectors from Yongji city in Shanxi who were accused of negligence and abuse of their powers, Xinhua reported.
Amid a national outcry, the central government has begun an inquiry into the widespread exploitation of migrant workers and children in the backward province.
Some of the workers and children were abducted from rural train and bus stations or enticed to travel to the kilns with bogus offers of good pay and conditions.
Once they arrived, they were often beaten, poorly fed and forcibly prevented from leaving, according to news media reports.
The abuses were exposed in reports in China's increasingly feisty news media last week after parents had unsuccessfully pleaded with the authorities for assistance to find and free their children.
Earlier this month, more than 400 parents in neighboring Henan Province posted a letter on the Internet complaining that their children had been abducted and sold as laborers to brick kiln operators in Shanxi.
Chinese journalists say the authorities have since tried to limit coverage of the abuses, which have highlighted an often unseen consequence of China's economic boom: the brutal working conditions endured by many workers in remote areas of the country.
But coverage has continued with the official news media also saying Friday that the police had placed 35 people in criminal detention and were hunting for 20 others suspected of involvement in the use of forced labor in the kilns.
There are suggestions that further abuses may be uncovered. 
''Forced laborers of unknown number, both adults and children, may still be suffering,'' the official China Daily newspaper said, ''and officials who have shielded the notorious business have yet to be brought to justice.''
Investigators have rescued 359 people, including 65 who are mentally retarded and 12 children, from the kilns, the reports said. 
The police in Henan rescued more than 200 others, the reports said.
Employment of children younger than 16 is forbidden in China, but the investigation has exposed the complicity of local officials in the scandal, state news media reported.
China's central government has ordered provincial authorities in Shanxi to mount a full investigation and to compensate victims.
Authorities from Hongtong County in Shanxi sent teams to 12 provinces to visit the homes of victims to deliver letters of apology, pay outstanding salaries and arrange compensation, Xinhua said.
