
To many Western companies, China is the future, either as a huge potential customer or a looming low-cost competitor. 
But in the world's metal markets, that future has already arrived, and Noranda, the Canadian mining group, has the bruises to prove it.
Noranda, a unit of Brascan, and its partners spent years and 733 million Canadian dollars ($496 million) to build the world's biggest magnesium smelting plant, at Danville, Quebec, and planned to have it go into commercial production around now. 
Instead, it is being mothballed, and Noranda has written off its 80 percent stake in the plant.
Noranda says that the plant cannot be run economically now chiefly because so much magnesium, a lightweight metal used mainly in the electronics, auto and aviation industries, is pouring out of China. 
From hardly any production a decade ago, China has shot up to become the world's biggest exporter. 
According to Richard Opatick, director of the International Magnesium Association in Washington, magnesium prices have fallen by half in the last three years, as Noranda's plant was being completed.
China "is the subject on everyone's mind," said David Humphreys, chief economist with Rio Tinto, the mining giant. 
"It is very big indeed, and growing bigger by the month."
And not just on the supply side. 
Inco, the West's biggest nickel producer, told analysts last month that demand in China for stainless steel, which is made with nickel, expanded so fast last year that the growth alone was equal to more than half of total consumption in the United States or Japan. 
In the presentation to analysts, much of which was devoted to China's impact, Peter Goudie, Inco's executive vice president for marketing, said, "It is easy to understand why China has become such a dominant influence in nickel and across the full range of metals."
China's fast-growing economy is one of the world's few bright spots for some industrial commodities that China imports. 
But for others, the combination of government subsidies, cheap credit, cheap electricity and lax environmental controls has fueled huge increases in production, far in excess of domestic demand.
"The Chinese business model is based on creating a critical mass and then finding the market," said Simon Hunt, a British consultant who specializes in China and spends several months a year there. 
According to Mr. Humphreys at Rio Tinto, "Rapid growth of China's exports has hit prices and put huge pressure on producers elsewhere in the world."
China is becoming the most important actor in the market for one metal after another.
Copper is one example. 
Bloomsbury Minerals Economics, a London consulting firm, estimates that China's use of refined copper grew 21 percent in 2001 and 13 percent last year, moving it ahead of the United States as the world's biggest consumer.
Bloomsbury forecasts a further 10 percent rise in 2003, reflecting the rapid expansion of China's electric power grid and rapidly growing demand for domestic appliances. 
By contrast, copper consumption in the United States is expected to inch up by just 1.4 percent.
China also accounted for two-thirds of the increase in global demand for nickel in 2002. 
Its purchases of alumina, the raw material used for aluminum, have helped almost double world prices in the last year.
China is now the world's second-biggest importer of iron ore and of lead, and has become the top producer of steel, aluminum and tungsten. 
Its exports of tin, coal and a number of industrial minerals are rising fast.
These trends generate both excitement and worry among metals executives in the West. 
Copper producers, for example, are delighted, because little high-grade ore has been discovered in China and the country must import refined metal to meet its needs -- a rare source of strength in a largely depressed industry. 
Bloomsbury calculates that Chinese imports have surged by an average of 37 percent a year since 1999, and are probably still growing at that pace.
"There is certainly no sign of a reversal just yet, with booming domestic consumer spending rather than exports driving the market," the consulting company reported in February. 
"China, yet again, appears to be the savior of the copper market."
But China sends shivers through other markets. 
The United States and the European Union have moved to impose duties on Chinese magnesium, saying that China is dumping the metal on the market at prices below the cost of production. 
In addition to the Noranda plant in Quebec, the slump in prices has recently forced the closings of the last two primary magnesium producers in Europe, one in France and one in Norway.
Mr. Humphreys of Rio Tinto said that aluminum was "potentially another magnesium situation."
China has gone from importing 132,000 tons of aluminum in 2001 to exporting about 220,000 tons last year. 
China has a substantial advantage, according to Carmine Nappi, director of industry analysis at Alcan, a major producer based in Montreal. 
"They can build a smelter in less time than us, and the cost is half that in the Western world," Mr. Nappi said.
Mr. Nappi, however, expects that surge in Chinese exports to be short-lived. 
The sharp rise in world alumina prices over the last year is likely to encourage Chinese producers to shut down old, inefficient plants and limit their output to domestic needs, which are expanding because of a boom in construction, in car production and in erection of power lines, he said.
Doing business with China can be a headache for Western producers because of uncertainties about government policies and the legal system there. 
Peter Hollands, head of research at Bloomsbury Minerals, said that while Western producers and buyers of metals commonly sign long-term contracts, most business with China is conducted on spot markets through trading companies.
Still, Western analysts said that China's recent entry into the World Trade Organization and the country's growing contacts with foreign companies have helped promote mutual understanding.
"You've seen a wholesale change in attitude, both in the state-owned companies and the private sector," Mr. Hunt, the consultant, said of China.
The Chinese government is taking steps to modernize the industry and its practices. 
Kaihui Yang, a University of Toronto research geologist, said in an e-mail interview from Yunnan in southwest China that more than 150,000 small mines in the country have been closed for environmental or safety reasons since 1998. 
According to Dr. Yang, subsidies for small or unprofitable mines and processing plants have been "largely removed."
A new mining law, due to take effect this month, "will be more favorable for foreign investments," Dr. Yang said.
According to Mr. Humphreys, the Chinese government "has become increasingly aware that uncontrolled selling has damaged its own interests, suppressing world prices and encouraging the over-rapid depletion of its domestic resources."
China's shifting role in the zinc market may offer lessons for other metals. 
A burst of zinc shipments from China severely disrupted world markets in the late 1990's and 2000. 
But, according to the International Lead and Zinc Study Group in London, mine closings since then have resulted in the first drop in Chinese refined zinc output in almost two decades. 
Last year, China became one of the biggest customers for Western zinc producers.
