
Chinese armed forces have moved into new positions along the country's border with North Korea, charged with defending an 870-mile-long frontier that is often violated by hungry refugees from that isolated state.
Chinese Foreign Ministry officials confirmed in a statement today that army troops had replaced the police along the border, though they did not confirm Hong Kong press reports that as many as 150,000 soldiers were involved.
The move marks a subtle but significant change in relations between the two Communist nations, which fought together against the United States and other nations in the Korean War and still have a mutual defense treaty.
While Chinese officials described the new border arrangement as a routine adjustment, it comes at a time when China has exerted new pressure on North Korea to abandon its nuclear weapons program. 
China is the main sponsor of negotiations involving North Korea, the United States and three other countries that are trying to reach a negotiated settlement of the nuclear issue.
Chinese troop movements near North Korea and Myanmar, formerly Burma, have attracted attention in recent weeks. 
Several Hong Kong newspapers have reported that as many as 150,000 troops have been assigned to tighten security along the Korean border.
Several analysts said they had seen no evidence of a troop movement of that size. 
But they said the dispatch of army troops did suggest that China was worried about conflict in the area.
"I think this shows that China is getting more concerned about the overall state of affairs in North Korea and the refugee problem in particular," said Ma Dingsheng, a Chinese military analyst in Hong Kong. 
"But we are not seeing the kind of deployment you would see if China were contemplating military action."
He said the border troops were the type who guarded China's boundaries in some other areas, like the restive Western region of Xinjiang, and were not equipped with tanks or artillery.
The Korean border has been a source of consternation for China in recent years, as North Koreans have slipped over in increasingly large numbers to escape poverty, famine and political repression. 
Groups devoted to helping the refugees say as many as 300,000 North Koreans live in northeastern China, often in constant fear of being captured and repatriated by the Chinese police.
Though many North Koreans manage to live and work in China unofficially, Beijing often rounds up refugees and sends them back to North Korea. 
By many accounts, the North Korean authorities severely punish those people when they return.
The Bush administration has pressed China to allow more North Koreans to flee across the border as a way of putting pressure on the government of Kim Jong Il or even of causing it to collapse. 
But China has resisted those entreaties.
