
Secretary of State Colin L. Powell said Monday that China had agreed to discuss the American request for a new dialogue over the detention of Chinese citizens without due process and other human rights violations. 
The talks broke off earlier this year because of Chinese objections to American criticism of its practices.
Mr. Powell also said he had sought to encourage China to have a dialogue with Taiwan to resolve its differences with Taiwanese leaders. 
But on this subject, Chinese leaders responded negatively, giving Mr. Powell what an aide said was ''an earful'' of criticism over American military aid to Taiwan.
Speaking to reporters after a morning of meetings with top Chinese leaders, Mr. Powell said the agreement to discuss a possible resumption of the human rights dialogue came as he again expressed American concern to the foreign minister, Li Zhaoxing, about the arrest of a research assistant working for The New York Times.
As he had after meeting with Mr. Li on Oct. 
1, Mr. Powell said the foreign minister would ''look into the matter,'' but he said he had been told that the research assistant, Zhao Yan, was being dealt with according to Chinese law. 
''We did have a pretty candid exchange on the subject,'' Mr. Powell said.
Senior State Department officials said after Mr. Powell's comments that Mr. Zhao's arrest illustrated the general problem of the lack of rule of law in China, where dissenters and others are often seized and punished without due process, and that this should be the subject of broad Chinese-American talks.
A senior official said the Chinese improved their human rights record two years ago, but lapsed last year into the practice of arresting people without regard to their legal rights. 
The United States introduced a resolution criticizing China at the United Nations Human Rights Commission in Geneva this year.
''They were extremely unhappy about that resolution,'' the official said. 
As a result, on human rights, ''we have not been able to have talks, even at the routine level.''
His comments were made on Mr. Powell's plane as he headed toward Seoul after spending a day in Beijing.
Mr. Powell said he had told Chinese leaders that China had been ''moving backward'' on human rights ''with respect to detention of journalists, with respect to other individuals who have not been able to move about as freely and participate in civil society as freely as we would like to see.''
He said that for the past year, the United States and China had not discussed this issue ''as openly and candidly as we should.''
He said that one advantage of a broader dialogue, as opposed to talking about individual cases like that of Mr. Zhao, was that it would encompass Chinese concerns about American criticism.
On Taiwan, American officials have recently been saying that although China has been helpful in holding negotiations with North Korea on its nuclear program, Chinese leaders have become increasingly vocal about American support for Taiwan's government.
The Chinese official news agency reported that President Hu Jintao told Mr. Powell that it was in the interest of China and the United States to oppose Taiwan's independence. 
Mr. Hu was reported to have said that he appreciated American support of a one-China policy, but that harm was being done by American support of Taiwan's activities.
China has claimed sovereignty over Taiwan since the Communist victory in the Chinese civil war in 1949, and has long objected to any diplomatic, economic or military ties Taiwan has with other countries. 
Despite American support for Beijing's position that Taiwan is part of China, successive American administrations have given Taiwan military aid to defend itself against attack.
Chinese criticism of the United States has accelerated as Taiwan's president, Chen Shuibian, has started talking about constitutional changes that the Chinese see as possibly leading to independence, something they view as anathema.
As for North Korea, State Department officials said China was engaging in ''a very active period of diplomacy'' to press the North Korean government to stop boycotting talks about its nuclear arms program. 
''I see China as a full participant, and not just as a convener in the talks,'' Mr. Powell said, referring to discussions involving China, Russia, Japan, South Korea and the United States.
A State Department official said that with effort by China, it was possible that talks on North Korea could resume in a few months.
