
Here on this history-soaked peninsula, where Portuguese culture mingles with the salt air of the South China Sea, a visitor from Brazil can start the day sipping cafe de manha, while scanning one of three local Portuguese daily newspapers or watching the news on one of two Portuguese-language television stations.
On the street, a taxi driver will pull down his ''livre,'' or ''free,'' sign and take a passenger past a tableau of coconut palms, baroque Catholic churches, whitewashed forts, hilltop lighthouses, blue tile street signs in Portuguese and Chinese, and bilingual banners advertising music festivals. 
Making the Portuguese-speaking visitor feel more at home, Radio Macao blares fado, bossa nova and news in Portuguese all day long.
Five years ago, when Portugal surrendered this 10-square-mile enclave to China, most people predicted that its language would disappear here in a blink of an eye. 
The Portuguese had done little to promote their language here since their merchants first stepped ashore around 1553. 
By the time they left, only about 2 percent of Macao's 450,000 people spoke the language of Lisbon, with the other 98 percent speaking Cantonese and other languages.
But in a surprising turnaround, enrollments for private Portuguese classes have tripled, to 1,000, since 2002. 
That prompted public schools here to offer Portuguese this fall, drawing more than 5,000 students.
''The number of Portuguese speakers has exploded in the last year,'' said Manuel F. Moreira de Almeida, a longtime Portuguese resident who runs Livraria Portuguesa, a bookstore on a narrow colonial street here. 
''In a few years, there will be more Portuguese speakers here than during the Portuguese time.''
If economics dictate the rise and fall of languages, the renaissance of Portuguese is dictated by Beijing's new determination that Macao will serve as a platform for China's growing commercial and strategic interests in the Latin world. 
Although gambling has long been the main industry here, tiny Macao has found a new role: China's link to the 220 million people of the Portuguese-speaking world.
While Beijing will always draw the top-level visits, like the trip last May by President Luis Inacio Lula da Silva of Brazil, Macao offers training programs and conventions in the culturally friendly environment of China's Mediterranean corner, where Portuguese, is, officially at least, on equal footing with Chinese.
''Macao can be a bridge between China and the Portuguese-speaking countries,'' China's vice commerce minister, An Min, said in October 2003 after trade talks here with seven Portuguese-speaking countries. 
Capping the talks, China signed an agreement to increase trade, investment and economic cooperation with Portugal and six of its former colonies: Brazil, Angola, Mozambique, Cape Verde, Guinea Bissau and East Timor. 
Sao Tome and Principe did not come because it has diplomatic relations with Taiwan.
The University of Macao now teaches law in Portuguese to Angolans and Mozambicans. 
Training seminars in tourism, nursing, translation and business administration draw students from the five Portuguese-speaking countries of Africa and from East Timor, an Asian land with long ties to this trading post on the Pearl River Delta.
''Macao could come in as a middleman, providing good quality services in training, translation and consultants,'' said Gary M.C. 
Ngai, a local researcher.
Slow to establish connections with Portuguese- and Spanish-speaking countries, China now is moving aggressively. 
Almost overnight, it has become Brazil's second-largest trading partner, after the United States, buying Brazilian iron, steel, aluminum and soy. 
China's bilateral trade with Brazil has quadrupled since 1999, to $6.7 billion last year. 
In return, China is backing Brazil's effort to gain a seat on the United Nations Security Council.
''China is intimidating from a military and industrial standpoint, but its special regions have a different image,'' Brazil's trade minister, Luiz Fernando Furlan, said here at the trade talks last year, referring to Macao and Hong Kong, according to The Associated Press.
In Northern Brazil, a $1.5 billion steel mill is being built in a joint venture between the Shanghai Baosteel Group and Companhia Vale do Rio Doce of Brazil, the world's largest iron ore producer. 
C.V.R.D. also has a partnership with the Chinese aluminum producer Chalco to build a $1 billion alumina refinery, also in northern Brazil.
Argentina's trade with China has doubled since 2000. 
Chile is negotiating a free trade pact with China.
As China becomes more and more dependent on imported oil, it is cultivating Angola, one of West Africa's largest oil producers. 
With business and official exchanges intensifying, China agreed recently to extend $2 billion in credits to Angola, largely to rebuild the nation's east-west railroad, a colonial-era line destroyed by 40 years of civil war.
''The resource-rich Portuguese-speaking countries and world's fastest-growing market, China, seem to be a perfect match,'' Mr. An, the Chinese vice commerce minister, said at the trade talks here last year, according to Xinhua. 
For these new markets, Macao is preparing a bank of bilingual translators.
Typical of the new direction, when the Macao International Trade and Investment Fair opens here Oct. 
21, there is to be a large section called the Chinese-Portuguese-Speaking Countries Fair.
After meeting here in early October, executives of Portugal Telecom, Portugal's largest company, are drawing up plans to expand from here into China.
Under a new Macao-China free trade deal, duty-free access is to start Jan. 
1, 2006, for about 93 percent of goods exported from here to China, and China's market is to be opened for 18 service sectors here, including telecommunications.
For Ricardo Pinto, editor of Ponto Final, one of the Portuguese dailies, the connection also allows this city ''some economic diversification away from gambling.''
Macao has billed itself in the past as the Monte Carlo of the Orient. 
Today, gambling is booming, swelling the ranks of the five million people expected to use Macao's international airport this year.
Its 15th casino, the Casa Real, opened recently and gambling revenue in Macao is up about 50 percent over last year, according to The Macao Post Daily, the city's first English-language newspaper, which opened in August. 
With billions of dollars planned in new casino investments, Macao expects to double its number of annual visitors by 2010, to 30 million, roughly the same as Las Vegas.
With Macao's per capita income hitting $17,000, near the level of Portugal, there is little economic incentive for the 110,000 Portuguese passport holders here to emigrate to Portugal. 
Riding the casino boom, the Macao government expects to collect $2 billion in gambling taxes this year, 60 percent more than last year.
Far from shrinking from Macao's colonial past, city leaders have restored and illuminated such colonial landmarks as churches, forts, hospitals, theaters, museums, an observatory and the governor's palace. 
Rare for a modern Asian city, the historic preservation has been so extensive that Macao is expected to win recognition next year from Unesco as a world heritage site.
''They have gone from heritage preservation to heritage cultivation,'' said Harald Bruning, director of The Macao Post Daily.
The pastels, burnt red tile roofs, Portuguese cod dishes and swarms of motor scooters give an ample taste of the Mediterranean. 
All company names and road signs are required to be written in Portuguese and Chinese, which can leave English-speaking visitors bewildered.
But as Mr. Almeida, who sees a new generation of Portuguese speakers walking into his bookstore, said, ''Portuguese has gone from a colonial hangover to a business opportunity.''
