
China lent Russia $6 billion late last year to enable Rosneft, which is owned by the Russian government, to buy Yukos's biggest oil-producing unit, Kremlin officials said Tuesday.
Through a complex financing chain, Chinese banks lent $6 billion to Russia via Vneshekonombank, a government-owned bank that had already credited Rosneft some of the money to pay for Yuganskneftegas, the Yukos production unit.
Yuganskneftegas, the most important of Yukos's three production divisions, pumps a million barrels of oil a day. 
It was auctioned by the government in December for $9.35 billion to help defray a $14 billion tax claim against Yukos.
The $6 billion loan was backed by Rosneft's promise of oil deliveries over the next few years to China, underscoring just how willing China is to strike creative deals to meet its energy needs.
Aleksei Kudrin, Russia's finance minister, told news agencies Tuesday that Vneshekonombank ''borrowed $6 billion from Chinese banks to credit Rosneft,'' clearing up the mystery of how Rosneft came up with the $9.35 billion price tag. 
Export-Import Bank of China and other Chinese banks lent the money to Vneshekonombank, he added.
A Rosneft spokesman declined to comment on the financing.
The terms of Rosneft's oil pledges were not clear, and the deal as described by Mr. Kudrin was slightly different from the one described by Sergei Oganesian, the head of the Federal Energy Agency in Russia. 
Mr. Oganesian, who sits on the board of Rosneft, told a news conference on Tuesday that Rosneft had obtained a $6 billion loan from the government-owned China National Petroleum Corporation, which was guaranteed by future crude oil deliveries.
''The two companies have agreed on the prepayment for long-term oil deliveries,'' Mr. Oganesian said. 
''There is nothing unusual that the prepayment is for five to six years.''
In any case, ''the Chinese are paying money up front for a lot of years of oil,'' said Alasdair Breach, a strategist at Brunswick UBS, a brokerage firm.
In addition, the deal may insulate the Russian government from legal action in the United States, where Yukos has filed for bankruptcy in Houston. 
Some also say that China may have won a pipeline concession as part of this deal. 
Late last year, Russia chose to plan a pipeline ending in a port in the Far East, giving Russia's oil access to Japan and other markets, instead of building a shorter pipeline only to China.
But Simon M. Vainshtock, president of Transneft, the pipeline monopoly, said last week that the company had started to design a pipeline with a spur to send oil to China.
Yukos was the first Russian oil company to sell crude oil to China. 
Its founder, the billionaire Mikhail B. Khodorkovsky, had pushed for a privately financed pipeline to China -- a move that reportedly infuriated Russia's president, Vladimir V. Putin. Mr. Khodorkovsky was arrested in October 2003 and is on trial for fraud, embezzlement and tax evasion.
In March 2004, Yukos signed a two-year deal with the Chinese to supply 6.4 million tons of oil in 2004, 8.5 million tons in 2005 and 15 million tons in 2006, at market prices and by rail delivery. 
Steven M. Theede, chief executive of Yukos, said in an interview from London that companies buying oil from Yuganskneftegas ''should be concerned about future liabilities; they should be concerned of buying stolen property.''
Mr. Theede said he thought that a court hearing on Feb. 
16 in Houston to establish jurisdiction would be decided in Yukos's favor, and permit the trial to proceed in the United States. 
Mr. Theede and about 20 other managers now live in London and the United States.
