
China agreed on Wednesday to give up a plan to impose its own standard for wireless technology, essentially agreeing to join the rest of the world rather than dividing it up.
The Chinese said they would indefinitely postpone a plan, scheduled to go into effect on June 1, to impose a software encryption standard for wireless computers that American giants like Intel and Microsoft regarded as an unfair trade barrier.
The concession was one of several made by China in a daylong trade meeting held here between senior Chinese and administration officials. 
But the agenda did not include contentious issues like textile exports, currency controls or labor rights.
For the administration, the successes from the meeting offered an opportunity to respond to critics who have complained that President Bush has failed to protect American industries and American jobs from unfair trading practices, especially by China.
''It is certainly a landmark day -- a fruitful day in the relationship between the United States and China,'' said Donald L. Evans, the commerce secretary, who was co-chairman of the talks with Robert B. Zoellick, the United States trade representative.
Instead of viewing China as a predator stealing jobs and livelihoods, Mr. Evans spoke, instead, of China as a huge, hungry customer of American goods and services.
''Our exports to China are growing faster than exports to any other country in the world,'' he said.
But Democrats complained that the administration only began addressing China's unfair trading practices because of election year politics and said more needed to be done to help American workers.
Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, the presumptive Democratic nominee for president, said in a statement that ''there are 2.8 million reasons why this White House needs to change its tune when it comes to standing up to China, and they are the 2.8 million manufacturing workers who have lost their jobs since George Bush took office.''
The Chinese also agreed in the talks to concede to administration demands to crack down on counterfeiting and piracy of intellectual property rights, to fully open their markets six months ahead of schedule and to sign international treaties protecting intellectual property rights on the Internet.
But the decision to back down on imposing a separate standard for wireless technology resolved a potentially serious dispute.
The Semiconductor Industry Association applauded the decision, which will mean greater access to the world's third-largest semiconductor market.
''This is a very important development that will help grow world markets, said George M. Scalise, president of the association.
Last month, Mr. Evans, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell and Mr. Zoellick wrote an urgent appeal to Vice Premier Wu Yi to agree to negotiations on the encryption issue. 
Ms. Wu headed the 70-member Chinese delegation at the talks on Wednesday.
If China had proceeded with the June 1 deadline, it would have meant that wireless laptops that work in the rest of the world would not work in China.
In addition, the American companies worried about having to give up intellectual property rights if they were forced to work with Chinese companies that would eventually become their competitors in the global market.
Analysts and trade experts were also concerned that China might then be emboldened to establish exclusive standards for other high-technology products in what they considered a misguided protectionist attempt to give Chinese producers an edge.
In a joint news conference, Ms. Wu said the talks ''proved to be a complete success.''
That success was ensured by the administration's decision to adopt a narrow agenda and avoid issues where disagreement was inevitable.
The Chinese were spared questions about how they will respond once the global textile quota is lifted next year and, experts predict, China takes over 50 percent of the United States textile market.
Also off the official agenda were China's currency controls, which will be discussed this weekend at the International Monetary Fund's spring meetings, and its labor practices.
The A.F.L.-C.I.O. filed an unusual trade complaint last month asking President Bush to punish China for reportedly gaining a commercial advantage in trade through violating workers' rights.
Responding to a reporter's question, Ms. Wu said that petition ''is completely groundless'' and that she would invite the American labor leaders to visit China and investigate the situation for themselves.
To try to improve the longstanding problem of piracy and counterfeiting, the Chinese agreed to increase the range of violations of intellectual property rights that are subject to criminal investigations and penalties.
They also agreed to lower the threshold for these sanctions and apply them to the import, export, storage and distribution of pirated and counterfeit products.
Jack Valenti, chairman of the Motion Picture Association, said this plan was commendable and ''contains important elements that could lead to improved copyright protection in China.''
This was not the first instance where China promised to crack down on piracy under pressure from the United States. 
Under President Bill Clinton, several prominent agreements were reached to end counterfeiting of tapes, movies and compact discs. 
But the problem was never resolved and has grown worse in some areas, in part because piracy is carried out on such a large scale that it may be unstoppable, according to analysts.
China agreed to further open its market to American agricultural products in talks on Wednesday. 
But the United States refused to discuss the $19 billion it pays in agricultural subsidies and supports its farmers to raise commodity crops, including cotton and soybeans.
The United States contends that agricultural subsidies should only be discussed in the global setting of the World Trade Organization.
Ann M. Veneman, the agriculture secretary, took part in the meeting and said afterward that American agricultural exports to China had grown threefold over the last several years. 
China is now the biggest customer for American soybeans and cotton, she said.
