
A financial entity of the Chinese government has acquired a sizable stake in BP, one of the world's biggest energy companies, for about $2 billion.
The investment is the latest indication that China, flush with cash from its booming economy and its huge currency reserves, is becoming an increasingly important global investor and has begun focusing on the world's most recognizable brands.
A spokesman for BP, based in London, confirmed the investment on Tuesday, saying that over the last six months a Chinese entity had acquired a 1 percent stake in the company, which is valued at more than $200 billion.
''We are a publicly traded company, and we welcome investments,'' the spokesman, David Nicholas, said in a telephone interview. 
He did not identify the investor.
Specialists say the investment probably came from either the State Administration of Foreign Exchange, an arm of the Chinese central bank that manages the nation's foreign exchange reserves, or the China Investment Corporation, a $200 billion sovereign wealth fund.
Officials at the two agencies could not be reached for comment late Tuesday.
Over the last year, China has tried to improve its returns and diversify its holdings by investing billions of dollars to acquire minority stakes in financial giants like Morgan Stanley and the Blackstone Group, the private equity firm.
A Chinese bank had also been planning a $1 billion investment in Bear Stearns before the company collapsed last month. 
Two weeks ago, the French oil and gas giant, Total, said a Chinese entity had accumulated a 1.4 percent stake, valued at about $1.5 billion, in the company.
In recent years, some Western politicians have worried about the political and strategic implications of Chinese acquisition of controlling stakes in leading international financial or energy businesses.
But with global financial markets weakening, China's capital is being welcomed, and even courted, in many countries.
On Tuesday, according to Reuters, the British chancellor of the Exchequer, Alistair Darling, told reporters in Beijing: ''Our belief in open markets and free trade is reflected in the U.K.'s openness toward inward investment, including from sovereign wealth funds. 
We welcome the creation of the China sovereign wealth fund and its potential for investing in our country.''
