
At the opening ceremony of China's much celebrated first conference about H.I.V. and AIDS, an anonymous H.I.V.-positive person delivered brief remarks -- from the corner of a darkened stage, lit by green glow sticks, so that his face could not be seen.
It seemed a perfect symbol for the government's evolving policy: fledgling efforts to combat a disease that is spreading rapidly, combined with considerable ambivalence about the openness that experts agree is essential to win that battle. 
That attitude came under sharp criticism from the United Nations' top AIDS specialist, who attended the conference.
"Compared to two years ago, what's being said and the strategies that are being proposed are good," Peter Piot, executive director of Unaids, the United Nations program on AIDS, said in an interview. 
"But there is definitely not nearly enough going on now to effectively deal with the epidemic. 
And there is a lack of a sense of urgency at nearly all levels.
"They do not seem to see what a problem this is going to be for China."
Later he told the conference that if effective measures were not taken, China could have an additional 10 million AIDS sufferers in the next decade.
After nearly a week here, Dr. Piot praised the increasing openness he had encountered among officials in Beijing, the government's plan for combating H.I.V. and AIDS, and also the skill of Chinese researchers.
But he criticized the severe discrimination faced by people with H.I.V. here, the scarcity of treatment and the lack of effective AIDS education. 
Most of all, he criticized China's top leaders for failing to make the disease a priority.
"There has to be public expression by the top leadership of a country that this is a top issue, that gives everyone working below them a green light," he said in the interview.
The conference was a landmark of sorts, bringing together for the first time nearly 2,000 researchers and academics to discuss their work openly. 
Many of them, almost all Chinese citizens, hoped the high-profile conference would validate their work, often regarded as embarrassing or too sensitive for public discussion.
But although the Health Ministry initially said sessions would be open to journalists, a few days ago it abruptly announced that press coverage was limited to the opening session and a news conference that followed.
Throughout the meeting, officials continued to use figures for H.I.V. that have been widely discredited as too low -- some even in the Chinese press. 
Health Minister Zhang Wenkang estimated that there were 600,000 people with H.I.V. in China and repeated a previously set goal to limit the number of infections to 1.5 million by 2010.
But experts, including some from the United Nations, say in private that they believe there are already more than 1.5 million people infected in China. 
Some Chinese experts estimate that Henan Province in central China alone has a million sufferers.
While conference organizers were clearly thrilled to have Dr. Piot in attendance, every time he used the word epidemic in his speech, Chinese translators substituted "situation."
Worse still, although Vice Premier Li Lanqing initially was scheduled to give the opening address, researchers said, Health Minister Zhang took on that task.
"Having the health minister involved is essential, but not enough," Dr. Piot said. 
"In most countries the solution has required the support of the prime minister, the king or the president. 
Only then do things really start to happen."
Nevertheless, the inch-thick book of papers from the conference illustrated how much was already under way despite occasional official indifference or even hostility from local governments.
Some papers broach topics that would have been taboo several years ago, including H.I.V. in China's gay community and infection caused by contamination of the blood supply. 
In a country where ads promoting safe sex have been torn down as too racy in a number of cities, 30-foot-high inflatable condoms with sunglasses adorned the hall.
Still, many ended their first day disappointed, including the Chinese scientists, academics, doctors and journalists who have pushed for a more liberal policy.
People with AIDS, who hoped for more government attention to their situation, complained that the opening ceremony reinforced the notion that having AIDS was something to be embarrassed about.
In August, Deputy Health Minister Yin Dakui opened the door to talking about H.I.V. in China in a wide-ranging news conference during which he responded to questions on even the most sensitive issues, including the epidemic of H.I.V. among poor farmers in Henan.
Tens of thousands, if not hundreds of thousands, of poor peasants in that province were infected with H.I.V. after they sold their blood to collectors who used unsterile procedures in the mid-1990's.
But at today's news conference, the door appeared to close a bit as lower-level officials seemed unable to answer many of the questions posed by Chinese and foreign reporters.
When pressed by a Chinese reporter about the government's plan to deal with AIDS in Henan, for example, the director general of the Health Ministry's Disease Control Department suggested that reports of the problem were overblown, asserting that it was confined to "a dozen villages."
Residents of rural areas in the province, as well as some doctors working there, have long insisted that the problem affects dozens of villages if not more. 
In villages where blood selling was common, infection rates among adults are well over 50 percent and dozens of young men and women die each year.
The issue is sensitive because blood selling was officially outlawed in 1995, even though the practice continued long after that. 
Also, in Henan, blood selling was actively encouraged by the local government, and blood collecting was often done under its auspices.
"There is greater openness now," Dr. Piot said. 
"But there is still a need to break the silence at all levels of government and in all parts of the country."
