
China's central bank announced late Wednesday that it would raise the interest rates it charges banks for loans by nearly two-thirds of a percentage point, and would require the weakest banks to hold larger reserves.
Taken together, the two measures represent a moderate tightening of monetary policy -- a light tap on the brakes for an economy that is showing signs of overheating and rising inflation. 
Economists said the two moves could somewhat slow the swift increase in bank lending that has caused a steep rise in China's money supply and has raised fears that Chinese banks may be creating another wave of bad loans.
The two steps show Beijing's growing determination to prevent banks from taking undue risks in lending in the confidence that the government will bail them out if they run into trouble. 
The central bank's moves will increase pressure on commercial banks to shore up their finances so as to avoid extra costs in borrowing money and in holding greater reserves.
The central bank also said that the State Council, China's cabinet, had given it greater flexibility in setting the interest rates that it charges to banks. 
Until now, the State Council had to approve every change in interest rates, a cumbersome rule that limited the central bank's ability to move rates up and down in response to the changing fortunes of the economy.
The new policy will ''slowly, step by step, enhance the ability of the central bank to guide interest rates in the market,'' the central bank, known as the People's Bank of China, said in a statement.
The interest rates that China is raising are most nearly comparable to the Federal Reserve's discount rate in the United States. 
But whereas the Fed strongly discourages banks from borrowing from it at this rate except as a last resort, China's central bank is a significant lender to smaller banks that lack strong branch networks for gathering deposits and have trouble persuading bigger banks that they are creditworthy enough to qualify for interbank loans, experts on China's banking system said.
Having the central bank charge higher interest rates to banks shows that China is moving toward more sophisticated methods of economic management than simply raising reserve requirements for the entire banking industry, as it did last September, said Liang Hong, an economist in the Hong Kong office of Goldman Sachs.
Interbank lending in China is less organized than in the United States, while bond trading in China is still in its infancy. 
So the effect of Wednesday's moves on interest rates for interbank loans and for bonds is hard to predict, economists said.
The People's Bank of China closely regulates the interest rates that banks may charge companies and consumers, and said on Wednesday that it was not allowing any increase in these rates.
Many business executives and economists across Asia have taken to watching with great attention whether China's central bank can engineer a soft landing of the Chinese economy, by gently restraining what even Chinese officials are describing as the tendency of many sectors of the economy to overheat.
David Burton, the director of the Asia and Pacific department of the International Monetary Fund, said in a speech here on Tuesday that the international agency was optimistic that China could manage its economy successfully, while the fund remained on the watch for potential risks.
''Our central scenario is for a soft landing, but a more abrupt slowdown remains a possibility if China is not successful in striking the right balance between preventing generalized overheating and avoiding a large decline in investment,'' he said.
The central bank's actions come as shortages of critical commodities and increasingly severe transportation bottlenecks are starting to push up inflation in China. 
Several hours before the central bank acted, China's National Bureau of Statistics announced that wholesale prices of industrial goods were 3.5 percent higher in February than a year earlier.
That is the same pace of inflation at the wholesale level as in January, and represents a sharp acceleration from most of last year, when inflation was practically nonexistent. 
Chinese authorities were concerned about the possibility of deflation early last year.
The People's Bank of China said late Wednesday that on Thursday it would raise by 63-hundredths of a percentage point the interest rate it charges to banks for loans without collateral for maturities of up to one year. 
The rate for a 20-day loan, for example, would rise to 3.33 percent from 2.7 percent.
The central bank said that it would also raise the interest rate it charges for rediscounting -- essentially, overnight lending with the bank putting up collateral -- to 3.24 percent from 2.97 percent.
Banks are currently charging each other interest rates of around 2 percent for short-term loans. 
But banks have become leery of lending anything to many small banks, often owned by municipal governments, that are in especially bad financial condition.
These small banks have increasingly been turning to the central bank for loans, especially as rates in the interbank lending market have been creeping up because of inflation fears. 
So, until now, the cost of borrowing from the central bank has seemed quite manageable for small banks, said Joan Zheng, an economist in the Hong Kong office of J.P. 
Morgan.
The central bank said in a separate announcement that the weakest banks, as measured by four criteria assessing capital adequacy, would be required to hold 7.5 percent of their assets as reserves at the central bank, beginning on April 25. 
The current requirement is that banks hold 7 percent of their assets as reserves.
Because the central bank pays negligible interest on reserves, the increase to 7.5 percent acts as a financial penalty on weaker banks and an incentive to operate more prudently.
The central bank has set lower reserve requirements for rural financial institutions, and it said on Wednesday that it would increase the interest rates that it charged them for loans by only half as much as it is charging the rest of the country's financial institutions. 
Beijing is trying to improve economic growth in rural areas, which have fallen behind cities badly in income growth over the last decade.
The four biggest banks in China have large portfolios of nonperforming loans, and have required three huge bailouts in the last decade. 
But they could benefit from Wednesday's changes by the central bank, which has historically looked out for their interests and exempted them from the increase in reserve requirements for weak capital bases.
The entirely state-owned big four banks -- the Agricultural Bank of China, the Bank of China, the China Construction Bank and the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China -- take in a huge and steadily rising flow of deposits from China's increasingly affluent people, and lend part of these deposits to other, less liquid banks. 
The smaller banks may be forced now to borrow from the big four instead of the central bank.
A monetary policy report released by the People's Bank of China on March 17 showed that the big four banks were net lenders of $110 billion in the interbank market last year, while a few other medium-size banks were net lenders of another $10.8 billion.
Foreign financial institutions, which face severe restrictions on their ability to take deposits in China but are stepping up their lending, borrowed $5.2 billion last year. 
Domestic financial institutions, including securities firms as well as smaller banks, borrowed the rest.
