
Billboards here show elephants and giraffes roaming the savanna. 
Traffic has been curtailed, construction sites shut down and even the sky has been tantalizingly, if temporarily, blue.
Beijing has put on its best face to court Africa, ''the land of myth and miracles,'' as official posters call it. 
Political leaders of 48 of the 53 African countries, including 40 heads of state, are to arrive this weekend for a huge diplomatic event, the China-Africa forum.
The official purposes of the three-day event are to expand trade, to allow China to secure the oil and ore it needs for its booming economy and to offer aid to help African nations improve roads, railways and schools.
The unofficial purpose is to redraw the world's strategic map by forming tighter political ties between China, which has the world's fastest-growing major economy, and Africa, a continent whose leaders often complain about being neglected by the United States and Europe.
''African leaders see China as a new kind of global partner that has lots of money but treats them as equals,'' said Wenran Jiang, a political scientist at the University of Alberta who has studied Chinese-African ties. 
''Chinese leaders see Africa, in a strategic sense, as up for grabs.''
China's enthusiasm for Africa has raised concerns among many in the West while the United States is distracted by its efforts to curb terrorism, and France, Britain and other former colonial powers exert less influence in Africa than they once did.
China does not follow the international lending standards intended to fight corruption in the region. 
It has embraced the leaders of Sudan and Zimbabwe, two countries that are under heavy pressure to improve their poor human rights records. 
Major oil companies have complained that China uses its influence to secure business opportunities for its state-owned companies.
Chinese officials say those concerns are overblown or hypocritical, and they deny that they have a grand scheme to create an exclusive sphere of influence in Africa. 
But China has nearly $1 trillion in foreign currency reserves, boundless entrepreneurial energy and a strong drive to compete there on its own terms.
''The Western approach of imposing its values and political system on other countries is not acceptable to China,'' said Wang Hongyi, a leading specialist on Africa at the China Institute of International Studies. 
''We focus on mutual development, not promoting one country at the expense of another.''
China's economic goal is to secure Africa's abundant supplies of oil, iron ore, copper and cotton at the lowest possible prices, analysts say. 
Chinese companies view Africa as an open market, neglected by Western multinationals, that they can cultivate with their trademark low-priced goods.
But if the goal is mostly mercenary, not unlike European objectives in Africa 150 years ago, the method is avowedly anti-imperialist.
The forum's slogan -- ''Peace, Friendship, Cooperation, Development'' -- underscores China's pledge not to discriminate or intervene. 
It even invited the five African countries -- Burkina Faso, Malawi, Gambia, Swaziland and Sao Tome and Principe -- that still extend diplomatic recognition to its rival Taiwan, though none agreed to attend.
In the long term, Chinese officials say they hope not only that the overture will give their companies an edge in the competition for resources, but also that it will give their diplomats an advantage at the United Nations and other international organizations, where African countries can constitute a powerful voting bloc.
Unlike China's initial push into Africa under Mao, which aimed to support the Socialist governments of postcolonial Africa, the focus is now on commerce.
''China has offered Africa a new model that focuses on straight commercial relations and fair market prices without the ideological agenda,'' said Moeletsi Mbeki, a South African businessman and political analyst.
''They are not the first big foreign power to come to Africa, but they may be the first not to act as though they are some kind of patron or teacher or conqueror,'' he added. 
''In that sense, there is a meeting of the minds.''
The event in Beijing, like most big political affairs in China, promises to be long on ceremony and propaganda and short on substance. 
President Hu Jintao is meeting a procession of heads of state.
The state media have promoted the ''three 50s'': 50 years of Chinese-African cooperation, 53 African countries, $50 billion in two-way trade (a projected figure for 2006). 
China Central Television is conducting a nationwide survey to select 10 outstanding African icons. 
Contenders include Cleopatra, South African diamonds and the Sahara.
Chinese diplomats hint that by the end of the meeting they will unveil a variety of trade and aid concessions. 
These may include a list of African goods that can enter China tariff-free, increases in aid and technical cooperation and debt forgiveness.
China's trade with Africa is growing faster than with any other region except the Middle East, increasing tenfold in the past decade, to just shy of $40 billion last year. 
China buys timber from the Congo Republic, iron ore from South Africa and cobalt and copper from Zambia. 
An estimated 80,000 Chinese expatriates live in Africa, selling shoes, televisions and everything else the world's factory produces.
More vitally, Africa has helped quench China's growing thirst for oil. 
Angola, which China cultivated assiduously in recent years, has edged out Saudi Arabia as China's largest foreign source of oil.
Sudan, shunned by the West for its genocidal civil war in Darfur, was a net oil importer before China arrived there in 1995. 
China has since invested heavily in oil extraction, helping Sudan export about $2 billion worth of crude annually, half of that to China.
Beijing's aggressive pursuit of commodities has often been accompanied by generous aid programs, low-interest loans and other gifts that some Western interests say undermine efforts to foster good governing in Africa. 
The World Bank and the International Monetary Fund have expressed their concerns that China's unrestricted lending, including a $2 billion credit line for corruption-plagued Angola, has undermined years of painstaking efforts to arrange conditional debt relief.
Some African economists complain, too, that China wants to extract raw materials for industry and then sell manufactured goods back to Africa, a mercantilist pattern that failed to bring sustained growth in the past.
China has also prompted concerns among human rights groups by using the threat of its veto in the United Nations Security Council to protect Sudan and Zimbabwe against international sanctions. 
The rights groups say China's arms exports to Sudan fuel the conflict in Darfur, which has claimed at least 200,000 lives and has forced more than two million people from their homes.
''China insists that it will not interfere in other countries' domestic affairs, but it also claims to be a great friend of the African people,'' said Sophie Richardson of Human Rights Watch. 
''But that doesn't square with staying silent while mass killings go on in Darfur.''
For years, Chinese officials insisted that such concerns were the internal affairs of the countries involved, but they have recently changed their stance somewhat.
Zhai Jun, an assistant foreign minister responsible for African affairs, said last week that the Africa forum would address human rights and good government, and he specifically mentioned Sudan.
''The humanitarian situation in Darfur should be improved,'' Mr. Zhai said. 
''We will adopt our own method and use the upcoming summit to do our part.''
Even if China does speak out on some rights issues, its basic strategy of engaging African countries on their own terms remains the core of its foreign policy.
Mr. Jiang, of the University of Alberta, said that unlike in the cold war, when China's foreign involvement was motivated by ideology, Beijing now had a commercial strategy as the developing world's biggest beneficiary of globalization to unite with the region most conspicuously left behind.
It will be up to each country's leaders, and ultimately each country's people, to decide how to use the wealth, he said. 
''From China's perspective the Western powers and Western companies have had their chance in Africa and really nothing has happened,'' he said.
''China is trying a different approach,'' he added. 
''It is saying, 'Let us have a chance.'
''
