
When an ailing United States-based executive was granted bail from a prison last month, his family breathed a sigh of relief. 
In his five months in captivity, the businessman, Liu Yaping, had developed symptoms of a potentially life-threatening brain aneurysm.
But instead of being released in accordance with bail regulations, Mr. Liu was transferred to a hospital, where he has been held under 24-hour police guard, unable to leave or to discuss his detention freely with his family or lawyers.
Although he was in a hospital, family members say, he has not been given any medical treatment for his condition, which had not been previously diagnosed. 
Indeed, doctors at the hospital said they could not perform the surgery that Mr. Liu may well need.
"This is a profound injustice," said Jerome Cohen, a lawyer from New York who is advising Mr. Liu's family. 
"What the authorities have done is to turn this hospital into a prison.
"They've found a fantastic new way to deal with their problem. 
If he dies now, they can say, 'He's in the hospital, so it's not our responsibility.'
And now they don't have to pay for his detention, since the family is paying the hospital bill."
Mr. Liu's detention has been mysterious from the start, Chinese and Western lawyers said, violating China's criminal procedure in various ways. 
Charged with just minor economic crimes connected to a Web design company that he was starting in China, Mr. Liu was whisked off the street in Hohhot, the provincial capital of Inner Mongolia, on March 8, the day before he was to have returned to his family in Connecticut.
Although Mr. Liu's Chinese lawyers said such crimes were generally punished by fines or by revoking a business license, the police in Inner Mongolia held Mr. Liu virtually incommunicado in a military prison with extremely limited access to his lawyers.
Although neither family members nor lawyers are clear about why Mr. Liu has been subjected to such treatment, he had previously done business with the Police Department in Inner Mongolia and had lingering business disputes there, his wife, Pei Zhang, said in an interview from Connecticut.
Mr. Liu, who was born in Hohhot and carries a Chinese passport, holds a United States green card. 
His wife and son are American citizens, and he was about to obtain American citizenship at the time of his arrest.
It is unclear whether the neurological symptoms that Mr. Liu developed for the first time in prison, which included headaches, slurred speech and vomiting, are related to police mistreatment. 
Most aneurysms are not related to trauma.
Mr. Liu was not allowed to meet family members or lawyers at all for the early in his detention. 
His family became aware that he was ill when his brother in Hohhot started to receive bills for brain scans in April, his wife said. 
In the months that followed, lawyers and family members applied for bail two times so that he could be freed and treated. 
Those requests were turned down -- until Aug. 
7, when Mr. Liu was "released pending trail" under a provision that should have allowed him move freely about as long as he did not leave the city, Mr. Cohen said.
A delegation of United States senators who intended to bring up Mr. Liu's case met Chinese leaders in Beijing that week. 
"He should have been allowed to go anywhere in the city and to see anyone he wanted to," Mr. Cohen said.
Instead, by nightfall he was captive in the hospital, his every word scrutinized by guards who stay with him 24 hours a day. 
At first, he was not alarmed, his wife, Ms. Zhang said. 
He wanted attention for his medical problems, and the police assured him and family members that he would be allowed out of the hospital in a few days, "after he had regained some strength."
But the days have turned to weeks and the weeks to longer than a month. 
The sole medical attention that Mr. Liu has had is a repeat M.R.I. scan, his wife said. 
That test, she added, simply verified the findings of one he had in the military prison. 
His family in China is being billed $25 a day for his room.
Ms. Zhang said that since her husband has been in the hospital, she has been able to call him for the first time, talking to him nearly every day. 
But he cannot call out. 
She said their conversations were monitored.
Doctors at the hospital have urged Mr. Liu's release for treatment at a better-equipped medical center.
