
Treasury Secretary Henry M. Paulson Jr. and a team of cabinet members unveiled limited accords Wednesday with their Chinese counterparts to open markets in China but made little progress on major disputes over trade and currency.
The United States and China committed themselves to doubling daily passenger flights and granting American carriers ''unfettered access'' for cargo. 
Another accord called for joint cooperation to develop clean coal-burning technologies and reduce trade barriers to products that help control pollution.
While China also agreed to allow foreign financial firms to expand their operations there modestly, the Bush administration failed to achieve an increase in the ownership ceilings that the Chinese impose on joint ventures with American firms, officials said.
Mr. Paulson, a former Goldman Sachs executive who negotiated many deals in China, had unsuccessfully pressed Wu Yi, a vice premier who headed the Chinese team, on that issue over dinner at his home Monday night.
After the two-day session involving more than a dozen top officials on both sides, the Chinese started an unusual set of meetings with Congressional leaders to try to head off the possibility of sanctions against China this year.
But the difficulty of reaching that goal was made clear when Republicans and Democrats on the House Ways and Means Committee released a tough letter to Ms. Wu, saying they had serious concerns about several Chinese economic practices.
The letter cited China's ''massive and constant interventions in the currency markets'' to keep the value of its currency low, its use of subsidies to promote exports and its ''inability to enforce intellectual property rights.''
Over all, the letter accused China of not living up to its legal obligations under international trade agreements.
The letter sent a signal, if one were needed, that the talks were unlikely to deter Congress from trying to impose sanctions on Chinese exports this year. 
It was signed by Representatives Charles B. Rangel, Democrat of New York, and Jim McCrery of Louisiana, the chairman and ranking Republican on the Ways and Means Committee.
Mr. Rangel, in a telephone interview Wednesday evening, said that the meeting with Ms. Wu went well but that he told her that whatever the value of the agreements her team made with the Bush administration this week, ''the legislative process will go forward.''
He said he told her that Congress represented ''the will of the people'' on trade with China.
Mr. Paulson, who opposes such legislation, said at a news conference that the talks, the second session of a ''strategic economic dialogue'' begun last year -- the first session was in Beijing in December -- were worthwhile. 
''While we have much more work to do, we have tangible results of our efforts thus far,'' he added.
Later, in an interview, the Treasury secretary declined to predict the impact on Congress of this week's session. 
''All I can say is that we've made important progress, and that it's more progress than we would have without the S.E.D,'' referring to the strategic economic dialogue.
There were no statements to the press from the Chinese side, so it was left to the American side to describe the tone of the meetings, which it said was constructive and friendly, despite signs of deep unhappiness among the Chinese over recent American legal challenges to Chinese economic practices.
On Tuesday, Ms. Wu said that efforts by some to ''politicize'' the Chinese-American relationship were ''absolutely unacceptable.''
This was taken as a reference to the American challenges to Chinese subsidies of exports and piracy of DVDs.
Susan C. Schwab, the United States trade representative, speaking at the conclusion of the talks Wednesday, made it clear that her own session with Chinese leaders had done little to narrow differences on these issues. 
''Suffice it to say we had a healthy exchange of views,'' she said.
Two other cabinet members -- Mike Johanns, the agriculture secretary, and Michael O. Leavitt, the health and human services secretary -- said they had used the dialogue to press the Chinese on strengthening the safety of food and medicine exports.
''I thought our conversation was helpful,'' Mr. Johanns said.
Mr. Paulson offered mixed views about China's movements on the currency issue, a particular flashpoint in Congress, where many lawmakers argue that China intervenes in the currency markets to keep the value of its currency low in relation to the dollar, a strategy that would promote its exports by making them cheaper for American consumers.
Noting that the value of the Chinese currency had appreciated a little more than 8 percent in two years, with a small increase in the last few days, the Treasury chief called on China to ''move more quickly'' on currency.
''We make the case, they listen and they are moving,'' Mr. Paulson said. 
He said that an announcement last week that China was widening the band in which the currency could fluctuate each day was a ''positive signal'' but that more needed to be done over time.
Reaction to the announcements by Mr. Paulson and the other administration officials was generally positive among business groups. 
Groups critical of American trade practices were skeptical, sometimes extremely so.
''There was progress in some areas,'' said Myron Brilliant, vice president for East Asia at the United States Chamber of Commerce. 
''From our standpoint, we want to see more in certain areas. 
But if you look at the overall picture, the glass is more than half full.''
But Alan Tonelson, a research fellow at the United States Business and Industrial Council, a group that generally opposes deals to reduce trade barriers and supports efforts to protect American industry from foreign competition, said the dialogue with China ''stands exposed as a cynical Bush administration exercise in spin and P.R.''
He said the dialogue's only purpose was to ''fool the American people.''
Mr. Paulson, in the telephone interview, said the tone of the discussions was healthy even when both sides disagreed. 
''I think whenever you get a group of people that powerful together, you're going to have a serious discussion on a range of topics,'' he said.
Mr. Paulson said he was impatient for more concrete results himself and hoped there would be further progress before the third session of the dialogue, in Beijing in December.
''I have no doubt that we're getting more results than we would have without this dialogue,'' he said.
