
Chinese officials are promising to reduce taxes on peasants and increase farm subsidies to improve the lot of 800 million rural residents left behind in the fast-growing economy.
The measures, announced in a government publication called the ''2005 No.1 Document'' and described by policy officials this week, are intended to slow the surging wealth gap between urban and rural residents, a major source of social discontent and perhaps the greatest challenge for the governing Communist Party.
China's rapid economic growth has generated widespread prosperity and lifted average per capita incomes past $1,000 a year, pulling the country out of the ranks of the world's poorest developing countries in a single generation.
But the benefits of that wealth have fallen disproportionately on urban residents, a point of severe stress for a society that once preached egalitarianism.
Last year average urban income was 3.2 times as much as average rural income, one of the biggest urban-rural divides in the world, statistics released in January show. 
China keeps its rural and urban populations distinct through population controls, classifying most rural residents as peasants even when they migrate to cities to find work.
The gap in living standards is actually greater than the income figures suggest, because urban governments and companies often offer health, housing, education and retirement benefits that are not widely available in the countryside.
Many developing countries experience rising inequality in the early stages of industrialization. 
But China's transition has proven especially volatile, because the authoritarian government has injected hundreds of billions of dollars into developing urban coastal areas while maintaining tight controls over farmland and peasants to ensure steady supplies of grain and surplus labor.
Local corruption, unpaid wages for migrant workers and forced requisitioning of farmland for development are among the biggest causes of popular protests and even riots in some areas, police statistics show.
The new agricultural policy marks the second straight year that Prime Minister Wen Jiabao devoted his first major initiative of the year to addressing rural problems. 
Officials say the measures have proven effective in increasing rural incomes.
But analysts said the government's policies had tended to emphasize short-term steps to subsidize grain production and cut taxes while avoiding more fundamental changes like giving peasants greater control over their land.
Chen Xiwen, the government's top rural policy official, said this week that by the end of this year, 24 of China's 31 provinces and metropolitan regions would eliminate the basic agricultural tax imposed on all rural families since collective farms were dismantled in favor of private farms in the early 1980's.
The rest of the country will phase out that tax over the next several years, faster than the five-year schedule announced last year, Mr. Chen said. 
Experiments in reducing or abolishing other taxes assessed on farmers, like those for nongrain commercial crops and livestock, are also being accelerated, he said.
Canceling the agricultural tax should put about $4 billion back into the pockets of the 800 million people who are considered peasants under China's population control system, or roughly $5 per farmer annually.
That does not amount to a windfall for farmers, who had an average income of $353 last year. 
But it would address one of the most conspicuous inequalities in Chinese society by ending broad mandatory taxation on the nation's rural majority. 
Urban residents do not pay taxes unless they earn more than $1,200 a year.
Mr. Chen said early rounds of tax reduction, a new grain-planting subsidy and big increases in market prices for wheat, corn and rice increased farm incomes last year at the fastest pace since at least 1997.
''If we continue to have policies that raise farmers' incomes, they will have greater incentives and their outlook on life will become much better,'' he said at a news conference.
Adjusted for inflation, income for rural residents grew by 6.8 percent in 2004, the State Statistics Bureau reported. 
Still, that fell short of the 7.7 percent increase in urban incomes, meaning that the urban-rural income gap continued to widen.
Mr. Chen said the government planned to protect farmers' land use rights and invest more in irrigation and infrastructure to further improve the farm economy. 
But he acknowledged that it would be difficult to maintain the pace of growth in rural incomes achieved in 2004, because the market prices of grain were not likely to increase rapidly for a second straight year.
Outside experts said the government had not yet shown a willingness to level the playing field between urban and rural residents through bolder policy changes. 
''The measures they have taken are all good things to reduce the disparity,'' said Li Ping, China representative for the Seattle-based Rural Development Institute. 
''But the government cannot indefinitely increase subsidies or allow the grain price to keep rising, so these measures are not really sustainable.''
Mr. Li and other experts say one potential key lies in creating a market for farmland that resembles the one for urban land. 
That way, they say, some farmers could profit from selling land rights while others could acquire more efficient farms.
Urban Chinese can buy and sell property. 
But rural land is distributed based on 30-year contracts and remains firmly under the control of local authorities, who can requisition it or redistribute it largely at will.
Late last year, the government adopted a new policy that aims to protect farmland and to ensure that farmers get more compensation if their land is seized. 
But local governments still exercise far more control over land than they do in countries that recognize property rights. 
Selling land has become the most important source of revenue for local governments, Mr. Li said.
''The central government realizes that secure land use rights are the most important tool in boosting the rural economy,'' he said. 
''But they still have a long way to go to address the underlying problems.''
