
China reported on Tuesday that its trade surplus grew for the seventh consecutive month, to a record $11.1 billion in December. 
The surplus helped send China's foreign currency reserves soaring further, lifting the economy to another year of extremely strong growth, Chinese officials announced.
The robust performance, however, is a double-edged sword for China. 
It is likely to increase pressure for Beijing to allow China's currency, the yuan, to rise in value against the dollar as foreign investment and export earnings alike pour into the country at an accelerating pace. 
China's ballooning surplus also serves as a convenient backdrop for an increasingly polarized debate in the United States over whether trade with China is good or bad for the economy.
While the Bush administration often highlights the benefits of trade, especially the lower cost of imported goods, even some White House officials have begun blaming China for the growing level of trade friction.
As if on cue, United States Commerce Secretary Donald L. Evans, arriving in Beijing with a team of American trade negotiators, prepared to hand China a stern warning of restiveness among lawmakers and businesses in the United States.
In remarks set for delivery on Wednesday, Mr. Evans cautioned that China's surplus, and what United States officials describe as unfair practices, including alleged government subsidies to exporters and patent violations, could spark retaliation.
''China must forcefully do more to lift barriers to free trade and confront widespread intellectual property theft that is undercutting American workers,'' Mr. Evans said. 
''China's willingness to tackle these challenges head-on will be the most important measure of the success or failure of its efforts.''
Adding more fuel to the fire, a research group in Washington reported on Tuesday that, had the United States not run deficits with China since 1989, the country would have 1.5 million more jobs today. 
The trade deficit with China grew to $124 billion in 2003 from $6.2 billion in 1989. 
The study was prepared for the United States-China Economic Security Review Commission, a Congressionally appointed panel, by Robert E. Scott, the senior international economist at the Economic Policy Institute, a liberal think tank.
The report said that jobs were lost in every state, but the highest numbers came from California, Illinois, New York, Pennsylvania and Texas. 
Among the hardest-hit states as a share of total state employment were Arkansas, Maine, Massachusetts and North Carolina.
The job losses were not just in labor-intensive industries, like textiles and plastics, but also from new sectors once thought to be out of China's reach, such as high technology.
''What is really shocking is the rate that China has moved into the production of high-skill, high-technology product,'' Mr. Scott said. 
''China is now entirely responsible for our $32 billion deficit in advanced technology products like computers, electronics.''
Not everyone agrees with Mr. Scott's conclusions. 
Daniel T. Griswold, the director of the center for trade policy studies at the Cato Institute, a libertarian think tank, disputed both the report's methods and its findings.
''There is no connection between employment and our trade with China,'' Mr. Griswold said. 
''But even if the finding of 1.5 million jobs is correct, it is spread over one decade and a half and that mounts to less than 1 percent of job displacement over the entire period.''
Instead of focusing solely on job losses, Mr. Griswold said the report should have included the money China invests in United States Treasury bills that keeps interest rates down.
China's exports of everything from clothing to consumer electronics have been rising rapidly for 2004, and were 33 percent higher last month than in 2003, its ministry of commerce announced. 
But high oil prices combined with China's attempts to build emergency oil reserves inflated the cost of the country's imports, until recently offsetting the big expansion of exports. 
Lower oil prices are now allowing China's remarkable export performance to show up in bigger and bigger trade surpluses.
To prevent the yuan from rising in value, China's central bank has been buying up the extra dollars flowing into the country from the trade surpluses and from growing investment by multinationals and speculators alike. 
Reuters reported from Beijing on Tuesday that the country's foreign currency reserves had surged to $609.9 billion by the end of December, up 51.3 percent from in 2003.
Chinese officials also said on Tuesday that the economy grew more than 9 percent in 2004, without providing a more precise figure, and estimated that investment in new factories and other fixed assets rose by 25 percent in 2004.
The December trade surplus and the accumulation of foreign currency are so large that they are certain to bring renewed calls for Beijing to let the yuan appreciate, which could limit somewhat the competitiveness of Chinese exports, economists said. 
But Chinese leaders have been resisting such calls for more than two years, and may prove just as intransigent now, the economists warned.
''The pressure will grow because of the simultaneous release of rapid growth in foreign exchange reserves and record trade surplus,'' said Desmond Supple, the managing director of Asian research in the Singapore office of Barclays Capital. 
But he added, ''There's a very sizable difference between political pressure and a change in policy.''
Forward contracts based on the value of the yuan a year from now were trading in Singapore late Tuesday at the equivalent of 7.89 yuan to the dollar. 
That suggests investors expect the currency to appreciate from its current, government-managed level of 8.28 to the dollar. 
The contracts are not for the actual delivery of yuan because of the many restrictions that Beijing still imposes on money flowing in and out of China.
