
The China Philharmonic Orchestra performed Mozart's Requiem with the Shanghai Opera House Chorus for Pope Benedict XVI on Wednesday, an unprecedented concert that could signal a thaw in the historically chilly relations between the Vatican and the Chinese government.
The event evoked memories of Ping-Pong diplomacy, which helped lead to the restoration of relations between the United States and China in the 1970s, with music instead of sports as the bonding agent.
''Music, and art in general, can serve as a privileged instrument for encounter and reciprocal knowledge and esteem between different populations and cultures,'' Benedict said after the concert, which was held in the Paul VI Audience Hall at the Vatican. 
''A means attainable by all for valuing the universal language of art.''
China and the Vatican have not had diplomatic relations since the 1950s, though each side has made conciliatory signs in recent years. 
Last summer, Benedict issued an open letter directed to Chinese Catholics that sought to heal the rift between underground congregations loyal to the Vatican and state-approved Catholic churches in China.
It was the pope's first official statement on China's 12 million Catholics and it sought to reassure the Chinese government that the Vatican was not challenging its political authority, while urging the state-sponsored churches to defer to the Vatican in religious matters.
The pope did not refer to the tensions in his greetings after the concert, but he expressed ''a special thought for those of your fellow citizens who share faith in Jesus and are united through a particular spiritual bond with the successor of Peter.''
In the Gospels, the Apostle Peter was chosen by Jesus to lead the church, and each pope is said to be the successor of Peter.
The concert at the Vatican was a last-minute addition to a tour of Europe, said Long Yu, the artistic director and principal conductor of the orchestra. 
''It is an extra honor to play at the Vatican,'' Mr. Yu said. 
''I would be pleased to know that the concert is a further move on both sides.''
Mr. Yu said the concert was historic in the same way that the Philadelphia Orchestra became the first Western orchestra to visit China in 1973; the New York Philharmonic did the same in North Korea in February.
The 150 musicians and singers were led by Deng Rong, the founder of the orchestra and the daughter of Deng Xiaoping, who eased persecution of Catholics as the Chinese leader in the 1980s and allowed worship to resume.
''Her father changed the Chinese economic system, and now she is changing culture,'' said Mr. Yu, who noted that her presence at the Vatican ''was absolutely significant'' because of her standing as a cultural figure in China.
Han Qiang, a spokesman for the Chinese Embassy in Rome, said the concert was an ''unofficial cultural initiative,'' not promoted by his government, that could nonetheless ''improve relations between the two states.''
Mending ties with China has emerged as a major goal for Benedict. 
But some experts in Chinese-Vatican relations were skeptical.
''It's just a little folklore,'' said the Rev. Giancarlo Politi, a former missionary in China with the Pontifical Institute for Foreign Missions. 
''On one hand, you have a boycott, and at the same time you have the concert. 
That's why I don't think the opening is of much consequence.''
Cardinal Tarcisio Bertone told the ANSA news agency he hoped the concert would be ''a good omen for future developments between the church and China.''
The pope also received the supreme patriarch of the Armenian Orthodox and Apostolic Church, Catholicos Karekin II, on Wednesday. 
Benedict recalled ''the severe persecutions suffered by Armenian Christians.''
Karekin II urged all nations to condemn the Armenian genocide, remembering how John Paul II did so in 2000. 
The two leaders are to meet privately on Friday.
