
Southeast Asian countries and China agreed to strengthen product standards and safety, economic ministers said Sunday. 
The move follows recalls of several tainted Chinese products from international markets.
China's commerce minister, Bo Xilai, defended the quality of Chinese goods, saying 99 percent of his country's exports to the United States and Japan passed quality controls and adhered to global quality standards.
A joint statement issued Sunday by economic ministers from the 10-member Association of Southeast Asian Nations and China, at the end of their annual consultations, said product quality and food safety were common challenges faced by every country. 
All parties should actively cooperate in improving controls and ensuring quality, it added.
''The ministers agreed to urge relevant government agencies to properly deal with product quality-related cases by strengthening consultations with the view to protecting the safety and health of consumers while not impeding bilateral trade and economic cooperation,'' it said.
Chinese goods have come under intense scrutiny in recent months after toxic chemicals were found in exports ranging from toothpaste to seafood and pet food ingredients.
With growing numbers of countries rejecting Chinese goods, China has sought to reassure consumers by highlighting similar problems in other countries and criticizing foreign media for playing up the safety problems.
At a joint news conference by the ministers, Mr. Bo said that 50 percent of products manufactured in China were made by foreign enterprises, and that more than 60 percent of exports were made and inspected according to standards set by foreign importers and buyers.
''In the past 29 years, the annual growth rate of Chinese exports is 17 percent, and this itself shows a high degree of recognition of product quality of China by other countries,'' Mr. Bo said. 
Nevertheless, if even only 0.1 percent of Chinese products are problematic, his government will seriously address the matter, he added.
China is Asean's fourth major trading partner, after the United States, the European Union and Japan. 
Chinese foreign direct investment in Asean nations reached $936.9 million in 2006.
Asean and China signed a trade in goods agreement in 2004 and a trade in services deal in January. 
An investment agreement is still under negotiation as part of steps to establish the Asean China Free Trade Area.
