
In what would be the first modern active deployment of its warships beyond the Pacific, China appears set to send naval vessels to help in the fight against hijackers in the pirate-infested Gulf of Aden.
A vice foreign minister and a leading naval strategist were quoted in Chinese state media on Wednesday as saying that Beijing was close to mounting a naval mission in the gulf.
''China is seriously considering sending naval ships to the Gulf of Aden and waters off the Somali coast for escorting operations in the near future,'' said the Foreign Ministry official, He Yafei, quoted by Xinhua, the official news agency. 
His remarks were made at a ministerial meeting of the United Nations Security Council.
Li Jie, a military strategist and naval expert, told the state-run newspaper China Daily that cooperating with a multinational force operating against the pirates would be a ''very good opportunity'' for the Chinese Navy.
''Apart from fighting pirates,'' he said, ''another key goal is to register the presence of the Chinese Navy.''
The newspaper said this month that Maj. Gen. Jin Yinan, a military planner at the National Defense University, had conceived the Gulf of Aden plan. 
The paper quoted him as saying, ''The Chinese Navy should send naval vessels to the Gulf of Aden to carry out antipiracy duties.''
''If one day the Chinese Navy sends ships to deal with pirates,'' General Jin said, ''nobody should be shocked.''
On Wednesday, an international antipiracy force rescued a Chinese cargo ship that had been taken over by pirates, The Associated Press reported. 
After the crew sent a distress signal, the International Maritime Bureau's piracy reporting center sent two helicopters that fired on the pirates, causing them to flee, the news agency reported.
Traditionally concerned with coastal defense, the Chinese Navy has been undergoing a wide and rapid modernization, especially in the bolstering of its submarine fleet. 
A long-range goal of the Chinese expansion has been the development of a navy capable of extended tours far from home.
About 60 percent of China's imported oil comes from the Middle East, and much of that passes through the Gulf of Aden, along with huge shipments of raw materials from Africa. 
Last month, two Chinese ships were hijacked there: a fishing trawler and a cargo ship flying the Hong Kong flag and carrying wheat.
While China has been ''quite wary of putting maritime assets in the region and wary of doing anything out in the open,'' Chinese diplomats have been active in antipiracy efforts, according to Arthur Bowring, managing director of the Hong Kong Shipowners Association.
''The Chinese have been working diplomatically with the Yemeni government and coast guard, and their ambassador in Nairobi is very heavily involved,'' Mr. Bowring said. 
''They may not seem out in front, but they work extremely hard in the back seat.''
To help combat the sharp rise of increasingly brazen pirate attacks in the gulf, the European Union deployed its first-ever naval mission this month, a six-ship flotilla. 
The union's operation, code-named Atalanta, joined other navies already patrolling there, including those from the United States, Russia and India.
''China is usually quite conservative about playing with the big guys or saying they're going to match up with them,'' said Jane Chan, an associate research fellow in the maritime security program at Nanyang Technological University in Singapore.
She also said, ''I would think they would go to protect their own interests -- just for escorting purposes and not for policing.''
Also this month, the United Nations Security Council passed a resolution allowing navies to breach Somalia's 12-mile territorial limit while pursuing suspected pirates. 
And on Tuesday, the Council voted unanimously to permit attacks on pirate bases on the ground.
Although pirates use oceangoing ''mother ships'' to attack merchant vessels deep in international waters, they are resupplied and find havens in towns along the lawless coast of Somalia. 
Many antipiracy experts have pressed for international strikes against the pirate bases on land.
''Piracy is a symptom of the state of anarchy which has persisted in that country for over 17 years,'' said the United Nations secretary general, Ban Ki-moon. 
''This lawlessness constitutes a serious threat to regional stability and to international peace and security.''
More than 100 vessels have been attacked by pirates in the gulf this year, and 42 have been hijacked. 
Sixteen are being held for ransom, including a fully loaded Saudi supertanker, the Sirius Star, and a Ukrainian ship, the Faina, carrying 32 battle tanks and other heavy weapons. 
About 250 crew members are being held on the various hijacked ships.
