
The United States, Europe and China removed the last remaining obstacle blocking China's admission to the World Trade Organization tonight, as the Bush administration scrambled to show that its engagement in international affairs was undiminished by terrorist attacks.
The agreement means that China's entry to the trade body will be formalized as early as Monday and will take effect early next year. 
That will complete a quest that the Communist government began more than 15 years ago, when Beijing accelerated efforts to overhaul its command-and-control economy and open its market to the outside world.
Negotiators in Geneva agreed on Saturday morning, their time, that a dispute about the differing status of European and American insurance companies in the China market did not have to be fully resolved before China could enter the W.T.O.
Though negotiators had initially suspended talks over how to resolve the dispute after the terrorist attacks in New York and Washington, Bush administration officials said they made a renewed push to finalize China's entry later in the week.
"We're showing that the United States and Europe can work together in this environment to get China into the W.T.O. and that we're not paralyzed by this," said Robert B. Zoellick, the United State trade representative.
Mr. Zoellick and Pascal Lamy, the European trade commissioner, worked to seal the China agreement this week as part of a broader effort to lay the groundwork for an international trade summit meeting scheduled for Doha, Qatar, in early November, administration officials said.
Some experts have questioned whether the Doha meeting will take place, given the fact that it is supposed to be held in the Middle East at a time when American retaliation for the terrorist attacks may have occurred or be under way. 
But Mr. Zoellick said both he and his European counterpart had redoubled their efforts to make sure that meeting, if it did take place, did not dissolve into squabbles, as a similar summit meeting in Seattle did in 1999.
"It's really more important than ever that the U.S. demonstrate leadership on international economic issues even as we focus on security issues," Mr. Zoellick said.
Under the agreement on China's accession, European and American insurance companies would be granted access to China's domestic insurance market based on separate terms Europe and the United States reached with China last year. 
The deal between China and the United States had given a significant edge to American insurers, and an effort to reconcile those terms with Europe's agreement had cast doubt on whether China would win admission soon.
The accord appears to favor American International Group, the American insurance giant, which has special access to the China market because it is allowed to operate there without local partners.
After China enters the W.T.O., European companies could still seek the same access that American International has. 
But the issue is not finally resolved, meaning that Europeans may end up suing China for the rights through the trade organization's dispute-resolution process.
China also reached a final accord with Mexico this week, which was the only other remaining obstacle to joining the trade body.
President Bush is scheduled to visit China next month for a conference of Asian leaders and a state visit with President Jiang Zemin. 
Administration officials were determined to help China realize its goal of joining the trade body before that time.
