
The world's biggest mining company, BHP Billiton, must decide by Wednesday whether it will proceed with a bid for a rival, the Rio Tinto Group, after China intervened with a strategic investment that could sharply increase the price of what would be one of the biggest mergers in corporate history.
BHP declined to comment Monday on speculation that it would increase its $127 billion offer before the deadline set by market regulators in London for the company to make a formal bid.
The company's chief executive, Marius Kloppers, must also consider whether BHP can afford to antagonize China, its biggest customer, which has objected to the takeover.
On Friday, the Aluminum Corporation of China, which is owned by the government and known as Chinalco, joined the Aluminum Company of America, or Alcoa, in paying $14 billion for 12 percent of Rio Tinto. 
Chinalco contributed $12.8 billion to the Rio Tinto investment.
Chinalco's investment was widely interpreted as a blocking move and another indication that China was hostile to the merger.
China, one of the world's biggest importers of minerals and energy, fears that a merged company will dictate prices for commodities, in particular iron ore, that fuel its economy.
Industry analysts say that this is a pivotal moment for Mr. Kloppers and his plan to create a mining and processing colossus worth an estimated $350 billion. 
''BHP now has a very serious problem,'' said Tim Treadgold, a mining industry analyst and commentator in Perth, Australia. 
''The Chinese are saying: 'We don't want you to do this. 
If you do it, you are declaring war on your biggest customer.'
''
Mr. Kloppers has argued that the merged company can expand production more rapidly and efficiently to meet soaring demand from China and India, resulting in savings that will be passed along to its customers.
Management of Rio Tinto rejected the terms that BHP proposed in November, saying that the price undervalued the company's resources and growth potential.
Chinalco moved Friday to distance itself from speculation that it intended to make a counterbid for Rio Tinto. 
Some analysts suggested that the investment was a signal that China had ambitions to become a major player on world commodity markets and secure its ownership of the minerals vital for its economic growth.
Chinalco's president, Xiao Yaqing, said at a news conference in Sydney that the investment in Rio Tinto was strategic and that the company had no plans to increase its stake or play a role in management. 
''We are satisfied with our 12 percent stake,'' he said, according to a Reuters report.
Mr. Xiao also said Chinalco would consider selling its stake for the right price if BHP went ahead with its bid.
BHP has endured a tense relationship with Chinese customers and senior Communist Party officials in Beijing after successfully leading negotiations for steep increases in iron ore prices.
Some analysts suggested that Mr. Kloppers had no choice but to press ahead with a higher offer because he did not want to undermine the company's negotiating position with Beijing. 
''Perhaps the Chinese have to learn to live with it, but they certainly don't like it,'' Mr. Treadgold said.
In announcing their investment in Rio Tinto, Chinalco and Alcoa reserved the right to make a full offer within the next six months. 
But mining industry specialists said they doubted that the Chinese company would do so.
While China has been actively buying offshore energy and raw materials, a bid for Rio Tinto, the world's second-biggest mining company, would dwarf its previous investments. 
It would also almost certainly face bigger regulatory hurdles than the BHP bid, analysts said.
They suggested that Australia's Foreign Investment Review Board would probably not allow the Chinese government through Chinalco to gain control of Rio Tinto's vast mineral resources in Australia.
Some industry specialists suggested that apart from complicating the BHP bid, Chinalco and Alcoa might have their eye on some of Rio Tinto's aluminum mining and processing assets.
If the BHP bid succeeds, analysts said, regulators in the United States might require the merged company to shed aluminum assets.
''I suspect the regulators will force them to sell,'' said Michael Komesaroff, managing director of Urandaline Investments in Queensland and a specialist on China's metals and minerals industries. 
''With their stake in Rio, Chinalco and Alcoa will be in a position to ask for certain of those assets.''
