
China's national legislature began deliberating Thursday on a landmark law that would provide legal protections for private property as well as a law that would gradually equalize corporate taxes on foreign and domestic corporations.
The two pieces of legislation are a result of years of debate within the Communist Party. 
They are intended to protect private wealth, create more coherence in the tax code and continue the country's market-driven economic reforms. 
The property law is particularly symbolic, because it writes private property into the evolving legal code of a country that is growing rich on capitalism but nominally remains a socialist state.
''To me, the private property law is more a symbolic ratification of how far China has rejected its socialist past,'' Arthur R. Kroeber, managing editor of China Economic Quarterly, said in an e-mail message. 
''That's important insofar as it signifies a point of no return in the reform process.''
Both pieces of legislation were introduced Thursday during the National People's Congress, the annual two-week gathering of the Communist Party-controlled legislative body. 
Passage, considered a formality, is expected next week.
Approval of the property law was expected last year, but party leaders tabled the proposal after an unusually public and passionate ideological fight erupted. 
It was led by leftist scholars who argued that the law would worsen income inequality, legalize the misappropriation of state assets and undermine the socialist tenet of state ownership of property.
''This will accelerate the loss of state assets,'' Gong Xiantian, a law professor at Peking University, said in an interview this week. 
''And it will accelerate the process of turning the country into a place where private ownership is the dominant system.''
This year, Mr. Gong and other critics tried to continue their fight, but the law's introduction indicates that it will be approved. 
Wang Zhaoguo, a ranking official in the National People's Congress, said that the public wanted legal safeguards for its property and that such protections stimulated ''people's initiative to create and accumulate wealth and to promote social harmony.''
Mr. Kroeber said the property law largely ratified customary practice, and he predicted that the practical short-term impact on business would be limited. 
He said the law offered entrepreneurs protection against seizure of assets but most businesses were more concerned about fees, levies and illegal taxes.
Land in China is owned by the state, but individuals and corporations are permitted to own buildings, homes or apartments while renting the land below on long-term leases.
Real estate has become a primary engine of the Chinese economy, but also a source of widespread official corruption and illegal land confiscations. 
Government studies indicate that land has been confiscated from more than 40 million farmers, often by corrupt officials working in concert with developers. 
Urban residents have been evicted from aging apartments to make way for development.
Critics like Mr. Gong have argued that the property law would legalize such misappropriations. 
But Jiang Ping, a scholar involved in the early drafting of the law, said the law protected only ''legally obtained'' property and also included protections for farmers against illegal land seizures.
Mr. Jiang, an emeritus professor at the Chinese University of Politics and Law, also said the law addressed specific concerns of the emerging middle class on narrow issues like ownership rights of common areas and parking garages in apartment complexes.
''I see the law as a great encouragement for people to seek wealth legally, and be protected,'' Mr. Jiang said.
The proposed law on corporate taxes has also been under discussion for several years. 
For years, China has offered tax incentives and lower rates to foreign corporations, a package that has helped attract record amounts of foreign investment. 
Domestic companies also receive certain tax preferences, but many resent the tiered tax-rate structure.
Anthony M. Fay Jr., a tax lawyer with White & Case in Beijing, said domestic companies paid a 33 percent statutory tax rate while their foreign competitors paid a much lower rate and often received ''tax holidays'' like two-year exemptions followed by three years of paying half the usual rate. 
Under the new law, the statutory tax rate will gradually be equalized to 25 percent for all companies, Mr. Fay said.
Most existing companies will be grandfathered into the old system for up to five years, Mr. Fay said. 
Mr. Kroeber said the proposed changes had been publicized for several years to give foreign companies time to plan for them.
Mr. Kroeber said the tax changes might prompt manufacturers of low-end items like shoes and garments, which depend on tax preferences to make their profit margins, to move to places like Vietnam. 
But he predicted that China would remain a favorite for foreign investment.
''Foreign companies still have enormous incentives to invest in China because of the manufacturing efficiencies it offers and the market opportunities,'' he said.
