
In permitting seven North Korean asylum seekers to leave here today on medical grounds, China turned its back on the central question the incident raised.
Are the hundreds of thousands of illegal North Korean immigrants in China political refugees who deserve protection from persecution in their homeland or are they simply poor people in search of a better life who should be forcibly returned?
China never directly addressed the status of the seven, although it has steadfastly maintained that such people are what it calls economic migrants, sending back thousands to North Korea in the last few years. 
"Judging from international law and the purpose of their entry into China, they are not refugees," a spokeswoman for the Foreign Ministry, Zhang Qiyue, said this week.
She was referring to North Korean immigrants in general, not the seven who took refuge on Tuesday in the office of the United Nations high commissioner for refugees here. 
After interviewing the seven, United Nations officials concluded that they, at least, qualified as political refugees. 
The officials could not answer the larger question of how many other North Koreans might qualify for a similar status, largely because China has never let United Nations inspectors interview in the border area where most live.
Since North Koreans started streaming into China years ago, many driven by severe food shortages, United Nations officials have quietly protested to the Chinese the lack of access. 
But the bold action of the seven this week brought new attention to the situation, for a moment at least.
"We hope this incident, which has highlighted the problems of North Koreans, will lead to a new dialogue with Chinese authorities, so we can properly address the plight of North Koreans in China, especially those who left for refugee-related reasons," Ron Redmond, a refugee agency spokesman, said in Geneva.
Although most of the North Koreans in China came originally in search of food, many people say those who have fled their homeland are branded traitors and often jailed if they return, especially if they are known to have made multiple trips across the border. 
Indeed, the seven North Koreans who presented themselves at the office here were part of an extended family of 17 that came to China in 1999. 
Five family members were picked up by authorities and sent back, and two are in North Korean jails, a Japanese journalist who accompanied the seven said.
The family, which arrived today in the Philippines after flying from Beijing to Singapore, was reportedly under guard at the international airport in Manila. 
They were expected to fly to South Korea on Saturday.
Aid groups that help North Koreans in the border area say many if not most of the North Koreans in China would qualify for refugee status if United Nations representatives could interview them freely.
United Nations officials and diplomats here have avoided pressing the Chinese, fearing that might prompt Beijing to seal a lightly patrolled border that provides a lifeline for North Korea's northern provinces.
Although some North Koreans choose to stay in China, more probably make short trips back and forth for food and supplies, experts said.
Even though China insists that the North Koreans should be returned if caught, in practice the large ethnic Korean population in northeastern China generally offers help, hiding them and finding them jobs. 
Officials have generally not been extremely aggressive in seeking them out, although occasional sweeps occur.
But experts and diplomats here who are concerned by the North Koreans' plight, acknowledged that China was involved in a delicate balancing act. 
Its longtime ally North Korea wants its citizens returned. 
And Beijing fears that if North Koreans believe that they can easily win free passage to South Korea by entering China, thousands more would move.
In a sense, the seven got what they wanted -- United Nations designation as political refugees and eventual passage to South Korea, where they are scheduled to land on Saturday. 
But they also had larger goals.
"We ask," the group said, "on behalf of thousands of other North Korean refugees hiding in China, that the world pay more attention to our situation and give us help if you are people who value freedom and human rights. 
Let us live as you do."
