
President Hu Jintao said in a major address today that the "foremost political duty" of China's leaders was to carry out the ideological theories of his predecessor, Jiang Zemin, disappointing some reformists who hoped he would advocate at least a modest agenda for political change.
In a lengthy speech in Beijing marking the 82nd anniversary of the Chinese Communist Party's founding, President Hu, who is also the head of the party, called on the country's 67 million party members to rededicate themselves to helping the urban and rural poor.
But the bulk of his speech dwelled on the theory of the Three Represents, which Mr. Jiang enshrined as party gospel before handing his major political posts to Mr. Hu.
The theory has been held to show that the party can speak for private entrepreneurs and other so-called advanced forces in modern China while still meeting traditional commitments to the working class.
"The thorough implementation of the important ideology of the 'three represents' is linked to all aspects of the work of the party and government and is linked to the great goal of building a well-off society," Mr. Hu was quoted by the official New China News Agency as saying.
Mr. Hu did not mention the notion of introducing democratic elections within the Communist Party, an idea embraced by some left-leaning intellectuals as a way of enlivening the political process. 
He also left out any reference to amending the Constitution to guarantee private property rights. 
Articles in the official media broached those topics in recent weeks, leading to speculation that Mr. Hu intended to use this address to begin laying out a program for making the ruling party more open and accountable.
But his speech coincided with evidence of increasing tensions between Mr. Hu's supporters and people loyal to Mr. Jiang, who retains enormous power as China's military chief.
Party officials say Mr. Jiang has signaled his disagreement with the way Mr. Hu has handled some personnel issues. 
People close to Mr. Jiang have also sought to impose tighter controls on the government-run media even as other officials who are believed to reflect Mr. Hu's thinking have offered the media more leeway.
Mr. Hu, who was an invisible apparatchik before becoming the party's general secretary last fall, rose in stature in the eyes of many Chinese after he fired two senior leaders for missteps in fighting the SARS epidemic and then moved decisively to bring the disease under control.
He has also begun to assert himself behind the scenes in areas where he was expected to remain largely passive, including modernization of the armed forces, party officials and analysts say.
But the unadventurous tone of his speech may reflect the fact that even if Mr. Hu intends to tackle political reform, it may take him years to build up the necessary consensus.
For the immediate future, he has the delicate task of balancing demands from liberals for more openness with the counterdemands of conservatives more closely allied with Mr. Jiang, who worry that bold political reform could destabilize the one-party state.
"It took Deng Xiaoping some number of years before he could push through economic reforms," said Kang Xiaoguang, a political scientist at the China Academy of Science, "and Jiang Zemin also took years to establish himself politically. 
Hu Jintao will need to build support over several years before he can begin to implement his ideas."
Even so, Mr. Hu was not as deferential to Mr. Jiang in his address today as he had been in other public forums. 
In the portions of his speech made available by the New China News Agency, he rarely mentioned Mr. Jiang by name. 
That suggests that the Communist Party may incorporate Mr. Jiang's thinking into its canon without noting authorship, unlike the way it handed the theoretical contributions of Mao and Deng.
Mr. Hu also did not define the Three Represents the same way Mr. Jiang did. 
That could mean that the theory, always vaguely worded, could evolve into a vehicle for Mr. Hu's thinking down the road.
Mr. Hu said the essence of the Three Represents was "establishing a party to serve the public and ruling to serve the people."
The line is not much more specific than Mr. Jiang's formulations, but might be viewed as a broadening of the 1990's emphasis on economic development above all.
