
China announced temporary regulations on Friday loosening restrictions on foreign journalists, a step intended to fulfill the country's promise to allow visiting reporters to work freely in advance of the 2008 Beijing Olympics.
The rules, announced by the Foreign Ministry, will supersede existing restrictions that require journalists to obtain government approval before traveling or conducting interviews. 
Under the new rules, a foreign journalist will only need to obtain the permission of the person being interviewed.
''It is crystal clear that as long as the interviewee agrees, you can do your reporting,'' the ministry spokesman, Liu Jianchao, told reporters at a briefing.
The Foreign Correspondents' Club of China, a Beijing-based association of international news bureaus, applauded the new rules and singled out the Foreign Ministry for praise. 
But the group also called on the government to make the regulations permanent. 
The rules take effect on Jan. 
1 and end Oct. 
17, 2008, after the conclusion of the Paralympics.
''Depending on how they are implemented, we hope they'll one day be looked back upon as a major step in bringing correspondents' reporting conditions in China much closer to international standards,'' the group said in a statement.
Reporters Without Borders, the international press advocacy group, also praised the new rules but noted that the announcement came on the same day that a Beijing appeals court upheld a fraud conviction against Zhao Yan, a Chinese researcher for The New York Times.
Mr. Zhao's case has brought international criticism; some analysts considered his conviction an implicit warning to foreign journalists and their Chinese news assistants. 
According to the Reporters Without Borders Web site, at least 32 Chinese journalists were jailed in China as of January. 
The new rules will not apply to Chinese journalists, who still face heavy censorship.
For China, the relaxed reporting rules for foreigners are an important public relations gesture as Beijing prepares for the Olympic Games in August 2008. 
More than 20,000 journalists are expected to attend the Games, and Beijing promised the International Olympic Committee that reporters would be allowed to report freely.
Historically, China has tightly monitored foreign reporting and censored the Chinese news media on issues deemed politically delicate. 
In an earlier era, state security agents often tried to intercede or follow foreign reporters who tried to travel without permission.
Currently, foreign journalists work in something of a gray zone. 
Journalists are rarely followed, though many reporters assume that their e-mail messages, telephones, offices and possibly homes are monitored with listening devices. 
Many journalists now travel without government permission and also conduct interviews without applying for approval. 
Often such trips are completed without incident.
But the restrictions create a tense atmosphere that leaves reporters vulnerable to official scrutiny and, in some cases, arrest. 
Journalists can be identified by a special ''J'' designation on their visas. 
Hotel clerks are supposed to notify local public security bureaus anytime someone with a ''J'' visa registers for a room.
In addition, foreign journalists visiting remote areas sometimes attract suspicion if they are not ethnic Chinese. 
Reporters caught traveling without permission are sometimes detained and questioned by the local police. 
In some cases Chinese residents have been harassed or even arrested after being quoted in news articles.
Jonathan Watts, the Beijing bureau chief for The Guardian, the British newspaper, applauded the new rules but also noted that the proof would come in how they were carried out. 
''As with everything in China, it is going to depend on implementation,'' Mr. Watts said. 
''But the fact is that they have set a precedent.''
The new regulations apply to reporting about the Olympics and ''related matters.''
But Mr. Liu, the Foreign Ministry spokesman, said the regulations could be broadly interpreted and ''actually expands the areas on which foreign journalists can report.''
''Foreign journalists will not limit their activities to the Games themselves,'' Mr. Liu said, according to The Associated Press. 
''They will also cover politics, science, technology and the economy.''
He added that the police would maintain the right to intervene with reporters during emergencies or protests. 
That caveat raised questions about what barriers journalists would face if they should try to cover events like the numerous protests and riots that have occurred throughout China in recent years.
