
At 10 p.m., when the hulking Beijing West Railway Station is usually emptying of passengers, Xie Wenzhong has arrived eight hours early for his morning train in hopes of beating the crowds. 
He can barely find a place to sit.
Soldiers with bullhorns are shouting ''Move inside!
Move inside!'' as passengers spill from stuffed waiting halls into the main concourse. 
The line for Shenyang in the northeast is five or six wide and nearly 100 yards long -- and that is for just one of 107 trains on the schedule.
''I was afraid that if I came later, there would be no space to even stand,'' said Mr. Xie, 42, who, despite the inconvenience, seemed to enjoy the spectacle. 
''It will be like this until morning.''
Mr. Xie, an air-conditioning repairman, is one of a few hundred million Chinese trying to go home for the holidays. 
For the 40 days and 40 nights bracketing the Lunar New Year on Feb. 
9, Chinese officials estimate that passengers will make nearly two billion total trips by car, bus, train, boat or airplane.
It is probably the world's worst holiday traffic nightmare. 
For perspective, consider that the Department of Transportation estimates that the combined number of ''person trips'' Americans take for Thanksgiving, Christmas and New Year's Eve is 202 million.
The strain is so great on China's transportation system that top leaders are rethinking what is still a relatively new phenomenon -- the vacation. 
The weeklong Lunar New Year holiday is one of three ''golden weeks'' of vacation introduced in 1999 by the State Council, or China's cabinet, to stimulate domestic spending in the Asian financial crisis.
But last November, state media reported that a State Council study group was examining whether the weeklong holidays in May and October should be replaced by a more flexible system of paid vacation that would place less burden on the infrastructure. 
A decision could be made in March at the annual meeting of the National People's Congress.
Notably, the proposals being floated appear unlikely to change the break for the Lunar New Year, also known as Spring Festival. 
It is the most traditional and revered Chinese holiday, when the tens of millions of people who have left villages for cities go home for family reunions and celebrations.
It is also a human stampede from which few cities in this country of 1.3 billion people are spared.
In Beijing, the daily number of passengers is expected to reach 280,000 on peak days. 
In Shenzhen, a southern manufacturing hub, officials last month converted a sports stadium into a temporary ticket office to handle tens of thousands of migrant workers. 
Railway officials predict that the daily passenger load will exceed the system's capacity by up to 60 percent.
''It's like that American expression,'' said Huang Zhi, 22, a university student, describing a past Spring Festival train trip. 
''We were packed in there like sardines.''
This year, Mr. Huang's journey is fairly typical. 
He left his school in Harbin, the northeastern provincial capital, at 7 p.m. on a Thursday and made the nearly 600-mile trip to Beijing in 11 hours. 
He secured a seat on that leg of the journey. 
But in Beijing he could only buy a boarding ticket for the remaining leg to Guilin, his hometown, in the south.
That meant he would have to stand or squat in the aisle with hundreds of other travelers for a trip that would take 24 hours. 
''There are people everywhere in the hallways, and people even standing in the connecting spaces between cars,'' he said. 
Others sleep in washrooms, he added.
Liu Taiguo, 52, is one of the country's 120 million migrant workers, for whom Spring Festival is often the only visit of the year with his family. 
Last weekend, he clutched his ticket as he stood in a cranny of the Beijing West station that would be his home for the next two days.
''I'm staying here until my train leaves,'' he said on a Friday of his train, which was to leave Sunday. 
It meant he would spend 48 hours pulling his bag through the concourse before squeezing onto a packed train that would take 42 hours to reach his home in Sichuan Province.
''The train is so crowded,'' he said. 
''There is nowhere to stretch your legs. 
But Spring Festival is the Chinese custom. 
For the family reunion, no matter how far away you are, you have to go home.''
The glut of passengers seems to overwhelm whatever steps the government takes. 
The Ministry of Railways has increased the number of trains nationwide by a third, and Chinese airlines have added 1,000 extra flights. 
In Guangzhou in the southeast, officials opened an online train ticketing system that eased sales. 
Still, the state media reported that the demand for tickets outstripped supply by a ratio of four to one.
The Ministry of Railways, sensing a public relations opportunity, has called for more money to update the system. 
It has also increased ticket prices for the holiday period by up to 20 percent, ostensibly to cut demand but driving up profits in the process.
For most of the passengers pouring through the Beijing West station, the only thing that mattered was getting home. 
The sound of hundreds of pieces of luggage rolling over the marble floors of the main concourse created a steady hum as migrant workers pushed through carrying their clothes in plastic buckets. 
The buckets would double as seats for those relegated to the aisles.
Tao Shiwu, 38, stood in Waiting Hall No.7 with his 3-year-old son, Weixin. 
The crowd was so thick that guards shouted at groups squatting on the floor to clear enough room for people to walk. 
Young Weixin wailed.
Mr. Tao said he had no seat and was faced with holding the boy for more than 30 hours. 
He said he did not mind. 
He smiled, even when the boy burst into tears and screams.
''I can only stand in the aisle,'' Mr. Tao said, wincing. 
''With my son, I'll play it by ear. 
This is his first trip.''
