
Prime Minister Zhu Rongji called today for a renewed assault on official corruption and for bolstering the dwindling incomes of farmers in a stern speech that highlighted gnawing threats to China's prosperity and social stabilityI.
In his televised State of the Nation address this morning, at the opening of the annual session of Parliament, Mr. Zhu praised China's "remarkable achievements" in 2001, including an economic growth rate of 7.3 percent despite global economic woes.
But he devoted most of his 90-minute speech to a litany of problems that he said are dogging the transition toward a market economy. 
They include the stagnation or decline in incomes among the rural majority, soaring backlogs in payment of wages to rural teachers and pensions to urban workers and the growing threat of unemployment.
Even as China enters the World Trade Organization, the country's economy remains warped by its legacy of central planning, said Mr. Zhu, who is a leading advocate of market reforms. 
"Industrial structure remains irrational, and deep-seated problems in our economic system have not been solved," he said.
He described problems of environmental degradation, local protectionism, "deception, extravagance and waste" by officials, lax enforcement of the law and an epidemic of "grave work site accidents."
Mr. Zhu, 73, is beginning his last year of a five-year term as prime minister, after which he is expected to retire. 
His sobering economic review was given to the 2,987 delegates to the National People's Congress, an annual gathering that endorses new laws, gives national leaders a platform for advertising their priorities and gives Beijing officials feedback from the provinces.
As usual on such occasions, Mr. Zhu read his speech from a script and laced it with praise for the legacy and decisions of the Communist Party, "with Jiang Zemin at the core."
Mr. Jiang, who is chief of the party as well as being China's president, and Li Peng, chairman of Parliament and No. 2 in the party, watched impassively as they heard a text that all the top leaders had already reviewed.
Mr. Li, 73, a former prime minister, is also expected to retire next year when his term ends. 
Crucial leadership decisions will be made in October at the five-year Communist Party Congress, when Mr. Jiang, 75, is expected to step down as party chief.
Mr. Zhu's speech reflected the complexity of governing China as it moves from a rigidly socialist past. 
But his approach also seemed to reflect his history as a manager of a planned economy under one-party rule. 
He offered few solutions to the country's problems, in part because of the limitations imposed by politics and the Communist Party's power monopoly.
He demanded immediate payment of back wages owed to millions of rural school teachers, for example, but he also said local governments, which pay those wages, must reduce taxes and fees. 
He did not explain how to square those goals.
Mr. Zhu called for stern measures against official corruption, but did not mention the systemic answers that many analysts feel are needed to curb it: more press freedom and competitive elections.
Altogether, in a speech that in its English translation ran 35 pages, Mr. Zhu used the phrase "we need to," or variations on it, more than 100 times, usually without offering specific means to achieve the goal.
In an indirect reference to the flaring anger among displaced workers and farmers that is reflected in unease among the delegates to the Parliament this year, Mr. Zhu offered advice to fellow officials. 
"We should initiate investigations and studies," he said, "go all the way down to the realities of life and to the people to learn their actual conditions, listen to their opinions, share their weal and woe, and lose no time in solving the problems they resent or are dissatisfied about."
Mr. Zhu said the government would continue with its expansionary deficit-spending policies in the year ahead, although some economists questioned the approach this week.
The leadership's preoccupation with economic development, social stabilityII and the wrenching changes associated with market opening was reflected in the speech.
Mr. Zhu gave only brief attention to foreign affairs and stated no changes in policy. 
He repeated recent offers to open dialogue with any Taiwanese leaders who accept the one-China principle. 
Perhaps more significant, he did not issue any new warnings to the island, which China considers a renegade region.
Still, in an indication of the political potency of the Taiwan issue, Mr. Zhu received his only burst of applause when he said, "We are firmly convinced that the great aim of national reunification will be realized at an early date."
