
The World Health Organization declared today that Beijing had effectively conquered SARS, signaling victory over the disease in the country where it originated and took the most lives.
The announcement prompted expressions of relief and celebration around the city, where just a few weeks ago people had stopped going to work, eating at restaurants or even leaving their homes for fear of catching the sometimes fatal illness.
Government officials hailed the suppression of SARS, or severe acute respiratory syndrome, as a victory for Communist Party leadership, seeking to gain public credibility even though official dissembling and inefficiency contributed to its rapid spread last winter.
The lifting of the warning against travel to Beijing and the removal of the city from the list of SARS-infected areas came after the W.H.O. found that people had not been catching the disease in Beijing for more than three weeks, except for some new cases that had been reported among people confined to isolation wards as recently as June 11.
Taiwan and Toronto are the only two places that remain on the organization's list of infected areas, though they are no longer subject to a travel advisory and are thought to have the disease largely under control.
Officials of the organization cautioned that they had not excluded the possibility that SARS would prove seasonal, like influenza, and re-emerge as a threat when the weather turns cold next winter.
"Today is a milestone in the fight against SARS, not only in China but in the world," Shigeru Omi, the organization's regional director for the Western Pacific, said at a Beijing news conference. 
"The W.H.O. is no longer advising against travel to anywhere in the world."
He added that "there is no room for complacency" and urged China to maintain its heightened surveillance for at least another year.
SARS has infected more than 8,400 people and killed more than 800 worldwide since it first emerged in Guangdong Province, in southern China, late last year. 
Beijing did not get its first cases until March, but it quickly became the world's most heavily infected area, with more than 2,500 cases and 191 deaths.
The outbreak overwhelmed the Chinese medical system, which has suffered from inadequate funding and lacks adequate procedures and facilities for dealing with highly infectious diseases. 
But it was at least as serious a test for China's single-party political system.
Propaganda authorities ordered the official news media to stop reporting on SARS in February, even as the virus was sickening hundreds of people in Guangdong.
The decision left other parts of China and neighboring countries and territories, including Chinese-controlled Hong Kong, unprepared.
It was not until mid-April that leaders acknowledged some mistakes, fired the health minister and Beijing's mayor and began a national political mobilization to fight SARS. 
China made broad use of quarantines to isolate anyone suspected of having contact with SARS patients. 
The military built a 1,000-bed SARS hospital in a week, and travel was heavily restricted.
Such measures contributed to a sense of panic, but they helped contain the disease sooner than some foreign experts had predicted.
Gao Qiang, the vice health minister, today claimed credit today for the suppression of SARS in the name of President Hu Jintao and Prime Minister Wen Jiabao. 
They took a big gamble in the Chinese political context by cooperating with international health authorities and granting the news media a temporary reprieve from tight censorship to report relatively openly on the disease.
Some local and foreign experts have expressed doubts about China's claim that it has eliminated SARS and question the accuracy of reporting about the disease in rural areas, where the health system is weakest. 
But there is no concrete evidence to suggest that officials are distorting statistics to make the government look good, as they were a few months ago.
