
China and Japan said they had made progress addressing their historical animosities and territorial tensions on Sunday, as Shinzo Abe, the new Japanese prime minister, devoted his first overseas trip to mending ties with Asian neighbors.
The Chinese president, Hu Jintao, called Mr. Abe's visit, the first to Beijing by a Japanese leader in five years, ''a turning point'' for two Asian powers, whose relations had sharply declined. 
Mr. Abe told reporters on Sunday night that he also considered the event a turning point ''that will lead Japan-China relations to a higher level.''
The trip coincided with fears that North Korea would test a nuclear weapon at any moment, which may have helped focus the meeting on a common strategic concern rather than on political disputes.
North Korea said Monday that it conducted the test. 
At the time of the meeting, both sides said they would do their utmost to dissuade the North from conducting a nuclear test and would urge it to return to multilateral negotiations. 
But there appeared to be no agreement on a response if North Korea carried out its threat to conduct a test. 
''We saw eye to eye that a nuclear test can never be tolerated because it would pose a grave threat to peace in Asia and the international community,'' Mr. Abe said.
The fact that China agreed to a visit from Mr. Abe amid the uncertainty over the test and the opening on Sunday of China's annual Communist Party Central Committee meeting, a major political event for Chinese leaders, underscored how eager Chinese leaders were to reduce tensions.
Mr. Abe, who took office on Sept. 
26, broke a tradition among Japanese prime ministers of visiting Washington on their first overseas trip, emphasizing his desire to improve the diplomatic environment among Japan's neighbors. 
His next stop is Seoul, South Korea.
While economic ties between China and Japan have remained robust, political relations froze after Junichiro Koizumi, Mr. Abe's predecessor, made visits to the Yasukuni Shrine in Tokyo. 
China views it as a provocative symbol of Japan's World War II-era militarism, which took millions of Chinese lives.
The countries have also sparred over control of potentially oil-rich exploration sites in the East China Sea and over Japan's ambition to join the United Nations Security Council, as well as Japan's increasingly close alliance with the United States.In early 2005, residents in Beijing, Shanghai and other cities protested Japan's treatment of its history with China, in rare and at times violent urban demonstrations. 
Chinese security forces initially did little to suppress the protests, but later banned street demonstrations and have taken steps to contain popular outrage.
China's main television news on Sunday devoted an unusual 12 minutes to Mr. Abe's meetings with Mr. Hu, Prime Minister Wen Jiabao and Wu Bangguo, chief of China's Parliament. 
The official news program rarely devotes that much time to a foreign leader unless Chinese leaders wish to signal their support.
''Your ongoing visit is serving as a turning point in China-Japan relations, and I hope it will also serve as a new starting point for the improvement and development of bilateral ties,'' Mr. Hu told Mr. Abe, the state news media reported.
The only concrete result of the visit was a commitment to step up dialogue on all matters that divide the countries. 
Mr. Abe said that he had invited Mr. Hu and Mr. Wen to Japan, and that they planned to visit soon.
The two sides agreed to set up a joint panel of experts to study their common history and to discuss making needed changes in the operations of the United Nations.
Mr. Abe said the two countries would also discuss exploration in the East China Sea, and broader energy and environmental issues.
Mr. Abe is regarded by Chinese analysts as a nationalist who favors Japan assuming a more prominent international role commensurate with its status as the world's second-largest economy. 
Some Chinese have expressed fears that he may be determined to continue Mr. Koizumi's visits to the Yasukuni Shrine.
While Japanese officials say the shrine commemorates those who fell fighting for their country and stands for peace, China and South Korea have opposed the visits because the shrine and an associated museum also honor 14 Class A war criminals.
Mr. Abe departed slightly from Mr. Koizumi's position. 
He has declined to say whether he will visit the shrine, opting for ambiguity.
It is unclear if Japanese and Chinese diplomats reached an understanding before Mr. Abe's visit. 
Chinese state media indicated then that there was a new understanding. 
Japan denied that it had offered any concessions.
But Mr. Abe said Sunday that China appeared to have accepted how he said had he would handle the matter.
