
HONG KONG'S bounty of regional Chinese restaurants is one of the chief lures of this great eating city. 
Visitors can sample specialties like crisp Peking duck, spicy Sichuan dan-dan noodles, juicy pork dumplings from Shanghai, and a vast selection of the dim sum of southern China. 
Deciding which regional style to try is the only difficulty.
For the last few years, I have been disappointed by the Hong Kong versions of Chinese regional classics; too often, the sauces lacked the fiery, multidimensional flavors sampled on my many forays to other parts of China. 
A trip to Hong Kong last December, however, dispelled my previous disappointments: a new crop of restaurants is creating superb renditions of regional dishes that are often superior to those prepared in the regions themselves.
Little Southern Country (Xiao Nan Guo)
For years, Lao Ching Hing reigned as Hong Kong's best Shanghai-style restaurant, offering authentic eastern Chinese delicacies like drunken chicken and hairy crabs. 
Following a tip from a retired Hong Kong food critic, I visited a branch of the renowned Shanghai restaurant Xiao Nan Guo, which means Little Southern Country.
The main dining room was casually elegant, with cathedral ceilings, white linen tablecloths and handsome wooden chairs with pinstripe cushions. 
Across the hall, the Japanese-style annex was less serene and sophisticated, but still appealing.
Shanghai cooking is considered one of the most refined regional styles. 
Grains and all types of fruits and vegetables thrive in the region's subtropical climate. 
Freshwater and saltwater fish are plentiful along with poultry and pork. 
Sauces are generally subtle, accentuating the natural flavor of fine ingredients.
At Little Southern Country, hairy crab, plump with sweet meat and available only from May through December, was succulent. 
It was in a rich, reduced soy sauce glaze atop soft rice cakes, which absorbed the mellow sauce. 
Pork trotter, a signature dish, was superb. 
Braised for six to eight hours, the tender pork easily fell from the bone.
Dim sum, sweet and savory snacks including dumplings, steamed breads and noodles, is served on weekends. 
Stephen Wong, a Hong Kong friend, and I relished crisp scallion pancakes (my son, Jesse, was in heaven); impeccable steamed juicy buns, which were chock full of fragrant juice; and small bowls of delicate chicken broth garnished with custardlike tofu and cellophane noodles. 
The whole meal was a treat and we were surrounded by equally enthusiastic Shanghainese and Hong Kong customers.
Victoria Seafood
Dim sum has always been one of Hong Kong's star attractions. 
For the uninitiated, dim sum is a ritual as well as an eclectic food form. 
Previously, the Luk Yu Teahouse was the city's premier dim sum restaurant, but these days, Victoria Seafood (which now has seven branches) is considered tops.
I particularly like the one on the fifth floor of the Citic building in Wanchai (a five-minute ride toward Causeway Bay from central Hong Kong) with long windows offering spectacular views of Hong Kong Harbor. 
The decor is hardly distinctive and could best be described as Hong Kong glitz. 
Although the restaurant is quite modest in size, when the tables are full and the staff is circulating with platters of freshly made food, the atmosphere is frenetic -- teeming with energy and enthusiasm of people enjoying one another's company and good food.
At most dim sum parlors, carts laden with freshly made offerings are wheeled around the room. 
At Victoria Seafood, each dish is made to order. 
If you are unsure of what to order, simply look around at other tables. 
My favorites were the clear-steamed or pan-fried vegetarian dumplings; flaky, baked chicken pastries embellished with walnuts; steamed rice packages in lotus leaves; and baked barbecued-pork buns. 
Steamed shrimp dumplings are plump and fresh-tasting and Shanghai soupy buns are sumptuous.
With them, I often order a dish of seasonal stir-fried green vegetables with garlic (my favorite is snow pea shoots) and a platter of pan-fried noodles with assorted meat, vegetable and seafood toppings. 
On my most recent visit, I tried chicken shreds with black mushrooms, garlic chives and bean sprouts -- delicious. 
Sweet dim sum, including warm custard tartlets, mango pudding and double-boiled papaya, are also not to be missed.
Quan Ju De Roast Duck Restaurant
Quan Ju De has a venerable history in China: for more than 30 years, the Beijing branch has served Peking duck to numerous V.I.P.'s and tourists alike (even Zhou Enlai was a fan). 
I have not had great experiences at that large restaurant, but the Hong Kong branch of Quan Ju De was quite different, with excellent service and delicious food.
Upon entering, one is seemingly transported back to Imperial China. 
The restaurant is vast, with a sea of large, round banquet tables with smaller tables for four here and there. 
The gaily painted ceiling is dotted with Chinese lanterns, but the lighting is too bright and the red and gold motif is somewhat gaudy. 
One wall is lined with black and white photos of Henry Kissinger and other diplomats in the Beijing branch. 
But whatever Quan Ju De lacks in atmosphere, it more than makes up for it in the food.
We began with a medley of small starters: pao cai, or pickled cabbage; mock goose, a bean curd dish that was deliciously smoky; and memorable duck webs with mustard sauce.
Fortunately, since we were a party of three, -- my husband, Don, a Chinese friend and me -- we could order half a Peking duck, but enjoy the whole ritual: a chef, resplendent in white, wheeled out a beautiful, freshly baked, lacquer-brown duck. 
He swiftly and effortlessly carved small pieces of skin with meat. 
We helped ourselves by smearing a paper-thin Mandarin pancake with a generous dollop of sweet bean sauce, adding scallions, cucumber and pieces of duck. 
The harmony of flavors and textures was superb.
Although roast duck takes center stage, there are other wonderful dishes. 
Sauteed chicken was tender and spicy; pork shreds in soy bean paste with scallions was impeccably cooked and seasoned; and the sweet and sour Mandarin fish called like squirrel was most impressive -- bathed in a tart sweet-and-sour sauce.
The mushrooms and green vegetable were perfunctory, but the pan-fried dumplings were crisp and juicy. 
Skip dessert and enjoy fruit.
Hunan Garden
I have always found Hong Kong to be a difficult place to find authentic Sichuan and Hunan food because chefs too often toned down the seasoning. 
Happily, spicy food is back in vogue and Hunan Garden makes a great effort to capture the true flavors, often hitting the mark.
Hunan Garden is in the sleek Forum Building right in Hong Kong center. 
Upon alighting from the elevator, you first glimpse a cascading waterfall with a lotus pool, which underlines the restaurant's lotus theme. 
The restaurant is divided into two parts: the left room is reserved for private parties and the right room, which has about 40 tables, is the main dining area. 
The lotus motif is repeated in the stylish pink tablecloths and green carpet. 
Large windows line the walls, allowing customers an expansive view of the city. 
At night, a trio plays classical Chinese music.
The service can be perfunctory and curt, but the food is above reproach. 
We began with one of the house specialties: Hunan minced chicken in bamboo pot. 
The broth was delicate, but I've had better elsewhere. 
I suggest concentrating on other dishes, like the fried chicken with chilies, which my son practically inhaled.
At another table, I spotted an intriguing-looking dish, roasted chicken with garlic, that is only on the fixed-price menu, and the staff was happy to accommodate me. 
I ordered it at no extra cost. 
A whole, plump chicken is deep-fried until crisp and then covered with mounds of fragrant fried garlic. 
It was heavenly.
Braised brisket of beef was so tender it rivaled my great aunt Sophie's. 
The spicy pan-fried green beans, dan-dan noodles in spicy sesame dressing, and fluffy steamed buns were memorable. 
Tea noodles with minced meat and spicy sauce are not to be missed, and banana pancakes provide a lovely ending.
Since the wine menu is limited, my friend, T. C. Lai, brought a lovely Australian wine. 
The restaurant charged roughly a $13 corkage fee.
Tung Lok Hin
Tung Lok Hin offers an unusual dining experience: after all, there aren't many Chinese restaurants whose private dining rooms are decorated with avant-garde topiary and Edward Hopper prints. 
The main restaurant, with only 27 tables, is spacious, contemporary and rather characterless, although the wall-length aquarium at the entrance is quite dramatic.
The menu, with its diverse selection of costly delicacies is a little too pricey (a bowl of shark's fin soup runs $45 to $100, while Yoshihama abalone can cost up to $320 a piece). 
But it was highly recommended by some Hong Kong friends, so I tried to keep an open mind.
The assorted appetizers of braised baby bamboo shoots, Shanghai headcheese and fried taro strips were all delicious, with an appealing mixture of contrasting tastes and textures. 
Sauteed lobster in xo sauce (using an intensely flavored concentrated broth made from pork, chicken, rice wine and ginger) was a little too rich for my taste, but Don and our three dining companions were left swooning. 
Spare ribs with a strawberry-based sweet-and-sour barbecue sauce were tender, slightly sweet and appealing with a star anise flavor.
Salt-baked chicken served with a scallion-ginger sauce was outstanding, and the assorted stir-fried vegetables were beautifully cooked and seasoned. 
We drank Chinese beer at $4 apiece, though unlike many restaurants, Tung Lok Hin offers a varied selection of liquor, five different types of Chinese wine, and five varieties of Cognac.
Tea was served in individual Melior pots with very good vanilla mousse and creme brulee to finish the meal.
Tung Lok Hin has illustrious roots: Its owner, Patrick Yuen, founded the renowned Sun Tung Lok Shark's Fin restaurant, which closed last December. 
This restaurant has hefty prices, as its late cousin had, and a slightly pretentious manner, but many of the dishes shine. 
And if customers don't mind the stiff prices, they will certainly enjoy the experience.
Bill of fare
All these restaurants are open for lunch and dinner daily except around the Chinese New Year. 
Reservations are recommended. 
All accept major credit cards and have sections for nonsmokers. 
Many allow customers to bring their own wine, charging a corkage fee. 
I often prefer to drink beer.
Prices are for two without wine or drinks, at 7.8 Hong Kong dollars to the United States dollar. 
A service charge is included, but it is customary to leave a few dollars extra.
Little Southern Country (Xiao Nan Guo), 301-302 Level 3 Man Yee Building, 68 Des Voeux Road Central, Hong Kong; (852) 2259-9393, fax (852) 2259-9233. 
Hours: 11:30 a.m. to 3 p.m. and 6 to 11 p.m. Lunch is $30 to $40, dinner $50 to $75. 
Wines, from around the world, are $30 to $80.
Victoria Seafood, Fifth Floor, Citic Tower, 1 Tim Mei Avenue, Central, Hong Kong; (852) 2877-2211, fax (852) 2877-2933; 11 a.m. to 3 p.m. (dim sum) and 6 to 11 p.m.; $40 for dim sum, and $60 to $120 for dinner, depending on delicacies. 
A number of French wines, from $35, but no corkage fee for your own bottle.
Quan Ju De Roast Duck Restaurant, 4/F China Resources Building (High Block), 26 Harbour Road, Wanchai, Hong Kong; (852) 2884-9088, fax (852) 2884-9808. 
Open 11:30 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. and 5:30 to 11 p.m. About $35 for lunch and $65 for dinner. 
The wine list is minimal.
Hunan Garden, the Forum, Exchange Square, Hong Kong; (852) 2868-2880, fax (852) 2537-9742; 11:30 a.m. to 3 p.m. and 5:30 to 11:30 p.m.; lunch, $45; dinner, $60. 
A respectable wine list, $30 to $50.
Tung Lok Hin, 2/F Oxford House, Westlands Road, Taikoo Place, Quarry Bay, Hong Kong; (852) 2250-5022, fax (852) 2250-5033; 11:30 a.m. (11 on Saturday) to 3:30 p.m. and 6 to 10:30 p.m.; $100. 
Excellent selection of wines ($50 to $120) and mixed drinks.
