
The Chrysler Group signed a deal Wednesday with China's biggest automaker, Chery Automobile, for a production venture that could export the first Chinese-made cars to the United States.
The first cars will reach Latin America or Eastern Europe within a year, and models might be exported to North America and Western Europe in two and a half years, Chrysler's chief executive, Thomas W. LaSorda, said at a signing ceremony.
The alliance offers Chery, a 10-year-old company based in the eastern Chinese city of Wuhu, an opportunity to realize its longtime ambition of entering the American market.
Chinese automakers already export low-price trucks and buses to Africa and other developing markets. 
But analysts say the automakers lack the technology to meet American and European safety and pollution standards on their own.
Chery's chief executive and chairman, Yin Tongyao, said the deal would help Chery improve its skills as it expanded foreign sales of its own models.
''Chery is still young, so we should learn from Chrysler and improve our own competitive edge in the near future,'' he said, calling Mr. LaSorda ''my teacher in the automotive business.''
The first Chrysler-Chery export will be based on Chery's A1 compact and will be sold under the Dodge brand, Mr. LaSorda said.
A 1.3-liter version of the A1 is sold in China for the equivalent of $7,100 to $7,900. 
Export prices have not been announced.
Others also have announced plans to export Chinese-made cars to the United States, but none has yet made it to market.
A Chinese automaker, Changfeng Motor, said in January it hoped to sell sport utility vehicles in the United States within two years, but gave no details. 
Chery had a deal with the American entrepreneur Malcolm Bricklin to sell cars in the United States, but that fell through.
Honda Motor of Japan has exported Chinese-built Jazz subcompacts to Europe since 2005.
Asked if Chrysler, which is being bought by Cerberus Capital Management, was worried that the alliance would help Chery develop into a competitor that might threaten its American partner, Mr. LaSorda said: ''No, we're not. 
With us or without us, they're going to grow. 
So the question is, are you going to go with a winner?''
