
A selective listing by critics of The Times of new or noteworthy opera, classical music and dance events this weekend in the Northeast.
Classical Music
BARGEMUSIC. This small floating concert hall is one of most intimate chamber music performance spaces in New York, offering picturesque views of Lower Manhattan while gently bobbing in the East River. 
The unifying theme of this weekend's programs is the classical guitar in various combinations. 
Tonight the guitarist Simon Wynberg and the violinist Mark Peskanov will play works by Paganini, Villa-Lobos, Falla, Sarasate and others. 
Tomorrow night and Sunday afternoon the duo is joined by the flutist Lorna McGhee, the violist David Harding and the cellist Bryan Epperson in works by Haydn, Mozart, Bach and Paganini. 
Tonight and tomorrow night at 7:30, Sunday at 4 p.m., Fulton Ferry Landing, under the Brooklyn Bridge, Brooklyn, (718) 624-2083. 
Tickets: tonight, $35; tomorrow and Sunday, $40; $20 for students (Jeremy Eichler).
WILLIAM BOLCOM AND JOAN MORRIS. 
Mozart and Constanze, Verdi and Strepponi -- there have been many alliances between (male) composers and (female) singers. 
Few, however, have been as creatively profitable for both parties as that of William Bolcom and Joan Morris: separately, a composer and a singer; together, a popular and polished cabaret act. 
Even in big operas like "A View From the Bridge," Mr. Bolcom shows his leanings toward a sweet melody, a catchy phrase; this weekend he and Ms. Morris show off these traits in the first performance of his complete cabaret songs, written during the last 25 years to lyrics by his longtime collaborator, Arnold Weinstein. 
Sunday at 3 and 8 p.m., Flea Theater, 41 White Street, TriBeCa, (212) 352-3101. 
Tickets: $25 (Anne Midgette).
MAVERICK CONCERTS. 
This concert series near Woodstock, N.Y., now in its 88th season, offers performances in a barn built by Maverick's founder, Hervey White. 
Part of the series's charm is that the barn's open back allows the sounds of nature to mingle with the sounds of music. 
Tomorrow evening, Christopher Costanza, the new cellist of the extraordinary St. Lawrence String Quartet, plays a recital of unaccompanied works that includes suites by Bach and Britten, as well as Bright Sheng's "Seven Tunes Heard in China."
On Sunday afternoon the pianist Ruth Laredo closes the season with an all-Schubert program -- the Impromptus in G flat (Op. 90, No. 3) and B flat (Op. Posth. 142, No. 3), the Sonata in A (Op. Posth. 120) and a selection of waltzes and Landler -- to benefit the Friends of Maverick, which helps support the series. 
Tomorrow at 8 p.m., Sunday at 3 p.m., Maverick Concert Hall, Maverick Road, between Routes 28 and 375, West Hurley, N.Y., (845) 679-8217. 
Tickets for Mr. Costanza's recital are $20, $5 for students; Ms. Laredo's recital is open to Friends of Maverick for a minimum contribution of $50 (Allan Kozinn).
ROLF SCHULTE, SOPHIE SHAO and RICHARD WILSON. 
Besides being a longtime professor of music at Vassar College, the American composer Richard Wilson is an active pianist. 
His work as composer and pianist will be on display in a Sunday afternoon chamber program that also features the cellist Sophie Shao and the violinist Rolf Schulte. 
Mr. Wilson will be the pianist for performances of Beethoven's Cello Sonata in A (Op. 69) and Mozart's Violin Sonata in B flat (K. 454). Ms. Shao will play Mr. Wilson's "Lord Chesterfield to His Son," for solo cello, and Mr. Schulte, a specialist in contemporary music though a dynamic and technically brilliant performer in any repertory, will offer Elliott Carter's "Four Lauds" for solo violin. 
Sunday at 3 p.m., Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan, (212) 501-3330. 
Tickets: $20 (Anthony Tommasini).
Opera
"SILK ROAD 2003."
On previous visits to New York, Li Bao-chun, a master of Chinese opera, appeared to great effect in the charming and intimate confines of the now-defunct Taipei Theater in Manhattan. 
This time he joins the Taipei Li-yuan Chinese Opera Troupe in a vastly larger and more impersonal setting. 
If nothing else, these performances should test how much of an audience Chinese opera has built up in New York since Chen Shi-zheng's celebrated productions of "The Peony Pavilion" and "The Orphan of Zhao" at the Lincoln Center Festival. 
Tonight Mr. Li performs a signature role as the lead in "The Monkey King," as he did here in 1992. 
Tomorrow he appears in vignettes from "Farewell My Concubine" and "Golden Falcon."
Tonight and tomorrow night at 8, Avery Fisher Hall, Lincoln Center, (212) 721-6500. 
Tickets: $25 to $85 (James R. Oestreich).
Dance
COMPAGNIE FELIX RUCKERT. 
This troupe from Berlin continues its unthreatening intermingling and exploration of dancers and audience members in its new "Deluxe Joy Pilot."
The company blurs the boundaries partly by inviting those in the audience to interact from chosen spots, including inflatable club chairs and beds at center stage. 
Tonight at 7; tomorrow at 7 and 10 p.m. Dance Theater Workshop, 219 West 19th Street, between Seventh and Eighth Avenues, Chelsea (212) 924-0077; www.dtw.org. 
Tickets: $20 (Jennifer Dunning).
DANCENOW/NYC. Dance rules, at least through next weekend when this sprawling, nearly citywide festival ends. 
This weekend's attractions take place in four theater spaces, starting tonight with two shows at Joe's Pub, moving uptown tomorrow afternoon to High Bridge Park, careering downtown tomorrow night for two shoes at the Joyce SoHo and heading back uptown to end the weekend on Sunday afternoon at Marcus Garvey Park. 
More than 50 choreographers and companies will participate, among them Larry Keigwin, Centro Cultural Ballet Quisqueya, the Young Dancemakers Company, Dance Theater of Harlem, Forces of Nature, George Faison Universal Dance Experience, Urban Bush Women, Elisa Monte Dance, Jeanine Durning, and the Snappy Dance Theater. 
Tonight at 7:30 and 9:30. 
Joe's Pub, Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, at Astor Place, East Village. 
Tickets: $15. 
Tomorrow at 3 pm. 
High Bridge Park, at the Pool Playcenter, West 173rd Street and Amsterdam Avenue, Washington Heights. 
Free. Tomorrow at 7 and 9 p.m., Joyce SoHo, 155 Mercer Street, between Houston and Prince Streets. 
Tickets: $15. 
Sunday at 3 p.m., Marcus Garvey Park Amphitheater, West 122nd Street and Mount Morris Park West, Harlem. 
Free. Performances continue, at these and two other spaces, every day next week (except Thursday). 
Information: (718) 850-2488;   www.dancenownyc.org (Dunning).
LACY JAMES'S MEREMINNE DANCERS. 
Ms. James's dancers come from troupes including Ailey II and the Martha Graham Ensemble. 
The company name comes from an ancient word for mermaid, which Ms. James chose to suggest a connection between spirit and nature. 
This program includes five new and recent dances by Ms. James, a choreographer who has a bachelor's degree in English literature and comparative religions and experience dancing the works of Graham and Isadora Duncan. 
Tonight and tomorrow night at 8, Theater of the Riverside Church, 120th Street and Claremont Avenue, Morningside Heights, (212) 870-6784. 
Tickets: $20; $15 for students and 65+; $10 for children 12 and under (Dunning).
PALISSIMO. This new dance and theater production company, formed by Pavel Zustiak, a Slovakian director and choreographer, will perform "Blind Spot," a multimedia work about the resurrection, recovery and renewal of the senses. 
The piece has been shaped with a dramaturge, seldom a good sign in dance, but it is a co-presentation with the agreeably iconoclastic Chashama Theater. 
Tonight through Sunday night at 8 p.m. Chashama Theater, 135 West 42nd Street, Manhattan, (212) 352-3101. 
Tickets: $20; $15 for students (Dunning).
PILAR RIOJA. 
One of today's foremost exponents of Spanish dance and a compelling stage personality at the height of her artistic power, Ms. Rioja offers summer programs of solo dances. 
Tonight and tomorrow night at 8, Sunday at 3 p.m., Gramercy Arts Theater, 138 East 27th Street, Manhattan, (212) 889-2850. 
Tickets: $25 to $40 (Jack Anderson).
