
For families of the crew of a United States Navy plane held in China, the anxious times are compounded by the dearth of specific news about their loved ones.
"The spouses I spoke to were, of course, frightened, concerned for the well-being of the crew, and very, very angry," said Capt. William Marriott, commander of the Patrol and Reconnaissance Wing 10, at the Whidbey Island Naval Air Station, the home base for the surveillance plane. 
"They wanted to know the whens and whys, but of course we didn't have all the information they wanted. 
The best we could tell them was all the crew members were safe on deck."
Here in this Navy town on a 35-mile-long island north of Seattle, families of 14 crew members and other residents have tied yellow ribbons around trees, traffic signs, fence posts and other objects. 
On a sunny day here several aircraft of the same type as the one being held in China were seen taking off and landing from the naval air station.
David M. Cecka has been based at the naval air station for four years, and he has lown over the South China Sea many times in the course of duty as an aviation electronics technician. 
When he left March 2 for a routine three-month assignment in Asia, he was leaving behind his newborn son, Cameron, for the first time.
That made the trip particularly hard, said Mr. Cecka's father, Mike Cecka. 
But the father said he was optimistic that all would be well with the crew of the EP-3E Aries II reconnaissance aircraft involved in the midair collision on Sunday with a Chinese fighter jet. 
"David thinks well on his feet and responds well to changing situations, so we're confident that he's handling this situation just fine," Mr. Cecka said from his home in Cle Elum, Wash.
Each family has been assigned a military liaison to give them the latest information on the crew's status. 
Sandy Cecka, David's mother, said that at about noon today, she and her husband received a phone call from their naval liaison who said he had a message from their son. 
The words he read to them were: "All is well. 
Send our love, blessings. 
Be home as soon as we can."
Mrs. Cecka said she was relieved to hear the message, but knew they were not David's words. 
"My son would have said 'Yo Mom!'
" she said. 
"But nevertheless I was very glad to receive word from the group. 
The fact they were finally able to speak at all is great news."
Kimberly Martin, a spokeswoman at the base, said the families of the sailors are coping well. 
"They're getting a great deal of support from the community and emotional support from family and friends."
A private prayer service was held on Monday afternoon in the base chapel.
Of the 21 men and 3 women in the plane's crew, only a handful call western Washington State their permanent home. 
Elsewhere around the country, family members were similarly praying and waiting for any news from China.
When Navy officials rang the home of John Bensing in Sun City Center, Fla., on Sunday, his initial reaction was that his son, Ensign Richard G. Bensing, had been killed. 
"They assured me pretty quickly, though, that nobody was hurt," said Mr. Bensing, a retired jeweler. 
"My first question was, 'What is the prospect of getting them out?'
They didn't have an answer for that, and they still don't."
Updates from Navy officials are coming several times each day, but the information amounts to "about what you hear on the evening news, said Ensign Bensing's mother, Cheryl Bensing, who is separated from her husband and lives in Taylorsville, Utah. 
"I try not to think about him not coming home. 
That would be unthinkable. 
He's got a wife and a 1-year-old daughter."
Ensign Bensing, 32, enlisted in the Navy 13 years ago and was commissioned as an officer in 1999. 
He is stationed at a base in northern Japan, his father said.
Mr. Bensing said he felt confident that the Chinese government would release the plane and its crew soon. 
"I don't expect it to be indefinite," he said. 
"My concern at this point is that it doesn't force the two governments to get their testosterone going to the point that somebody thinks they have got to prove something."
For Robert Blocher of Charlotte, N.C., the last e-mail message he received from his 24-year-old son, Steven, a member of the EP-3E crew, came last Wednesday. 
"Sorry, nothing exciting to report," the message said. 
"As a matter of fact, things are kind of boring here."
Normally, Mr. Blocher and his wife, Sandra, get e-mail messages from the naval base on Whidbey Island, Wash., but his one came from Japan. 
"When we saw the incident reported on CNN and saw what kind of plane it was -- there aren't many -- we felt pretty sure that Steven was one of the crewmen," Sandra Blocher said this afternoon. 
"We went on to church that morning, and when we got back, there were already several messages from his chief."
Steven Blocher followed in the footsteps of his grandfather, Berwyn Lieb, and two older brothers by joining the military three years ago. 
His brothers, while in the Army, served in Operation Just Cause in Panama and Operation Desert Storm in Iraq.
"It is kind of a bonding thing," Mrs. Blocher said, "because each one understands what the other is experiencing a little bit."
Here in Oak Harbor, there was no overt panic today, just a constant sense of awareness of the diplomatic emergency across the Pacific.
Though Oak Harbor is trying to build on the tourism created by artists' communities on the island's south end, it is first and foremost a Navy town, supporting 7,500 active duty military personnel and more than 2,000 civilian employees.. 
"You'd better believe that when something like this happens, it touches the very core of the community," said the Oak Harbor mayor, Patty Cohen.
Arlys Abrahamse, a retired day-care worker who has lived in Oak Harbor for 45 years, said military and civilian families mixed easily in the community. 
"I think everyone here is concerned," Ms. Abrahamse said as she talked with friends over coffee at a local McDonald's restaurant. 
"Everyone cares about what happens to these guys."
