
What a difference a day makes.
On Tuesday, before China and the United States reached an agreement to allow the release of the crew of an American spy plane, people interviewed here were angry and frustrated.
Though few were prepared to advocate a military solution to solve the crisis, many threatened to take personal economic action by boycotting Kmart and other retailers that sell Chinese-made goods.
Yet by breakfast this morning, among Republicans and Democrats, blue- and white-collar workers and retirees, Kansas City is letting bygones be bygones.
"I don't think the Chinese man in the street is a warmonger," said Leonard Gorter, 69, a retired insurance agent.
Edward Story, 75, a veteran of World War II, was equally positive, and equally willing to move on.
"I was just numb" worrying about how the dispute would be resolved, said Mr. Story, a Republican who lives in the overwhelmingly Republican suburb of Overland Park, Kan..
"But one thing Bush has done is surround himself with a lot of brilliant men, and ladies. 
We handled it correctly.
The Chinese handled it well, too, he said. 
"I thought they would stall a month or two," he said. 
"As for the plane, you can scratch that off. 
The Chinese will take it apart, and we won't get anything back but the hubcaps."
If it had been a Chinese plane in American territory, he said, "we'd be all over it too, like a bunch of ants."
Outside a Kmart on the north side of the Missouri River, Dave Saunders, 57, a self-employed appliance repairman, welcomed the return of the crew. 
Though he did not vote for George W. Bush, he praised the president.
"I think Bush handled it as well as could be expected," he said. 
"I think we should get the plane back, but I don't think we should go to war over it."
He added that he would probably avoid purchasing Chinese-made goods from the Kmart behind him -- but not because of this month's dispute.
Buying American products protects American jobs, he said. 
There was also the question of quality: "If it's for permanent use, I buy American made."
Around Kansas City, the nature of the American apology was a subject of debate.
"You can't just say, 'Sorry the accident happened,' " said Pam St. Thomas, 44, of Olathe, Kan., a Kansas City suburb, who was having lunch at a mall.
At another table Margaret Fancher, 53, whose son was wounded in Desert Storm, disagreed. 
"To say 'I won't apologize' is ridiculous," she said before the wording of the American statement was published. 
"I would hope we would be more humble."
But with peace and commerce at stake, people found they could be flexible.
On Tuesday, after President Bush expanded his expressions of regret to encompass the plane's unauthorized landing on Chinese soil, Jim Gilmore, owner of a State Farm insurance office in Overland Park, and his daughter, Lori Emerick, the office manager, had mixed feelings about apologizing.
By this morning, however, both felt Mr. Bush and China had settled on a suitable compromise.
"We didn't apologize," Mr. Gilmore said. 
"It was like bumping into each other in the elevator. 
You say 'Sorry' or 'Excuse me.'
That's basically all we did. 
In my view, Bush handled it just perfectly."
Ms. Emerick, 34 and an Air Force veteran, said that on Tuesday, she was prepared to join the boycott. 
"But no, not now," she said.
Besides, her own household economy today is bound up with China's. 
"If American goods are available," she said, "I will still buy them. 
But half the time they're not there."
