
For 11 days, this Navy town took in the news of the 24-member spy plane crew detained by China like worried parents. 
Yellow ribbons were tied to nearly every lamppost and tree on Route 20, the main thoroughfare. 
Businesses, from real estate offices and banks to espresso stands and hotels, posted signs of support and prayer. 
The local news station kept a crew posted day and night by the Whidbey Island Naval Air Station here, home base of the crew.
Today, Oak Harbor had no cares. 
Signs around town read: "Welcome Home: God Bless America" and "Welcome Whidbey 24: What an Easter."
The Antique Rose flower shop, just outside the base, still sold out its latest shipment of yellow ribbons, but this time for use in the celebration planned for Saturday.
That's when the crew, released by the Chinese on Wednesday, finally arrives here after a debriefing in Hawaii following their trip across the Pacific Ocean to Guam. 
The families of the 21 men and 3 women who endured a collision with a Chinese fighter jet, landed on a Chinese island, and then became the center of an international incident when the United States and China squabbled over who was to blame, will arrive here from all over the country before 4 p.m. on Saturday, when the celebration is scheduled.
Gates to the base will open three hours before the ceremony, when an expected 10,000 well-wishers, including much of the town of Oak Harbor (population 20,000) and the naval station (population 7,000 military) will greet the crew, along with the governor, Gary Locke, the commander in chief of the United States Pacific Fleet, Adm. Thomas Fargo, and other dignitaries.
President Bush, who expressed gratitude and respect for the crew today, was not expected. 
He had plans to spend a long Easter weekend in Texas, said Kimberly A. Martin, a spokeswoman for the Whidbey Island Naval Air Station. 
"As far as we know," she said, "that's where he'll be."
For Oak Harbor, whose bond with the naval station go back 50 years, there will be plenty to celebrate. 
Seven of the 24 crew members have families here, but Oak Harbor claims the entire crew as its own.
"These are our sons and daughters," said Patty Cohen, the mayor, "so you can imagine the outpouring and the gratitude and the relief that this community is expressing."
If the town was relieved, relatives of the crew were absolutely elated to see their loved ones alight from their transport plane in Honolulu this morning.
"I just saw him on television , and the camera stayed on him a good long time," said Sandy Blocher of Charlotte, N.C., whose son Steven, 23, is an aviation electrician's mate third class on the crew. 
"I was able to see Steven quite closely," she said, clearly pleased, "and he looked good. 
They all looked good."
On Wednesday, Mrs. Blocher met the president, who was in North Carolina to discuss education. 
"He gave me a big hug, and I started to tear up and he got teary, too, and he had to wipe his eyes," Mrs. Blocher said. 
"He was very personal, very warm. 
He made us feel so comfortable. 
He said he was proud of the troops and proud of the way they conducted themselves."
In Show Low, Ariz., the parents of Brandon Funk said they were awaiting word on details of the trip to reunite with their 21-year-old son Saturday at the naval station. 
The crew is stationed there. 
"We don't know when we're flying out but we're already getting ready," said Carly Funk, who will be joined by her husband, Kevin, and their two other children.
Ms. Funk said she knew what she would do when she saw her son again: "I'm going to kiss him and hug him like I'll never let go."
The couple spoke to Brandon, a cryptologic technician, late Wednesday night for about 30 minutes in a call placed from Guam.
"He was very, very relieved and said he was tired," said Ms. Funk, who admitted to shedding a few tears during the conversation. 
"It was so good to hear from him. 
He said he couldn't wait to have a pizza."
Oak Harbor had planned to have a big parade on Saturday, but it was postponed until the end of the month so that the crew could spend time with their families.
