
Members of Congress from both parties said today that the end of the standoff over an American spy plane would most likely keep Congress from taking punitive steps against China on trade.
Yet key figures in the House and the Senate said the 11 days it had taken to win the return of the crew had strengthened China's critics on Capitol Hill and given them new ammunition on an array of delicate issues, including a quickly approaching administration decision on whether to sell Taiwan an array of advanced weapons.
Representative Henry J. Hyde, the Illinois Republican who heads the House International Relations Committtee, said the first serious foreign policy test of the Bush administration had brought a "general cooling of ardor for treating China as a strategic partner."
While predicting that normal trade relations with China would ultimately be maintained, he said there would be "a little more skeptical approach to the relationship, a closer look at the transfer of technology to China, less enthusiam for the Olympic Games being in Beijing."
Senator Tom Daschle of South Dakota, the minority leader, struck a similar tone. 
"It appears that this immediate challenge in our relations with China has been overcome, but the impact of this incident on our long-term relationship remains to be seen," he said.
"We have many important issues facing us," Mr. Daschle noted, citing human rights and the spread of weapons, as well as membership for Taiwan and China in the World Trade Organization. 
"Progress on this agenda depends on rebuilding the trust that was damaged over the last 11 days," Mr. Daschle said.
Republican leaders used to be sharply critical of President Clinton's approach to making China a "strategic partner."
While Republican leaders sought to rally around President Bush in his foreign policy challenge, those arguing for a tougher line against China have been among the loudest voices on Capitol Hill.
More than 80 lawmakers, on both the right and the left, wrote to the president to support Taiwan's request for an array of advanced weapons including the Aegis ship-borne radar system.
China fiercely opposes the sale of the Aegis to Taiwan. 
In addition, some lawmakers introduced legislation to revoke normal trade relations, which give China unfettered access to the American market.
Several pro-trade Republicans said today that the end to the standoff would allow trade relations to be kept on track, though the battle is likely to be more bitter than had been expected. 
At the same time, they said they thought that conservatives would step up their pressure on Mr. Bush to sell Taiwain a robust arms package.
Because China has not completed negotiations to enter the World Trade Organization, Congress is expected to have to vote once again this year on normal trade status.
"If this had gone on for another couple of weeks, it would have had lasting impact, or an impact it would have taken some time to turn around," said Senator Don Nickles of Oklahoma, the assistant majority leader. 
"A lot of us think trade is an avenue for helping bring China into the modern world."
Representative Doug Bereuter, a Nebraska Republican, was instrumental in developing the compromise that led to the House vote in favor of China's permanent normal trade status last year. 
"I do think it strengthens the opposition in the Congress to China generally," he said of the incident.
But he added that the release of the crew now, before Congress returns from its April recess, means that "if everything continues as agreed, the damage won't be too substantial."
Still, some usual proponents of trade were witholding judgment. 
"I don't think there's any doubt there's been some dissipation of support for China as a trade partner," said Representative Porter J. Goss, a Florida Republican, who is chairman of the House Intelligence Committee.
He said the outcome of further negotations between the United States and China next week, which will include discussions of returning the American plane, were crucial.
Representative Joseph R. Pitts, a Pennsylvania Republican, called it "good news" that the plane's 24-member crew was coming home, but said that "we've only accomplished half our goal."
"The crisis will not be over until our plane is returned," he said.
Representative Richard A. Gephardt, the Democratic leader of the House, who opposed normal trade relations with China last year, said, "The manner in which the Chinese government has handled this incident reinforces my concerns about China's lack of adherence to the law."
He said that "our ongoing dialogue with China must include diplomatic pressure to bring about its compliance with international standards on human rights, trade and secuirty."
Mr. Bush faces a decision almost immediately this month on what arms the United States will sell to Taiwan this year. 
A military delegation from Taipei is expected in Washington in just two weeks. 
A confidential review by American naval officers has found that Taiwan needs a significant infusion of weapons, including the Aegis system.
But Mr. Bush has an array of weapons of various levels of sophistication that he could choose to sell Tawiwan, and some believe that he will delay a decision on the Aegis to another year.
Lawmakers said Congress would most likely go along with Mr. Bush on the matter, putting the crucial decision inside the administration. 
And conservatives are trying to step up the pressure now for a robust package.
"Congress has traditionally been very pro-Taiwan," said one House Republican leadership aide. 
"This latest embroglio will make Congress be more pro-Taiwan."
Mr. Hyde said cautiously: "I think there would be a general momentum to transfering more weapons on the Taiwanese list. 
On the other hand, the mega-question is the four destroyers with Aegis missile systems, and I don't know what the nuances of that are."
