
Two American diplomats held a third meeting with the 24 detained American servicemen and women here early this morning, nearly a week after the EP-3E Aries II surveillance plane they were flying collided with a Chinese fighter jet and made an emergency landing at a military base on the south end of Hainan island in southern China.
On Friday, American officials said the Chinese had agreed to provide American diplomats with regular access to the crew members until they are released. 
But China has not made any public statements about those agreements and appears intent on emphasizing its control of the situation and restricting diplomatic access to the crew.
Following the pattern that the Chinese government set for two previous meetings, the seven American diplomats waited all day before being summoned shortly before 10 p.m. to board three black Toyota Crown sedans and a red minivan at the Hainan Mandarin Hotel, where the American diplomats are staying.
They were taken to the Hainan provincial government compound in downtown Haikou, where they met with Chinese officials for more than two hours before two of the diplomats were allowed to go to a nearby military base for China's Southern Fleet to meet with the crew members.
The American diplomats handed over to the Chinese items to be passed to the crew, including contact lens solution, nail clippers, playing cards, cigarettes and a copy of Saturday's International Herald Tribune, which carried extensive coverage of the diplomatic standoff.
The Americans have asked that they be allowed to visit the crew during the daytime and without the laborious meeting beforehand, in which everything said must be translated into the other language and written down and in which the Chinese repeat their charges, for example, that the crew entered China illegally.
As with the past two meetings, only the American Embassy defense attache, Brig. Gen. Neal Sealock, and the chief of the consular section at the United States Consulate in Guangzhou, Ted Gong, were allowed to visit the crew.
Their hourlong meeting, which the two men were able to conduct without Chinese representatives present, began at about 1 a.m.. 
Much of the meetings have consisted of administrative matters, such as securing powers of attorney for family members of some of the crew so that they can take care of business back home. 
The crew asked for more toiletries, such as cotton swabs, to be delivered at the next visit.
At a news briefing after the meeting, General Sealock repeated his earlier report that the crew are in "very high spirits."
"They are looking forward to going home," the general told a crowd of more than 50 reporters gathered in a hotel conference room after the meeting. 
"They do offer that they very much appreciate the e-mails that they've been allowed to receive from home."
General Sealock took no questions and left after his brief statement to telephone President Bush at Camp David, the presidential retreat.
Many Chinese say the crew members will not be released until Beijing abandons the search for the pilot of the F-8 jet that collided with the American plane. 
The pilot, 33-year-old Wang Wei, ejected from his aircraft and has not been found.
