
The American ambassador, Adm. Joseph W. Prueher, met with China's foreign minister this morning, in the latest in a series of negotiations aimed at securing the release of the 24 crew members of an American spy plane that made an emergency landing on Sunday on a southern Chinese island.
United States diplomats here said today that American representatives would be allowed to have a second meeting this afternoon with the crew members, who are being held incommunicado on Hainan Island, as the two governments searched for a face-saving compromise over China's demand for an open American apology.
The incident began when an American eavesdropping plane in international waters near China collided with a trailing Chinese jet.
The Chinese jet went down and its pilot is presumed lost, and the damaged American plane made an emergency landing at a Chinese military airfield, which the Chinese call an illegal infringement.
Thursday afternoon, in the first glimmer of progress toward resolving an increasingly emotional test of wills, a Foreign Ministry spokesman said the United States had taken "a step in the right direction" with Secretary of State Colin Powell's expressions of regret for the collision.
But in public, Chinese officials mainly held to their frosty position. 
The spokesman, Sun Yuxi, also berated the United States for being "high-handed" and indicated that the American crew members could be visited again only after the United States adopted a more "cooperative approach."
Late in the night here, well after Mr. Sun made his comments, President Bush expressed his regrets for the incident and his deep concern over the fate of the lost Chinese pilot.
Today's 8 a.m. national television news broadcast did not mention Mr. Bush's gesture or the ongoing negotiations, instead describing international condemnation of the American position, but it may be that China's lumbering propaganda apparatus did not have time to issue new instructions to the media.
In the early hours of Wednesday morning, an American military attache and a consular officer were allowed a meeting with the crew in Hainan. 
But American officials complain that they have not had a chance to debrief crew members on Sunday's events, even as China demands that the United States accept full responsibility for the collision and unauthorized landing.
"If the United States takes a cooperative approach, we will consider another visit," Mr. Sun said on Thursday. 
"The United States should admit its mistakes, apologize and explain to the Chinese people. 
This is the first step."
Mr. Sun also said it was "natural" for the Chinese authorities to interrogate the crew members about the incident because they are the "culprits" who caused it by flying recklessly and then entering Chinese territory without seeking permission.
Both governments say they hope to resolve the incident soon and prevent it from further corroding relations.
American officials appear to be privately resigned to losing whatever secrets and technology on the plane that the crew could not destroy before landing, but the Chinese leaders are aware that tempers in Washington are flaring over the detention of the crew.
President Jiang Zemin and other leaders have played a political balancing act. 
They have prohibited anti-American demonstrations and stressed their continued desire for good relations with the United States. 
Yet, even if China's enemies use this incident to harm economic ties or the country's bid to play host to the 2008 Olympics, "nothing is more important than safeguarding the sovereignty and dignity of China," Mr. Sun said.
The leaders are giving vent to the anger many Chinese have expressed at the exposure of routine American spy flights near their shores, and the downing of a Chinese pilot.
University officials around the country were gathered in meetings on Thursday to hear a directive from the Education Ministry instructing faculty and students to "stand fast at their posts to work and study and not take to the street."
So far, groups from more than 50 universities and colleges have requested permission to demonstrate against the United States, the directive said, according to a person who saw it.
Mr. Sun repeated China's assertion that the midair collision occurred because the slow-moving American propeller plane swerved suddenly, running into a Chinese fighter that was cruising some 1,300 feet to the side. 
But he refused to provide evidence of that.
Mr. Sun also sought to buttress China's contention that the American aircraft had entered Chinese territory in an illegal manner, no matter how urgent its plight. 
Pentagon experts say that they believe that the plane issued a standard "Mayday" alert and that by international custom it then had the right to make an emergency landing.
The Chinese say the aircraft issued no distress signals or requests for permission to land, even though it had time and means to do so, and thus violated international and Chinese laws.
"When the aircraft intruded into Chinese airspace, we did not receive any message from the U.S. side," Mr. Sun insisted.
This, together with the charge that the American plane caused the crash with a reckless move, is the basis on which China says it is holding and investigating the crew. 
Several times, Chinese officials have said they will not release the crew until an investigation is completed.
But at other times, government spokesmen have suggested that the crew's release will be rapid if the United States will bow to China's political and symbolic demands.
