
Two American officials met with the crew members of a downed spy plane here today, the first contact the United States has had with the 21 men and 3 women since they were taken into custody by Chinese officials early Sunday.
"They are in good health and are being well taken care of," said Brig. Gen. Neal Sealock, the American defense attache in Beijing, after the 40-minute meeting early this morning. 
The crew members, wearing the same clothes they wore when they landed here on Hainan island after colliding with a Chinese fighter jet, were reported to be in high spirits.
"The entire crew has faith in America, and I indicated we have faith in them," General Sealock said. 
He said that the next step was to "get them home as soon as possible," but that he had not discussed the timing with his Chinese counterparts.
In Key West, Fla., on Tuesday, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell told reporters that he hoped the meeting was the "beginning of an end to this incident."
"I hope that this meeting will lead to the rapid release of all of the members of the crew back to the United States, so that they can be returned to their organizations and their families, and I also hope it will lead to the rapid return of our airplane," General Powell said.
But China is arguing that the crew breached Chinese sovereignty and may bear legal liability for the collision, in which a Chinese fighter pilot was lost at sea. 
It says it has the right to detain and interrogate the American crew members.
China said Tuesday that the pilot, Wang Wei, parachuted out of his F-8 jet after the collision on Sunday. 
He has not been found.
The American officials were expected to try to visit the crew members again later today, when they hoped to arrange for fresh clothing, toiletries and other items for them.
This morning's meeting, which came as tension over the incident mounted between the United States and China, followed three frustrating days for American officials who were awaiting word of the crew. 
General Sealock, Ted Gong, an American consul in the southern Chinese city of Guangzhou, and Capt. Bradley Kaplan of the United States Navy had flown to Haikou on Monday and then traveled overland to the south of Hainan island in the hope of seeing the detained men and women.
But they spent Monday and much of Tuesday at a resort hotel near the airfield at which the plane had landed. 
Diplomats in Beijing and Washington, meanwhile, tried to negotiate a meeting with the crew.
In midafternoon on Tuesday, General Sealock and Mr. Gong were ordered back to Haikou and left by car for the return trip north. 
Haikou is the capital of Hainan, a provincial level special economic zone that is best known for its beaches, its coconuts, its clusters of unfinished buildings left over from an ill considered mid-1990's building boom and its droves of prostitutes.
Shortly after the two officials left the south, reporters who had staked out a roadblock to the Lingshui airfield, where the damaged EP-3E Aries II plane is, and near where the crew is believed to have been held since Sunday, said a police car leading two buses with darkened windows had left the airfield.
General Sealock and Mr. Gong were met in Haikou by two more American consular officials from Guangzhou and a lower-level defense attache from Beijing.
Captain Kaplan, the United States' naval attache, remained in the south to underscore the United States' interest in arranging the timely return of the damaged aircraft.
Shortly before 10 p.m., General Sealock appeared in uniform in the Haikou hotel lobby, trailed by the other American diplomats and surrounded by a crush of reporters and People's Armed Police officers in plainclothes. 
The American officials were driven to the Hainan provincial government compound in downtown Haikou.
There, they met with five Chinese officials for more than an hour, exchanging pleasantries and negotiating the terms of the visit with the crew. 
One condition was that only two officials could attend the meeting, and three of the diplomats returned to the hotel while General Sealock and Mr. Gong went to meet the crew members around midnight at an undisclosed location in Haikou.
The meeting focused on the well-being of the crew, rather than the details of the collision and emergency landing, presumably because Chinese officials were there.
Reuters quoted an American official as saying that the United States has satellite images that show Chinese authorities examining the plane. 
It was not clear whether they had removed any of the aircraft's sensitive surveillance equipment.
