
Once, the only way to get a toaster at a bank was to open a savings account.
Beginning this fall, toasters -- and any number of other home appliances -- will be available in a cavernous neo-Classical banking hall at Broadway and 36th Street. 
Just don't wait for a passbook.
The landmark former Greenwich Savings Bank at 1356 Broadway was bought last month for $14 million by Haier America, the domestic arm of the Haier Group, China's largest appliance maker. 
Haier (pronounced "higher") plans to reopen the building as a combination restaurant and appliance showroom; certainly not your run-of-the-mill retail concept.
"We intend to keep the building open and accessible all day long for consumers to see our product offerings," said Michael Jemal, president and chief executive of Haier America, his words echoing across the 72-foot-high elliptical banking hall, which HSBC Bank USA left in May.
Haier plans to bring in a restaurateur to serve lunch and dinner in the central tellers' area. 
Around the perimeter of the room will be museumlike displays of Haier refrigerators, wine coolers, air conditioners, television sets and other devices, behind stanchions and glass, with flat-panel display screens at hand to furnish information on the appliances.
"We felt the time was right for us to make a statement," Mr. Jemal said. 
"And this building makes a statement."
Unlikely as it sounds, the restaurant-showroom plan seems to be of a piece with the company's strategy to build its image worldwide.
"Chinese companies have a problem because the label 'Made in China' means low quality and low price," Zhang Ruimin, the president and chief executive of the Haier Group, said last year. 
"In 1996, we started exporting products under our own brand name. 
We were told it wouldn't work, but we insisted. 
Now we're successful with the Haier name all over the world."
Haier America's current office and showroom is at 45 West 36th Street, just down the block from the 77-year-old Greenwich Savings Bank, a veritable Roman temple with its monumental Corinthian colonnades designed by York & Sawyer. 
The Landmarks Preservation Commission designated both the exterior and the main interior public spaces as landmarks in 1992.
"The second we heard it was available, we knew it was for us," Mr. Jemal said.
There was just one hitch: it wasn't for sale.
Leslie Wohlman Himmel and Stephen J. Meringoff spent 10 years pursuing 1356 Broadway before gaining all four layers of control: ownership of the property, known as the fee, subject to reversion in 2006 to a third party unless an option is exercised to purchase it; a leasehold on the property; $4.8 million in mortgages secured by both the fee and leasehold interests; and a long-term lease on the space, which has been occupied in turn by the Greenwich, Metropolitan, Crossland, Republic and HSBC banks.
Himmel & Meringoff Properties was not eager to relinquish the building. 
Instead, it sought a tenant through Andrew S. Goldberg and Eric Gelber of Insignia/ESG Inc. 
The marketing campaign included wrapping the building -- Cartier-at-Christmas style -- with a red ribbon that said, "Lease a landmark."
But Mr. Jemal said, "Leasing was not an option."
Though a couple of institutions were interested in leasing the space, Ms. Himmel said, they were not sufficiently creditworthy. 
Himmel & Meringoff realized, she said, "We either have leases we can't finance or we sell it."
What Himmel & Meringoff did not sell were 235,000 square feet of unused development rights, or air rights, that come with the bank building, since it is so much smaller than zoning rules would allow.
These air rights could theoretically be used on the same block -- Ms. Himmel envisions a hotel atop the bank building, "when Landmarks gets lenient enough" -- or transferred across the avenue.
Haier America will make 1356 Broadway its headquarters for North and South America, Mr. Jemal said, with more than 100 employees.
Installing a restaurant in a former banking hall is not much of a problem, said Joseph Donovan, a partner in Gruzen Samton Architects, Planners and Interior Designers, which is working on the renovation.
Most of the kitchen, he said, can be in the cellar, which has high ceilings for ventilating ducts and is not subject to landmark regulation. 
Mr. Donovan said the architects had met informally with the landmarks commission and might present a formal proposal in a few weeks.
That may include a request to enlarge the ground-floor windows in the masonry facade, but Mr. Jemal said the plans were not complete.
Mr. Jemal said he was not aware of any other showroom-dining combinations but noted that there were restaurants in the Haier Group headquarters in Qingdao, China.
And what cuisine would best accompany a self-venting dryer with removable lint trap and stainless-steel tub?
No decision has been made, but according to Mr. Jemal, "The intention is to appeal to everyone."
