
Tan Dun, the composer, is pacing nervously. 
He is at a fashionable art gallery here, dressed head to toe in black. 
And he is awaiting the arrival of a French delegation that includes the wife of the French prime minister.
He will not talk about the music he once composed for Yo-Yo Ma or the New York Philharmonic. 
Nor will he conduct one of his concertos for stone, water or paper instruments. 
He is the tour guide this day for a new art exhibition. 
His own.
''Tan Dun Visual Music 2005'' opened last month at the Shanghai Gallery of Art. 
Not many composers sell art. 
But Mr. Tan does.
The solo exhibition features a collection of his old pianos (deconstructed and reconstructed by the composer), multimedia installations and nearly a dozen prints and manuscripts, including the Academy Award-winning score he composed for the film ''Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon.''
Following the guided tour, one comes to the conclusion that Mr. Tan -- who is known to have a gift for self-promotion -- has deftly rebranded himself: the composer as visual artist.
But in doing so, this 48-year-old Chinese-born composer and conductor is also doing what he has done best in the music world: crossing over into new genres, blurring the lines between art and music and melding his own modernist style with classical traditions, East and West.
''These are all visual sculptures,'' Mr. Tan said, gesturing toward some of the reconstructed pianos in the gallery. 
''There's a message here about deconstruction, reconstruction and resurrection, something we're seeing all over China today.''
For the show, Mr. Tan, who lives in New York, shipped several pianos he had collected over the years to Shanghai. 
He also brought music and videotapes of himself wielding a sledgehammer and hacking away at old instruments.
Then he reassembled some of the smashed pianos into what he says are works of art. 
He formed small piles of rubble with the keys, chords and other assorted piano parts. 
He laid some pieces out on the floor in a circular pattern reminiscent of a Zen meditation garden. 
And he left a few pianos upright, absent their outer shells but still capable of carrying a tune.
''Listen to this,'' he said, crouching down to play at one of the vintage ones as a friend of his started to sing along. 
''That's Peking opera.''
To help bolster the show, the Shanghai Gallery of Art, a privately financed contemporary art space, created a collection of prints based on some of Mr. Tan's original music scores. 
Several of those manuscripts, which show his drawings, comments and philosophical musings, are on display here.
And for nearly a week, Mr. Tan roamed the small gallery's corridors, offering impromptu tours to those who happened to stop by.
''This is a violin. 
Then a cello. 
Duet duet duet,'' he told one group of visitors as he ran his finger over one of the framed scores. 
''Then boom!''
Mr. Tan's music is also heard in the gallery, sometimes accompanying video images and sometimes coming from computer-operated pianos.
Is this art or performance?
The gallery's directors say both, which may be the reason more than 3,000 people showed up on opening night in Shanghai's Bund area to get the first viewing of the exhibition, which runs through May 21.
Mr. Tan's prints, including one made from his musical score for ''Water Passion After St. Matthew,'' sold out almost immediately, said Weng Ling, the gallery's director. 
And several ''piano sculptures'' were acquired by collectors, mostly wealthy mainland Chinese.
This is not the first time Mr. Tan has shown his works of art. 
He organized a similar show last year in Taiwan. 
And his multimedia installation ''Tan Dun: Organic Music'' was presented at the Museum of Modern Art in New York in January.
But it is only with this exhibition that Mr. Tan has begun selling his artworks.
''Everyone knows Tan Dun as an established musician,'' Ms. Weng said. 
''But now he's definitely a visual artist, a new visual artist.''
One thing the show makes clear is that Mr. Tan is not content to stay within the confines of classical music -- or music, for that matter.
He increasingly spices his operas and classical concerts with Eastern instruments and influences. 
He has composed for water and paper instruments, which he says evoke the natural sounds that were among his earliest inspirations here in China.
And over the years he has broadened his musical repertory by composing for performance artists, choreographers and filmmakers like Ang Lee, the director of ''Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon,'' and Zhang Yimou, whose film ''Hero'' was released in the United States last summer.
Now Mr. Tan is collaborating with Mr. Zhang and the novelist Ha Jin on ''First Emperor of China,'' commissioned by the Metropolitan Opera. 
The opera is scheduled to open in New York in December 2006, with Placido Domingo starring as the Qin dynasty emperor Qin Shi Huangdi. 
It is also expected to be staged along the Great Wall near Beijing in 2008, as part of a cultural festival leading up to the Olympic Games.
For now, Mr. Tan says he is considering moving his piano exhibition to New York. 
And what about his next artistic act?
''I have a lot of stones, thousands of them,'' he said, laughing. 
''I've collected stones from all over the world. 
They are very good instruments.''
