
After more than a month of public wrangling and secret negotiations, Cnooc, the Chinese government-backed oil company, suffered a second blow in less than a week in its bid to acquire Unocal when the United States Congress called for a review that would delay such a takeover by many months.
The proposal significantly steps up the pressure on Cnooc either to retract its offer or raise its bid. 
While the White House has been virtually silent about the bid in order not to alienate America's third-largest trading partner, lawmakers in Washington have been at the forefront of the battle to block Cnooc's offer.
Cnooc has been facing stiff political opposition since June 22, when it offered $18.5 billion in cash for Unocal. 
The move came two months after Chevron won the backing of Unocal's board for a cash-and-stock bid valued at $16.8 billion. 
The bid has since been raised to $17 billion.
Late Monday, Congressional negotiators working to reconcile the House and Senate versions of the energy bill added a provision that requires a four-month-long study of China's energy needs before the government can approve Cnooc's bid. 
A legislator responsible for the proposal said the move was specifically intended to stall Cnooc.
''This is a fairly significant issue and the fact is, we should deal with this in a manner that reflects our national interest,'' said Senator Byron L. Dorgan, a North Dakota Democrat and a member of the Senate energy committee. 
''Oil and gas are important strategic assets. 
We ought to delay this to examine the larger question. 
Do you think Unocal could buy Cnooc?
Not in a million years. 
The Chinese government would not allow that.''
The energy bill is now headed back to the House and Senate floors for a final vote. 
If approved, it would have to be signed by President Bush to become law.
Congress's proposed four-month study would require an examination of how China's energy demands affect the United States, in connection with Cnooc's bid. 
It differs from another official review required when foreign companies acquire American companies that may be strategically sensitive. 
Cnooc, 70 percent owned by the government-controlled China National Offshore Oil Corporation, would still need the approval of the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States, or Cfius, a multiagency government group that reviews takeovers by foreign companies for national security concerns. 
That review, which can last as long as 90 days, gives the president the option to block the takeover.
''The White House doesn't want to get into this,'' said J. Robinson West, the chairman of PFC Energy, a consultancy in Washington and an adviser to Chevron. 
''It's an extremely unpopular issue. 
It's an issue that is also dividing the administration. 
They would like for it to be taken out of their hand and be able to tell the Chinese, 'We didn't have anything to do with it.'''
The proposed review, which would start when the energy bill is signed, would be conducted by the Departments of Energy, Homeland Security and Defense. 
That would be followed by a cooling-off period of 21 days to allow Cfius to include the recommendations of the other agencies.
The additional time further clouds the prospects for the Chinese offer and makes it more likely that shareholders of Unocal, a midsize American oil company, will approve the lower bid by Chevron, analysts said. 
A vote by Unocal's shareholders is scheduled on Aug. 
10.
''This is the political process intervening and trying to push the decision into Chevron's hands,'' said Jeb S. Armstrong, an analyst at Argus Research in New York. 
Last week, Cnooc failed to persuade Unocal's board to back its proposal. 
The board instead recommended that its shareholders approve the new proposal from Chevron.
Unocal has been negotiating with its two rival suitors since June. 
According to a regulatory statement filed by Unocal earlier this week, Cnooc and Unocal came close to reaching an agreement but the talks broke down after Cnooc refused to increase its offer.
Despite the complications in Washington, Cnooc said yesterday it remained committed to its proposal and continued to ''monitor the situation actively,'' according to a spokesman in New York.
