
A widening Chinese anticorruption investigation is taking aim at Beijing's party leaders, a sign that President Hu Jintao intends to continue removing officials he considers insufficiently loyal, people told about the leadership's planning said.
Some 300 Communist Party investigators have been examining property deals and procurement practices in the capital city since at least late September and have uncovered suspicious dealings that implicate top Chinese leaders, the people said.
None of the people interviewed would allow their names to be used, fearing official retribution for speaking about a continuing investigation into an area of extreme delicacy for the Chinese leadership.
Among those seen as likely targets of the inquiry are Jia Qinglin, a member of the nine-member Politburo Standing Committee and a former party secretary of Beijing, as well as the current Beijing party secretary, Liu Qi, who is a regular member of the Politburo.
If the investigation results in the removal of one or both of the men, it will make the housecleaning the most sweeping since the shake-up after the 1989 suppression of democracy protests.
In September, security forces detained Chen Liangyu, the party chief of Shanghai and another Politburo member. 
They also removed numerous Shanghai officials from office and arrested or sidelined leaders in Tianjin, Fujian and Hunan, among other places.
Nearly all of those implicated to date are viewed as loyalists to China's former top leader, Jiang Zemin, or as having resisted the policies of Mr. Hu, the party boss since 2002.
As such, the crackdown serves two purposes, the people told about the leadership's goals say. 
Mr. Hu and Zeng Qinghong, the vice president and day-to-day coordinator of Communist Party affairs, have sought to warn underlings that they intend to punish corruption, widely seen as a worsening problem within the ruling party, even at the highest levels.
But the two leaders have also signaled that only those they consider allies will have the power to resist investigations of their financial affairs. 
That message seems intended to shore up support as the leadership prepares for its five-yearly political transition with the convening of the 17th Party Congress next fall.
The party leaders of Beijing and Shanghai, who control great wealth and enjoy broad autonomy, have traditionally served on the ruling Politburo. 
No major investigations of their activities are likely to be initiated without the approval of the top-most leaders.
Mr. Hu has recently worked hand in hand with Mr. Zeng, the No. 5 ranking leader who is also viewed as one of Mr. Hu's possible rivals, to consolidate power. 
Though China's one-party system concentrates authority in the hands of Mr. Hu, he must also navigate personal, regional and institutional allegiances that can make it difficult to carry out decisions made in Zhongnanhai, the leadership compound.
The investigation has significant policy implications. 
The economies of both Beijing and Shanghai, fueled partly by state-directed investment and rapid real estate development, have grown faster than the rest of the country at a time when Mr. Hu has sought to reduce speculative investment and stabilize soaring property prices.
One concern is that China remains too vulnerable to boom-bust economic cycles. 
If today's double-digit growth rates were to tumble, the resulting slowdown could threaten social stabilityII and the ruling party's hold on power.
Mr. Hu's drive to build a ''harmonious society'' aims to steer more state resources into underdeveloped parts of the economy, including rural areas, rather than supporting frothy investment in the wealthiest cities.
At the same time, Mr. Hu has appealed for calm and sought to show that he remains on good terms with Mr. Jiang, the predecessor he pushed from his final post, as head of the military, in 2004.
Mr. Hu and Mr. Jiang appeared together at the Great Hall of the People last weekend to mark the 70th anniversary of the Long March. 
Mr. Hu delivered a speech that emphasized the ''unity of the whole party.''
Party officials said that although the investigation has mainly been directed at people considered part of Mr. Jiang's ruling circle, Mr. Jiang has been consulted about the need to control corruption. 
They added, however, that he no longer had the power to resist even if he chose to.
The current crackdown began in June, when a Beijing vice mayor, Liu Zhihua, was removed from his post after being accused of leading a ''dissolute lifestyle.''
People told about the charges said they included misusing state funds and maintaining luxurious homes where he entertained mistresses and call girls.
There has been no announcement in the state news media about further investigations in Beijing. 
The Beijing mayor, Wang Qishan, recently dismissed speculation about stepped up inquiries in the capital city as nonsense.
But two people told about the leadership's planning said that top officials have ordered a renewed anticorruption push here. 
The most likely targets are Liu Qi, the party chief, and Mr. Jia, the standing committee member, they said.
Mr. Jia, a longtime loyalist of Mr. Jiang, has been dogged by allegations that he presided over rampant corruption in areas that he supervised. 
He was party secretary of Fujian Province in the early and mid-1990s. 
Mr. Jiang moved him to head the Beijing party apparatus in 1996, and he was elevated to the Politburo Standing Committee in 2002.
Mr. Jia, 66, still supervises the affairs of Beijing in addition to leading the Chinese People's Political Consultative Congress, which manages the party's relations with nonparty social interests, like business leaders and religious groups.
Liu Qi replaced Mr. Jia as party secretary and is thought to answer mainly to Mr. Jia.
The ultimate goal of investigating Beijing's affairs may be to incapacitate Mr. Jia politically so he cannot exercise much sway during the jockeying for positions and power that precedes the party congress, people told about the planning said.
But any broader crackdown in the capital poses some risks for China because Beijing will stage the 2008 Olympics, an event the leadership views as confirmation of the country's rise as a global power and as a chance to display China's best face to the outside world.
Liu Qi manages the tens of billions of dollars invested in Olympics-related venues, infrastructure and urban improvements. 
Leaders are eager to show that any corrupt activities in Beijing do not involve the Olympics and that planning for the event remains on track.
People told about the leadership's planning say that Liu Qi may remain head of the Beijing Organizing Committee for the 2008 Olympic Games even if he is replaced as party secretary. 
It is the latter post that carries significant political clout.
If Mr. Jia were removed or forced to resign, he would most likely be the first person ousted from the elite body for corruption since the Communist Party took power in 1949, though Mao purged several members of the Politburo Standing Committee during his long reign.
The most recent high-level purge was that of Zhao Ziyang, the party's general secretary, who was ousted by Deng Xiaoping in 1989 for opposing the crackdown on student-led democracy protests that year.
Some party officials and political observers think Mr. Hu would be reluctant to confirm that corruption extends to the top ruling body. 
They say it is more likely that any evidence gathered against Mr. Jia would be used to push him into retirement in 2007 and to reduce his political influence in the meantime.
