
ONLY Gustavo A. Cisneros could have orchestrated such a scene: President Hugo Chavez of Venezuela and President Jiang Zemin of China joined Julio Iglesias in singing a few verses of "When I Left Cuba" during Mr. Jiang's visit here last year.
Mr. Cisneros, a media tycoon and one of Latin America's most powerful figures, had discreetly arranged for Mr. Iglesias, a close friend, to smooth relations between the leaders. 
Mr. Jiang used the trip to announce investments by several Chinese companies in Venezuela's energy industry.
That was before Mr. Chavez, who once enjoyed Mr. Cisneros's support, was briefly ousted in an uprising this month that has this nation of 24 million swirling with theories about its conspirators. 
Much attention has been focused on Mr. Cisneros, who is 56. 
He owns one of the nation's most influential television networks as well as Venezuelan companies like Cerveceria Regional, a brewery, and Los Leones, a popular Caracas baseball team.
Mr. Cisneros, a multibillionaire whose international conglomerate of 70 companies relies on unfettered access to high-ranking political and economic officials in nearly 40 countries, said in an interview on Wednesday that he had no involvement in the planning behind the president's 48-hour intermission from power. 
Some of Mr. Chavez's allies have also rejected speculation that Mr. Cisneros played such a role.
"I don't consider him a Venezuelan capable of adventures of that sort," said Jose Vicente Rangel, the defense minister.
Yet few people anywhere are capable of mixing adventures in the most rarefied of circles as extensively as Mr. Cisneros.
He draws much of his influence from his company's media properties. 
The Cisneros Group has the widest reach of any broadcaster in South America, and Cisneros-owned companies like Venevision produce and distribute more than 19,000 hours of programs in Spanish and Portuguese each year to 40 million households in 21 countries on three continents. 
It is the largest shareholder in Univision, a Spanish-language network that owns 18 stations in the United States -- six in California, five in Texas and others in New York, Florida, Pennsylvania, Illinois, Arizona and Connecticut.
In addition to his business interests, he and his wife, Patricia Phelps de Cisneros, have several homes outside Venezuela, in places like New York, Madrid and Aspen, Colo., where they are fixtures in an international social scene that combines finance, media, art collecting and philanthropy.
Mr. Cisneros's presence in this stratum of international business is a result of decisions he began to make in the 1980's, long before other prominent investors in Latin America were looking beyond their own backyard. 
By that time, Mr. Cisneros, together with his younger brother Ricardo, had taken control of a set of business holdings established by their father, Diego, an immigrant from Cuba who moved to Caracas to form a trucking company in the 1930's.
"Many wealthy people in Latin America are content to put their money in a bank in Switzerland and watch it grow," said Violy McCausland, an investment banker from neighboring Colombia who has advised Mr. Cisneros on several deals. 
"Gustavo's strong personality prevented him from taking such a boring route."
Mr. Cisneros's father had sought partnerships abroad early on, striking a deal in the 1940's to form an independent bottling operation for Pepsi-Cola, a relationship that persisted until the Cisneros Group switched to bottling Coca-Cola in 1996. 
The group also acquired interests in a variety of companies in Venezuela, in areas like supermarkets and mining, cementing their position near the pinnacle of the nation's economic elite.
(The family's position certainly did not hurt last year, when authorities shelved an investigation, involving Ricardo Cisneros, over the failure of Banco Latino in 1994. 
They said they could not place individual blame.)
In the 1980's, the Cisneros Group acquired controlling stakes in Spalding Sports Worldwide, the sporting goods manufacturer, and Evenflo, a maker of baby products, that it sold in 1996 for an estimated $1 billion to the leveraged buyout firm Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Company. 
Around that time, Mr. Cisneros bought a town house on East 61st Street in Manhattan and turned it into an office where investment bankers scoured the United States and Latin America for opportunities.
This strategy produced one of the most internationalized media empires in Latin America. 
The Cisneros Group of companies includes interests as disparate as DirecTV satellite television operations in eight countries; Spanish-language television networks in Venezuela, Colombia, Chile and the United States; Internet access companies across the region through a partnership with America Online; and even the Miss Venezuela Pageant, which the Cisneros Group produces and which is broadcast in 20 countries.
THESE investments have allowed Mr. Cisneros to build one of Latin America's largest fortunes, estimated by Forbes magazine recently at $5.3 billion, second in the region only to the wealth of Carlos Slim Helu, the billionaire chairman of Telefonos de Mexico. 
The Cisneros Group, which is privately held by Mr. Cisneros and other members of the family, has annual sales of about $3.6 billion.
"The internationalization of the Cisneros Group has taken a lot of the volatility out of their operations," said Jose Gonzalo Maci, the chief executive of BBO Servicios Financieros, an investment banking firm here. 
"By limiting their exposure to Venezuela, they've actually been able to become more influential within the country."
When it became apparent in 1998 that Mr. Chavez, a populist politician who led a coup attempt as an army colonel in 1992, would be elected president, Mr. Cisneros and other influential businessmen in Venezuela supported him and sought to influence him. 
For years, members of Venezuela's elite have supported politicians of a variety of stripes to try to retain their influence in the economy, said Miguel R. Tinker Salas, a Venezuelan who directs the Latin American studies program at Pomona College in Claremont, Calif.
Their support for Mr. Chavez eroded, however, after the president made clear that he planned to pursue fundamental changes in Venezuela to try to redistribute wealth in the country, where 80 percent of the population lives in poverty. 
Mr. Chavez's speeches often had references to "squalid oligarchs" bent on preserving their upper-class privileges.
Oscar Garcia Mendoza, the president of Banco Venezolano de Credito, said in an interview that "Cisneros, like any businessman, would like to see Chavez go."
As Mr. Chavez's profile grew in recent years, so did Mr. Cisneros's. The Cisneros Group invested $300 million to increase sales of beer from his Regional brewery, reigniting competition with the Mendoza family, owner of Cerveceria Polar, Venezuela's largest brewer, and traditional rivals of the Cisneros family.
Mr. Cisneros also bought the Leones professional baseball team last year, a move that several analysts here compared with Ted Turner's purchase of the Atlanta Braves. 
Mr. Cisneros is a close friend of another baseball family, the Bushes of Texas, and he went fishing in Venezuela last year with the first President Bush.
Exceso, a Venezuelan magazine, this month went as far as to publish a cover article speculating that Mr. Cisneros had presidential aspirations. 
He said he was surprised by the article. 
"I have no such ambitions," Mr. Cisneros, smartly dressed in a tailored suit, said in an interview at his office in the sprawling Venevision television network complex here. 
"I hope I have a few years left to be mischievous in my business career."
As Mr. Chavez broadened his efforts to take greater control of the Venezuelan economy in recent years, Mr. Cisneros's luxurious villa in Caracas became a meeting point for people interested in discussing political alternatives, according to Juan Carlos Zapata, managing editor of Tal Cual, a newspaper.
"The entire counterrevolution could be found at his home at certain moments," said Mr. Zapata, who has written several books about Venezuela's business elite.
The presence at one recent reception of Luis Miquilena, a former Chavez ally who has had a falling out with the president, was cause for speculation here over the erosion of political support for the president.
But political opponents of Mr. Chavez are not the only guests at Mr. Cisneros's home. 
He has also held receptions for Charles Shapiro, the United States ambassador to Venezuela, and Donna Hrinak, the former ambassador in Caracas and currently the ambassador to Brazil.
Mr. Cisneros also remains a friend of Otto Reich, the under secretary of state for Latin American affairs and a former United States ambassador to Venezuela. 
Mr. Reich is believed to have called Mr. Cisneros several times during the frenetic 48 hours when Mr. Chavez was out of power to discuss the situation, people close to the Cisneros Group said.
Mr. Cisneros is not only an important go-between for officials in the United States and Venezuela. 
His behind-the-scenes diplomacy extends to Venezuela's relations with other countries in Latin America and with Spain, people close to the Cisneros Group said. 
Mr. Cisneros declined to comment on these ties.
For example, Mr. Cisneros had helped to arrange a series of meetings between the former president of the Dominican Republic, Leonel Fernandez, and officials in Venezuela, including Mr. Chavez, these people said.
Mr. Chavez is a friend of Mr. Fernandez, and Mr. Cisneros, who also has a home in the Dominican Republic, is believed to have thought it would be useful for the president to hear about Mr. Fernandez's recipe for bringing strong economic growth to his country. 
The meeting with Mr. Chavez was scheduled to take place on the afternoon of April 16, two days after the president's supporters returned him to power; it did not take place.
SIMILARLY, Mr. Cisneros has served as a conduit for the government of Spain to relay messages to Venezuela's. 
Mr. Cisneros has had close ties with Spanish authorities since the Cisneros family made investments in department stores and other businesses in Spain in the 1980's. 
Spain has tried to form closer political ties with Latin American nations since Spanish companies went on an investment binge in the region in the 1990's but has met some resistance to closer ties in Venezuela.
Mr. Chavez's administration, for example, has been reluctant to extradite several people in Venezuela who are suspected of having ties to E.T.A., the Basque terrorist organization. 
Government officials say this is because the extradition requests need to go through normal legal channels in Venezuela, but the government's critics cite ideological differences with the government of Jose Maria Aznar, Spain's right-of-center prime minister.
Mr. Cisneros declined to comment on his recent communications with Mr. Chavez, though it is believed that they discussed the E.T.A. extraditions at a conference last month in Monterrey, Mexico. 
The two men still relay messages to each other through cabinet officials who are on friendly terms with both of them, people close to the Cisneros Group said. 
In the meantime, Mr. Cisneros has emphasized the need for wider debate over the nation's future.
"The need for a democratic solution to Venezuela's political dilemma is absolutely clear," he said.
Given Venezuela's recent history of instability, it is no surprise that pessimism about the economy is pervasive. 
Interest rates remain above 40 percent, gross domestic product is expected to contract by 1 percent this year and inflation is seen accelerating to 30 percent this year from 12 percent in 2001.
Reporte, an economic newspaper here, summed up the country's situation as "a closed economy, a shaky financial system and high inflation."
So is the Cisneros Group planning to reduce its holdings in Venezuela, as it did during the uncertain days of the early 1990's?
Not by a long shot. 
In addition to looking at opportunities elsewhere in Latin America, especially in Argentina and Brazil, Mr. Cisneros is planning to increase investments here. 
The group will start with the Regional brewery as it seeks to take away market share from its larger rival, Polar.
"We remain firmly committed to Venezuela," Mr. Cisneros said. 
"We won't shrink here, we'll expand."
