
Do you have what it takes to live on the American frontier in 1883?
Could you get up before dawn to milk the cows, kill a chicken, plow a field or cop the trees to build a cabin?
Sure, you could, you tell yourself - as you snuggle into your cozy couch and prepare to watch "Frontier House," a six-part PBS series starting tomorrow night that follows the progress of three modern-day families who elected to spend five months in the Montana wilderness, living under the same spartan conditions as those families who trekked westward to strike land claims under the Homestead Act of 1862.
But before you pop a beer and send out for pizza, ask yourself this: Could I survive on the frontier for five months without fresh meat (hunting was illegal and fish were few), a chainsaw (participants were limited to the tools and technology of the era) or a hot shower (the nearby creek was cold enough to freeze butter)?
"We looked for people who were genuinely interested in learning something about that period of American history, and in having an historical experience of their own," said Beth Hoppe, science programs director at Thirteen/WNET New York and the show's executive producer.
The idea for this reality series came to Ms. Hoppe when she was working on "1900 House," a British documentary about a modern-day family living under domestic conditions prevalent at the turn of the 20th century. 
Casting about for a way to adapt that show for an American audience, she found her inspiration in Laura Ingalls Wilder's "Little House on the Prairie," which she happened to be reading to her daughter. 
Having found her model, she set about creating a historically accurate environment for the show's participants. 
"I like to do things that are popular," she said, "but that are also based on good science."
The trading post used by the families, for instance, authentic down to the last bag of beans and bolt of homespun, was a few days' journey away, and its manager was Chinese, as were many shopkeepers of the period who had come from China to build the railroad and stayed on.
The families themselves, chosen from among 5,000 applicants, went through a rigorous two-week training session during which they were taught, among other things, the best way to slaughter a chicken (you can either wring its neck or chop off its head with a hatchet) and the proper attire for a frontier wedding (an event that actually took place in the course of filming). 
By the time the group set out in covered wagons for the two-day journey to their homestead sites, every man, woman and child was already missing some treasured comfort of modern civilization.
"Mmmmn, listen to it rustle," Karen Glenn crooned, as she caressed a roll of toilet paper. 
"I just don't think I can bear to leave it."
Her 9-year-old, Logan Patton, who had accompanied her from Tennessee with his 13-year-old sister, Erinn, and their stepfather, Mark, felt the loss of "my Nintendo, my Nintendo 64, my Super Nintendo. 
..."
But, even as they faced their first crisis - a runaway team of horses that overturned a wagon filled with settlers, who were terribly shaken but unhurt - the pioneers vowed to put creature comforts behind them and focus on what they hoped to gain from their wilderness experience. 
"I think what I'm trying to achieve is a sense of who I am," said Mark Glenn. 
Nate Brooks, whose goal was to build a cabin before his fiancee, Kristen, arrived from Boston for their July 4 wedding, hoped to discover the lost art of "neighboring."
Gordon Clune, a self-described workaholic entrepreneur from California, welcomed the opportunity to reconnect with his family. 
Although the women in the party were less inclined to reach for the existential skies, and the children seemed dubious at best, expectations were keen all around.
And then, like some scenario from the Book of Job, the disasters began to pile up. 
The Glenns' milk cow took sick. 
The Clunes' hens wouldn't lay. 
A freak storm dumped snow on precious seedlings. 
A wildcat cattle drive imperiled the hay crop. 
There were signs of malnutrition in one family and marital discord in another. 
A bear tore up the Clune cousins' tent. 
One of the children was bitten by a dog.
More disturbing, the good-neighbors spirit of the frontier had seeped out of the little settlement. 
The Clunes were resentful of Karen Glenn's profiteering methods of stockpiling food and supplies. 
Karen was out-raged that Gordon Clune would allow his children to work at distilling moonshine on his illegal still.
Not even the peaceable Brooks household was immune to the backbiting. 
"I pictured that we'd all be just this great, happy community," said the newlywed Kristen. 
"In actuality, there's a lot of funny survival stuff that goes on. 
People turn into animals."
Although she acknowledged these tensions, Beth Hoppe bristled at comparisons to sensationalist reality shows. 
"There is not contest and there are no prizes," she state firmly. 
There was, however, plenty of drama and dirt, and midway through the project, "Frontier House" began to feel a lot like "Frontier Fort."
Nonetheless, some six months after their educational ordeal, the participants speak proudly of the survival skills they developed - even the ones that alienated them from the neighbors. 
"One of my best moments was when I went into the laundry business and was able to bargain my goods and services with the country-store owner," said Karen Glenn. 
"It's unfortunate," she said, that her satisfaction had to derive from hard-driving business tactics, "but you needed to generate funds in order to survive, and when I set up that whole commercial exchange, I knew my family would make it. 
It was all about female empowerment."
Today, Aine Clune, 16, looks back with detachment on her 15-year-old self, the girl who, she admits, "complained a whole lot" and felt she had to smuggle in cosmetics to survive. 
"I'm not as materialistic anymore," she said, adding that she didn't need "a whole lot of makeup, a whole bunch of clothes, little figurines all over my room."
And she happily recalls her efforts to cook a rattlesnake. 
"I was pretty proud of that," she, "and I appreciated the meat."
For the 69-year-old Rudy Brooks, who spent close to two months sleeping in a tent while he helped his son build a homestead, the big satisfaction was refusing a neighbor's offer to share their cabin during a snowstorm. 
"Our society tends to protect older folks by not allowing them to participate fully in life's experiences," he said, "so, even though it was hard living in a tent and cooking outside, that made me feel pretty good."
And his worst moment?
"Leaving," he said. 
"Leaving was the hardest thing to do."
