
A maverick Chinese economist who is an outspoken critic of China's endemic corruption has fled to the United States, fearing that she was about to be arrested in a crackdown on dissidents and scholars with ties to the West.
The economist, He Qinglian, 44, was already planning on leaving China on June 26 for a year's sabbatical at the University of Chicago.
But, speaking by telephone today from a conference at American University in Washington, she said she left China instead on June 14, after security agents broke into her apartment in Shenzhen and seized documents, including invitations to academic conferences in the United States, Japan, Taiwan and Sweden.
Just two months earlier, she added, security agents had seized her cell phone and other personal effects. 
And for the last year, ever since she was dismissed as a writer for The Shenzhen Legal Daily, she said, the police had regularly shadowed her, and her telephone had been tapped.
Fearful of being arrested, Ms. He left her apartment on June 14 without any luggage, and adhered to her usual routine -- except that instead of going to work, she went to the bank, then to Baiyun Airport in Guangzhou for a flight to Beijing. 
She then flew to Singapore, and landed in the United States on June 16.
"I was very worried that I would not be able to safely leave the country because they knew that I was going to the United States in two weeks," Ms. He said. 
"I have decided to leave China for now."
In recent months China has arrested scores of dissidents, closed newspapers and fired outspoken editors in an accelerating effort to tighten control on public discourse. 
And it has charged several visiting scholars with spying, including a naturalized American who had been teaching in Hong Kong and a United States resident who had been working at American University in Washington.
No one knows why, though theories abound.
Recently issued regulations allow the government to close publications that mention a broad range of subjects, including speculation on China's coming leadership transition.
Jiang Zemin, who is president, general secretary of the Communist Party and chairman of the Central Military Commission, is expected to step down as leader of the party next year and to retire from the presidency in 2003. 
Li Peng, the chairman of the National People's Congress, and Prime Minister Zhu Rongji are also expected to step down in 2003. 
Who fills those posts will be decided next year, at the party's 16th Congress.
The crackdown may also be motivated by a growing fear of espionage by disaffected Chinese nationals for the United States or Taiwan.
Ms. He, educated as an economist in Shanghai, made her name in 1998 with "China's Pitfalls," a pessimistic evaluation of the economic and political system as irretrievably corrupt. 
Nine companies refused to publish the book until after it had been published in Hong Kong and had won the praise of Liu Ji, an academic who is a close adviser to Mr. Jiang.
Its subsequent mainland edition sold a 170,000 copies, and an estimated one million more were sold in pirated editions.
Her attacks have been unrelenting, eroding the government's patience.
In March 2000, she published a long analysis of the growing inequalities in Chinese society in Reading Room, a magazine based in Changsha. 
The essay formed the core of another book, "We Are All Still Gazing at the Stars."
The book included criticism of Mr. Jiang's three priorities for the party, the cornerstone of what he hopes will be his intellectual legacy. 
He says the party should represent "the advanced forces of production, advanced culture and the interests of the grass roots."
But Ms. He's book said that theory was really just an attempt to consolidate the power of the ruling elite.
The book was banned, and Reading Room's editor in chief and several other senior editors were removed from their jobs.
