
EVERY morning, Kevin Esteban and Bob Siciliano have coffee in their tiny Upper West Side garden, under the fragrant white flowers of their seven-son flower tree (Heptacodium miconioides). 
Their voices are hushed, reverent. 
This is their morning worship service.
"It starts blooming every year, like clockwork, at the beginning of September, no matter what the weather, and lasts for more than a month," said Mr. Esteban, gazing up at the branches still full of inflorescences of single flowers the color of ivory. 
The buds form in August, hanging in clusters of creamy droplets.
"It was completely full right before the rain," said Mr. Siciliano, referring to a hard rain two weeks ago. 
The rain dashed thousands of blossoms to the ground, where they laid like two inches of snow. 
"We only swept them up because they started to turn brown."
But that little cleanup job was no cause for mourning. 
When these flowers fall, their calyxes -- those cap-like whorls of leaves that protect each flower -- remain, turning from green to pink to bright red as the tiny fruits develop.
"They look like little red wings," Mr. Esteban said. 
"They remind me of fuchsias."
Heptacodium also has beautiful shaggy, exfoliating bark, in tones of gray and brown, which adds interest to the winter garden.
Mr. Esteban bought his Heptacodium as a four-foot whip from Allen C. Haskell's legendary nursery in New Bedford, Mass., about nine years ago. 
Now this tree, or shrub, depending on how you prune it, is 20 feet tall. 
"I keep limbing it up to let in the light," Mr. Esteban said, nodding toward the valiant plant, which seems to stretch for all it's worth for the few rays that fall into this shady, 20-by-25-foot patch of the great outdoors, which has buildings on all sides.
The history of Heptacodium in America harks back to its discovery in 1907 by Ernest H. Wilson, during a plant expedition to western China for the Harvard University Arnold Arboretum in Jamaica Plain, Mass. 
He found the plant on a cliff 3,000 feet above sea level in western Hubei Province, and returned with a few dried herbarium specimens, but no living plants.
It wasn't until the Sino-American Botanical Expedition in 1980 that Heptacodium took root in this country. 
That's after American botanists wandered through the Hangzhou Botanical Garden in Hangzhou, in the province of Zhejiang, saw a beautiful arching specimen growing in full sun, and asked for some seeds.
Gary L. Koller, in the 1986 fall issue of Arnoldia, the Arnold Arboretum's quarterly, tells how readily the seeds germinated at both the Arnold Arboretum and the National Arboretum in Washington, and how young plants were soon being propagated by adventurous nurserymen like Mr. Haskell and the late James C. Raulston, at North Carolina State University, in Raleigh.
"We auctioned one off to Allen Haskell, who started marketing it," said Peter Del Tredici, the director of living collections at the Arnold Arboretum, and the botanist who successfully germinated the first seeds. 
"Then his good buddy, Martha Stewart, recommended it and it took off."
If left unpruned, Heptacodium is a big rangy, multistemmed shrub, he said, with very dramatic exfoliating bark.
"Or if you carefully train it to a single stem," he said, "it becomes very very white, with an almost elm-like form that's really striking, particularly in the winter landscape."
As Mr. Koller points out, the word Heptacodium ("hepta" being Greek for seven and "codium" meaning poppyhead) refers to the single flowers that are "born in a tiered six-flowered whorl that is terminated by a flower."
The affectionate Chinese name, Zhijiang seven-son flower, may allude to the same thing. 
"I would guess it's just the inimitable Chinese poetic style that suggests the flowers are all intimately connected," Dr. Del Tredici said. 
"Why not daughters?
Who knows?"
ORIGINALLY called Heptacodium jasminoides, this fragrant shrub is a member of the honeysuckle family. 
It is hardy to at least Zone 5, or minus 20 degrees, and thus far seems free of disease and insects. 
"It's also highly salt tolerant, which might make it a good plant for roadsides and streets that get a lot of de-icing salts," Dr. Del Tredici said. 
It is also very drought tolerant. 
And it can be easily propagated, he added, from seed or softwood cuttings.
Now, of course, I must have one. 
These shrubs seem readily available at good nurseries, like the Allen C. Haskell Nursery, in New Bedford, Mass. 
(508-993-9047), Wayside Gardens, in Hodges, S.C. 
(800-845-1124; www.waysidegardens.com) and Twombly Nursery, in Monroe, Conn. 
(203-261-2133;   www.twomblynursery .com). 
And don't forget that fall is a good time to plant, because roots love to grow in cool soil, especially when there is no green growth up top to make demands.
I think a little grove of them, limbed up to show off the bark, will be just the thing for the old farm in Maryland. 
And just one will fill a shady city garden with light.
