
FOR Shen Wei, a 33-year-old Chinese choreographer who is attracting attention at international festivals, dance is essentially about one thing: what he calls "the beauty of human life."
"There are some moments like walking in the mountains after the rain when you feel it is so wonderful to be human," Mr. Shen said. 
All this may sound very Chinese, especially from a choreographer who is also a painter more than familiar with his national tradition of landscape painting. 
When asked about the near nudity in his recent works, Mr. Shen responded in the same vein: "Artistically, the beauty of the human body is important to me. 
Not every piece has to have nudity. 
But sometimes to put clothes on the body is like covering a flower with a blanket."
Beauty is never one thing for Mr. Shen and his own life story is anything but ordinary. 
Trained as a child in the fine art of calligraphy and then a professional Chinese opera performer in Hunan Province, he became a founding member of China's first modern-dance troupe, the Guangdong Modern Dance Company.
Along the way, he read Goethe and discussed van Gogh, Gauguin and Duchamp with his young painter-friends. 
In 1995 he settled in New York, where he has continued to paint in his living room in a building frequented by drug dealers. 
Slight of build but determined in all he does, Mr. Shen said: "I'm not afraid of them. 
I understand them as human beings."
After undergoing surgery a few years ago to correct a rapid heart beat, he feels that both he and his dances have become serene.
As Mr. Shen repeatedly tells his dancers, beauty can be found in the grotesque or the apparently ugly: his favorite painter is Francis Bacon. 
Last summer, the American Dance Festival in Durham, N.C., presented the premiere of Mr. Shen's "Near the Terrace," which caused a sensation with its striking stream of draped figures often positioned on a stagewide staircase.
Before choreographing the work, Mr. Shen showed the dancers a book about the Belgian Surrealist Paul Delvaux. 
"Near the Terrace II," a sequel that will have its premiere at the festival next Sunday and which will be performed at the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in October, is related to the first piece. 
But it is more about "happiness and is more Eastern with Indonesian music," Mr. Shen said. 
He told the dancers in his new company, Shen Wei Dance Arts: "I see the piece as a lot of flowers and butterflies. 
Everything is in transition."
Grotesquerie, as also seen in "Behind Resonance" in May at the Performing Arts Center at Purchase College in Purchase, N.Y., is often found in Mr. Shen's concept of beauty. 
In the pieces he has choreographed since 1996, when he shifted from a more realistic style and a conventional modern-dance idiom, one often sees near-nude bodies in white makeup. 
These are apt to twist into contorted shapes or look like headless statues. 
Others with large egglike heads might scoot around. 
In the equivalent of a sculpture garden, a sensual flow of figures on a lakelike surface might be interrupted by clownish interlopers who tumble into angular silhouettes.
It is tempting at first glance to think of Mr. Shen's choreography as having something in common with the images in the work of Martha Clarke, Japanese Butoh dance and Robert Wilson. 
Yet if it is easy to label his pieces as image theater, surreal and dreamlike, they are in fact distinctive in their startling originality. 
Mr. Shen has a quality of haunting strangeness that others do not.
"Quality of feelings" is the central phrase that Mr. Shen used in an interview in New York. 
The specific meaning of his pieces may appear hidden, but not so their emotional resonance. 
"I don't want to tell audiences what to see, but I can control a visual image to give them a quality of what to feel," Mr. Shen said. 
"Everything is about what I feel in real life although I no longer choreograph about real life's problems. 
I try to make this quality more intense so the audience can feel it. 
Then later they can make up their mind about the piece."
Unlike most choreographers, Mr. Shen spends considerable time talking to dancers before creating a piece. 
He shows them paintings and art books. 
Sometimes he shows films by Fellini and the Russian director Andrei Tarkovsky.
"My dancers must understand my artistic vision and what I believe as an artist and a human being," he said. 
"If they trust what I do and they believe what they are doing is truthful, the quality that comes out is more honest."
Experience formed him, especially the fact that he left his family at 9, he said. 
His father wrote scenarios and directed and acted in an opera company in the Xian opera style, an older tradition than the Beijing opera. 
Mr. Shen was the middle of three brothers, born in Xian Ying, a town in Hunan.
"We lived in the same building behind the theater," he recalled. 
"As a boy I would watch the actors put on makeup and I would play with the costumes."
Because his grandmother on his mother's side came from a wealthy family, she was ill-treated during the cultural revolution and lived in the countryside. 
Paradoxically, there was more food there and Mr. Shen was sent to live with her.
At 7, he appeared onstage in his father's productions and the three brothers practiced calligraphy every day. 
"My life was already set up," Mr. Shen said. 
"I was doing dancing and painting."
In 1978 he was admitted to the opera department of the new Hunan Arts School in Changsha. 
"There were no pop stars in China as there are now. 
To be a Hunan opera star was very prestigious. 
It was a very hard school because they were trying to get back the training lost during the cultural revolution."
The regimen was difficult. 
The children would rise at 5:30 a.m. to practice voice in the mountain air and go through classes, with an afternoon nap, through 9 p.m. In the art classes, Mr. Shen saw a reproduction of Duchamp's famous Cubist painting, "Nude Descending a Staircase."
"I remembered I loved the movement in that picture," he said.
In 1984, he became a member of the Hunan Xian Opera company. 
Today, he said: "I see Chinese opera as an avant-garde form. 
Many Western people like Robert Wilson want to do it."
In 1989, Mr. Shen left the company and applied to the Beijing Fine Arts Academy. 
When he was not admitted, his friends told him it was just as well: "You will lose your personality in this school by copying your teachers for four years."
Yet to raise money to go to Beijing, Mr. Shen choreographed a solo, "Life," for himself to part of Beethoven's Ninth Symphony. 
He won a competition cash prize. 
"I had seen a modern-dance company from Canada," he said. 
Deciding to become a dancer, he spent three months with an army song and dance ensemble before entering the Guangdong Dance Academy.
Yang Mei Qui, its artistic director, had attended the American Dance Festival. 
In collaboration with the festival's directors, Charles and Stephanie Reinhart, she founded the first Chinese modern-dance troupe in Guangdong.
Mr. Shen was one of the students who graduated into the new company and choreographed many pieces for it. 
Yet he was not allowed out of China when the troupe made its United States debut in 1991 at the festival. 
He had taken a trip to the countryside with two Taiwanese dancers sent to teach classes by an American teacher.
MR. SHEN learned later that it was taboo at that time to make friends with Taiwanese visitors. 
"I left the company later because of these problems," he said. 
Helen Lai, a choreographer in Hong Kong, obtained a scholarship for him in New York at the school founded by Alwin Nikolais and Murray Louis. 
Mr. Shen arrived in January 1995.
The American Dance Festival invited him to choreograph the next summer, and the composer Tan Dun introduced him to Ms. Clarke, who cast him in the operas she directed. 
Living on the edge during his first years, he nonetheless found New York City "the best place for an artist."
"Nothing is just one thing here," he continued, "and you see a lot of art. 
In other countries you may be really good, but you do not know who you are. 
I see more clearly in this city. 
Unless there are other colors around, you don't know what color you are.
"I was in Stockholm. 
It's beautiful but I couldn't live there because I would find an answer to what my life is. 
There would be nowhere to continue. 
But in New York, you still go on although you don't know what you will go on to.
"I was affected by what happened to me in life -- leaving my parents at 9 and being independent. 
Also thinking about death when I was so sick with my heart. 
Now I have found myself as a human and I know what art means in life. 
It is to be a better person."
