
Late last month a young North Korean conducted reconnaissance in Beijing's embassy district, once a serene tree-lined oasis of stately buildings, now laced with barbed wire and dotted with roadblocks.
"I still think I could get in," concluded the wiry man in a red T-shirt, who would give only his surname, Han. 
One of the more than 100,000 North Koreans living illegally in China, Mr. Han now has the goal of moving to South Korea.
"It's not my preferred method," he said, "but if nothing else works I'll eventually jump into an embassy."
In the last 10 weeks, 38 North Koreans have won political asylum in South Korea by jumping over walls or pushing through gates at embassies and consulates here. 
Four more are in the South Korean Consulate here; their passage out is still being negotiated.
Such success has turned the walls of embassies in Beijing into a new boundary between the divided Koreas, something like a displaced Berlin Wall. 
Those from the impoverished Communist North who accomplish the risky leap over can be rewarded with freedom and relative prosperity in South Korea, which offers arrivals from the North nearly $30,000 in resettlement aid.
So despite heightened Chinese security, experts on North Korea predict that desperate dashes will increase. 
Though South Korean rights activists assisted the first group of asylum seekers to enter a foreign embassy, on March 14, others like Mr. Han have since been inspired to consider trying on their own.
This year, observers predict that the total number of North Koreans reaching Seoul may rise to 1,500, up from 583 last year and only 71 in 1998. 
Although most leave China quietly, relying on smugglers, the cost of that route, at least $3,000, is too high for the vast majority of migrants.
This week, with the soccer World Cup focusing attention on Asia, rights activist have vowed to abet more dramatic escapes to highlight the North Koreans' plight. 
Dr. Norbert Vollertsen, a German doctor based in Seoul, wants to load North Koreans onto a boat in a Chinese port and set sail for South Korea.
"The North Korean boat people are prepared for boarding," he announced in an e-mail message late last week.
But many people who work with the refugees worry that such news-making asylum ploys involving tens or hundreds may actually increase harassment for the far greater number of North Koreans who remain illegally in China.
Since March, to discourage asylum seekers, China has conducted house-to-house sweeps for illegal migrants along the North Korean border. 
Detentions followed by forced return to North Korea have increased 30 per cent in the last two months, say aid workers who monitor the border between China and North Korea.
Previously, Chinese officials were relatively tolerant of the hungry and penniless North Korean migrants, who found refuge and low-wage labor within the large population of Chinese in the border area who are ethnic Koreans.
In the last two weeks the police have also stepped up pressure on the many churches and international aid groups that run shelters for migrants near the border. 
They have detained and questioned several foreigners suspected of helping the migrants leave for South Korea, including Philip Eun, a Korean-American who runs a shelter, and Joseph Choi, a Korean-American missionary, according to rights groups.
But it is hard to know if China's aggressive approach will dampen the migrants' will to make it to Seoul or merely encourage more creative tries.
In explaining his decision to seek asylum, Mr. Han pulled from his pocket an orange cigarette lighter, made in North Korea, that he said belonged to a neighbor and fellow migrant in China who had been recently seized by the Chinese police. 
Mr. Han said he also feared arrest, believing that he would be executed if sent back to North Korea.
"Everyone is feeling really scared and desperate now," said a North Korean woman who lives in northeastern China with fake Chinese documents that carry the surname Zhang.
For China the rise in asylum seekers at diplomatic missions has been a political nightmare. 
The police have been forced to patrol a virtual border between North and South Korea in China. 
Chinese officials have had to serve as referees in what many consider the world's most contentious refugee crisis, since they must grant permission for the asylum seekers to leave China.
North Korea considers each jump into an embassy as an act of treason and says the migrants should be returned there to face punishment. 
South Korea, meanwhile, is committed to accepting them.
Most Western countries and the United Nations believe that most if not all of the North Koreans in China illegally deserve political asylum.
"China must seek to reduce the number of these cases," said Chu Shulong, who teaches international relations at Qinghua University in Beijing, "since each time it happens, even if it's only one or two people, China must start again negotiating with all countries concerned.
"And there is no solution that will satisfy everyone. 
So China has to balance the competing wills of all these governments and to try not to offend anyone."
Although China has so far allowed all of the North Koreans who made it into diplomatic compounds to leave for freedom, the government's official policy is that they are economic migrants, not political refugees, and should be sent back to North Korea. 
The Foreign Ministry announced this week that foreign embassies had no right to grant them asylum.
But break-ins and asylum requests are likely to continue. 
For one thing, there are many foreign consulates outside Beijing that are not so heavily guarded. 
And even if it is physically impossible to gain access, North Koreans can resort to ploys: the last man who made it into the South Korean Consulate presented a fake Chinese identity card to gain admission, announcing that he was a North Korean seeking asylum only after he was inside.
Many North Korean migrants have lived in China off and on for several years, learning Chinese and securing false identity cards in the process. 
Some women marry Chinese men. 
Many live in cities with large ethnic Korean populations where they blend in readily and can find work through sympathetic South Koreans in business.
Mr. Han, who sports a 2002 World Cup pin, runs a small business in a Korean section of a large city, which earns him about $120 a month, not a bad salary for China.
While migrants' first trips across the border into China tend to be brief supply trips in search of food, over time extended families make the move and set up homes, and become accustomed to the relative freedom there. 
Unable to live legally in China, many eventually set their sights on the safety and cultural familiarity of Seoul.
Mr. Han would not say exactly how he planned to leave China. 
But he was quite clear about one motivation. 
"While living in China I learned so much about the world and realized that so much of the indoctrination I'd received in North Korea was false," he said.
