
What might ordinarily be a rather low-profile trial in State Supreme Court in Queens this week has attracted a lot of attention from the Chinese language press.
It is the trial of one of two teenagers charged with robbing and then brutally killing an 18-year-old Chinese food deliveryman a year ago to get money to buy Air Jordan sneakers.
The deliveryman, Huang Chen, who was working for his family's takeout restaurant in South Jamaica, was lured to an apartment by three teenagers and robbed and brutally beaten and stabbed to death.
The case set off outrage, particularly in the Chinese-American communities in New York City, because of its brutality and because it was one of a string of violent crimes against Chinese delivery employees working for takeout restaurants in high-crime neighborhoods.
When the trial started on Tuesday, the deliveryman's family held a news conference in front of the Queens courthouse, in Kew Gardens, along with leaders from the Chinese community. 
Yesterday, reporters from five Chinese language newspapers covered the proceedings.
One of them, Joe Xia, a reporter for Ming Pao, a daily newspaper in New York, said that many of the papers, both in New York and in China, had been publishing daily articles about the case.
''There's a lot of interest in this trial because it has become all too typical,'' he said. 
''It is just one more Chinese immigrant family so desperate to make a living that they open a store in a dangerous neighborhood. 
When this boy was brutally murdered, many Chinese people took the view that it was because the black community does not regard Chinese people as human beings.''
For a second straight day, more than a dozen Chinese people -- the Chen family, along with friends and supporters -- sat on the right side of the aisle, behind prosecutors. 
On the left side of the aisle behind the defendant, Charles Bryant, 17, who wore an oversized dark suit, were about a dozen friends and relatives of Mr. Bryant.
They listened stoically as the lead prosecutor, Brad Leventhal, an assistant Queens district attorney, reconstructed the grisly death that occurred on Feb. 
13, 2004, when Mr. Bryant, along with a friend, Nayquan Miller, 17, and a third man who was never charged, lured Mr. Chen to Mr. Miller's apartment in the Rochdale Village complex by calling in an order for about $10 worth of food.
In his opening statement, Mr. Leventhal said the boys cracked Mr. Chen's skull ''like it was an eggshell'' and ''made him almost unidentifiable.''
Then family members testified about frantic attempts to reach Mr. Chen on his cellphone and then retracing his delivery route.
Yesterday, Detective Edward Hendrickson, 47, who is with the 113th Precinct's homicide squad, testified that Mr. Bryant had signed a confession after being arrested admitting his involvement in Mr. Chen's death.
In the statement, Mr. Bryant said, ''We started talking about how we were going to get the money to buy the new Air Jordans that just came out.''
Mr. Bryant then said that they had decided that ''we could rob the Chinese man.''
According to the statement, Mr. Bryant said that he and Mr. Miller ambushed Mr. Chen at the apartment, dragged him in and beat, stabbed and robbed him. 
They then stuffed his body into a plastic garbage bag and finally dumped it into a pond in a nearby park.
Mr. Bryant's lawyer, Brian D. Perskin, questioned the validity of the statement, asking the detective repeatedly whether he had struck Mr. Bryant or otherwise intimidated him into signing the statement. 
Detective Hendrickson said he never touched the teenager.
Mr. Bryant faces charges including murder, robbery and tampering with evidence, which carry a sentence of 25 years to life in jail. 
Mr. Miller, who is being tried separately, is awaiting trial.
