
A victory on Sunday by a popular figurehead of the democracy movement in an election for a legislative seat here has given fresh momentum to demands for the early introduction of promised democratic reforms.
In one of the most fiercely contested and symbolic elections since China assumed control of Hong Kong a decade ago, the democracy advocate, Anson Chan, a 67-year-old former leader of the civil service, won a decisive victory on a platform that called for full democratic rights to be granted to voters of Hong Kong within five years.
Mrs. Chan, whose service as chief secretary straddled the last years of British rule and the early years of Chinese rule, won 54.6 percent of the vote, or 175,874 of the 321,938 ballots cast, according to official results announced early Monday.
Her main rival, Regina Ip, 57, who oversaw an attempt to introduce a deeply unpopular anti-subversion law as security secretary of Hong Kong in 2003, won 137,550, or 42.7 percent, of the vote. 
Although both candidates contested the election as independents, Mrs. Chan was supported by a coalition of democratic parties. 
Mrs. Ip was supported by pro-Beijing parties.
''The result of this election indicates that Hong Kong people are anxious to put forward democracy,'' Mrs. Chan said after her victory was announced, The Associated Press reported Monday. 
''We think we're all ready to implement universal suffrage in 2012.''
She said she expected that the governments in Hong Kong and Beijing ''would listen to the genuine voice of Hong Kong people.''
The current electoral system in Hong Kong allows voters to directly elect only half the members of a 60-seat legislature; the remainder is elected by limited franchise from special interest groups. 
The chief executive, Hong Kong's leader, is chosen by an electoral college of 800 representatives, most of them loyal to Beijing.
In some quarters, the election was billed as a referendum on the nature and timing of democratic reforms long promised to Hong Kong.
But analysts say Beijing is in no hurry to see Hong Kong become a model for democracy on Chinese soil and is unlikely to agree to significant reforms by 2012, when elections are due for the chief executive.
With democratic reform emerging as the central issue of Sunday's election, the campaign generated more political emotion than Hong Kong has seen in a long time. 
Scuffles broke out at several political rallies during the campaign, on one occasion leading to the arrest of a young supporter of Mrs. Ip. Election day, however, was peaceful, the electoral office said.
The results are a fillip to the democratic cause as the Hong Kong government prepares a proposal on democratic reform that it will put to the Legislative Council and the central government in Beijing for approval next year.
Under the Basic Law, Hong Kong's mini-constitution, China is obliged to introduce democracy, but the document is vague on when and how that should happen.
Democrats and pro-Beijing conservatives are deeply divided over several issues, including how soon democratic reforms should be introduced and the rules for screening candidates for chief executive elections, which is a stipulation of the Basic Law.
Mrs. Chan championed a liberal model for reform that would allow an open field for chief executive elections and a fully elected legislature by 2012.
Michael E. DeGolyer, a political scientist who has observed elections in Hong Kong since 1988, said the democratic reform model to be proposed next year by the chief executive, Donald Tsang, could be influenced by the outcome of the election. 
But he said the total votes received by Mrs. Chan might have fallen just short of what Mr. Tsang viewed as a decisive endorsement of her model.
''If 60 percent of the people agreed on a certain model, that would influence what he takes to Beijing,'' Mr. DeGolyer said.
During the election campaign, Mrs. Ip argued that Beijing would not allow Hong Kong to move too far or too fast with democratic reform.
She advocated a more modest package of democratic reforms and supported 2017 as a possible alternative date for free elections.
''Unless we come together, Hong Kong's dream of democracy will forever remain beyond our reach,'' she said in a campaign speech to foreign correspondents.
