
IF there are two square blocks that signify the exuberant, modern future of this city, they are the Xintiandi district, where new white-walled boutiques and dark, romantically lighted bars are housed in 1920's brick buildings. 
When Benjamin Wood and Carlos Zapata of the Boston design firm Wood & Zapata won the commission four years ago to turn Xintiandi into something unreservedly commercial, they decided to add a bar of their own. 
Their DR bar, which has a serpentine wall of curvy roof tiles sliced one inch thick, was once a dilapidated 700-square-foot space that was the headquarters of the local Communist Party.
"It was very dark and unheated and had no plumbing," Mr. Wood said. 
The floor was mud. 
People went there to register to vote, report on their communities and read the newspapers, displayed in a plexiglass case outdoors.
Now the same men gather outside DR, eager for a glimpse of the new China. 
"They're fascinated that some Westerner who built this froufrou martini bar has sawed up their roof tiles to make a wall," Mr. Wood said. 
What the former residents see is architects and designers -- both local and foreign -- having cocktails at DR by candlelight and discussing Shanghai's transformation, almost overnight, from a rundown city to one teeming, once again, with new ideas.
Next week, the 2002 Shanghai Biennale opens here with a forum on "The Present and Future of Chinese Urban Architecture," including lectures by Arata Isozaki and Michael Graves. 
Shanghai is "glimmery and shining and full of life," said Alanna Heiss, director of the P.S. 
1 Contemporary Art Center in Queens, and chief curator of a portion of the biennale.
Xintiandi (pronounced shin-tea-en-dee) signifies the future of this city, and is the first neighborhood to be completed in a 128-acre (27 square blocks) master rehabilitation plan. 
The plan was the work of the Shui On Group, a developer in Hong Kong, and Skidmore, Owings & Merrill in San Francisco. 
"Xintiandi has successfully given Shanghai not just a nice development and nice buildings," said Albert Chan, general manager of Shui On Group. 
"It has somehow given Shanghai a new lifestyle, a way of life not possible before it was born."
He said that more than 15 other Chinese cities have approached Shui On to develop their own versions of Xintiandi.
In some parts of the city, there are dazzling white apartment houses that look like they came from Richard Meier, loftlike spaces with exposed beams that could be found in Montmartre and interiors painted nontraditional colors like purple and taxicab yellow.
"Shanghai has always had a modern sensibility, of thinking without constraints," said Calvin Tsao, a partner at Tsao McKown, a Manhattan architectural firm, and a visiting critic at the Harvard Graduate School of Design. 
He is working on a hotel here. 
"In the 20's and 30's, Shanghai embraced Art Deco design -- Western design," he said.
The time seems ripe for a new embrace. 
"It's not that Shanghai is beautiful like Paris or sexy like Rome," Mr. Tsao said. 
"Now Shanghai is sort of like Berlin, after they tore down the wall."
Berlin, it should be said, before Daniel Libeskind, Norman Foster and Renzo Piano designed major buildings there.
"It's not often that a Western architect like myself gets to come to a place like China," Mr. Wood said. 
"It's like a gold mine."
After the Communists took over in 1949, nothing happened for 50 years. 
"Now, it's a rampant outbreak of total energy," he added. 
"It's because people have gone out into the world and come back to China. 
It's an insertion of Western modernism into China."
Shanghai, a bustling port city of 13 million people, is speaking the international language of design, but in mixed tongues. 
Futuristic skyscrapers like the Orient Pearl Tower and the Jin Mao Tower abound in the Pudong financial district. 
"Everyone is trying to create their own unique, special piece, and at the end of the day, Will it hold together?" asked Adrian Smith, the architect of Jin Mao and a partner at Skidmore, Owings & Merrill in Chicago. 
Most of the new skyscrapers, he said, ignore Chinese culture and design. 
Instead, he said, they are "derivative of Western architecture, which is then placed on amphetamines."
The last little boutiques of Xintiandi were finished last month, and the area now has the spirit of SoHo when Banana Republic first arrived. 
TMSK, another high-design night spot, has an eye-popping art-glass bar. 
Shops sell celadon bowls alongside clothing from Comme des Garcons, and visitors can find an ice cream parlor, a McDonald's, a Starbucks, a Vidal Sassoon salon.
At the DR bar in Xintiandi, designers, artists and architects meet to exchange information on resources and admire new materials. 
The base of the bar is made of indigenous materials like black inkstone. 
The bar top has silver threads woven so tight by two women in Canton that spilled liquids cannot penetrate, said Delphine Yip, a 29-year-old architect born in Hong Kong, who went to the Harvard Graduate School of Design and now directs Wood & Zapata's Shanghai office. 
They needed $65,000 to turn the party headquarters into the DR bar.
Because so many resources here are hard to find, Wood & Zapata named their bar DR, short for design resources. 
"If you want to know where to get the inkstone, we will tell you," Ms. Yip said, adding that there is now so much work in Shanghai that architects don't have to compete with one another.
Architects look to the same schools -- Tongji University in Shanghai and Chinghua in Beijing -- for help, Mr. Wood said. 
"But in architectural offices, or at a dinner party, you'll get two Shanghainese, two from Hong Kong and an Australian," he said. 
Students are influenced by Frank Gehry, I. M. Pei, Rem Koolhaas, Rafael Moneo and Steven Holl, Ms. Yip said. 
Foreign-born or foreign-trained architects are paid American or Hong Kong rates, but those Chinese-born and trained make 20 to 80 percent of that.
Both Mr. Wood and Ms. Yip have extended their minimalist aesthetic to their homes. 
Mr. Wood has created a minimalist home out of the villa he has rented in Shanghai. 
"Minimalism is in short supply," he said, "but I'm doing my best to try to promote it."
Ms. Yip rents a 1927 wood farmhouse in an alley off a commercial street called Huaihai Road, where she lives, with some misgiving, among her landlord's ornate teak furniture. 
In a minimalist gesture she has draped black cloth over the most elaborate pieces and painted the walls white.
If Mr. Wood and Ms. Yip are minimalists, the glass artists Chang Yi and his wife, Loretta Yang, are not. 
They own and designed the TMSK bar. 
Their bar is made of blue and green glass tiles, their bar stools are enclosed in egg-shaped red silk lanterns.
Mr. Chang, 50, and Ms. Yang, 52, are China's answer to Harvey Littleton, who is considered the father of the studio glass movement in the United States. 
Thirty years ago, Mr. Chang was a film director in Taiwan, and Ms. Yang a movie star. 
In 1986, Ms. Yang started making glass the way the Chinese made it in the Shang dynasty nearly 4,000 years ago. 
"I saw Lalique and Daum," Ms. Yang said, "but no Chinese pieces."
Mr. Chang and Ms. Yang organized the Contemporary Glass Exhibition in Taipei in 1995, and showed 54 artists, including Dale Chihuly. 
The couple have their own brand name, Liuligongfang, a rarity in China, and 44 boutiques selling their glass jewelry, statues and vessels throughout Asia.
Robert Chan, 27, a partner in Nube (pronounced new-bay, Spanish for cloud) Design, is a minimalist designer of products and interiors and a follower of Philippe Starck, Claudio Silvestri and Richard Meier. 
Mr. Chan grew up in London, studied industrial design at the Royal College of Art, and moved to Shanghai five years ago.
Last year, he began to focus on interior design. 
Most of his clients are local Chinese in their 30's to 50's who want the cachet of hiring a foreign designer. 
But he also works for people like Alex Abplanalp, 39, managing director of Zenith Media. 
Mr. Abplanalp, an Englishman, had seen Mr. Chan's work in magazines and hired him to gut and renovate his rented house here for $140,000. 
A maximalist, Mr. Abplanalp wanted Mr. Chan to advise him on colors, and where to put his Indian chairs inset with mother-of-pearl and ebony, his Chinese daybeds and his huge gilt mirrors.
So Mr. Chan abandoned his beloved white walls for ones painted deep yellow, purple and turquoise. 
He had teak floors installed and organized Mr. Abplanalp's flamboyant furniture into eclectic groupings.
The spirit of such interiors, after so many years of dutiful party loyalty and regulated lives, is one of joy, the same spirit inhabiting Xintiandi. 
Ms. Yip said, "Old people come here and feel nostalgic, and young people think it's so modern and trendy, and Western people think it's so Chinese."
