
BEIJING -- Chinese reporters, each fighting with their elbows for the best position, clamored around Cheng Fei as if she were a movie star after the first session of gymnastics qualifying on Sunday at the Olympics.
Questions flew at her in rapid succession: ''What was it like out there?
How was the team?
Will China beat the Americans on Wednesday?''
Cheng, 20, remained cool as the rest of her team -- four 16-year-olds and one 15-year-old -- scurried from the arena. 
Their coach, Lu Shanzhen, had just shooed them away, telling them to refuse interviews.
Cheng, the team captain and China's most decorated gymnast, would represent the athletes, he said.
''We had a bit of nerves, but the team was quite unified,'' Cheng, sounding like a statesman, told reporters through an interpreter after the qualifying session. 
''We encourage each other.''
As pressure to win a gold medal for their home country weighed on them, the Chinese female gymnasts were in need of some encouragement Sunday, in their first competition at the Games. 
Their fans obliged them.
A packed crowd here at the National Indoor Stadium wildly waved Chinese flags. 
They chanted, ''Jia you!''
-- pronounced JA-YO -- which means ''Come on!'' or, literally, ''Add oil!''
They yelled, ''Cheng Fei!
Jia you!''
And Cheng responded.
She finished first in the floor exercise with a score of 15.750 and first on the vault, her specialty. 
Her vault, one of the most difficult in the world, was given a score of 16.150.
The Chinese team members, dressed in red velveteen-like leotards with yellow flowers and the emblem of China on their chests, also finished first over all. 
The United States was in second, 1.475 behind.
Gymnasts from China finished first in all four events, setting them up for a possible wealth of Olympic medals. 
Li Shanshan was first on the balance beam with a score of 16.125. 
Yang Yilin was first on the uneven bars with a 16.650.
''Whoa, it sounds like they were pretty amazing, but team finals is another day with even more pressure than today,'' said Nastia Liukin, who qualified for the all-around and for the final in every discipline but the vault for the United States. 
''It's going to come down to who can handle that pressure the best.''
China also qualified two gymnasts, Yang and Jiang Yuyuan, for the all-around. 
Yang was third, and Jiang seventh. 
Another teammate, Deng Linlin, was ninth, but only two gymnasts from each country are eligible for the all-around final.
Yang and Jiang -- and their teammate He Kexin -- have been at the center of age falsification questions leading up to this Olympics. 
Some Chinese sports registration lists have shown that they may not be old enough to compete at the Games. 
All Olympic gymnasts must turn at least 16 this year.
In the days before qualifying, Shanzhen said that all team members had met that age requirement.
Speaking of the team's performance on Sunday, he said that the team was ready, but that it did not give its all.
''Today's performance was about 70 percent,'' he said through an interpreter. 
''I am very satisfied with their performance. 
If I can give them a score, I would say 70 percent, mainly for He Kexin falling off the uneven bars. 
It's a big pity for her.''
He is normally China's uneven bars star. 
In qualifying, she was dazzling for most of her routine, twisting and turning her body as if she were a windup toy. 
Then she met disaster.
As she moved from one bar to another, her grip slipped and she tumbled to the ground. 
She finished the routine, but failed to hold back tears. 
Her thickly applied purple eye shadow quickly turned shiny and wet.
''The error was because of some problems with the smaller moves,'' Shanzhen said. 
''This is quite common for the young athletes, maybe because they have less experience.''
After He's disappointing routine, Cheng gave her encouragement. 
The support went only so far. 
They exchanged no big hugs or high-fives.
''I felt a little surprised, but everything is possible in competition, so failure is normal,'' Cheng said, without emotion, of He's routine. 
''I hope she can adjust her feelings as soon as possible because we will have other competitions.''
Correction: August 12, 2008, Tuesday
This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An article on Monday about China's solid performance in the first qualifying session in women's gymnastics at the Olympics described a patch on the team's uniforms incorrectly. 
It is the emblem of China, not ''the official Chinese Communist Party patch.''
