
After six months of sizzling growth, an unexpectedly sharp slowdown in the Japanese economy caught nearly everyone by surprise. 
But, economists said, don't let the setback fool you: Japan's recovery is far from over.
Japan's economy grew at an annual rate of 1.7 percent in the second quarter of the year, a surprisingly sharp deceleration from the heady rate of 6.6 percent in the first quarter and 7.4 percent in the last quarter of 2003.
The pace was also much slower than the 4.2 percent expansion expected by economists, prompting many of them to question the accuracy of the data and predict a rebound in the quarters ahead.
''We think this is kind of a temporary slowdown and the economy is likely to return to solid, steady growth,'' said Takehiro Sato, an economist with Morgan Stanley in Tokyo, arguing that soft spots in consumer spending and capital investment would turn around.
Growth slowed, in part, because of disappointingly weak consumption at home. 
That could be a troubling development, as Japan is counting on a rebound in spending to take up the slack when, as anticipated, a slower global economy takes a toll on Japanese exports later this year. 
Weakness in consumer spending meant that exports were, once again, the main engine of growth in the second quarter.
Still, economists and policy makers said they were confident that Japan's recovery remained on track, though at a slower pace, and that consumer spending would again help drive growth.
''With recovery in the corporate sector filtering through to households, the economy is recovering firmly,'' Takeshi Erikawa, a cabinet office official, told reporters on Friday. 
He dismissed the idea that the subpar growth figures would prompt the government to lower its own economic forecasts.
Toshihiko Fukui, head of the central bank, last month went so far as to declare that the end of Japan's ''lost decade'' of stagnant economic growth was finally in sight because of signs that the export recovery was expanding to include consumers at home.
The problem is that many ordinary Japanese do not entirely share that rosy outlook, which has resulted in some faltering in spending.
While government surveys show that consumers are beginning to take heart from rising corporate profits and an improving job market -- Japan's 4.6 percent unemployment rate is the lowest in more than three and a half years -- many workers are still not seeing the fruits of the recovery, now in its second year.
''The economy may be getting better, but it isn't getting particularly better on an individual level,'' said Kiyotaka Awatsu, 42, who works at a computer company in Tokyo. 
Like many Japanese his age, Mr. Awatsu said his salary had been shrinking, making it difficult to spend more.
Although companies are making more money, the paychecks of workers are still falling. 
The average monthly income for Japanese households dropped 0.7 percent in June from a year earlier, continuing a long downtrend.
Big exporters, department stores and even the once-teetering banks are all healthier than they have been in years, but many are still trimming payrolls. 
Underlying the current divide between the fortunes of corporate Japan and many ordinary Japanese are fundamental changes in Japan's employment conditions.
After 10 years of stagnant growth -- Japan's economy has expanded at a pace of around 1 percent a year over the last decade -- companies have set aside their traditional reluctance to lay off workers to reduce costs. 
Even among those companies that are hiring again, few are taking on large numbers of new full-time workers, turning instead to lower-paid part-timers and contract employees.
Kenichi Ooya, 37, says that even though he is taking home more money this year from his job at a marketing company in Tokyo, he is careful about how much he spends.
''I have two children and I'm worried about the future,'' he said. 
''The economy might be getting better, but that is only because many companies are cutting costs by laying people off.''
Such worries help explain why consumption rose just 0.6 percent in the second quarter compared with 1 percent in the previous quarter. 
Although, spending by Japanese households rose for five straight months till May, in June there was a surprising 2.6 percent decline.
Consumer spending is crucial to Japan's economy as a counterweight to exports. 
Japan's economy is closely tied to China's through trade, and so Japan, like many other countries, will be affected when that country's torrid growth cools. 
Any slowdown in the United States economy because of the sharp rise in oil prices could also crimp Japan's exports. 
Expectations of slower growth overseas are causing many economists to predict that Japan's economy will grow at a more moderate rate of around 2 percent next year.
In the second quarter, the single biggest reason for the slowdown was the weakness of corporate capital spending, which was flat for the April-to-June period after big increases the previous two quarters. 
Economists, however, said the sudden slowdown evident in Friday's report contradicted other recent figures that showed business investment still growing.
''Fundamentally, there is no reason to explain why investment might have paused, given the steady growth in corporate profits and rising business confidence,'' said Ryo Hino, an economist at J.P. 
Morgan in Tokyo. 
Mr. Hino and other economists predicted that the government would raise the capital investment figures in a later report. 
Japan's growth data is often subject to significant revisions.
Despite the unexpectedly sudden slowdown, most economists do not see Japan slipping back into the kind of stagnation experienced during the 1990's and early in this decade. 
Though Japanese consumers remain cautious, there are signs that spending will continue to grow, if only gradually.
In the near term, economists expect the sweltering summer temperatures of the last month to give the economy a lift as people spend more trying to keep cool.
And Mamoru Yamazaki, chief economist at Barclays Capital, said the long decline in wages was about to end. 
Already, summer bonus payments at Japan's biggest companies were higher this year as they shared the bounty of widespread profit gains. 
Mr. Yamazaki predicted that companies would start paying higher salaries next year as the cost-cutting phase of recent years gives way to rising sales and profits.
And at least one category of consumer has shown no hesitation in opening pocketbooks: the elderly. 
Spending by elderly households makes up an increasingly large proportion of overall consumption.
How much of this increase is simply a reflection of the fact that older people now account for a larger share of the population because of Japan's falling birthrate is not clear, but there is anecdotal evidence that the elderly are living more active lives. 
Government figures show that people in their 60's have the highest propensity to spend.
Motoko Nakano, for instance, an 84-year-old retiree, is a former restaurant owner and now an avid traveler, having ventured to China 10 times in the last couple of years, most recently in February.
''I worked very hard for a long time to make money,'' she said. 
''Now I'm enjoying myself.''
