
Ma Pui-han has lived all her life in the shadows of Stanley Market, Hong Kong's most famous Chinese street market, watching it evolve from a warren of narrow alleys frequented by local residents and a few foreigners to a major tourist attraction.
In the 1960's and early 70's, when Mao's China was closed to most outsiders, the trip to Stanley Market afforded American soldiers on leave from Vietnam a glimpse of life in the British colony -- a red, double-decker bus ride over the hills from the bustling harbor to a curiosity market nestled between small expatriate apartments and a fishing village.
Today, tourists from Europe, the United States and Australia come by the busload, scouring the stalls of inexpensive goods churned out by southern China's low-cost factories. 
Local flavor has largely disappeared -- the snakes floating in dark liquid in large glass bottles and butchers carving apart pig carcasses are no more -- and shops selling fake Beanie Babies and extra-wide pants for obese Americans are the norm.
Yet even this more antiseptic market may now vanish. 
If developers have their way, Stanley Market will become a paved paradise in the form of a nine-story hotel and an air-conditioned shopping mall. 
Many of the merchants, especially second- and third-generation denizens of the market, are appalled.
"That is why Hong Kong tourism is getting worse, the government is tearing down all the historic buildings," complained Ms. Ma, 43, who was born in the government clinic at the edge of the market. 
Her father ran a small hardware store here; she herself sells soft drinks and ice cream.
While other street markets here have already been bulldozed and replaced by malls without much protest, Stanley's merchants and Hong Kong's small community of historic preservationists seem determined to fight the latest scheme.
"The people that are actually making the decisions can't appreciate going to an outdoor market," said Jason Wordie, a local historian. 
"I would think it extremely likely that something like that will go ahead," he said, referring to the new development plan.
In part, this reflects Hong Kong's slow but steady transition from a colonial outpost to just another big Chinese city, albeit a cosmopolitan one. 
Tourism is booming in Hong Kong, but thanks mostly to a flood of visitors from mainland China, which gained control of Hong Kong from Britain in 1997.
These mainlanders come mainly for a look at city life or to shop for luxury goods not available at home. 
Stanley's wares do not interest them.
For now, Stanley Market continues to attract a slow, steady stream of celebrities -- for instance, Bill Clinton, who was here last fall.
The squatters' huts of the fishing village gave way a decade ago to handsome, government apartments and a five-story shopping mall whose supermarket has driven most of Stanley's fishmongers, butchers and produce vendors out of business.
For lifetime denizens like Ms. Ma, the disappearance from Stanley Market of rice merchants and other sellers by the early 1990's started a long, slow decline of the market. 
"In the 1980's, there were huge numbers of tourists and we made loads of money," she said. 
"Tourists come to Hong Kong to see more local stuff, how the locals live, not just a boring shopping mall."
