
Serbia will be the focus of intense diplomatic attention this week as senior Russian and Chinese officials visit Belgrade and Europe's top diplomats travel to Moscow.
The flurry of activity signals the beginning of the countdown to independence for Kosovo, according to analysts, despite Serbia's strong opposition to ceding the province that has been governed as a United Nations protectorate since 1999.
''Maybe this activity is the beginning of the first of the last round of such maneuverings,'' said Ivan Vejvoda, director of the Belgrade office of the German Marshall Fund of the United States. 
''The U.S. and Britain want closure.''
The European Union, which will replace the United Nations in Kosovo once the province's status has been agreed to by the Security Council, is also seeking a quick resolution. 
But the two stumbling blocks are Serbia's staunch opposition to the recommendations made by the United Nation's special envoy to Kosovo, Martti Ahtisaari, and Russia.
Serbia's leaders have rejected the Ahtisaari plan, which envisages an interim period of international supervision and would grant Kosovo its own army, flag, anthem and constitution before achieving full statehood. 
Instead, they have proposed a status that would grant Kosovo ''more than autonomy but less than independence'' without specifying how that would work in practice.
So far, Serbia has received support from Russia.
Moscow, however, has not yet spelled out any concrete options or indicated if it intended to use Kosovo as a bargaining chip on other negotiations. 
Those include the terms of a new trade and political accord between Moscow and Europe.
''We simply do not know what Russia's real intentions are,'' said a senior European Union diplomat involved in the Kosovo negotiations.
Sergey V. Lavrov, the Russian foreign minister, will arrive in Belgrade on Wednesday for two days of talks with President Boris Tadic, Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica and Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic.
''Lavrov is coming to discuss Kosovo,'' a Russian diplomat in Belgrade said. 
Asked if the foreign minister was bringing any new ideas that might persuade Serbia to accept the United Nations plan, the diplomat said that Moscow wanted to hear what the Serb leadership had to say.
Until recently, Russia had suggested that if Kosovo achieved independence, other breakaway regions -- in Georgia and Moldova, for example -- could make similar claims. 
Moscow, however, has refrained from making such comparisons in recent weeks.
Instead, Russia has requested more time for negotiations before the Security Council debates the issue. 
As a permanent member of the council, Russia has veto power.
American and European diplomats have resisted further delays, largely because they fear that the fragile unity among the three main ethnic Albanian parties in Kosovo -- in which the groups pledged not to resort to violence to press their claim for independence -- would unravel.
''There is every reason to believe that that solution put forward by Russia, put forward by the Serb government itself, would lead to more violence, rather than less,'' said R. Nicholas Burns, the under secretary of state for political affairs, during a speech on Monday at the Council on Foreign Relations in Washington.
Serbia is also hoping to win support from China, which holds veto power at the Security Council. 
Hui Liangyu, the Chinese deputy premier, was set to arrive in Belgrade on Tuesday.
The European Union, which is already making arrangements to take over from the United Nations mission in Kosovo, will attend talks in Moscow on Friday along with other members of the so-called Contact Group on the Balkans. 
The group includes Germany, the United States, Russia, France, Britain and Italy. 
It is scheduled to meet again next week in Berlin.
Germany, the current holder of the Union presidency, said it still hoped to break the impasse between Kosovo and Serbia before the G-8 summit meeting in June. 
According to German officials, Chancellor Angela Merkel does not want the issue to dominate a meeting at which she will make climate change a top priority.
In a sign of just how brittle the atmosphere is between Belgrade and some of the Contact Group members, the German ambassador to Serbia, Andreas Zobel, apologized for comments he made last week at a forum in the Serbian capital.
Mr. Zobel had questioned whether Kosovo had always been a part of Serbia and warned that if the solution for Kosovo fell short of independence, it could lead to a flare-up in other areas of Serbia.
