
The shop owner nervously eyed shelves packed with bright silk scarves and carved wooden elephants, wondering how her business would weather an impending influx of Chinese tourists to the sleepy Laotian capital.
''I don't think they'll want to buy any of this,'' the owner, Sythat, said, folding the handmade silk cushion covers she now sells mainly to well-heeled European tourists for about $5 a piece. 
''The Chinese will not spend as much and will make too much noise.''
That sentiment is despite evidence to the contrary in many other places, where Chinese tourists have proved a potent economic force. 
In 2004, 290 million Chinese tourists went abroad, almost 50 percent more than the year before.
China's relaxation of travel rules has been a big factor in Hong Kong's economic recovery.
''It's going to be difficult here when they come,'' Sythat added, carefully rearranging blue and maroon silk ties in a wicker display basket.
Almost anywhere else in the world, the arrival of newly rich Chinese tourists eager to leave China for possibly the first time in their lives is greeted with keen anticipation. 
In Laos, a poor and mountainous place where a quarter of the population lives on less than a dollar a day, it is being awaited with a sense of foreboding.
Last month, China and Laos signed an agreement expected to more than double the number of Chinese visitors to Laos to about 200,000 a year, or a quarter of all tourists who visited in 2004.
''We are planning for an influx of Chinese tourists,'' The Vientiane Times quoted Somphong Mongkhonvilay, head of the Lao National Tourism Administration, as saying. 
Tourism is this country's most important foreign exchange earner, pulling in $124 million in 2004, according to the newspaper, although that is dwarfed by the $9.6 billion earned by Thailand, Laos's neighbor to the south.
The arrival of Chinese tourists has not always gone smoothly in the region. 
Articles about badly behaved Chinese tourists often appear in Southeast Asian and even in mainland newspapers, complaining of passengers refusing to get off aircraft in protest of delays, and littering in public parks.
In 2002, Chinese newspapers buzzed with talk of the ''Seven Deadly Sins of Chinese Tourists,'' saying they were dirty, noisy, coarse and rude. 
The papers pointed out that in Thailand some signs asking people not to spit were written only in Chinese.
''We've heard about these Chinese in Thailand, and I don't think such behavior will go down well here,'' said Nelamith Daongam, 34, a barber, sipping Thai whiskey under a papaya tree in a back alley off Vientiane's Chinatown.
But in laid-back Vientiane, where the number of automated teller machines can be counted on the fingers of one hand and where the calendars seem permanently stuck on 1975 -- the year of the Communist takeover by the Pathet Lao -- people are slowly gearing up for the expansion of tourism from China.
Signs in the simplified Chinese used in mainland China are going up, even in Vientiane's Chinatown, replacing the traditional characters used by many overseas Chinese.
The entire population of landlocked Laos -- six million people -- is equivalent to a small Chinese city.
Just 200,000 people live in Vientiane, a city of Buddhist temples and decaying French colonial villas perched on the banks of the Mekong River.
Its relative size has caused some Laotians to fear the country could be swamped by its giant neighbor. 
A new road will eventually link China with Thailand via Laos.
