
TRADITIONAL large employers -- the very foundations of the economy -- are in trouble. 
They have debts they may not be able to pay, and are having great difficulty making any money. 
So they continue to borrow and look to the government for help.
The government could just let them fail, saying that those who cannot make the grade in the new era of globalization should make way for those who can. 
But there are costs to such a strategy, over and above the fact that those companies have friends in high places.
Millions of people rely on the companies for more than jobs. 
They have promised to provide the most basic of needs, including health care and old-age pensions. 
If they are allowed to fail, the costs could be large.
So it is today in China -- and in the United States. 
It is remarkable that two major economies have followed such very different paths to get to such similar problems.
In China, the problem lies in the old state-owned industries. 
Communist China gave those companies all the social responsibilities that governments have in the West, and gave them the right to borrow what they needed at state-owned banks. 
Now post-Communist (in reality if not in name) China must deal with the residue. 
It hesitates to close those money-losing operations, and papers over the problems by forcing the banks to keep making loans.
In the United States, the problems are with pensions and health care costs, both of them traditionally paid by employers. 
General Motors, having announced plans to cut employment by 25,000 workers, is trying to get unions to let it cut benefits, but what it really wants is to shift some of what it calls ''legacy costs'' -- pension and health benefits for retired workers -- to the government.
THE government's Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation is deeply in the red, having insured far too many pension benefits for premiums that are far too low. 
The law has all kinds of strange provisions, as the Government Accountability Office detailed in a report to Congress this week, that lets companies with underfunded pensions hide that fact from workers until it is too late.
The obvious solution is to let the guaranty corporation charge higher premiums and force companies to do a better job of funding their pension promises. 
The Bush administration has proposed such a bill, but many businesses object. 
It is likely that a watered-down bill will let companies put off dealing with the problem in hopes something will turn up. 
Sort of like China's method of dealing with some of its state-owned enterprises.
Some of the companies most affected are also having trouble competing with Chinese companies, and are pushing for action to make China revalue its currency. 
China might be more willing if it did not fear the impact of such a move on its banks, and if it did not think it might need the money it is piling up to restructure the state-owned enterprises and provide for their workers.
The problem of rising health care costs raises issues of American competitiveness as companies struggle to meet an obligation met by governments in other countries.
To make matters worse, Americans pay much more for their health care, in part because they pay high prescription drug costs that offset pharmaceutical companies' research costs. 
Most other countries impose price controls on drugs, thereby getting what amounts to a subsidy from the companies paying the health care bills in America.
There are many differences between the problems faced by China and America, of course, but perhaps one stands out. 
China is accumulating money that could be used to meet those obligations, while the United States is going deeper into debt.
