
YAO MING, the 24-year-old Houston Rockets All-Star center from Shanghai, isn't your typical National Basketball Association player. 
He doesn't have tattoos, and he doesn't party with groupies after games. 
Instead of living in a bachelor's pad with women in skimpy bikinis lining the infinity pool, he lives with his parents.
But when Mr. Yao, who is 7 feet 5 inches tall and wears a size 18 shoe, walked into Blue Smoke, a barbecue restaurant on East 27th Street, at 7:30 on a recent Tuesday night with an entourage that included his girlfriend, his translator and Team Yao -- several businessmen who work for him -- all heads turned. 
Mr. Yao, accompanied by a bodyguard about half his size, narrowly missed colliding with a chandelier hanging from the high ceiling.
Basketball is in Mr. Yao's blood. 
His parents played basketball for the Chinese national teams and when their son was 10, doctors X-rayed his hands and predicted he would grow to be over 7 feet tall. 
He worked his way up through the ranks of the Shanghai teams and in 2002 became the N.B.A.'s No. 1 draft pick, the first foreigner to do so.
''The Chinese government doesn't force tall people in China to play basketball but they can suggest it,'' he said. 
Though he is becoming proficient in English, he often relies on his translator, Colin Pine. 
(Mr. Pine doubled as Mr. Yao's driver until Mr. Yao got his license and a customized BMW 745 last year.)
Mr. Yao, who lives in Houston, came to Manhattan to promote his autobiography, ''Yao, A Life in Two Worlds'' (Miramax Books). 
In addition, a documentary, ''The Year of the Yao,'' is coming out about his first year in the United States.
His idea of a perfect evening in Manhattan included a feast of barbecued spare ribs and a performance by the Blue Man Group. 
But Mr. Yao and his friends, who were staying uptown at the Trump International Hotel, were an hour late. 
The van they had ordered didn't show up, and Mr. Yao, who is too large to fit comfortably in a taxi, had to wait for another van.
Team Yao sheltered the celebrity in a banquette facing the back of the room. 
''It's impossible for him to go outside and not attract attention,'' Mr. Pine said, stating the obvious. 
Mr. Yao ordered a platter of ribs. 
''Do you have any orange cream soda?'' he asked. 
(Mr. Yao said he rarely drinks alcohol.) His girlfriend, Ye Li, who is 6 feet 3 inches tall and lives in Shanghai, where she plays basketball for the women's national league, sat at his side. 
''I met her when I was 17 and have never dated anyone else,'' he said.
A few fans walked over to ask for autographs but Mr. Yao's bodyguard, in a black suit and slicked-back hair, intercepted them. 
''It's easier to guard someone tall 'cause people's eyes are focused on his face and they don't notice me down here,'' the bodyguard said.
Mr. Yao does not seem fazed by his celebrity. 
He has sponsorship deals with more than eight multinational corporations, including Gatorade, Pepsi and Reebok. 
He is the face for McDonald's new ad campaign.
''I have to give a percentage of my earnings to the Chinese government but it's not that much,'' he said. 
He makes $25 million to $30 million a year. 
''I don't mind because ever since I was a child, the government paid for my schooling and training. 
I owe the people of China.''
Mr. Yao said he preferred playing video games and going out for steak to night-crawling with his teammates. 
''Actually, I'm not that different than those people,'' he said referring to other N.B.A. players. 
''We're all trying to find what's comfortable and I've found that I like a quiet life.''
After polishing off his ribs, he decided to go back to the hotel and sleep. 
He would skip the Blue Man performance. 
It was only 9, but he had to get up early the next morning for an appearance on ''Live With Regis and Kelly.''
Driving back, one of the Team Yao businessmen suggested a detour, a pass through Times Square. 
As they snaked up Sixth Avenue, Mr. Yao and Ms. Li gazed out at the buildings. 
The driver pointed down a street. 
''That's Madison Square Garden,'' he said. 
''Oh, yes,'' Mr. Yao said, brightening. 
''Now I know where we are.''
