
North Korea is not a country, but a cult. 
In dealing with a cult, it is not usually very productive, as President Bush has done, to call its Dear Leader ''evil'' and ''a pygmy.''
After four years of ideology and imprecations but no progress in dealing with North Korea, with its comatose economy and its increasingly worrisome nuclear weapons program, many in Asia want the United States to change its approach and start trying to achieve practical results patiently and in small increments -- even if that means being civil to the North's dictator, Kim Jong Il. 
At the least, they pray that Washington will resist the urge to do anything precipitous that would set off a crisis.
Whether by explosion or implosion, any sudden change in North Korea could be calamitous for the region, many Asians believe. 
For one thing, its nuclear weapons could be used, or could slip into rogue hands. 
Die-hardism is probably a greater risk in North Korea than it ever was in communist Europe: over six decades of isolation, the population has been drilled relentlessly to worship the Kim family and despise America, Japan and South Korea, the scapegoats for all the country's woes.
A collapse of Kim family rule would probably unleash floods of desperate refugees on the country's neighbors. 
The coast guards of Japan, Russia and South Korea have detailed plans to head off an expected rush of boat people, and China has stationed more troops along its border with North Korea.
The contrasts across the Demilitarized Zone are stark. 
In December, Freedom House, which monitors civil and political rights, ranked North Korea among the most repressive countries on the planet, but South Korea among the freest. 
Average income per person in the South is at least 13 times that in the North.
Given these huge differences, most South Koreans want to reunify the peninsula very gradually, over perhaps 50 years, starting with economic ties that they hope will infect the North with creeping capitalism.
Many American conservatives would prefer to see the North collapse by next weekend, though they might settle for 2010. 
A broad coalition of Korean-Americans, Christian and human rights activists, and conservatives in Congress wants to hurry the process along by flooding North Korea this year with cheap portable radios that can receive broadcasts from outside the country, and with prepaid cellular phones that can connect with the Chinese network.
News of these plans spurred North Korea's propaganda machine last fall into a fury of hostility. 
Now, with the North's missiles able to strike Tokyo and its artillery within easy range of Seoul, officials in both capitals want to lower the temperature and revive regional talks that have been stalled for seven months.
A positive sign to Asians: Christopher Hill, the American ambassador in Seoul and a moderate, is expected to be the new assistant secretary of state assigned to deal with North Korea. 
JAMES BROOKE
