
EBay, the online auction place, found how unforgiving bidders can be.
Shares of eBay fell nearly 12 percent, as much as $12, in after-hours trading on Wednesday because its quarterly earnings missed Wall Street's expectations by a penny a share -- this despite profits that were up 44 percent.
The company reported strong results coming from continued expansion in overseas markets and strong growth across a range of product categories.
The company posted a profit of $205.4 million, or 30 cents a share, in the quarter ended Dec. 
31, up from $142.5 million, or 21 cents a share, in the period a year earlier. 
EBay's revenues, which come primarily from listing and transaction fees, were $935.8 million, also up 44 percent. 
The company indicated in October that it expected to earn $915 million in revenues for the quarter.
''Q4 was yet another good quarter for eBay,'' Meg Whitman, the chief executive, said in a conference call with investors. 
''Few 10-year-old companies can provide these kinds of results.''
But investors were far from pleased with the company's fourth-quarter performance, which was reported after the close of the markets. 
In after-hours trading, eBay shares fell $11.82, or 11.5 percent, to $91.23. 
The stock fell $3.32, or 3 percent, to $103.05 in regular trading.
Inside eBay, company officials said the performance fell short of analysts' expectations because of a sluggish start to the holiday season. 
''We saw some very unusual trading patterns in November and December,'' Ms. Whitman said. 
''As a mainstream shopping destination, the eBay marketplace was affected by the same delay in holiday shopping that occurred in much of offline retail.''
Yet David M. Garrity, a financial analyst with Caris & Company, an investment firm in New York, said eBay might be facing a more serious problem than a compressed holiday season. 
He noted that profit margins at the company had fallen and its growth rate had slowed compared with previous years.
''The company saw a clear deceleration in growth in 2004, and stocks that fall short of expectations tend to be treated brutally,'' said Mr. Garrity, who had a buy recommendation on the shares.
He also expressed concern about the company's plan to pursue a larger share of the Chinese market. 
''This is a highly competitive market, and I think companies operating in a number of other categories shows that the Chinese to some extent are irrational competitors,'' he said.
The company, which is based in San Jose, Calif., recently angered online sellers when it announced that, starting Feb. 
18, it would raise the monthly fee it charges them at eBay stores by 60 percent, from $9.95 to $15.95. 
At that time, the company will double the cost to a seller for listing an item to 40 cents, from 20 cents.
Domestically, the company had particularly strong growth in the consumer electronics, computers and camera and photography categories, said Rajiv Dutta, the chief financial officer. 
Still, auto sales rank as eBay's highest-volume category, with $6.2 billion in sales in 2004, up 44 percent for the year.
The strongest growth came overseas. 
More than 60 percent of eBay's new registered users in 2004 were in the international business. 
International users accounted for more than 45 percent of the goods sold on eBay.
''The growth rate for the international business was 65 percent'' in the fourth quarter, Mr. Dutta said, comparing that with a 25 percent United States growth rate during that time.
Goods worth $34 billion were sold on eBay in 2004, up 44 percent from the value of goods sold in 2003.
The company said 56.1 million people listed or bid on an item last year, a 36 percent increase over the 41.2 million the company reported in 2003.
For all of 2004, the company earned $778.2 million, up 76 percent from 2003. 
Its annual sales rose 51 percent, to $3.27 billion.
Mr. Dutta shrugged off the decline in eBay stock. 
''The bottom line is that I'm feeling good about the quarter and feeling very real good about the year,'' he said.
Mr. Garrity, reached by phone on Wednesday evening, was not so sure. 
''I think there'll be more fallout tomorrow,'' he said.
The company also announced Wednesday a two-for-one split of its shares, effective Feb. 
16.
