
Taiwan's embattled president, Chen Shui-bian, scored a rare coup last month when he supported relaxing certain restrictions on investment and trade with the mainland.
Still, Mr. Chen's prospects for effectively governing this factionalized island or developing any consensus over policy toward Beijing remain murky. 
The ousted Nationalists are plotting Mr. Chen's downfall, former President Lee Teng-hui is reasserting himself as a self-styled messiah and Beijing continues to ignore Mr. Chen's calls to open talks.
Now all the parties are looking toward parliamentary elections set for Dec. 
1 as a key to the final two years of Mr. Chen's term as president, and possibly to Taiwan's future stance toward the mainland.
"This won't just be a midterm referendum," said Chu Yun-Han, a political scientist at National Taiwan University. 
"It will actually decide the profile of the next cabinet."
He said there was a real possibility that Mr. Chen would be forced to cede major power to his enemies in a coalition government.
Mr. Chen won a temporary lift with his handling of his 120-member economic advisory panel. 
He had charged the group with finding ways to reinvigorate Taiwan's badly listing economy. 
The Nationalists, who had worked unceasingly to isolate Mr. Chen, were cornered into participating in this game of his design, even allowing him to put his stamp on their proposals.
The panel's recommendations also gave Mr. Chen the cover he needed to fend off factions in his own Democratic Progressive Party that favor Taiwanese independence and are wary of deeper economic ties with the mainland.
Mr. Chen refuses to support the ideal of "one China" that Beijing demands, in effect at gunpoint, contending that Taiwan is a renegade province of China. 
But he has also tried to move toward the center, abandoning talk of independence, which would elicit military threats from the mainland, alarm the United States and scare his public.
But most of Mr. Chen's initiatives, foreign and domestic, have been stymied by a divided government. 
He was elected in a three-way race in 2000 by a minority of voters, while the long-ruling Nationalists retained a majority in the Parliament.
The Nationalists, led by former Vice President Lien Chan, and the second major opposition party, led by James Soong, a breakaway Nationalist, hope to improve their positions in the December elections. 
They want to force Mr. Chen into a coalition government in which he would give up much of his power to choose the cabinet and to set policy.
Mr. Chen's party, D.P.P., in turn, hopes to increase the proportion of seats, now just 30 percent, it holds in the 225-member Parliament.
"After the elections, we're likely to see a coalition of some sort," said Joseph Wu, a political expert at National Chengchi University in Taipei. 
"The question is, will the D.P.P. gain enough seats to dominate a coalition?"
Enter Mr. Lee, the former president. 
He formally remains a member of the Nationalist Party and is not expected to run for office himself, but he has thrown his "spiritual support" to the Taiwan Solidarity Union, a new party founded to push his agenda of an independent Taiwanese identity.
While Mr. Lee retired in disgrace after the 2000 elections, blamed by many Nationalists for dividing and betraying his party, he remains popular among native-born Taiwanese. 
Now he is campaigning for the Solidarity Union, hoping to draw out those in the Nationalist Party who share his abhorrence at the more accommodating policies toward Beijing being pursued under the leadership of Mr. Lien. Mr. Lee says the new party's winners will ally with Mr. Chen to give him a majority and stabilize the country.
Along the way, Mr. Lee, 78, has given ample evidence of what his critics call a "messiah complex."
On Saturday, he said at a Solidarity Union rally that "I want to retire but the father has a good-for-nothing son and so I have no choice," an unsubtle reference to his successor as Nationalist leader.
Mr. Lee has tormented his erstwhile Nationalist colleagues with his disdain, and has all but dared them to expel him. 
But the party has avoided that, fearing a public backlash.
But Mr. Lee's re-emergence has been a mixed blessing for Mr. Chen. Analysts say the new party is apt to draw more voters from Mr. Chen's own party than from the Nationalists. 
And judging from Mr. Lee's statements, his new group could be as much an albatross as a savior for Mr. Chen. One of Mr. Lee's goals is to torpedo the very economic overtures to Beijing that Mr. Chen has embraced.
"Going to China is like committing suicide," Mr. Lee told the cheering throng. 
If Mr. Lee's new party does add vital support for Mr. Chen, tricky new questions will arise, noted Steven M. Goldstein, an expert on Taiwan politics at Smith College.
"How would these two big egos, Lee and Chen, ever work together?"
Mr. Goldstein asked. 
Beijing's response, too, could be worrisome. 
In the minds of mainland leaders, Mr. Goldstein noted, "these are the world's two worst people."
