
Heavy gloom on world stock markets deepened in morning trading in Europe on Wednesday with sharp falls in London, Frankfurt and Paris on signs of economic slowdown in the United States and an end to a speculative bubble in China.
London's FTSE 100 index and the CAC 40 in Paris are now trading at levels below those seen at the end of 2006, after Europe's main stock markets hit six-year peaks during the first two months of 2007.
Many market watchers took the view that the falls were a necessary correction in an upward market trend.
In early European trading, London's FTSE 100 index of leading shares dropped 1.40 percent to 6,198.40 points, while the CAC 40 was showing a fall of 1.04 percent to 5,530.54 points.
Frankfurt's DAX 30 index slid 1.42 percent to 6,722.39 points.
Europe's main indices had already plummeted between 2.0 and 3.0 percent on Tuesday -- this ahead of declines of more than 3.0 percent for Wall Street.
In Shanghai, share prices actually closed up 3.94 percent Wednesday, one day after slumping 8.8 percent -- which was their biggest single day loss in 10 years.
The rebound helped Tokyo to pare its losses, with the benchmark Nikkei-225 index ending down 2.85 percent by the close.
Commenting on the falls in Europe, Mike Lenhoff, chief strategist at Brewin Dolphin Securities in London, said: "I think giving up a few percentage points isn't a big deal, in the context of things, when we've had four great years of rising stock markets.
"People tend to focus on the billions (of dollars) that have been lost yesterday (Tuesday) and possibly today but look at the trillions that were actually made over the past four year. 
I think one has to put it into perspective.
"I am not particularly worried about the end to the Chinese speculative boom," Lenhoff added.
"I don't think there's an end to the Chinese economic boom. 
I think that's going to continue and I don't think anybody is suggesting that it isn't going to continue. 
What's going on in the (Chinese) economy is for real and that will continue. 
What's going on in the stock market has been a lot of punting."
The chief economist for Asia at Societe Generale, Glenn Maguire, said: "What we are seeing is the echo of the fall in the Chinese market (on Tuesday) and more importantly the fall that we saw in the US equity market overnight.
"I don't think these moves significantly change the macroeconomic outlook for China which remains relatively firm at this stage. 
I think the markets should stabilise across the rest of the (Asian) region," he added.
Market players were meanwhile nervously awaiting the start of trade on Wall Street later in the day after the Dow Jones (NYSE:DJ) Industrial Average ended down 3.29 percent on Tuesday -- the worst day on Wall Street since 2001.
Comments from former Federal Reserve chairman Alan Greenspan and rising tension about Iran's nuclear programme added to undermine investor jitters.
Greenspan had warned on Monday that the US economy had been expanding since 2001 and that there were signs that the current economic cycle was coming to an end.
"I feel relatively confident that we're still going to see a decent year out of the US and with that in mind it's just a matter of time before the correction produces a buying opportunity," Lenhoff said.
"I don't feel this is the start of something really serious that is going to take us all the way back to where we started four years ago."
On the foreign exchange market, the dollar rebounded but dealers predicted the recovery could be short-lived amid fresh volatility on stock markets and concerns about tensions in Iran and Afghanistan.
Oil prices were meanwhile down about 50 cents in London and New York.
