
The European Union imposed sanctions on Uzbekistan on Monday, seeking to punish the country for its refusal to allow an international investigation into the bloody crackdown of an uprising in May in Andijon.
The sanctions embargo exports to Uzbekistan of arms and equipment that might be used for internal repression, and suspend meetings between the union and Uzbekistan that were intended to accelerate the nation's reconciliation with the West after decades as a Soviet republic. 
The sanctions also ban travel by Uzbek officials directly involved in the Andijon crackdown to the 25 members of the European Union.
The decision followed months of diplomatic tension over Uzbekistan after a prison break and antigovernment demonstration in Andijon on May 13. 
The demonstration, which survivors said included several thousand people, was scattered by gunfire from Uzbek troops and armored vehicles.
Survivors and independent organizations claim that hundreds of people were killed, almost all of them unarmed.
Uzbekistan, an autocratic Central Asian state that had been an ally in the Bush administration's counterterrorism efforts, has countered that the crackdown was necessary to combat terrorism, and said that only 187 people, described as mostly Islamic terrorists, were killed. 
It has resisted calls for an investigation.
As criticism over the violence increased in the spring and summer, Uzbekistan sharply shifted its foreign policy, aligning more closely with Russia and China. 
In July it ordered the United States to leave an airbase that Washington had been using since 2001, an eviction scheduled for early next year.
Meeting in Luxembourg, European Union foreign ministers approved the sanctions for one year, allowing for a review in 2006 of Uzbekistan's willingness to ''adhere to the principles of respect for human rights, rule of law and fundamental freedoms.''
Besides weapons and ammunition, the trade ban covers dozens of items that could be used in crackdowns and police work, including helmets and certain types of body armor, armored vehicles, leg irons, shackles, tear gas, water cannons, riot shields, fingerprint equipment, searchlights, equipment for intercepting or jamming communications and night-vision goggles.
The sanctions also suspend scheduled meetings under the so-called Partnership and Cooperation Agreement, the blueprint that since 1999 has helped develop the European Union's political relations with Uzbekistan and guide economic relations in trade, transport, customs, postal services, telecommunications and other areas.
Uzbekistan had no immediate reaction to the sanctions, which were announced in the evening well after government offices had closed. 
Human Rights Watch, an organization based in New York that has investigated the Andijon crackdown and repression, welcomed the move.
But the sanctions have a limited ability to undermine Uzbekistan's military or police forces, which are overwhelmingly equipped with Soviet-era military hardware that is still produced and sold by Russia, China and other non-European Union states.
Moreover, Russia has made clear that it will not honor the embargo, which may offer fresh trade opportunities for its arms industry, a sector that has rebounded under prodding from President Vladimir V. Putin.
''There are no restrictions on weapons supplies to Uzbekistan,'' Sergei B. Ivanov, the Russian defense minister, said last week in anticipation of the embargo, according to the Interfax news agency. 
''We will continue to develop further relations with Uzbekistan.''
The potential effects of the travel restrictions are also uncertain. 
President Islam A. Karimov and Col. Gen. Zakirdzhon Almatov, the interior minister, were in Andijon during the uprising, and have been accused by survivors of ordering and directing the violence against the crowd.
But the European Union has not yet drawn up a public list of officials it suspects of involvement, so it was not immediately clear which officials might face travel restrictions.
