
In the first case to review the government's secret evidence for holding a detainee at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, a federal appeals court found that accusations against a Muslim from western China held for more than six years were based on bare and unverifiable claims. 
The unclassified parts of the decision were released on Monday.
With some derision for the Bush administration's arguments, a three-judge panel said the government contended that its accusations against the detainee should be accepted as true because they had been repeated in at least three secret documents.
The court compared that to the absurd declaration of a character in the Lewis Carroll poem ''The Hunting of the Snark'': ''I have said it thrice: What I tell you three times is true.''
''This comes perilously close to suggesting that whatever the government says must be treated as true,'' said the panel of the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit.
The unanimous panel overturned as invalid a Pentagon determination that the detainee, Huzaifa Parhat, a member of the ethnic Uighur Muslim minority in western China, was properly held as an enemy combatant.
The panel included one of the court's most conservative members, the chief judge, David B. Sentelle.
The release on Monday of the unclassified parts of the decision followed a brief court notice last week. 
The notice said a classified decision had directed the government to release Mr. Parhat, transfer him to another country or conduct a new military hearing at Guantanamo to determine if he had been properly classified as an enemy combatant.
The Justice Department declined to comment on the ruling.
Although the decision was a defeat for the Bush administration, it was unclear what it might mean immediately for Mr. Parhat, a former fruit peddler who in recent years sent a message to his wife that she should remarry because his imprisonment at Guantanamo was like already being dead.
American officials have said that they cannot return Mr. Parhat and 16 other Uighur detainees at Guantanamo to China for fear of mistreatment and that some 100 other countries have refused to accept them.
Detainees' lawyers said the ruling in the case of Mr. Parhat, who says he went to Afghanistan in 2001 to escape China, could broadly affect other detainees because of its skeptical view of the government's evidence.
A lawyer representing other detainees, Marc D. Falkoff, said the evidence against many of the 270 men now at Guantanamo was similar to that in the Parhat case.
''This opinion shows that the government is going to have a hard time defending the military's decision to detain many of these men,'' said Mr. Falkoff, a professor at Northern Illinois University College of Law.
Pentagon officials have claimed that the Uighurs at Guantanamo were ''affiliated'' with a Uighur resistance group, the East Turkestan Islamic Movement, and that it, in turn, was ''associated'' with Al Qaeda and the Taliban.
The ruling released Monday overturned the Pentagon's finding after a 2004 hearing that Mr. Parhat was an enemy combatant based on that affiliation. 
He and the 16 other Uighurs were detained after the American invasion of Afghanistan in 2001.
The court said the classified evidence supporting the Pentagon's claims included assertions that events had ''reportedly'' occurred and that the connections were ''said to'' exist, without providing information about the source of such information.
''Those bare facts,'' the decision said, ''cannot sustain the determination that Parhat is an enemy combatant.''
Some lawyers said the ruling highlighted the difficulties they saw in civilian judges reviewing Guantanamo cases.
''This case displays the inadequacies of having civilian courts inject themselves into military decision-making,'' said Glenn M. Sulmasy, a law professor at the Coast Guard Academy and a national security fellow at Harvard.
The appellate panel reviewed Mr. Parhat's case under a limited procedure Congress provided for challenging military hearings at Guantanamo. 
The case was argued before the Supreme Court's decision on June 12 that detainees have a constitutional right to seek release in more expansive habeas corpus proceedings.
The 17 Uighurs now held at Guantanamo say they are allies, not enemies, of the United States.
The Uighur Muslims, who come from an area of far western China they call East Turkestan, claim oppression at the hands of the Chinese government, including forced abortions and relocations of educated people to remote areas.
The Chinese government has described the East Turkestan Islamic Movement as a terrorist organization. 
American officials agreed in 2002, when they were pressing for Chinese support for military operations in Afghanistan and Iraq.
The decision was written by Judge Merrick B. Garland, an appointee of President Bill Clinton. 
It was joined by Chief Judge Sentelle, an appointee of President Ronald Reagan, and Judge Thomas B. Griffith, a 2005 appointee of President Bush.
