
Even before the opening serve, the long-awaited women's volleyball match Friday night between the United States and China had a title fit for a summer blockbuster: The Battle of Peace.
It was an invention of the Chinese news media, based on a play of words combining the first names of the coaches on the two teams, Lang Ping of the United States and Chen Zhonghe of China.
Years ago, Lang coached the Chinese national team, and Chen worked under her. 
Lang, once an ace spiker known as the Iron Hammer, is a legend in China, having played on the Chinese women's Olympic team that won a gold medal against the United States at the 1984 Los Angeles Games.
But on Friday night, Lang had different loyalties -- it was her job to shepherd the Americans through the preliminary round. 
And the United States drew closer to a berth in the quarterfinals with a five-set victory.
The mostly Chinese fans in the packed stadium did not seem to mind that Lang was taking on her home country. 
She was introduced to thunderous applause, and so iconic is Lang that Hu Jintao, the Chinese president, even attended the match, a rare appearance for him at these Games.
The match came down to the final set, which the Americans dominated, spiking at will and staying ahead throughout to take the match, 23-25, 25-22, 23-25, 25-20, 15-11. 
The United States improved to 3-2 in pool play while China, the defending gold medalists, fell to 2-2.
''I tried to be very concentrated on the game, not to be more emotionally involved,'' Lang said. 
''I've been coaching with the U.S. team for the last four years. 
This is not the first time we've played against China.''
Before the game, Lang said, she told her players that ''every point for our team is very important. 
Don't think about the result. 
Even if we lose the game, every point is important. 
We have to fight for the result.''
Each point did turn out to be a fight. 
Several times, the United States pulled ahead in a set, only to lose it to China. 
The Americans had an 18-14 lead in the first set, only to see the Chinese inch back and then win the set with a soft lob.
Midway through the third set, China built a 5-point lead but could not close out the set until a hard spike by Ma Yunwen made it 25-23. 
Just one set away from a losing record, the Americans battled back.
''The players played very brave and played very aggressively, especially when we were down, 1-2, after the third set,'' Lang said.
Kimberly Glass led the United States in scoring with 20 points, followed by Danielle Scott-Arruda with 19, and Logan Tom and Heather Brown with 18 each.
China's Liu Yanan said she had noticed a change in the American team under Lang's guidance.
''Lang Ping is the role model for every Chinese female volleyball player,'' she said. 
''She's now coaching the U.S. team and she has helped them improve and change their style.''
Lang said the Americans were more fiery than the Chinese but that it was not necessarily an advantage.
''I think our players are more emotional, very passionate, sometimes too much'' she said. 
''I need to balance it. 
If it gets too high, I have to settle it, or if too low, I have to raise it, like a cheerleader.''
The Chinese fans showed that they can reach an emotional pitch too. 
The crowd worked itself into a frenzy, yelling ''Go China!'' and waving flags. 
But they were also here to lay eyes on a Chinese heroine who had once dazzled with her lightning serve, and to see how far she would take the team of her adopted homeland.
