
Kim Woo Choong, whose rise and fall as the founder of the dissolved Daewoo corporate empire became a symbol of the South Korean economy's breakneck growth and eventual implosion, returned home Tuesday after almost six years as a fugitive.
Prosecutors said they arrested Mr. Kim, 68, on fraud and embezzlement charges in the early morning as he arrived from Hanoi at an airport near Seoul. 
A noisy crowd of protesters met a gaunt Mr. Kim at the airport, some shouting, ''Punish the big thief!''
Mr. Kim's return has captured the attention of a nation eager to find out what exactly happened to the Daewoo Group, South Korea's second-largest conglomerate in 1999 when it crumbled under $80 billion in debt in one of the world's largest bankruptcies. 
Some Daewoo companies are still in business, though the group has dispersed.
Daewoo came to symbolize the excesses of the country's chaebol, the family-controlled conglomerates that still form the basis of much of the economy. 
The chaebol have been accused of bribing past governments, which nurtured them into the engine of an export-driven economy.
''I sincerely apologize to the people,'' Mr. Kim, who wore a dark blue suit and a pink tie, said at the airport in comments broadcast on TV.
In a handwritten statement distributed by his aides, Mr. Kim called himself a ''failed businessman who wants to put his past problems to rest.''
In explaining his reason for returning, he invoked the Korean saying that an old fox looks homeward when it is about to die.
''My Daewoo Group could not sail through the unexpected rough waves'' of the Asian financial crisis of 1997 and 1998, Mr. Kim said in the statement. 
''I am entirely responsible for imposing a burden on the national economy, and I will humbly accept all the measures the legal authorities will take.''
But it took 30 minutes for the police to guide Mr. Kim through a throng of angry protesters at the airport. 
Laid-off Daewoo workers shoved police and shook placards that read: ''No Amnesty!
Hold Parliamentary Hearings!''
One demonstrator hurled a bottle of water at Mr. Kim.
Prosecutors said they planned to indict Mr. Kim as early as Wednesday, but did not elaborate on the charges. 
Mr. Kim and other Daewoo executives have been accused of obtaining 10 trillion won in illegal financing, diverting 25 trillion won out of the country and exaggerating the company's assets by 41 trillion won, or $41 billion, through falsifying books
In a Supreme Court ruling in April, seven of Mr. Kim's lieutenants -- hard-driving executives fiercely loyal to him -- were sentenced to prison terms ranging from three to five years and a total fine of $23 billion, which state prosecutors will take years to try to collect any part of.
But the jail sentences were suspended. 
Some labor unions now fear that Mr. Kim may have cut a deal before his return to minimize jail time and want to know where Mr. Kim may have hidden his wealth.
Mr. Kim is a Korean business legend. 
In 1967, he borrowed $5,000 to start a company he named Daewoo, or ''great universe'' in Korean.
In 30 years, Mr. Kim, who traveled overseas 200 days a year and claimed to have never taken a day off, built a textile exporter into South Korea's No.2 conglomerate, with 62 trillion won in sales at its peak in 1998. 
Daewoo's cars, ships, refrigerators and television sets flooded markets around the world.
Mr. Kim personified the belief that South Korea, a country with few natural resources, had to export to survive. 
He was the first South Korean businessman to set up offices overseas -- opening in Sydney and Singapore in 1969. 
By 1972, the fifth anniversary of the company's founding, Daewoo was already South Korea's second-largest exporter.
In the 1990's, Mr. Kim shrugged off signs of an economic slump and went on a worldwide shopping spree. 
He bought dilapidated auto and home appliance plants in former Communist countries and developing nations at a pace so fast that at its peak, Daewoo took over a company every three days.
By 1997, Daewoo had 40 affiliates at home and 396 subsidiaries overseas with 300,000 employees. 
It built car factories -- by itself and in joint ventures -- in 14 countries, including China, India, Poland and Romania.
But it was an empire built on borrowed money, and it crumbled when the Asian financial crisis hit and banks called in loans.
Since he fled South Korea in 1999, Mr. Kim has been vilified as a suspected mastermind of the largest business fraud in the nation's history. 
He eluded South Korean reporters who searched for him in Vietnam, France, China, Sudan, Morocco and even in North Korea.
''We have smothered our anger for so long, I think he should get an appropriate punishment,'' said Park Chang Keun, a leader of 500 individual investors who lost their money in Daewoo's collapse.
Prosecutors have said a crucial question is whether Mr. Kim bribed some of the country's politicians. 
The government paid 29.7 trillion won in 1999 in a futile attempt to save Daewoo.
The collapse of Daewoo and other conglomerates during the Asia crisis ultimately forced South Korea to seek a $58 billion bailout from the International Monetary Fund.
''Our people have all but forgotten about the crisis,'' said Kang Bong Kyun, a former finance minister. 
''Kim's return will be an occasion for the nation to look back upon the crisis.''
