
Expertise can be more important than cash when it comes to winning investments in China, managers of four of the world's biggest buyout firms said on Tuesday.
''Just bringing capital to China is not sufficient, with China itself having more than $1 trillion in reserves,'' Daniel A. Carroll, managing partner of TPG's operations in Asia, said at the Boao Forum for Asia, a nonprofit event modeled after the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland. 
''It's about offering expertise, which is about management.''
Eager to get a share of the fast-growing Chinese economy, private equity firms are adapting to meet demands by Chinese companies that go beyond financing. 
They include management skills, help in solving regulatory problems in cross-border takeovers and access to a network that allows them to expand abroad. 
As a result, buyout firms, which usually aim for a controlling stake in a company, are seeking smaller stakes and investments in state-owned companies.
Mr. Carroll's comments were echoed by managers at the Blackstone Group, Kohlberg Kravis Roberts and Goldman Sachs, who shared a panel. 
The conference was held for the first time in London as the city competes for clout in the Chinese market.
''China is going to be a very, very important market for us long term,'' said Johannes P. Huth, a managing director at Kohlberg Kravis. 
''The macroeconomic environment is very favorable, and the entrepreneurial culture attracts us.''
Global private equity firms have poured into China looking for ways to benefit from rapid economic growth, especially as growth in developed economies is slowing. 
Yet, competition for talent and investments is fierce and investment plans are limited by tight regulations that restrict the stakes of foreign firms in certain industries, including natural resources.
Gerry Murphy, senior managing director at Blackstone Group in London, said investments in China generally involved more equity and less borrowed money, and were smaller than in developed markets. 
But private equity firms will want to exert the same influence over management decisions as elsewhere.
Andrew E. Wolff, a partner and managing director at Goldman Sachs, said investments could range from backing private entrepreneurs to helping state-owned companies to reorganize ahead of an initial public offering.
Private equity investors also could advise companies on possible takeover targets abroad. 
Natural resources and renewable energy are two particularly hot areas the company is eager to invest in, Mr. Wolff said.
Mr. Carroll agreed but added that a 25 percent limit on foreign ownership in natural resources firms meant that TPG had focused more on investments in companies one step removed from the sector, like mining services firms.
Evidence of the intensity of the competition among private equity firms for investments in these industries came when a Chinese businessman in the audience asked how his company could attract such funds. 
Almost all the private equity managers said they wanted to discuss a possible investment in his company.
