
Senior F.B.I. officials were told in the early 1990's that a Los Angeles woman accused this week of being a double-agent appeared to be spying for the Chinese, but they continued using her as an informer nonetheless, current and former officials said today.
Around 1991, senior Federal Bureau of Investigation counterintelligence officials met in Washington to discuss evidence that the woman, Katrina Leung, was spying for the Chinese, an official said today on condition of anonymity.
One F.B.I. supervisor in Los Angeles attending the meeting was James J. Smith, who was having an long-term affair with Ms. Leung after recruiting her to the bureau as an informer in the early 1980's. 
They were arrested this week on espionage-related charges.
An administration official who demanded anonymity said it was also "common knowledge" for years among senior people in the bureau's Los Angeles office that Mr. Smith and Ms. Leung were having an affair and that F.B.I. officials at headquarters suspected that there might be a Chinese intelligence "penetration" of the bureau on the West Coast.
Indeed, officials said today that they were investigating the possibility of a separate security breach involving China and another agent in the bureau's Los Angeles office.
The F.B.I.'s handling of the long-held suspicions surrounding Mr. Smith and Ms. Leung and whether it moved aggressively enough to head off the problem will be a major focus of inquiries by the bureau and the Justice Department, officials said.
Investigators are also trying to determine what information on nuclear, military and political issues she gave to China and what damage it may have caused to national security.
The bureau declined to comment today on questions about when senior officials at headquarters first became aware of suspicions in the case. 
"That's one of the things we're looking into as part of our oversight review: how the whole Smith and Leung matter was handled," an F.B.I. official, who spoke only on the condition of anonymity, said.
But other current and former officials say that if it is demonstrated that senior bureau officials had evidence for years pointing to Ms. Leung's activities, the bureau is sure to face difficult questions about why it did not take aggressive steps until recently.
One theory, officials said, is that officials were trying to use Ms. Leung to pass disinformation back to her native China without realizing that she had access through her affair with Mr. Smith to very sensitive material.
"There are really two possibilities," said William Baker, who was a high-ranking F.B.I. official until 1991 but said that as chief of the criminal division he had no knowledge of the case. 
"You're either talking about gross dereliction of duty at F.B.I. headquarters and the L.A. field office, or the F.B.I. wanted to play her back on China, and it just backfired on them, because they were played themselves. 
Either way, it didn't work, and the outcome was horrible."
Mr. Baker said bureau officials in Los Angeles should have been particularly sensitive to the dangers of an agent becoming too close to an informer because in 1990 a former agent, Richard W. Miller, was convicted on charges of passing information to Moscow through his Russian lover. 
"The red flag should have been the Miller case," Mr. Baker said.
Mr. Smith was allowed to be Ms. Leung's so-called handler from the early 1980's until his retirement in late 2000, and officials said the two had an affair for about 18 years. 
The bureau paid her $1.7 million as an informer to provide information on China.
The Justice Department acknowledged in court documents unsealed on Wednesday that a second F.B.I. agent in San Francisco who was also having an affair with the woman became aware in 1991 about an audiotape indicating that Ms. Leung had unauthorized contacts with officials in the Chinese intelligence agency and was passing information to them.
The San Francisco agent alerted Mr. Smith in Los Angeles; an alarmed Mr. Smith assured him that he would take care of the problem, prosecutors said. 
The second former agent, who is unidentified in court papers but whom law enforcement officials identified as William Cleveland, resigned on Thursday as head of security at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory after the lab began investigating the case.
Prosecutors suggested that only the two agents knew about the suspicions surrounding Ms. Leung, but officials said in interviews today that knowledge of the case extended to senior officials at the bureau.
"The F.B.I. chain of command was fully aware of the '91 report indicating that she was talking about things with China that she should not have been talking about," an official who spoke on condition of anonymity said. 
"Headquarters knew she had unauthorized contacts and communications with people in China. 
There were memos generated."
Officials said Robert S. Mueller III, director of the F.B.I. became aware of the case through back channels in late 2001 and dispatched senior counterintelligence people to do a full investigation. 
Last year, he demoted Sheila Horan, who was leading the national security division, because he was upset about how the case was handled, officials said.
Lawyers for Ms. Leung and Mr. Smith have defended their clients' character and pledged vindication. 
Brian Sun, a lawyer for Mr. Smith, said it was irresponsible for the Justice Department to try to pin full responsibility on the former agent.
"The bureau was fully aware from at least 1991 of the potential risks of using Ms. Leung as an asset," or informer, Mr. Sun said in an interview. 
"It's unfair to try to portray Mr. Smith as the only person responsible for the F.B.I.'s failure to follow up on this matter. 
If J. J. Smith committed acts of gross negligence, then the entire counterintelligence office of the F.B.I. was equally culpable."
