
THOSE North Korean missiles that splashed down harmlessly in the Sea of Japan last week prompted a lot of jokes about the country that couldn't shoot straight. 
But they were also a reminder that North Korea has defied more than a decade of predictions that it would shrivel up and go away; the choices for dealing with it look as grim as ever.
What could happen next?
The truth is that for years, both sides have been gaming plans for everything from negotiations to bombing runs, coexistence to collapse. 
Here are a few:
One-on-One Talks
Mr. Bush's critics say that he should do what President Clinton did: Hold his nose, and negotiate directly. 
That's how the 1994 ''Agreed Framework'' happened, when North Korea agreed to freeze its nuclear program in return for fuel oil and, some day, for ''proliferation resistant'' light-water reactors to provide energy. 
The deal has since died.
Mr. Bush says nothing doing. 
The North Koreans started cheating on the 1994 agreement, he says, almost immediately. 
But his big worry is that if America negotiates alone, it will be hung out to dry when talks go bad.
He insists that China and South Korea -- which are reluctant to crack down on the North, but have the most to lose -- must be at the table. 
Negotiate alone, he said on Friday in Chicago, and ''you run out of options very quickly,'' especially if the North manages to ''turn the tables and make a country like the United States the problem.''
Mr. Bush has a point. 
Talk one on one, and the dynamic changes. 
China and South Korea will likely portray Washington as the obstacle. 
The downside to Mr. Bush's approach: When six nations talk, clarity is the first victim. 
The North can play each country against the others. 
No wonder that in the three years of talks the result has been one agreement in principle, with no timetables, which everyone interpreted differently the day it was signed.
Taking Out Yongbyon
In 1994, when North Korea threatened to throw out international inspectors and turn its stockpile of spent nuclear-reactor fuel into plutonium for weapons, Brent Scowcroft, who had served as the national security adviser to the first President Bush, advocated pre-emption. 
It would be better to destroy North Korea's nuclear facilities at Yongbyon, he argued, than to let the country build a nuclear arsenal.
That suggestion struck a chord in the Clinton White House.
''My belief is that President Clinton was prepared to do it,'' said William J. Perry, the defense secretary at the time. 
But a last-minute deal with North Korea was struck.
Nine years later, in January 2003, the North Koreans made good on their threat. 
American spy satellites saw the North Koreans carting the rods off for what appeared to be reprocessing into bomb fuel, but President Bush, preoccupied with Baghdad, not Pyongyang, decided not to act.
What about now?
Many believe it is too late. 
By the C.I.A.'s estimate, North Korea now has the fuel for six or more weapons, and it is producing roughly a bomb's worth every year. 
(Whether they have turned the fuel into weapons is unclear.) The fuel could be stored anywhere -- in caves, tunnels, Kim Jong Il's shoe closet. 
Moreover, the United States has accused North Korea of starting up a second nuclear weapons program, using uranium, with the help of Pakistan's former nuclear architect, A. Q. Khan. 
That makes bombing pretty useless.
The Nightmare: North Korea Sells
This chain of events worries the Bush administration the most. 
Rightly or wrongly, the Pentagon assumes that because Mr. Kim, for all his other oddities, values his survival, he would not risk an attack with a return address.
But the North Korean leader may soon find himself with a small surplus of the world's most coveted weapons material, bomb-grade plutonium. 
David Albright and Paul Brannan of the Institute for Science and International Security estimated in a recent report that North Korea's stock of plutonium ''is enough for 4 to 13 weapons.''
Countries that have four weapons worth of bomb material probably aren't willing to give up any. 
But when you have enough for more than a dozen -- and you are broke -- the black market must look attractive.
Of course, making bomb fuel is one thing; getting caught selling it is another. 
During the six-party talks in Beijing, the North once threatened to sell a weapon, and American officials made clear that the results for Pyongyang would be disastrous.
Would the North Koreans dare do it?
''Who knows,'' said Michael Green, who recently left the administration after running Asian affairs at the National Security Council. 
''But their strategy is steady escalation, and their next step may be a nuclear test'' to prove the quality of their wares.
Live With It
There is always the Cuba strategy: Wait out the Kim dynasty, and hope that the starving, bankrupt, gulag-ridden state of North Korea finally collapses.
After all, the North is hardly in a position to lash out. 
Its military, while among the world's largest, can't afford to train its pilots. 
The thought that it would restart the Korean War, still considered plausible through the early 90's, seems almost laughable today.
But as Dick Cheney once famously said about the North, ''time is not on our side.''
It may take years, experts say, but they will straighten out that Taepodong 2 missile. 
Eventually they may figure out how to miniaturize a nuclear warhead to fit on top of it.
That is why, while Mr. Bush talks about finding a diplomatic solution, the Pentagon is mapping every corner of the country, trying to figure out how to deal with a nuclear outbreak.
And it is why the Chinese and the South Koreans fear a collapse -- because the only thing harder than dealing with a nuclear-armed North Korea may be handling millions of hungry, confused refugees headed for Seoul, Tokyo and Harbin.
