
Many a hapless romantic has fallen in love only to discover that that special someone is, well, a snake. 
So it is in Chinese Theater Works' latest production, with one difference: that characterization is literally true.
"Whitesnake," an hourlong adaptation of a centuries-old Chinese folk tale, relates the adventures of the title character (Kuang-Yu Fong), who meets a handsome pharmacist (Richard Chang) while she and her sister, Bluesnake (Yiling Li), are disguised as humans. 
The couple marry, but a vengeful monk who knows Whitesnake's true nature is determined to reveal her reptilian form.
"He thinks it's against Buddhist law to have an interspecies marriage," Ms. Fong, who wrote and directed the play, said.
Ms. Fong and her partner in Chinese Theater Works, Stephen Kaplin, present "Whitesnake" with Chinese music and singing, rousing Kun Opera-style martial arts and elaborate shadow puppetry, using antique donkey-hide puppets. 
But the dialogue is English, and there's even a framing story about a space alien.
"I feel it's very important for me as a Chinese-American to tell this in a different way," Ms. Fong said. 
"To combine different forms and cultures is our contribution."
Tomorrow's afternoon performance is to be a children's matinee, at which youngsters will be invited to try shadow puppetry after the show.
As for Whitesnake, alas, she ends up sealed inside a pagoda. 
But history has provided an interesting footnote to her fate. 
In 1927 the real building said to be her prison collapsed. 
"The Chinese people believe now that her spirit is free," Ms. Fong said, "and can join her husband."
"Whitesnake," through Sunday at Here, 145 Avenue of the Americas, at Dominick Street, South Village, (212) 647-0202. 
Tonight and tomorrow night at 7; tomorrow at 2 p.m.; Sunday at 5 p.m. Tickets: $15. 
Reservations advised.
1, 2, 3, Jazz!
Not only is it hard to sit still while listening to jazz, but the bandleader Barry Harris says it's also just as hard to keep silent.
"I knew a teacher who had been teaching at a high school in Brooklyn," Mr. Harris said. 
"He could never get those kids to sing. 
I said, 'Why don't you try some jazz songs that have lyrics?
Well, they went crazy singing, they loved it so much."
Singing, scatting, stomping, tapping and just about every other kind of joyful expression will be the order of the day tomorrow at Town Hall, when Mr. Harris is to present the first of three 90-minute programs in "Barry Harris Cooks Up Family Jazz."
Other ingredients are the vocalist Nancy Marano; the tap dancer Jimmy Slyde; the Children of Jazz, a chorus of young New York students; and Mr. Harris's octet and his adult choir, the Barry Harris Jazz Ensemble. 
And of course the audience.
"I have people call out numbers, and I make the numbers into a song," he said. 
"The numbers from one to eight are like a scale, and I take four of them. 
Last time they called out six, seven, eight and three, and it ended up being the most beautiful song you'd ever want to hear."
In addition to works by George Gershwin, Cole Porter and other Americans, Mr. Harris, 71, will present his own compositions, like "The Breeze Song" and "These Are the Things We Need," which includes the lyric: "We need a chance to fulfill all our dreams/To reach for the sky, not to die" -- words that resonate now more than ever.
"Barry Harris Cooks Up Family Jazz": "Step 1: Begin With the Children of Jazz," tomorrow; "Step 2: Blend With Adult Voices," Oct. 
20; and "Step 3: "Stir It Up!," Nov. 
3. All at 11 a.m. at Town Hall, 123 West 43rd Street, Manhattan, (212) 840-2824. 
Tickets: $15; children and ages 62+, $10; 20 percent discount if buying the entire series.
Feel the Earth Move
Adults don't need to be told that children can easily create seismic tremors. 
It's lots of fun, though, for youngsters to see it for themselves. 
And those who visit the Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory in Palisades, N.Y., tomorrow will have just that opportunity at a make-your-own-earthquake demonstration.
"We have a seismometer that measures tiny, tiny movements," said Michael Purdy, the observatory's director. 
"If you jump up and down two times, you'll see two spikes on the graph paper. 
It shows how the energy is propagated."
The demonstration is part of "Explore the Hudson, Explore the Earth," the observatory's annual open house, which will also include rocks and minerals to handle, computer games on climate prediction, displays on dinosaurs and copious data on the Hudson River.
Dr. Purdy also plans to display a huge core of sediment collected by pushing a tube 30 feet down into the Piermont Marsh. 
The material, 4,200 years old, includes fish scales, seeds, pollen and evidence of everything from climate swings to devastating forest fires. 
"These changes can happen again," he said. 
"It's using the past to understand the future."
So mud is important. 
But children never need to be told that.
"Explore the Hudson, Explore the Earth," tomorrow from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. at the Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory of Columbia University, Route 9W (10 miles north of the George Washington Bridge), Palisades, N.Y., (845) 359-2900. 
Free.
