
Looking energized and utterly in his element, Taiwan's former president, Lee Teng-hui, returned to his alma mater, Cornell University, this week for the first time since a visit in 1995 and wasted little time delving into a topic that has long confounded Beijing and Washington: Taiwan politics.
In a speech before more than 400 enthusiastic supporters on Tuesday night, Mr. Lee, 78, talked about Taiwan's growing pains as a democracy, while criticizing Beijing's government for ignoring "the voices of the people."
And he hinted strongly that his political days were not over. 
"After I stepped down, after I retired, I saw that everything became a mess, and I can't take it anymore," he said.
Given the politically charged atmosphere and passionate demonstrations that have followed him, it has been easy to forget that Mr. Lee is officially here on a private visit to see his granddaughter, a Cornell student, and to attend the dedication of a science institute named in his honor.
And for the most part, Mr. Lee has maintained a low profile. 
But simply by showing up, Mr. Lee has already seized upon a rare opportunity to draw attention to himself, his country's embattled economic and political climate as well as Taiwan's role in United States-China relations.
Circumstances were different in 1995. 
Mr. Lee, who received a Ph.D. in agricultural economics in 1968, was president then, and he delivered a speech that touched on his commitment to Taiwan's economic development and democratization. 
It wasn't so much what he said, but that Washington allowed him to say it -- as the first Taiwan president to visit the United States since diplomatic ties between Washington and Taipei ended in 1979 -- that angered Beijing. 
In retaliation, China threatened Taiwan with war games. 
Relations between Washington and Beijing reached their lowest point since the 1989 crackdown in Tiananmen Square.
This time, China's response to Mr. Lee's trip, while irate, has been more muted, perhaps because other issues, such as Beijing's 2008 Olympics bid, have been more pressing.
During his 12-year presidency, Mr. Lee earned the nickname Mr. Democracy for opening up Taiwan's political system, but was also criticized for tolerating corruption. 
Then, after Mr. Lee's Nationalist Party lost last year to Chen Shui-bian and the Democratic Progressive Party, which supports independence from China, Mr. Lee resigned as Nationalist chairman.
In recent months, however, he has re-emerged as an influential power broker while distancing himself from the Nationalists, expressing support for Mr. Chen.
On Tuesday, Mr. Lee arrived here from Los Angeles, and was greeted by more than 500 people, mostly Taiwanese-Americans, unfurling banners supporting Mr. Lee and waving the green-and-white flags of the Democratic Progressive Party.
Later, he delivered a speech in which he urged patience with the inexperienced Mr. Chen. "We should give him some time," Mr. Lee said. 
"You can't ask an inexperienced child to run before he learns to walk."
Today, however, Mr. Lee's detractors had their day. 
More than 200 protesters chanted slogans supporting a united motherland. 
Most were students from China, but the crowd also included Nationalist veterans from New York City who were born in China and fought against the Communists, but who have never accepted independence for Taiwan.
