
For five months, Gao Lading and other angry farmers had occupied the walled compound of the Communist Party's village office. 
They had pitched tents, eaten rice and sweet potatoes, and waited.
It was a sit-in born of desperation. 
Officials from the nearby city of Yulin had seized land that had been part of the village since imperial times. 
The farmers had protested for nearly two years before finally seizing the village government's seat of power.
Early on Oct. 
4, the government struck back. 
Witnesses say truckloads of paramilitary police surrounded the sleeping village. 
Hundreds of people inside the office compound were injured as the police fired tear gas and rubber bullets. 
Women were attacked with cattle prods. 
Farmers sleeping nearby were beaten in their beds.
''They pinned them to the bed, put handcuffs on them and dragged them away,'' said a woman whose husband was among the 29 people arrested.
In real estate terms, the crackdown amounted to closing day. 
Like other land transactions in rural China, negotiations had been one-sided: Yulin officials, citing an obscure legal clause, ordered farmers to leave and offered them $60 per parcel of land. 
The farmers had screamed robbery.
But farmers in China cannot be robbed of land because they are not allowed to own it. 
The same economic reforms that have made China the world's fastest growing economy have created a two-tiered property system that favors city dwellers while handicapping the farmers once at the core of this society.
One result is that a booming, private real estate market has emerged in cities, where residents can now buy and sell apartments or suburban villas as investments toward joining the fledgling urban middle class. 
Farmers still fall under a village collective system that forbids them to own, buy or sell the land they till -- and that often leaves them powerless to keep it.
The Sanchawan case is one example among thousands in which city officials pushing lucrative development projects have confiscated rural land by guile, fiat or force. 
Experts estimate that as many as 70 million farmers have lost their land in the past decade -- a number expected to rise above 100 million.
''If the government wants to take land, it can take it more or less at will,'' said Qin Hui, a history professor at Qinghua University in Beijing and a leading authority on rural China. 
He added, ''Farmers often not only haven't benefited from the process of urbanization, they are losing out because of it.''
Urban residents have not been immune to land seizures. 
Older sections of Shanghai, Beijing and other cities have fallen to wrecking balls to make way for new development. 
Residents are often poorly compensated and relocated to less convenient apartments.
But displaced farmers often lose their very livelihood. 
They have little chance of finding other land and face daunting obstacles to creating a stable new life in cities. 
Losing their land also deprives them of a social safety net in a country without one. 
A farmer with land can at least eat.
Riots and protests over land seizures and inadequate compensation have erupted across China for much of this year. 
Land seizures became so rampant that central government officials became alarmed that the loss of arable land threatened China's ability to feed itself. 
They ordered a temporary freeze on the economic development zones chewing up farmland and promised to reform the land system.
Here in the badlands of northern Shaanxi Province, the arid, desolate landscape holds a mythic place in Communist Party lore and has long been fertile ground for peasant anger and revolt. 
This is the bleak terrain where Mao Zedong found refuge from pursuing Nationalist troops in the 1930's, rebuilt his Red Army for eventual victory, and instituted a crucial political promise of his revolution -- redistributing land from landlords to peasants.
The Oct. 
4 clash here, which Chinese news media have been banned from reporting, clearly terrified villagers. 
During three visits in October and November, the village remained under tight watch by officials and undercover police officers. 
Most of the more than 30 villagers interviewed for this article were willing to be identified only by their surnames.
It was a stark change for a village that had been defiant, even brazen, in confronting the government. 
Interviews, government documents and petitions from the jailed protesters show that a core group of farmers repeatedly protested and staged sit-ins. 
Some, like Gao Lading, a hot-tempered leader, traveled to Beijing seeking help.
They were fighting for 1,670 acres of sandy, desolate soil.
''For thousands of years, the relationship between farmers and their land has been a thick as blood,'' villagers wrote in one petition to Beijing officials, ''as close fitting as lips and teeth.''
A Seduction of Riches
For years, Sanchawan prospered from its position on the banks of the Yuxi River, less than 10 miles from the produce markets in Yulin. 
But then discoveries of natural gas, coal and oil prompted local boosters to begin describing Yulin as ''China's Kuwait.''
Yulin became a hub in a major pipeline project moving natural gas from western China to Shanghai. 
In March 2002, former President Jiang Zemin visited to urge faster development. 
City officials were already ahead of him.
They were planning a new economic development zone on the high bluffs across the river from Sanchawan. 
Generations of villagers had worked the land, known locally as Xisha, or western sand. 
Some farmers irrigated the land and grew corn or cabbage. 
But most planted saplings as a buffer to protect their fields across the river from the nearby Gobi desert.
''We've been taking care of that land for decades,'' said Gao Qinglai, a elderly woman in the village. 
''Planting trees there provides a bit of firewood, but it also stops the sand from blowing down the gully and covering the river and the fields below.''
Since the early years of Communist rule, farmers said, the Xisha land was under the collective control of the village and had attracted little interest from Yulin officials. 
But once plans for the development zone were drawn up, villagers said officials cited an obscure 1951 clause in the country's murky property statutes and laid claim to the land.
The compensation offer of $60 per mu, or about one-sixth of an acre, infuriated farmers when they learned that the land was being leased to developers for 50 times that amount, or more.
''Officials took the land for development and have been pocketing all the money for themselves,'' said an old farmer surnamed Zhou who was tilling a field outside the village.
The brazenness of this kind of land grab is not uncommon in rural China. 
In one village in wealthy Zhejiang Province, farmers were given $3,040 per mu, only to watch city officials lease the same plots to developers for $122,000 each. 
And experts say farmers often get only a fraction of the compensation they are promised because village officials siphon off the rest.
In Sanchawan, the village head, Gao Guoqing, initially opposed the seizure but then switched his support to Yulin officials. 
Villagers say he is now a construction boss at the development zone and a member of one of its oversight boards.
''Scams are commonplace,'' said Sally Sargeson, a senior lecturer at the University of Nottingham who specializes in Chinese property rights. 
''In most cases, farmers don't get what they deserve.''
The Sanchawan farmers decided their only recourse was to protest. 
In December 2002, nearly 800 people blocked construction on the Xisha land, according to interviews and petitions. 
Villagers organized 16 teams of protesters that alternated sit-ins. 
The protests continued into the spring of 2003, often led by elderly women because the men needed to work.
By April 27, Yulin officials had lost patience. 
The protests were causing work delays on the development zone. 
So, villagers say, police officers and more than 300 construction workers surrounded the women as a district official harangued them through a megaphone.
''You're crazy!'' shouted the official, Ji Shengrong, according to an account later drafted by villagers. 
''Your heads are filled with sand.''
One woman threatened to complain to higher authorities in Beijing.
''So you dirt-poor trash think you can oppose the city government?''
Mr. Ji scoffed. 
''You don't have a chance in hell.''
The police then began dragging protesters to jail. 
When relatives from Sanchawan tried to come to their aid, the police blocked roads and bridges leading to the site.
Officials in the Yulin mayor's office and other city agencies refused interview requests and said they would not discuss the land confiscation. 
One official who declined to be identified said villagers were generously compensated.
Zhang Baohua might disagree. 
Mr. Zhang, 40, was not at the Xisha site during the protest but was later picked up by the police at the village. 
He later wrote an affidavit describing four days of interrogations in which he was repeatedly beaten and kicked. 
Pressured to identify the protest leaders, he repeated that he knew nothing and did not understand why he was being detained.
''Even if you beat me to death today, I still wouldn't know anything,'' Mr. Zhang said after a third day of beatings, according to his affidavit.
He was finally released and spent the next four weeks recovering in bed. 
''I'm an innocent member of the masses,'' he wrote. 
''Why did Public Security want to torture me like this?
I want justice.''
So did his fellow villagers in Sanchawan. 
But they needed someone willing to fight for them.
They found him in a cave.
Petitioning the Government
Liu Zhandou, 57, is an old unreconstructed Maoist whose fervor led him to change his name during the Cultural Revolution in the 1960's. 
He took the given name Zhandou, which means struggle. 
He lives about four hours east of Yulin, in a traditional cave dwelling. 
He and his wife stack potatoes inside for winter and share a heated brick bed, called a kang. 
They have a small, battered television with an antenna that they keep protected inside a red velour cover.
Mr. Liu, a farmer, grows dates that he sells once a year in the provincial capital, Xian. 
He earned a populist reputation across northern Shaanxi Province after leading a tax revolt in the late 1990's against local officials. 
He even won a seat in his township's people's congress, without the endorsement of the Communist Party.
In June 2003, Mr. Liu met with Sanchawan farmers and took up their cause. 
He has no legal training, though his high school education puts him above most farmers. 
He still wears a Mao button on his jacket and says local governments that seize land are no different from the corrupt landlords and officials of the Nationalist government in the pre-Communist era.
''It was so flagrant,'' he said of the seizure of the Xisha land. 
''They bought the land so cheaply and sold out for such a high price. 
They also violated the lawful rights of the farmers.''
Mr. Liu told the farmers they had no chance in Yulin. 
They needed to go to Beijing.
It is the path followed by hundreds of thousands of desperate peasants every year. 
They carry receipts, legal rulings or medical records -- any paper trail to prove they were wronged.
Mr. Liu went twice with small groups of Sanchawan farmers, first in October 2003 to visit government petition offices. 
The petition system traces its roots to China's imperial past, when it held out the promise of an audience with the central bureaucracy. 
Now it is the main official channel for popular dissent in China's authoritarian political system.
Mr. Liu helped the farmers assemble documents and draft petitions. 
Most of the older farmers had no more than a few years of schooling. 
Some signed official papers with thumbprints. 
One resourceful farmer narrated a CD-ROM that was presented with the petitions.
The October trip felt like a success at first. 
Petition officials promised that the case was being reviewed. 
But not in Beijing, it turned out.
''They sent it back to the local officials and nothing happened,'' Mr. Liu said. 
''Local officials claimed nothing was wrong.''
It had been an exercise in paper shuffling. 
The Sanchawan farmers had learned what other petitioners eventually learn: Beijing officials usually turn over grievances to the same local officials who are the cause of them. 
A recent study found that only 0.2 percent of petitioners receive any redress.
Even so, Mr. Liu returned to Beijing in December, this time with Gao Lading.
Mr. Gao, 63, had been a Communist Party member for decades. 
A lifelong farmer, he had enemies in Sanchawan because of his quick temper. 
But his brash nature made him a natural protester.
''He just couldn't stand seeing the officials taking advantage of farmers,'' Mr. Liu said of Mr. Gao. ''He says what's on his mind.''
Mr. Gao's impatience was evident in a petition he helped write for the trip. 
''The villagers are now as anxious as ants on a hot stove,'' the petition read. 
''Our suffering is too great. 
If the central leadership doesn't solve our problems after this visit to Beijing, more than 1,000 villagers will come to Beijing.''
Mr. Liu and Mr. Gao went to the Ministry of Land Resources in the hope of presenting the petition directly to the minister. 
But a guard instructed them to send it by express mail.
A bit naively, the farmers believed that might work. 
At the post office, they had what they considered a stroke of luck. 
A clerk who had once worked in Shaanxi Province recognized their accents and offered to hand their petition to a friend at one of Beijing's biggest petitions offices.
Mr. Liu and Mr. Gao left Beijing. 
Like peasants for centuries, they had come seeking an official audience. 
They had gotten a postal clerk.
Eventually a letter arrived from the clerk. 
He wrote that his friend could not help but had suggested that the farmers give gifts to Yulin officials or buy them expensive dinners. 
This was the best way to get anything done in China, he said.
Mr. Liu last saw the farmers in February. 
In Yulin, he met with two Sanchawan villagers who worried that their efforts had been futile. 
Trying to buck up their spirits, he bought them copies of ''An Investigation of China's Farmers,'' a best-selling expose of poverty and exploitation in the countryside. 
(Weeks later, the book would be banned.)
''I told them they should both read it, because if farmers want to solve their problems, they need to speak out for themselves.''
A Protest Is Broken
March is planting season for the villages along the Yuxi River. 
But early this year, development zone officials annexed more land from Sanchawan, this time a strip of prime cropland. 
Farmers decided to protest by leaving their remaining fields untilled. 
They would survive by eating from the village grain reserves.
The refusal to plant was provocative. 
Officials are held responsible for local production and Beijing had declared grain output a priority this year. 
Villagers also began a new wave of sit-ins to disrupt construction on the work site.
''They said they wouldn't leave or begin farming until the provincial governor came to hear their complaint,'' said one woman whose husband participated in the protests. 
''But that didn't happen. 
Instead, officials began arresting people.''
Furious at the arrests, hundreds of villagers occupied the village government office in April. 
At first, the protesters barred village officials from entering. 
But soon they allowed them back in as the sit-in continued. 
Relatives would come and go, bringing food and supplies, but protesters like Gao Lading remained inside.
By now, Mr. Gao had emerged as the outspoken leader. 
At one point in April, villagers say police officers tried to storm the compound and arrest him. 
Other farmers warded them off. 
The compound became his safe house.
''We knew the police were trying to arrest him,'' said a woman surnamed Yang who took part in the sit-in. 
''We went to the compound to protect each other from arrest, in particular to protect him.''
Villagers say Yulin officials initially tried to negotiate an end to the sit-in. 
They gave the farmers $120 each. 
Villagers, considering it a bribe, took the money but refused to leave. 
After five months, on the morning of Oct. 
4, the paramilitary police surrounded the village. 
Villagers counted as many as 2,000 officers.
The attack was fierce. 
One man struck by a tear gas canister lost an eye. 
Hundreds of people were hospitalized, scores with serious injuries from the rubber bullets. 
Mrs. Yang has a long scar on her leg where she was hit. 
Leaders like Mr. Gao were arrested.
The assault broke the protests. 
Mr. Gao and others remain in jail on charges of obstructing public affairs. 
Officials ordered workers to paint slogans on village walls telling farmers to obey the government. 
Farmers also were ordered to begin preparing their fields for next spring's planting.
''Nobody will dare protest now,'' one woman said. 
''Everybody is afraid.''
At the development zone here in November, construction crews were busy. 
Landscapers had begun planting bushes.
Yulin officials are marketing the zone as a new city. 
An October article in a state-controlled magazine, The Chinese Times, described plans for chemical and energy plants, a new school and new apartments -- though with price tags too high for Sanchawan's farmers.
Jiang Guozhang, director of the authority that oversees the development zone, promised potential investors that the Yulin zone would be ''an industrial pearl.''
He even quoted the zone's motto:
''You invest, I service,'' Mr. Jiang said. 
''You get rich, I develop.''
The Great Divide
Articles in this series are examining the widening gap between the rural poor and urban rich that has made China, the world's fastest-growing economy, also one of its most unequal societies. 
The first four articles, an audio report by Jim Yardley and additional photographs are online at nytimes.com/world.
