
When the Federal Reserve raises interest rates from the lowest level in more than four decades, a move expected on Wednesday, the news will flash through trading floors and finance ministries overseas with the same fanfare as in the United States.
Given the vast influence that American monetary policy exerts on the rest of the world, central bankers from Frankfurt to Tokyo will face the question of how best to adapt their own policies to the Fed's new stance. 
For most, the answer will be not at all, at least in the short run.
By starting its campaign to wean Americans off a diet of easy money, the Fed will, in fact, ease the pressure on other central bankers. 
Most will happily accept the favor.
A Fed move would narrow the gap in interest rates between the United States and the 12 nations using the euro currency, and could stabilize the dollar and take the steam out of the euro, one of Europe's more frustrating recent economic problems.
''Alan Greenspan will get a lot of applause in Frankfurt,'' said Holger Schmieding, an economist at Bank of America in London. 
''The U.S. is reducing the risk of what Europe fears most.''
That makes it easier for Jean-Claude Trichet and other leaders of the European Central Bank, which meets here on Thursday, a day after the Fed, to leave its key short-term rate unchanged at 2 percent.
The Bank of Japan and other Asian central banks are not likely to budge, either. 
Even in China, where the sizzling economy makes the case for a rate increase the strongest, officials may balk at following the Federal Reserve's move with their own.
The Bank of England may feel no need to follow the Fed because it got there first, with rate increases in November and February intended to rein in inflation. 
Critics say the Fed has been less a trailblazer than a slowpoke.
''The Fed is still the cornerstone,'' said Norbert Walter, chief economist of Deutsche Bank, who views the rate increase expected Wednesday as overdue. 
''But you don't always need to follow the cornerstone.''
The reluctance in Europe to raise interest rates stems in part from the mixed signals the economy has been sending. 
With worries about inflation popping up one week, followed by worries about a relapse of German economic stagnation the next, standing pat seems the wisest course to bankers here.
Though it has tempered recently, the rise in the value of the euro against the dollar has fed fears that European exports will be priced out of foreign markets, stalling economic recovery. 
Earlier in the year, the European Central Bank resisted intense pressure to cut rates, which are at their lowest since World War II.
A dollar that is stable rather than sinking would also be a big help to central banks in Japan and Southeast Asia, reducing the need for them to intervene in foreign exchange markets to keep their currencies from strengthening too much. 
As major exporters to the United States, these Asian countries worry about losing their competitive advantage, especially to China, whose currency is linked to the dollar.
Booming exports have helped them grow robustly. 
As in Europe, though, the humming export machine is not always matched by strong domestic consumption.
Inflation is of less concern in Asia, especially in Japan, where deflation has presented real worries. 
But higher interest rates in the United States may reduce the demand for goods exported from Japan and elsewhere in Asia in the coming months, which would slow those economies.
Faced with these factors, few economists expect the Japanese central bank to deviate from its policy of keeping short-term rates close to zero, although they do not rule out the possibility that countries like Indonesia that have experienced some inflation may in time have to follow a Fed move, perhaps a few months from now.
''We have no problem in Asia because we have large current account and trade surpluses,'' said Marc Faber, a money manager based in Hong Kong. 
''We don't have the bubbles we had in the 1990's.''
China, though, is a special case. 
With torrid economic growth, exploding credit and mounting inflation, it has been nurturing a potentially treacherous economic bubble, in the view of many economists.
The Chinese government has had some success tamping down the growth rate by cutting back the supply of credit using measures like higher reserve requirements for banks. 
Still, some economists argue that unless China raises interest rates, too, it will leave the door open to future bubbles. 
With inflation of at least 5 percent, and interest on savings deposits just 0.8 percent, the environment remains ripe for overinvestment, particularly in real estate.
''While it may take a while, China must increase rates as the Fed does,'' Andy Xie, the China economist at Morgan Stanley in Hong Kong, said in a note to clients. 
''Otherwise, China would face a liquidity shortage, leading to a black market for credit and destabilizing the economy.''
The notion of higher interest rates has met resistance in China -- in part because of the upward pressure that it would put on China's currency, the yuan, which is linked to the dollar at a rate that is widely to be considered artificially low.
But just as a rate increase by the Federal Reserve might help Europeans by shoring up the dollar against the euro, it could also help the Chinese by making it easier for them to allow their currency to drift upward.
''China needs to tighten,'' said Dong Tao, an economist at Credit Suisse in Hong Kong. 
''Now, with the Fed tightening,'' and the yuan's value tied the dollar's, ''they can move on interest rates as well.''
Other analysts of China are more skeptical, noting that interest rates there mean little in a economy where much lending is still done on the basis of personal and political connections rather than creditworthiness.
''The reality is that China is going to use administrative and quantitative methods to cool down its economy,'' rather than changing rates, said Simon Ogus, chairman of DSG, an investment research firm in Hong Kong. 
''The irony of China tightening is that the worst guys would continue to get credit.''
If China is still at risk of overheating, Europe remains fearful that it will go cold. 
The Continent's recovery is now basically on track, most economists say, with growth expected to reach 2 percent this year. 
Yet there are occasional wobbles, like the most recent Ifo Institute survey in Germany, which recorded an unexpected plunge in business confidence in June.
Mr. Schmieding argued that the survey reflected temporary concerns about the spike in oil prices, although retail sales and broader consumer spending in Germany also remain weak. 
''I would take it as a sign that the European recovery is fragile,'' he said. 
''This will make the E.C.B. very cautious.''
The program of rate moves that some Fed watchers expect -- four increases of one-quarter point each between now and the end of the year -- would suit the European Central Bank fine, according to Ulrich Ramm, chief economist at Commerzbank in Frankfurt. 
By December, he said, benchmark short-term interest rates in Europe and the United States will have converged at 2 percent, and the Europeans can then act.
A move by the Federal Reserve on Wednesday may yet kick off a round of ''global monetary tightening,'' as Goldman Sachs declared in a new report. 
But for Europe, it said, this will be a quiet summer.
