
During the cold war, the State Department called on the Harlem Globetrotters to travel as good-will ambassadors to counter hostile images of America around the world. 
During the Cuban missile crisis, the New York City Ballet was sent to perform in Moscow, where it was received enthusiastically.
And during these troubled times?
America's newest good-will ambassador is Michelle Kwan, the figure skater, who, in the words of her new boss, Karen P. Hughes, the under secretary of state for public diplomacy, ''combines the power of sports diplomacy with the personal appeal of a unique American story.''
On Thursday, flanked by Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice and Ms. Hughes, Ms. Kwan, 26, addressed reporters, giving the group a taste of what she would be telling the youth of the world.
She said she planned to share with young people, among other ideas, ''In the reality of life, it's not always smooth sailing, and sometimes you have to pick yourself up and keep on going.''
While many of the public diplomacy efforts by the United States in the past few years have been directed toward the Muslim world, it was unclear on Thursday whether Ms. Kwan would be sent to Iraq or Afghanistan. 
Ms. Kwan, who is of Chinese descent, said her first trip would likely be early next year, to Beijing.
''I've always wanted to somehow serve our country and to contribute and to make a difference,'' she said.
Afterward, reporters crowded around her with questions. 
''You said you'd like to share some of the values America represents with the world. 
What are those values?'' one asked.
Ms. Kwan talked about the importance of setting goals and taking life as it comes. 
She also mentioned that she wanted to empower women. 
She said the idea of her becoming the United States public diplomacy envoy -- her new title -- came up in April when she met Ms. Rice at a dinner in Washington for President Hu Jintao of China. 
When Ms. Kwan mentioned that she would be attending the University of Denver, Ms. Rice, a Denver alumna and former competitive figure skater herself, ''just lit up,'' Ms. Kwan said.
One reporter asked Ms. Kwan how she planned to deal with the hostility that she might meet as the public face of America. 
Ms. Kwan quickly showed that she was already familiar with the advice, contained in a memorandum from Ms. Hughes, recently published in The Washington Post, that advised State Department employees to hew to government policy while talking to the news media.
''I'm not here to talk about my political views,'' Ms. Kwan demurred. 
''I'm here to promote America. 
This is a place where anything is possible.''
