
First things first: the name. 
It's pronounced CHEE-na, like Sheena (of the Jungle), Gina (Lollobrigida), Tina (Sinatra). 
Not CHY-nuh, like the country on her birth certificate. 
Truth be told, China Machado -- 60's supermodel, the Western world's first non-Caucasian cover girl, survivor of the publishing debacle that was Lear's magazine -- invented her celebrated moniker by defiantly embracing the first two syllables of a very clearly remembered childhood slur. 
Chinita, little China girl, was what Buenos Aires's curbside Lotharios called her as she made her way across town to the nuns at the Convent of the Sacred Heart.
"Chinita is what they called any girl with slanting eyes," Machado says, settling into a rattan sofa in her shingled house in North Haven, near Sag Harbor, N.Y., her lean, lanky frame tucking into itself like an ivory yardstick. 
Diana Vreeland, every bit George W. Bush's equal when it came to bestowing nicknames, called her Golden Bones. 
Her real name is Noelie, because she was born on Christmas Day, "but when I started modeling in Paris, I had to come up with something different."
After all, Noelie Dasouza Machado had already embarrassed her proper Catholic family enough when she ended up on the arm of Luis Miguel Dominguin -- a fabled bullfighter and Picasso pal, the kind of guy other men wanted to be and their wives wanted to be with. 
"It was like I'd run off with Mick Jagger," she says of the resulting furor. 
The couple's unwedded bliss didn't last, and neither did her love affair with the screen star William Holden, but the damage was done. 
("That's not a period I'm ready to talk about.") Frederico Machado didn't talk to his only daughter for 15 years.
Pride had a lot to do with it. 
The Machados were pillars of Shanghai's Portuguese community. 
Sepia-tone snapshots tell a privileged tale that's Merchant Ivory by way of Marguerite Duras: tennis whites, uniformed nursemaids, cocktails at the luxe Lusitano Club. 
The family's apartment in the city's tony French Concession was crammed with wood furniture carved like petrified lace. 
The money fueling it all came courtesy of a boat-captain grandfather with a nasty temper and a crippled leg, the result of an unexplained gunshot wound. 
"He shipped cotton," his granddaughter says. 
"Maybe opium, too. 
Who knows?"
When Mao Zedong's forces moved into town in the 1940's, Frederico Machado packed up his wife and three children and sailed to Argentina. 
"Leave China to the Chinese," he said, certain that the Machados' mixmaster roots -- Chinese, Portuguese and perhaps a dollop of East Indian by way of Goa -- wouldn't mesh with the newly Sinocentric Shanghai. 
"We're neither fish nor fowl."
The tangled DNA that led her parents to hit the road is what made China Machado an international sensation. 
Splashed across a full page in Harper's Bazaar, in February 1959, her face upended the status quo. 
The imperious cheekbones, Bambi eyes and plush mouth that Richard Avedon put to film betrayed an ethnicity that Hearst's white-bread readers couldn't quite put their manicured finger on, much less identify with.
Depending on the amount of eyeliner involved, China Machado could morph from chinoiserie temptress to proto-Cher to Angela Bassett's first cousin. 
Not that anyone really knew quite what to do with her or that signature snow-white forelock. 
Much of the time, the fashion world's singular sensation ended up in vaguely Suzy Wong drag, banked with bamboo, Madame Butterfly in Balenciaga.
"It was a different time," she says with a no-nonsense shrug. 
"Today, I would have made a fortune."
Still, Avedon knew a star was born. 
Golden Bones, he once told a reporter, is "the most beautiful woman in the world."
Correction. Machado pulls out an album. 
Inside is an article describing her leap from fashion icon to fashion director of Harper's Bazaar in the mid-60's, and there's Avedon's paean in black and white. 
"Probably the most beautiful woman in the world,' is what Dick actually said."
She rolls her eyes, laughing. 
"Can you believe that?
I certainly didn't. 
Not then, not now."
Of course, she was flattered. 
Who wouldn't be?
But her old friend's praise didn't go to her head. 
About two years after that groundbreaking photo, Machado gave up professional posing.
"It was just a job," she explains. 
"It paid the bills."
In addition, "I get bored very easily."
Bored but creative. 
She's been an editor, a stylist, an actress, a television producer, a designer of hand-knit sweaters, owner of a funky general store, caterer and painter of curious landscapes and street scenes, often framed by open windows. 
Blame that inside-looking-out leitmotif on her amorphous place of origin. 
Shanghai was "half Oriental, half Occidental; half land, half water; neither a colony nor wholly belonging to China; inhabited by the citizens of every nation in the world but ruled by none," the author Stella Dong wrote in her history of the city. 
Territorial law meant that Machado was Portuguese from birth, she says, but: "I have no nationality, no country. 
I need shelter."
Actually, she seems to have found it. 
Her office is hung with snapshots of her daughters, Blanche and Emmanuelle -- by her ex-husband, the actor Martin La Salle -- and her grandsons, Malcolm and Montgomery. 
Riccardo Rosa, who works in the export business, has been by her side for the last 23 years, and now she's got Cha-Cha, a French-bulldog puppy with a taste for telephone cords. 
And, yes, there are more projects ahead. 
But first she must finish her cookbook about the East-meets-West cuisine of her childhood, spicy-hot dishes that she concocts for pals like the publishing executive Jason Epstein and the saloon keeper Elaine Kaufman: arroz gordo, tripe Nicoise, chicken with cloves, Chinese mushrooms and Thai herbs. 
"Four hundred recipes already," she sighs, patting the flanks of a bulging three-ring binder. 
"My agent says I have to cut a few."
As for modeling, it holds not one ounce of allure. 
For one thing, it can be damned uncomfortable. 
"I'm a senior citizen, for God's sake!"
Machado protests in mock indignation as she is coaxed onto the rocky beach outside her house for this salute.
The lady doth protest too much. 
Maturity never looked so good.
