
The parade yesterday in Flushing, Queens, was not for the fainthearted. 
Eric Yum, 13, lay on the frigid street, his shirt pulled up to expose his belly. 
A huge radish was positioned above his navel. 
Another was balanced under his chin.
His father, Ildo Yum, hovered overhead with a shiny sword. 
Mr. Yum was still spitting a bit, having just finished shooting six-foot flames from his mouth, but his concentration was intense nonetheless.
At the blink of an eye, perhaps two, the radishes were sliced in half and Eric was back on his feet.
"Don't try this stunt at home," a parade organizer said from a nearby viewing stand, tantalizing the crowd. 
Oooooh. Aaaaah. 
The crowd was pleased.
The annual Lunar New Year Parade in Flushing, home to one of the city's biggest Asian communities, was full of theatrics yesterday. 
Not all of the drama, however, was of Mr. Yum's variety.
The parade, like so many things in New York's mixed immigrant communities, was the source of great debate, bruised egos and geopolitical jockeying.
The mainland Chinese in Flushing were angry at the Taiwanese for dominating the parade. 
The Taiwanese, in turn, were angry at the Chinese for bringing politics to the event.
One group of Koreans was not speaking to another group of Koreans because of competing claims over which group should have been granted the official parade permit. 
Followers of Falun Gong, a spiritual movement banned in China, were annoyed with the Chinese, who tried to keep them out of the lineup (apparently with the active encouragement of Chinese diplomats across the East River in Manhattan).
At the front of the parade, the grand marshal's sash draped over her heavy winter coat, was Claire Shulman, the Queens borough president. 
Several community leaders in Flushing said they found Mrs. Shulman an odd choice to lead the year's biggest Asian celebration, but there was apparently no way to reach agreement on anyone else.
"It kind of defeats the purpose of this being a Chinese community event, but we are telling people that the key to this parade is not all of the silly political dignitaries but having fun," said Bor-Cheng Hsu, a board member of the local chapter of the Taiwanese Association of America, which had a big contingent of marchers. 
"Everyone says this parade is about harmony among all of the Asian groups. 
This is very funny harmony -- not harmony at all."
Janet Xiong, among the leaders of the Falun Gong practitioners in Flushing, said she found out only days ago that her group would be allowed in the parade. 
Strict conditions were placed on their participation. 
They were not allowed to practice their slow-motion exercises along the parade route and were banned from distributing literature. 
If not for its large banners, the group would have been indistinguishable from the other community organizations that spilled across Main Street.
"It is not ideal, but we are cooperating because this is a holiday," Ms. Xiong said. 
"We are here to celebrate with everyone."
The police estimated that more than 8,000 people crowded along the parade route, which began on Main Street and slithered like a snake through the downtown. 
It was largely a local affair, with senior citizen groups, small merchants and civic organizations from Flushing and nearby communities packing the lineup. 
But as is the tradition in Asian New Year celebrations (this is the year 4699 in China and Taiwan, known as the Year of the Snake), there were also colorful dancers, marching bands and other performers.
About 100 members of Yee's Hung Ga Kung Fu Academy, dressed in bright yellow sweatshirts, danced with a streaming dragon that extended the length of a block.
They also carried a towering lion that reached menacingly toward second-story windows, a banner proclaiming "Happy New Year" hanging from its mouth.
"He is really into this," said Rich Bernstein, a middle-school teacher from Rockland County, as his 2-year-old son pointed at the passing extravaganza. 
Mr. Bernstein adopted the boy, Daniel, from China and wanted him to see a Chinese celebration. 
A friend from his class for adoptive parents, Jayne Hirsch, leaned over the wooden police barrier with her 2-year-old, Rebecca, also from China and also clearly enjoying the show.
Ms. Hirsch, a computer consultant from Westbury, on Long Island, said she had heard about the political jockeying going on behind the scenes at the parade, but she was determined not to let it ruin the importance of the event.
"It is a lot of foolishness," she said. 
"The parade is wonderful. 
This is the second year we have come. 
It is for the people. 
Politics doesn't belong here."
Joana and Casey Donaher brought their three children all the way from Boston to visit their grandmother and see the parade. 
Mrs. Donaher grew up in Flushing, where her mother, Maryanne Liu, has lived for 25 years. 
Mrs. Liu still cannot believe it sometimes when she looks at Main Street in Flushing and sees an Asian parade, she said, rocking her year-old grandson in a stroller.
When she arrived in Flushing, she said, there were relatively few Chinese people. 
The community eventually became heavily populated by the Chinese, but more recently, she said, the Chinese have been displaced by other Asians like Koreans, Vietnamese and Cambodians.
As she spoke, eight dancers from the Swingers Junkanoo Group passed in snow-white costumes and hats that looked like lamp shades. 
Mrs. Liu said she had never seen the dancers before, but then it is hard to keep up with the changing face of Flushing. 
Someone nearby said the group looked like it belonged in a Mardi Gras parade, not a Lunar New Year celebration.
"It is true," said Anthony Williams, the group's leader. 
"We are visiting from the Bahamas."
