
The authorities here moved Wednesday to prosecute the Beijing-appointed executives of the fuel trader China Aviation Oil of Singapore over an investigation into its collapse last year after $550 million in derivatives losses.
On Wednesday, the police rearrested the former chief executive of China Aviation, Chen Jiulin, along with four other top executives, saying they would appear in court on Thursday morning to hear the charges against them. 
Mr. Chen had been free on bail in Singapore since his previous arrest in December.
As the executives were being detained by the Singapore police department's white-collar crimes unit, the company's creditors met and approved a sweetened offer on restructuring the company's debt.
Police declined to describe exactly what charges would be filed, but China Aviation said that Mr. Chen, whom it suspended as chief executive after the company's collapse in November, faced 15 charges, including accusations of criminal activity and violations of Singapore's securities and corporate law. 
News reports here said that the charges were likely to focus on insider trading, disclosure violations and forgery.
Along with Mr. Chen, police said those arrested included China Aviation's chairman, Jia Changbin; its former head of finance, Peter Lim; a company director who heads China Aviation's restructuring team, Gu Yanfei; and another Beijing-appointed director, Li Yongji.
Mr. Jia is also president of China Aviation's government-controlled parent, China Aviation Oil Holding, and Ms. Gu is its general manager. 
In addition to being the Singapore company's largest shareholder and creditor, China Aviation Oil Holding supplied six of the subsidiary's nine directors.
Two reports by the accounting firm PricewaterhouseCoopers, which Singapore authorities assigned to investigate the company's collapse, provided details about what went wrong at the company.
In its second report, issued last Friday, investigators blamed Mr. Chen for committing the company to its disastrous trading strategy and then concealing its losses, saying evidence suggested that he had been motivated by personal ambition and ''a need to surpass his past achievements as C.E.O.''
Before its collapse, China Aviation was responsible for filling virtually all of China's jet fuel requirements. 
China Aviation first began trading oil-related derivatives to hedge its jet-fuel purchases against fluctuations in the price of oil, but moved to using the derivatives to bet on market trends, the report said.
China Aviation never altered its risk management rules to reflect this more aggressive derivatives trading strategy, but traders exceeded even the company's existing limits on such trades. 
The report described the company's handling of the trades as a ''grave failure of controls.''
''They essentially got into trouble. 
They took a position and rather than follow their own rules, they chose to ignore them,'' said Chris Sanda, an analyst at the Singapore brokerage, DBS Vickers.
The company said Wednesday that creditors representing $539 million, or 97 percent of its debt, had voted to accept a restructuring plan proposed in May, when China Aviation offered to pay them $275 million over five years. 
It needed creditors representing at least 75 percent of its debt to accept the plan.
In January, China Aviation offered to pay $220 million over eight years to settle with creditors.
The scandal surrounding China Aviation is the biggest here since Nicholas W. Leeson brought down Barings Bank in 1995. 
Analysts say the case highlights the risks of investing in Chinese companies wherever they list, given the country's poor culture of transparency and corporate governance.
