
Paul Krugman responds to readers’ comments on his May 14 column, “Divided Over Trade.”
Paul Dorell, Highland Park, Ill.: I agree that free trade should be encouraged despite the hardship that it causes for some segments of the population. 
You conclude that U.S. workers whose incomes are declining due to low-wage competition from developing nations should be aided by domestic programs paid for by taxing the economy’s winners. 
Who are the winners who ought to pick up the tab?
Now that it looks as if the Democrats will win the White House in 2008, I’m sure many candidates are seeking pundits with palatable tax increase ideas. 
What are your thoughts on the relative merits of increases in corporate taxes, estate taxes, capital gains taxes and income taxes?
Should the mega-wealthy top one-tenth of one percent be paying more?
We’re going to need increased tax revenues regardless because of the enormous deficit.
Paul Krugman: Definitely higher top income tax brackets, and higher taxes on dividends and capital gains — back to 2000 levels for everyone with an income over $200,000, roughly. 
That’s actually a lot of money.
A. Aneesh, Santa Fe, N.M.: All your analysis seems to assume that there is no exchange rate effect i.e., currency speculation as well as other more direct measures at currency controls, including petro-dollars. 
The reason why goods from the so-called third world are cheaper may relate more to this currency differential, which also leads to a higher than necessary wage differential and labor standards will not have much effect there. 
Currency markets participate in social perceptions of a place, and can never accurately reflect the worth of an economy. 
What are you thoughts about it?
Paul Krugman: I blame 700-word limitations. 
The pressure from China is greater because of the undervalued yuan. 
However, even with a big rise in China’s currency, wages there would still be only 4 percent of U.S. levels, so currency issues are only a small part of the story.
John Jones, Waynesville, N.C.: Universal health insurance, although a necessity, is not going to be an adequate substitute for jobs for most Americans. 
Neither is a push for higher educational standards. 
As long as there a huge disparity in wages between the developed world, and what is more important for this discussion, the U.S., the loss of jobs will continue and the corporate vultures will continue to circle the globe, moving their industries anytime the wage differential is sufficiently great to make it profitable.
There is no painless solution but in the final analysis the U.S. must, and will, protect its workers with a system of trade barriers. 
We will not wait until our wage base is finally equal to that of the underdeveloped nations. 
This would be political suicide and a democracy will not stand for that. 
We must have protective tariffs that allow import goods to sell for a somewhat lower price such that price will not be the sole determinant that quality and nationalism will be able to overrule price alone. 
Then the U.S. must lead the world in seeking ways for the underdeveloped nations of the world to increase their living standards and manufacturer goods for home consumption.
The other side of the coin is that our standard of living will, of necessity, decline as we pay higher prices for goods manufactured in American companies which, in addition to goods, will produce jobs for Americans so the average American, who will never have his or her Ph.D., can work hard for a living wage. 
It will be some time for economists to come to grips with this they have, after all, been preaching for years that the rising tide raises all boats, but now that our boat shows signs of beaching on the shore, they will have to adjust their economic theories.
Paul Krugman: I don’t agree — health insurance would, by itself, do more for the bottom third of American workers than even the most extreme protectionist policy. 
I’m trying to be realistic about the downside of trade, but you also have to be realistic about the limits of trade policy — and the cost of a world of closed markets.
Giles D’Souza, Tuscaloosa, Ala.: Very perceptive article. 
I agree that universal healthcare will go a long way to helping the less well off in our society, but improvements in education cannot be far behind.
By the way, I’d like to know what the calculus is for saying that cheaper goods at Wal-Mart are not adequate compensation. 
Especially, since unemployment levels do not seem to be affected. 
I’m sure your readers would like to know.
Also, is the net loss of those losing out from free trade equal to the gain of those who win out?
If the winnings are greater, not a zero-sum game, then surely there is some basis for enacting policies that benefit those that lose from free trade. 
If the Democrats are to prevail, perhaps they should have a comprehensive negotiating strategy with the Republicans, where what they give with the right hand they take back with the left.
Paul Krugman: The note I posted on Times Select explains why lower prices aren’t sufficient compensation. 
It’s even got a pretentious-sounding name — the Stolper-Samuelson theorem. 
Wages of the losers fall more than import prices; the overall cost of living falls less than import prices.
Carole Cheskin, Neptune, N.J.: Your column about the dark side of free trade agreements was an interesting analysis. 
Does the large number of illegal immigrants in this country have a similar effect on the wages of Americans in such jobs as construction and landscaping or is this a false argument made by those who open borders?
Paul Krugman: There’s a serious debate about the effect of immigration, but I’m generally more convinced by the argument that it does reduce wages of native-born workers — although it’s a huge wage increase for the immigrants.
Martin Fallon, Naples, Fla.: A plan to mitigate lower wages in the United States has always been to provide enough education to help blue-collar workers transition to the service and technical sectors. 
In the meantime, the widening gap between the haves and those with significantly less would seem to require creative interventions that are downright anti-Republican. 
Universal health insurance and child care would be a start. 
A return to settlement houses dispensing information on all services, helping immigrants, a central place, city and country, for folks to get necessary support would be a cost-effective, humane method to get help and provide a data base for future needs assessments. 
To survive the transition to a global economy, this country must admit its inherent flaws and commit to providing intervening support to those most hurt. 
The savings in reducing prison populations and cutting back the chronic-care explosion would justify the additional line items, and their expense. 
It would require vision beyond fiscal and election-year anxieties.
Paul Krugman: Education isn’t an answer for 40+-year-old workers, and may not do the trick in any case. 
So yes, a lot of other initiatives.
JimBoB, Encino, Calif.: Before we throw our hands up, let’s at least talk about a value-added tax that levels the playing field a little bit for our workers. 
Instead of paying for Medicare and Social Security through the payroll tax — a tax which isn’t paid by foreign workers even into their own accounts which don’t exist, much less into the U.S. pool. 
If we levy a tax on all sales including those of imported goods, then both imports and homemade products are in essence paying the same tax having their price raised by that same percentage thus competing more honestly with each other. 
This is no panacea, but it takes out one large element of inequality, an unfair advantage enjoyed by imports.
Paul Krugman: This could get us deep into the weeds; but a value-added tax is just a sales tax that’s rebated on exports; basically it reduces the purchasing power of U.S. wages, end of story. 
The payroll tax, pretty surely, has just about the same effect, since it ends up being offset by lower wages.
Jonathan Bernstein, Naperville, Ill.: So you are admitting that, under current conditions, free trade can’t be said decisively to make all parties better off. 
The current rationalization for free trade, then, is that it is a way to transfer wealth from rich countries to poor countries. 
But that isn’t how it was originally sold to the public. 
This is dishonest to say the least.
Furthermore, a wholesale transfer of our industrial base to rising Asian countries, and a secular decline in the dollar make for a weaker America. 
Is that what we really want?
And do we want anything in return?
We need to discuss oil trade and the need for a policy of energy efficiency for any trade policy to make complete sense.
These are topics that deserve full and honest discussion, not a weakening of the country by default as we continue to flail for reasons to continue to worship at the free trade altar.
Paul Krugman: It was never honest to say that free trade makes everyone better off. 
However, the winners aren’t foreigners at the expense of Americans; it’s some Americans at the expense of other Americans. 
If you’re college-educated, or have a lot of investment income, you’re probably a winner from trade. 
(Yes, some highly educated workers have seen their jobs outsourced, but on average the educated have gained.) Overall, the U.S. economy is richer. 
Unfortunately, the losers tend to be poorer Americans, which is why I don’t just stress the increase in G.D.P.
Edward Kuzan, Hamburg, N.Y.: I have been to Europe with my wife a number of times over the past three years, and we have done a lot of shopping there. 
Whether we were in Paris, Lille or Vienna, the shops we visited were stocked almost exclusively with domestic goods. 
From clothing to cheap tourist trinkets, we did not find anything made in China, India, Mexico, Bangladesh or any other third world country.
Living in a suburb of Buffalo, N.Y., we frequently take day-trips to Canada, especially Toronto, and even there, the majority of clothing in mainstream stores is labeled Fabrique au Canada. 
The prices are comparable to what we pay at U.S. retailers like Macy’s, Lord Taylor, etc., and the quality is far superior.
If these industrialized countries can support domestic industries without crippling the economies of the third world, why can’t we?
Paul Krugman: The numbers say that European countries spend almost as much on imports from the third world as we do. 
I’m not sure why that isn’t apparent in the stores.
