
At the Parlex Corporation's factory in the western part of this city, about 500 workers are producing millions of flexible circuit boards that can be used in everything from smart cards and mobile phones to inkjet printers.
Bolstered by China's low-cost manufacturing model, this factory and two sister operations not far from here are showcases for an American company that has otherwise struggled to lower costs back home.
But with the United States Treasury secretary, John W. Snow, in Beijing to press the Chinese government to allow its currency, the yuan or renminbi, to further appreciate against the dollar, Parlex and hundreds of other large manufacturers operating in China once again face the prospect of higher prices for their goods sold abroad, and thus shrinking profit margins.
''If the renminbi continues to appreciate, that could have a significant impact on us,'' said Alan Wong, general manager of Parlex's Shanghai subsidiaries. 
''That's something we really don't want to see.''
Last summer, faced with mounting pressure because of its huge trade surpluses with the rest of the world, China ended its longtime currency peg to the dollar and allowed the renminbi to appreciate by about 2 percent, to settle at 8.1 to the dollar. 
China says the renminbi now floats against a basket of major currencies. 
But since July, the renminbi has barely budged. 
And that has helped renew trade tensions.
Some American officials say the revaluation was too meager to make a difference in global trade. 
Yet the Chinese government has insisted that while currency reform is under way, no one should expect further revaluations in the near future.
Those remarks have helped fan anti-China sentiment in the United States from those who believe Chinese exporters have an unfair trade advantage.
Mr. Snow is leading a delegation that hopes to persuade Chinese officials to ease currency controls. 
The group includes Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman.
Indeed, the United States just reported a $59 billion trade deficit in August. 
And imports from China reached a record $22.4 billion.
But Beijing worries that sharp currency moves could be too much of a shock for the economy, perhaps even forcing companies to lay off workers.
Some economists say China's golden years are already coming to an end for foreign manufacturers here.
''The big question is what will happen over the next few years,'' said Jonathan Anderson, the chief economist in Asia for UBS. 
''Wages and costs are going up in China. 
The economy is already past its peak. 
This is no longer the easy money you had in 2002 and 2003.''
There are fears that if China's currency appreciates markedly, some manufacturers will be forced to raise prices or shift production to other low-cost regions like India or Southeast Asia. 
Multinational companies in China are already drawing up contingency plans.
If the renminbi continues to appreciate, ''it will have a big impact on every company that has an operation in China,'' said Li Shenghai, a finance director at the Samsung Group, which has more than 50,000 employees in China.
The hardest hit are expected to be thousands of companies in China, Hong Kong and Taiwan that are important suppliers to Western companies like Gap, Wal-Mart and Costco.
''This is basically the beginning,'' said Lin Chungyu, a vice chairman for the Taiwanese Business Association in the city of Dongguan, one of China's biggest electronics manufacturing centers. 
Appreciation ''will have a large impact on Taiwanese manufacturers.''
Wall Street economists are forecasting that over the next couple of years, China's currency will continue to rise against the dollar, perhaps as much as 15 percent, making Chinese-made products more costly for Americans and other foreigners to buy. 
For consumers in America and elsewhere, this could mean moderately higher prices for everything from television sets to toys and clothing.
Here in the vibrant Yangtze River Delta region, where production plants hum year-round, manufacturers are worried that the latest currency dispute could further erode their profitability.
Take Parlex, for instance, which exports about 90 percent of the circuit boards it makes in China to Europe, the United States and other parts of Asia.
A Nasdaq-listed maker of circuit boards based in Methuen, Mass., Parlex came to China a decade ago to build a lower-cost factory to make its flexible circuits for automotive and telecommunications companies.
While its American parent has struggled to develop sophisticated circuit boards for the military, the Shanghai subsidiaries have amassed large profits selling to companies that produce consumer electronics.
Parlex, which recently agreed to be acquired by Johnson Electric, a Hong Kong company, has used its low-cost labor force (workers here in Shanghai make less than $1 an hour) to compete with companies from Japan and Taiwan. 
And now, Parlex sells flexible circuit boards, which are used to connect various electronic devices, to companies like Hewlett-Packard and Sony Ericsson.
Last year, the Shanghai subsidiaries were the most profitable divisions of Parlex. 
Naturally, it is worried that those profits could erode. 
One problem is that Parlex borrows much of its working capital -- about $10 million a year -- from local banks in renminbi. 
Wages and overhead costs like water and electricity are also paid for in renminbi, making payments more costly in dollars.
''It won't put us under, but it could hurt,'' said Mr. Wong, 53, who has led operations in Shanghai for nearly a decade. 
''We have to see what our competitors do. 
We might be able to pass a little along to our customers but if we increase our costs we could lose some business.''
