
Japan announced Wednesday that it would allow oil and gas drilling in waters also claimed by China, a move expected to strain diplomatic and economic ties already stretched thin by a series of anti-Japanese protests in Chinese cities.
Japan is to select among oil company bids by mid-July for exploration drilling in a long-disputed, 14,000-square-mile section of the East China Sea, according to Japan's trade ministry.
Although the ministry described the waters as ''the eastern part of the Japan-China boundary,'' China does not accept the line. 
Two weeks ago, Japan accused China of preparing to pump gas this summer from undersea reservoirs that stretch into Japan's exclusive economic zone.
On Wednesday, Japanese officials, including Junichiro Koizumi, the prime minister, stressed to reporters that the new announcement to explore for oil and gas in the area did not come in reaction to the recent anti-Japanese protests.
''It was unfortunate that the decision coincided with incidents which occurred suddenly,'' Shoichi Nakagawa, the trade minister, said.
On Thursday morning, shares in Tokyo fell sharply after the open amid the increased tensions between the two countries.
Two Japanese energy companies, Teikoku Oil and Japan Petroleum Exploration, have expressed interest in exploring blocks in the 14,000-square-mile area that is to be up for bid. 
With the claims overlapping, Beijing has granted Chinese companies oil and gas exploration rights to 12 blocks that infringe on Japan's area, Yomiuri, Japan's leading conservative newspaper, has reported.
Japan's move is ''a serious provocation of China's rights and international norms,'' said Qin Gang, a Chinese foreign ministry spokesman, according to a statement on the foreign ministry Web site Wednesday. 
On Tuesday, Tang Jiaxuan, the Chinese state councilor, told Japan's Kyodo News agency that Japanese exploration drilling would bring further complications and intensify the East China Sea situation, and would fundamentally change the nature of the issue.
In perhaps the worst flare-up since relations were established in 1972, recent mass demonstrations in several Chinese cities protesting Japan's playing down of its World War II atrocities against China turned violent, with some Japanese businesses vandalized. 
A boycott and more demonstrations are planned and Japan's oil and gas announcement will no doubt inflame tensions, analysts said in interviews.
''If real exploration starts, we cannot totally exclude the possibility of Japanese private company ships having to face Chinese military ships,'' said Junichi Abe, a Japan-China research fellow at the Kazankai Foundation, a centrist Tokyo research organization that runs a Chinese language school.
Referring to street protests, he said: ''If the attacks on Japanese businesses and Japanese people increase, it could make some Japanese companies decide to leave China.''
A Chinese Web site, Japanpig.com, is calling for demonstrations this weekend in six cities, including Beijing. 
More protests are scheduled for May and a monthlong boycott of Japanese goods is to start on May 1.
Still, China and Japan are intertwined economically and financially and increasingly dependent on one another for future economic growth, specialists say.
For years, China has been importing huge amounts of machinery, technology and equipment from Japan, imports that are helping to fuel China's economy. 
Last year, China supplanted the United States as Japan's most important trading partner and destination for Japanese investment. 
And Japan's own struggling economy has been kept afloat in part by its exports to China.
''China's economic development is highly dependent on foreign trade,'' said Yang Dongliang, a professor at the Institute of Japan Studies at Nankai University in Tianjin. 
''So unless one day in the future China's economy is strong enough not to rely on foreign trade with other countries, Chinese shouldn't take measures such as boycotting imported products.''
The uprisings and boycotts, he said, could tarnish China's image in the international community and undermine the nation's efforts to become a full-fledged superpower.
Across the disputed waters, in rival territory, Osamu Watanabe, chairman of the Japan External Trade Organization, a government agency, predicted in an interview in Tokyo, ''There will not be major impacts due to the situation.''
''But,'' he said, ''there has been a certain indelible psychological impact.''
Though it is unclear what the long-term effects will be, in the short term, China's hardest-hit sector may be tourism, which benefits from three million Japanese tourists a year. 
By contrast, China last year sent 189,692 tourists to Japan, 5 percent of Japan's total foreign visitors.
It is also possible that the growth in sales of Japanese cars and electronics in China will slow and Japan will have a tougher time winning bids on major infrastructure projects.
With passions so high in China -- Japanese television news, for instance, initially dwelled on a Chinese protest banner, ''Kill all Japanese pigs'' -- Japanese travel to China is expected to fall off, particularly during Japan's April 29 to May 5 ''Golden Week'' holiday.
''We are advising people not to go to the areas where embassies and consulate offices are located,'' Akiko Mitsuhashi, a spokeswoman for the Japan Travel Bureau, the nation's largest travel agency, said. 
Tour cancellations for China are already running at 3 percent.
Japanese businesses are giving similar advice. 
Honda Motor, Toshiba, and Matsushita Electric Industrial have asked employees to cut their travel to China to essential trips.
Last year, Japan's trade with China, excluding Hong Kong, jumped 27 percent, hitting $168 billion. 
This year, it could grow at least 13 percent, exceeding $190 billion, the Japanese trade group predicted in February. 
If trade with Hong Kong is added, both nations enjoyed roughly balanced bilateral trade.
Citing weakening exports, the International Monetary Fund on Wednesday cut its 2005 Japan growth forecast to eight-tenths of a percent, down from 2.6 percent six months ago. 
On Wednesday, Japan's stock indexes fell to their lowest levels in two weeks, partly on weak markets for China-related stocks.
Already, the China Chain Store and Franchise Association, a group responsible for about 10 percent of retail sales in China, has told its members to remove Japanese-made goods from store shelves.
Over the last two weekends, the Aeon Company, a big Japanese supermarket chain, twice closed its Shenzhen store for fear of vandalism by demonstrators. 
On Tuesday, Toshifumi Suzuki, chairman of the Ito-Yokado Company, a retailer in Japan, canceled a trip to China to inaugurate a store in Beijing. 
The store opened Thursday, despite the protests, according to news reports.
Last year, for the first time, China drew more foreign direct investment money from Japan than from North America. 
The $2.7 billion Japan invested in China accounted for almost 15 percent of Japan's overseas investment, up from 1 percent five years earlier.
With 16,000 Japanese companies doing business in China, the blue chips of corporate Japan are trying to lower their profile there, expressing concern at the antipathy while insisting they are there to stay.
The battle is pitched on the global stage, as well. 
After China made it clear it would block Japan's effort to join the United Nations Security Council, Japan pulled together a coalition that blocked China's bid to join the Inter-American Development Bank until at least 2008.
Analysts are pinning their hopes for a cooling of relations on a visit to China on Sunday by Nobutaka Machimura, Japan's foreign minister. 
A second chance may come on April 22 when Mr. Koizumi and Wen Jiabao, the premier of China, are to travel to Bandung, Indonesia, for an Asian and African summit.
Peter Morici, a business professor at the University of Maryland and an expert on international trade, said the Chinese government -- which is usually pragmatic when it comes to economic matters -- was not likely to let relations deteriorate further.
''China needs Japan and Japan needs China, and the leaders in both countries recognize that,'' Professor Morici said. 
''They will find a way to navigate this storm.''
