
WHAT do Brazil, Russia, India and China have in common?
They have the greatest prospects for long-term economic growth among big emerging-market countries, in the view of many analysts, who are bullish about investing in them.
Goldman Sachs calls the four countries the BRIC's, for their first initials, and many analysts say that all four have growing middle classes and improving domestic infrastructures, and are likely to play dominant roles in the global economy.
''The strong growth in these economies should mean good growth in stock returns and currency appreciation over the long term,'' said Dominic Wilson, senior global economist at Goldman Sachs.
For Americans, making a focused investment in all four of these countries isn't easy, or necessarily desirable. 
For one thing, no American mutual fund concentrates on just these four countries, although some firms are considering the possibility. 
Christian Deseglise, product manager for emerging markets at HSBC Asset Management, said his firm had just created an overseas BRIC fund for wealthy European investors and may start an American counterpart soon.
More crucial, though, is that some strategists say it wouldn't be wise to put too much money into these markets. 
Even if the four countries fulfill their economic potential, their domestic stock markets will not necessarily boom.
Over the short term, emerging-market performance doesn't neatly track economic growth. 
Last year, for example, the gross domestic product of Brazil grew by only 5 percent, but its stock market jumped about 30 percent in United States dollar terms. 
And in China, the stock market was virtually flat despite economic growth of 9 percent.
The Brazilian market benefited because it had been so depressed by earlier concerns over the 2002 election of President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva, who some investors feared was unfriendly toward business. 
Concerns about corporate governance in China continue to worry international investors who are still skittish about putting money there.
''There are so many difficult issues for foreign investors in China,'' said Brad Durham, an analyst at Emerging Portfolio Fund Research in Boston. 
He said that foreigners could buy only certain designated shares on Chinese exchanges and that a lack of regulation had led to trading abuses.
For those reasons, he said, making big focused bets is not wise for most investors. 
''Retail investors should not go into single-country stocks,'' he said. 
''They tend to be volatile, and you have to monitor the market regularly.''
Instead, many experts said, the best plan may be to stick to a diversified fund that includes broad exposure to the four major emerging markets, though is not limited to them. 
Jacob Rees-Mogg, who manages the Eaton Vance Emerging Markets fund, says he does not believe that opportunities for investment are any better in the BRIC's than in emerging-market countries in general. 
''There is no reason to exclude the other countries,'' he said. 
His fund's largest country allocation -- 20 percent -- is currently South Korea. 
That is partly because domestic consumption is picking up there, he said, after a huge increase in credit card debt.
Another expert on emerging markets, D.Kirk Henry, who manages the Dreyfus Premier Emerging Markets fund, said that ''many of the big markets in Asia have been dependent on selling to Western markets.''
Mr. Henry added, ''Now we are seeing a shift toward Asia, where domestic consumption is more important.''
The fund gained 22.9 percent a year, on average, over the last three years.
For the future, the BRIC's have great allure. 
Their representation in global equity markets, measured by total capitalization could soar to as much as 10 percent by 2020 from 3.5 percent today, Goldman Sachs estimated. 
But some investors say that it is too risky to move much money into a single market like China. 
Mr. Rees-Mogg, for one, said that his fund had little investment there because of corporate governance problems. 
''In many companies, investors are minority shareholders alongside the government or a family,'' he said. 
''A family-controlled company may decide to diversify into a completely different line of business, for instance. 
And though the government is a better partner, you have to be concerned because only a small percentage of the stocks in many companies actually trades. 
For example, PetroChina is a $100 billion company of which the government owns 90 percent. 
It can decide to issue new stock at any time.''
Whether the investment is in individual stocks or country-specific mutual funds, political developments in emerging markets can have a big impact. 
Consider that the Indian stock market fell 17 percent over two days in May after parliamentary elections permitted the Indian National Congress party to retake power.
Of course, markets can stage quick comebacks. 
Oppenheimer's India Fund, for example, managed by Punita Kumar-Sinha, has averaged a gain of 37.8 percent, annualized, over the last three years. 
It had a surge of 139.3 percent in 2003 and a decline of 20.8 percent in 2001.
Returns of Oppenheimer's Asia Tigers fund, also managed by Ms. Kumar-Sinha, have not been quite as volatile. 
The fund, which is more diversified, has returned 15.9 percent, on average, over the last three years. 
Last year, when the fund was up 10.5 percent, it had about 30 percent of its holdings in South Korea, 10 percent in India and 2.4 percent in China. 
''In India last year we were overweighted in construction, engineering and capital goods,'' she said, adding that the company had positions in Bharat Heavy Electricals and in ABB India, both power-equipment manufacturers.
''In China we liked the consumer sector,'' she said, with holdings in People's Food, largely a pork processing company, and the Want Want Group, a food company whose main product is rice crackers.
SOME analysts are bullish on India. 
Nandita Parker, who runs the Karma Fund, a small hedge fund that invests in Indian stocks and jumped 37 percent last year, said that the economy was expected to sustain economic growth of 6 to 8 percent a year over the next several years, slower than the 8.25 percent growth of last year. 
But Mr. Rees-Mogg has pulled back his fund's holdings in India, he said, because he thought valuations there were too high.
And some analysts say that while the Russian market is now relatively inexpensive, the short-term outlook for stocks is very uncertain, because of the battle between Vladimir V. Putin, the Russian president, and Yukos, the nation's largest oil company. 
Yukos is seeking bankruptcy protection in federal court in Houston, while the Russian government is trying to liquidate it.
Indeed, the volatility of emerging markets can sometimes make investors' stomachs churn. 
That is why diversification in these markets may be a smart move. 
When a market plummets, ''if it is 10 percent of your portfolio, it is annoying; if it is 100 percent, well . . .''
Mr. Rees-Mogg said.
