
SAVVY world travelers collected exotic embroidered wearables before the collapse of China's Qing Dynasty in 1911. 
Some of these costumes and textiles, including lavish dragon robes and lotus foot slippers shipped home to Hartford between 1860 and 1910, are the subjects of "The Forbidden Stitch: Chinese Embroidery" at the Wadsworth Atheneum Museum of Art through Sept. 
9.
"Although they look strange and exotic to us, the robes were worn every day in the emperor's court by the emperor's concubines," said Carol Dean Krute, curator of costume and textiles. 
"What I find so amazing is that this was a civilization in place for 3,000 years. 
And it literally vanished overnight with the Qing Dynasty in 1911, when all of these ceremonial robes became obsolete."
She said inspiration for the exhibition came when "I opened the drawers and said, 'Wow, look at this stuff.'
There was this unbelievable embroidery -- where I encountered the forbidden stitch, the title of the exhibit."
The stitch resembles a minuscule circle with a dimple in its center, formed by winding thread around an embroidery needle three or four times, then plunging it through the middle of the coil and fabric.
"We call it the French knot or the seed stitch," she said. 
"Today, when worked in China, it's called the Peking knot. 
But that is also the forbidden stitch. 
Rumors or misfacts persist that working this stitch made people blind and the government forbade it, which is pure nonsense. 
We think it's named after the Forbidden City. 
And now it is hot!"
The Art Institute of Chicago recently showed Ming and Qing Dynasty robes and the Bruce Museum in Greenwich is showing them through today.
Ms. Krute noted that Frank W. Cheney of the Cheney Silk Mill in Manchester, who bought raw silk in China from 1859 to 1961, and Samuel Colt, the gun manufacturer in Hartford, were independently conducting business in China at the same time.
The exhibit here features uncut robes made in imperial workshops collected by Mr. Cheney and donated in 1949 by his twin daughters, Marjorie and Dorothy.
"Cheney got his hands on them before the final cutting and assembly of the garment," Ms. Krute said, pointing out a dragon robe for a mandarin and a coat for a noblewoman.
The garments are paraded on figures and on textile mounts. 
Symbolism, a part of the design motif, is deciphered. 
All wedding robes are in shades of red, the color of happiness; on one calligraphy characters signify a double long life. 
And on the wedding day, the bride becomes an empress for a day. 
On that one day she is allowed to wear imperial symbols like the phoenix and the dragon.
"We have tons of wonderful textiles still in the basement," Ms. Krute said. 
"The problem with all costume and material exhibits, because of the necessity of light restrictions, is just a tiny fraction can be put on exhibit for a limited time."
The Wadsworth Atheneum Museum of Art, 600 Main Street in Hartford, is open Tuesday through Sunday, 11 a.m. to 5 p.m. and on the first Thursday of most months until 8 p.m. Information: (860) 278-2670.
