
INCHEON, South Korea
WHEN the elevator reached the 17th floor, the doors opened to reveal Lee Chan waiting in the hallway, looking far older than he had last fall, his face creased and sunburned, his entire body, it seemed, shrunken.
Back then, he had emerged as the unofficial leader of dozens of North Korean refugees held at the immigration detention center in Bangkok, Thailand. 
Standing with attitude in a visitation pen filled with detainees from all over Southeast Asia, openly smoking cigarettes he had somehow managed to get, speaking in a cocksure manner, he seemed a natural-born leader. 
He loomed large.
Despite the hardships he had endured in the North and during his escape through China, he also looked younger than a man in his late 30s. 
But the months since his arrival in South Korea last December had changed him. 
He now lived in a place he had never imagined occupying, one of the new, nondescript towns on the periphery of Seoul, dotted with identical white-and-blue high rises.
''I've lost a lot of weight -- it's the stress from living in South Korea,'' Mr. Lee said, shifting uneasily inside his own apartment, which he had furnished sparsely with part of the resettlement money the South Korean government gave to each North Korean arrival.
It was a quiet, sunny Sunday -- his one day off from the water-purifying company where he had recently started working -- but worries were ruffling him. 
He had to pay off the $3,400 he owed the brokers who had smuggled him across China and through the Golden Triangle into Thailand. 
He had to find a way to bring over his 62-year-old mother, who is in hiding in northeast China. 
He had recently broken up with his girlfriend, a North Korean who had shared the journey with him to South Korea and had sustained him during the bleakest moments.
And there was also South Korea, the country he had longed to reach. 
Differences stemming from half a century of a divided peninsula, his telltale accent from the North, a word misused, all these things betrayed him as an outsider. 
He had found, like the 10,000 North Koreans now living in the South and holding South Korean citizenship, that he was not in from the cold, not yet.
''When I think about all the things I have to do here, I'm overwhelmed,'' he said. 
''I feel so small.''
MR. LEE had bought secondhand appliances and furniture for his apartment, though he had made a point of stocking the living room with a new wall unit and flat-screen television. 
His favorite television program was ''Global Talk Show,'' which features single foreign women sharing their experiences of living in South Korea's homogeneous, sometimes disorienting society.
''What they're feeling is exactly what I feel in South Korea,'' he said, adding that his favorite was a half-British, half-Japanese regular named Eva.
It had taken Mr. Lee, now 39, almost half of his life to make it to South Korea. 
His journey began when he was in the military at age 20 and became entangled in a dispute with a superior, Mr. Lee said, declining to reveal details. 
According to his account, he tried to leave the North but was caught and sentenced to 10 years in prison. 
After his release, he held a series of jobs ranging from maintaining telephone lines to working in a fertilizer factory. 
His father, he said, died in the great famine of the late 1990s.
Then in late 2005, Mr. Lee made it to China and joined his mother, who had already been living there for a couple of years. 
After working seven months and earning enough to pay part of the fees to the smugglers, Mr. Lee made it to Bangkok and, following six months in the detention center there, arrived in South Korea, at long last.
At the airport here, a fellow North Korean, a young man wearing earrings, was ordered with an expletive by a South Korean security official to take them off.
''That was our first impression of South Korea,'' Mr. Lee said. 
''It wasn't a warm embrace.''
Like all North Korean refugees, Mr. Lee was then detained for about a month by the National Intelligence Service. 
He was interrogated for several days before being put into solitary confinement, he said. 
He felt intolerably lonely, so he began keeping a diary for the first time in his life.
In the only notebook he could obtain, a children's scrapbook titled ''Pinky and Jimmy,'' which Mr. Lee now keeps on his bookshelf, he wrote in a clear handwriting of his ''suffocating'' loneliness in solitary. 
With a broken television set in his cell, he wrote, ''how am I going to get through the night?''
He wanted larger portions of food, but could not bear the humiliation of asking the guards, he wrote, adding that he could see ''contempt'' in their eyes. 
He longed for his girlfriend, though he could not hide his misgivings. 
''She lacks perseverance and temperance, just like me,'' he wrote. 
''She cries a lot. 
She has the most beautiful eyes when she cries. 
I read in a book somewhere that if you are too emotional, you'll have a lesser chance of succeeding in life.''
Mr. Lee then stayed for a couple of months at Hanawon, an institution that offers North Koreans a crash course on living in the capitalist South. 
History was retaught, including that it was the North, not the South, that started the Korean War. 
Mr. Lee said that he had already gleaned the truth from South Korean films and television programs increasingly smuggled in from China. 
Hanawon also offered computer classes.
''I just focused on getting my driver's license,'' he said.
MANY North Koreans say that they are treated like second-class citizens in the South. 
But at the Sorae fish market near Mr. Lee's apartment, operators of food stands looking for customers called out to him, ''Chairman, chairman!''
''Everything's about money here,'' he said, dragging on a Dunhill Slim, a popular cigarette here. 
''You go to work in the morning -- you can't even take phone calls on your cell at work -- then you go home and go to sleep. 
In North Korea, there is a fence around people to control them. 
But it's very collective, so people help one another out. 
In that system, people do find ways to have meaningful relations with one another.''
As with many North Koreans, Mr. Lee's nostalgia about the North increased in direct proportion with his sense of alienation in the South. 
At a small noodle shop, he asked the owner to turn on the fan but got only a puzzled look because he referred to it with a word used only in the North.
It was getting late, and maybe because he had to wake up early for work in the morning, Mr. Lee's mood darkened. 
He had already worked three jobs in as many months, including aboard a small sun-baked fishing boat. 
He lingered outside a butcher's shop near his apartment, delaying, it seemed, his return to an empty apartment.
After they left Hanawon, he and his girlfriend spent nine days together, then split up. 
They had shared their journey to South Korea. 
But, once here, they saw that the reality of their relationship, as with many things, was different from their expectations.
''It was so hard to get here,'' he said. 
''Before, I thought that once I got to South Korea, everything would be all right. 
But now I know that I've just opened the front gate and come in. 
The journey's just begun.''
