
THE difference between Susur Lee in Toronto and Jean-Georges Vongerichten, the New York-based chef with whom he has been compared, is that Mr. Lee has no competition. 
For more than 20 years he has been the face of high-end culinary dazzle in his adopted Canadian hometown.
In a couple of months, he will open Shang at the Thompson Lower East Side hotel, his first restaurant outside Toronto, and may discover that New York has dozens of top chefs it is capable of chewing up and spitting out.
''I don't feel nervous,'' Mr. Lee said in a telephone interview from Toronto. 
''I feel the time is right for me. 
The time is now. 
New York is a pedestal for the world of food. 
It's a place of sophisticated tastes.''
But in his view, when it comes to Chinese food, the underpinning of all of his cooking, New York's sophistication needs work. 
He says most of the Chinese food he has tried here is ''old school,'' unlike the food in Toronto, where, he said, more recent immigrants bring authenticity.
For New York, he is developing dishes like winter melon with salted duck eggs and fish, and a pork dish steamed in broth with spices, preserved vegetables and rice wine. 
Shang will also feature what the chef calls Silk Road seasonings and food that expresses how Chinese cooking is interpreted in other countries: Jamaican jerk chicken in small pieces with a black bean sauce, for example.
Mr. Lee, 49, is a native of Hong Kong. 
After emigrating to Toronto, he opened Lotus in 1987. 
That minimal 12-table pan-Asian debut was enough to catapult him to renown and began to make the dimpled smile on his broad face and the signature black ponytail familiar in food circles beyond Canada.
After a three-year sabbatical in Singapore, he opened Susur in 2000 and Lee in 2004, serving high-end, Asian-accented food. 
Lee is the more experimental of the two. 
He closed Susur a few months ago and turned it into Madeline's, with a more European menu and family-style service.
Mr. Lee can project an intimidating presence, as Bobby Flay discovered on ''Iron Chef America'' on the Food Network. 
''He's intriguing as a chef, and in the heat of competition he becomes quiet, almost stealth-like,'' Mr. Flay said. 
The competition using Canadian bacon ended in a draw.
Shang, short for Shanghai, will have a sweeping bar, a dark and intimate lounge area and a dining room trimmed in Asian carved latticework screens. 
Rippling golden brass mesh fixtures seem to float. 
Mr. Lee's wife, Brenda Bent, is designing the waiters' uniforms.
