
The chief executive of General Motors, Rick Wagoner, arrived in Thailand on Tuesday to a decidedly brighter picture than the losses, layoffs and drawn-out overhaul his company is facing in the United States.
G.M. sold 35 percent more cars last year in Asia than it did in 2005, riding the wave of Asia's expanding markets. 
Its market share has also inched up.
On Wednesday, Mr. Wagoner is expected to announce an expansion of G.M.'s production of small cars at its plant east of Bangkok and the construction of an engine plant for its Colorado pickup truck, said Hajime Yamamoto, Thailand director for CSM Worldwide, a Detroit-based automotive market forecasting company.
This would be good news for Thailand, which has become a hub for car manufacturers serving Southeast Asia, Australia and the Middle East, and is now Asia's third-largest car exporter after Japan and South Korea.
A G.M. spokesman in Thailand declined to comment on the carmaker's plans, citing Mr. Wagoner's pending announcement.
The move would be an indication that G.M. is betting that continued growth in Asia could help ease the contraction in North America, where volume was down 20 percent in the second quarter. 
Asia, Europe and Latin America are now the bright spots on G.M.'s balance sheet, with the company selling more cars overseas than it does in the United States.
''Asia is front and center in terms of strategy and future direction,'' said John Bonnell, director for forecasting in Asia at J. D. Power & Associates. 
''Their big success story is in China. 
They've built a nice business there.''
Much of Asia remains the home turf of Toyota and other Japanese manufacturers. 
Although General Motors has increased its market share in Asia, by its own calculations, to nearly 7 percent from 5.9 percent in the last three years, its sales remain small compared with those in North America, where it still makes one of every five cars sold.
But G.M.'s smaller stature in Asia and the lack of any legacy costs for pensions and health care have allowed the company to be more nimble in Asia. 
Using technology from Asian partners, G.M. is aggressively marketing itself as an environmentally aware producer of smaller, more fuel-efficient cars.
In increasing production of two compact models here, the Aveo and the Optra, G.M. will be using technology from Daewoo Motor, the South Korean carmaker in which it acquired a controlling stake in 2002, Mr. Yamamoto said.
''Most of the models they sell in this region use a Daewoo platform,'' Mr. Yamamoto said.
''I wouldn't say they are going to improve their performance dramatically in the coming years,'' he said of G.M. 
''But I think they will continue to do better.''
In Thailand, G.M. has also benefited in the last decade from its partnership with the Japanese truck maker Isuzu, which provided engines for G.M. pickups and gave it access to suppliers. 
Now that the Isuzu partnership is over -- G.M. divested itself of its stake in the company two years ago -- G.M. will be building engines at the plant scheduled to be announced Wednesday.
G.M. has kept costs down in Thailand by cutting the number of expatriate managers to about 10, from 40 earlier in the decade. 
It has instructed its workers to follow the Japanese formula of kaizen, or continuous improvement, and the plant uses the just-in-time production system.
Entry-level workers earn a monthly wage of about 8,000 baht, or $235, at the factory, which exports cars and trucks to Australia and the Middle East in addition to Southeast Asia.
G.M. reported a cumulative loss of $10.1 billion for the first half of the year in its North American operations. 
Its overseas operations, by contrast, earned the company a profit of $1.2 billion, including earnings of $123 million in Asia.
The pattern is similar at Ford, which reported a loss of $1.3 billion in the second quarter of this year in North America, compared with profit of $388 million in South America, $582 million in Europe and $153 million in Asia and Africa.
In the last year, Ford has said it would expand its manufacturing capacity in China, Thailand and India for a total investment of $1.5 billion.
