
Two German engineering companies, Siemens and ThyssenKrupp, are negotiating to supply technology for a second high-speed rail link worth 4.3 billion euros between Shanghai and the nearby city of Hangzhou, state news media reported Tuesday.
The statement about the deal, worth $5.5 billion, came as Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany was visiting Shanghai, where she rode the world's first commercial magnetic-levitation train. 
That line, the maglev, carries passengers at speeds of as much as 270 miles an hour between the international airport in Pudong on the outskirts of Shanghai, and the financial district in the city center.
Transrapid International, a joint venture between Siemens and ThyssenKrupp, designed and built the $1 billion Pudong line, which entered service in 2004.
The new line, stretching 125 miles to Hangzhou, was approved by the Chinese government in March and is scheduled to be in operation by 2010, the official Xinhua news agency reported.
A spokesman for Siemens's transportation group, Dirk Erat, confirmed Tuesday that Transrapid was negotiating with its prospective Chinese partners on the new maglev link. 
But he said no formal agreement had been signed.
''The negotiations are in good shape and very constructive,'' Mr. Erat said by telephone from Erlangen, Germany. 
''All the details still have to be finalized.''
Xinhua reported that Siemens would transfer technology for manufacturing power supply and operational systems, and ThyssenKrupp would contribute technology for the carriages, switches and other systems.
Maglev trains travel above the track on a frictionless electromagnetic cushion and they have become a technological showpiece for China, as it spends heavily to expand its vast rail network.
The Chinese Railways Ministry plans to add 10,000 kilometers (6,250 miles) of passenger lines and 2,000 kilometers (1,250 miles) of high-speed links to its rail network by 2020 to overcome bottlenecks that have hampered economic development.
While the existing maglev line has drawn some criticism for its cost and pathway, transportation experts say the Shanghai-Hangzhou route would be a true test of the technology's commercial use.
The second maglev link, with a higher speed of about 280 miles an hour, would cover the distance between the cities in 30 minutes, a journey that now takes 140 minutes by rail, the state news media reported when the project received government approval.
Some transportation experts say China will have to substantially reduce the cost of maglev track if the new line is to be profitable. 
The 19-mile Pudong maglev track cost the equivalent of $53 million a mile, according to reports in the official news media.
