
Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld and the Chinese leadership agreed Wednesday to strengthen military ties, even as Mr. Rumsfeld said China needed to clarify its regional military goals and his Chinese counterpart rejected Pentagon assessments that Beijing understated its military spending.
The agreement on improved ties, coming near the start of Mr. Rumsfeld's first trip to China as President Bush's defense secretary, came after years of small steps to rebuild military relations that were ruptured in April 2001 when a Chinese fighter and a Navy surveillance plane collided over the South China Sea, killing the Chinese pilot and leading to the detention of the 24 members of the American crew for 11 days.
In another signal of Chinese openness, Mr. Rumsfeld became the first foreigner to visit the headquarters of China's strategic missile fleet, signing his name in an otherwise blank guest book. 
According to American officials, who spoke under ground rules that they not be named, Gen. Jing Zhiyuan, the missile forces commander, told Mr. Rumsfeld that China would not be the first to use nuclear weapons, but would use them only in self-defense.
That statement was interpreted by Pentagon officials as a repudiation of comments by another Chinese general over the summer that any attack on China by American forces responding to a Taiwan crisis might result in nuclear retaliation.
Mr. Rumsfeld was also told that China's nuclear missile fleet was not currently aimed at any other nation.
At an afternoon meeting with Mr. Rumsfeld, President Hu Jintao said improving military cooperation would percolate across both governments and benefit the broader relationship between the nations. 
President Bush is to visit China next month.
Mr. Hu said the talks with Mr. Rumsfeld would ''help the military forces of our two countries to better enhance their mutual understanding and friendship.''
This military relationship, Mr. Hu said, ''will also play an important facilitating role in promoting the growth of our relationship as a whole.''
Mr. Rumsfeld said the United States and China would benefit from more naval visits and educational exchanges ''to demystify'' how the two nations view each other.
But points of friction remained evident.
Earlier in the day, when Mr. Rumsfeld addressed the Central Party School, where the Communist Party grooms an elite for leadership, he said China had sent ''mixed signals'' about its goals and he cautioned that the expansion of Chinese military power had raised concerns through the region.
In July the Pentagon, in its annual report on China's military muscle, said that real military spending might be two to three times higher than its official reports, and that its expenses for research and development and for arms purchase abroad were hidden in other parts of the government's budget.
At a joint news conference with Mr. Rumsfeld at the Ministry of Defense, the defense minister, Gen. Cao Gangchuan, disputed the Pentagon assessment, saying China's annual military spending is no more than the official amount of $30.2 billion.
''That is, indeed, the true budget we have today,'' General Cao said, although he noted that some programs, like space exploration with astronauts, were not listed as military spending. 
He said China's military spending could not increase at the rates projected by Pentagon analysts because of the nation's commitment to raising the standard of living.
