
Responding to President Bush's call to deploy missile defenses, Russia said today that it was eager to begin the new strategic dialogue that Mr. Bush suggested to devise a common approach to new missile threats and to reduce nuclear arsenals even further.
But a senior official made clear that Moscow expected that Washington would not take "unilateral steps" to withdraw from the Antiballistic Missile Treaty of 1972 without first replacing it with a new understanding.
Governments across Europe and Asia reacted cautiously today after Mr. Bush's speech on Tuesday in which he said that the United States needed "a new framework that allows us to build missile defenses to counter the different threats of today's world."
They did, however, welcome his plan to begin extensive consultations next week among allies and other interested parties like Russia and China, whose reactions loom as the greatest challenges for the president.
While the Russians are clearly intrigued by a number of Mr. Bush's remarks about the prospect for cooperation "in a joint defense" with Moscow on missile threats that might arise, Foreign Minister Igor D. Ivanov told a news conference here that Russia would "insist on preserving and strengthening" the ABM pact. 
"It is extremely important that the U.S. administration does not intend to take unilateral steps, but intends to consult with its allies and friends, including Russia," Mr. Ivanov said.
Mr. Bush said on Tuesday that the treaty should be replaced "with a new framework that reflects a clear and clean break from the past."
Before his speech, Mr. Bush called President Vladimir V. Putin and, Russian officials said, assured him that Washington would not act unilaterally to change the strategic balance. 
The White House has not confirmed that version of the call.
Mr. Ivanov was at pains to point out that many aspects of the American plans for various missile technologies that could be brought to bear against rogue nations were not dissimilar to ideas that Mr. Putin has been floating since June, except that under the Russian proposals the ABM Treaty would remain in force as a prohibition against building a missile shield that would cover all United States territory.
"We think the position of the U.S. administration should be carefully listened to before drawing final conclusions," Mr. Ivanov said.
The ABM Treaty, he said, cannot be separated "from the general architecture" of arms control agreements "that has been formed in the last 30 years and that has become the basis of international security."
Other countries expressed concern about the possibility that the United States would abandon the ABM Treaty, although Mr. Bush's speech stopped short of saying he advocated such action.
Foreign Minister Joschka Fischer of Germany, speaking today outside the State Department in Washington, echoed the Russian concern. 
"The ABM Treaty worked well," he said. 
"We want control mechanisms that worked well in the past" to be replaced "only by better ones or more effective ones. 
We don't want there to be a new arms race."
Secretary General Kofi Annan of the United Nations said that instead of abandoning the ABM Treaty "there is a need to consolidate and build upon existing disarmament and nonproliferation agreements."
Through a spokesman, he called on the nuclear powers to engage in negotiations toward legally binding agreements that "are both verifiable and irreversible."
Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain, under pressure from conservatives to endorse openly Mr. Bush's plans that may need to rely on radar installations in Britain, refused to do so today. 
"This is a highly sensitive issue that we should handle it with care," Mr. Blair said.
"I believe President Bush has set out a case that we have to listen to," Mr. Blair told Parliament. 
"We will make our deliberations once we have had a specific proposal from the American administration."
But former Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher chastised the Labor government's position, saying, "I strongly support President Bush's plan to protect America and her allies from attack by ballistic missiles, and I trust that the British government will stop its shilly-shallying and support them, too."
Canada also warned that if the American consultations, to begin next week, fail to bring the results that Mr. Bush hopes for, he should not act outside the international consensus. 
Foreign Minister John Manley said, "A unilateral abrogation of the ABM Treaty would be very problematic for us."
In addition to fears about abandoning the missile accord, a major concern is that nothing that Mr. Bush or his aides said allayed deep suspicions that an American missile shield could undermine the nuclear deterrent forces of China, weaken those of Russia and start an arms race.
Neither China nor Japan commented officially about the speech.
The official New China News Agency said Washington's proposal would "destroy the balance of international security forces and could cause a new arms race."
In Tokyo, a Foreign Ministry official said, "We cannot say anything specific before carefully examining the details of the proposals made by President Bush."
Japan has agreed to study the feasibility of regional missile defenses in cooperation with the United States, but has deliberately withheld its commitment to build or deploy such a system in deference to China's objections.
