
The United States was within seconds of a major victory and a quarterfinal berth in Olympic men's soccer. 
Now the team is a tie away.
The Americans allowed a goal on a free kick by Gerald Sibon in the third minute of injury time, forcing them to settle for a 2-2 tie with the Netherlands on Sunday night in Tianjin, China.
''We were very close to being in the quarterfinals, and now we are very far,'' United States Coach Peter Nowak said. 
''Before the game, nobody gave us a chance. 
And I think we played pretty good. 
You can look at this as half empty or half full.''
The result left the United States with 4 points, tied atop Group B with Nigeria and 2 ahead of the Netherlands. 
Japan has none. 
Two teams advance.
The United States team faces the Nigerians on Wednesday in the final group game for both in Beijing. 
The Dutch will need a victory against Japan while the United States, with a superior goal difference to Nigeria, will require only a tie to advance.
''I'm still really bummed,'' United States midfielder Robbie Rogers said. 
''That's the best I've seen us play.''
The Americans fell behind in the 16th minute on a goal by Ryan Babel.
After a tactical change, Sacha Klejstan and Jozy Altidore scored eight minutes apart to give the United States a 2-1 lead by the 72nd minute.
As the game wore on, caution was no longer an option for the Dutch. 
Sibon entered in the 75th minute.
The United States fought off all chances until the Dutch earned a free kick 25 yards from the goal. 
Jonathan de Guzman and Urby Emanuelson were unsure who should take it.
''When I came in, they said they weren't sure, and so I said, 'I'll take it,' '' Sibon said. 
''You just blast it on goal and see where it lands.''
CYCLIST FAILS DRUG TEST The Spanish cyclist Maria Isabel Moreno became the first athlete to fail a doping test at the Beijing Games, the International Olympic Committee revealed Monday.
Moreno, 27, tested positive for EPO in a test conducted July 31. 
She left the athletes' village that evening before she knew the results of the test. 
(AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)
RECORD FOR ARCHERY TEAM The South Korean women started Sunday by smashing the world record and then got what they always come to the Olympics to get: the archery team gold.
Through wind, rain and noisy spectators, Yun Ok-Hee, Joo Hyun-Jung and Park Sung-Hyun delivered South Korea's sixth straight gold in the event. 
The streak is six because this is only the sixth time the women's team competition has been held.
For the first time, the Olympic team competition is using a 24-arrow format. 
Each side takes eight turns firing three arrows, one by each archer. 
A shot hitting the 12.2-centimeter (4.8-inch) inner ring earns a 10, and a perfect total score would be 240. 
So when the Italians finished with 217 points against South Korea in the quarterfinals under hazy but still conditions, it was an impressive score and the third highest by any team all day.
Yet they were pulverized. 
The South Koreans hit the center ring with 15 of 24 shots. 
Their nine other arrows were all in the next ring for 9 points, for a total of 231 points, beating their own world record of 228. 
PETER BERLIN
VOLLEYBALL IN RAIN The American pair of Kerri Walsh and Misty May-Treanor began their bid for another beach volleyball gold medal with a decisive victory over the Japanese team of Mika Teru Saiki and Chiaki Kusuhara. 
They needed only 36 minutes in an intermittent rain.
''We're in bathing suits,'' May-Treanor said, adding that the 87 percent humidity was more of a problem. 
''We're bound to get wet.''(AP)
MORE CHINESE CREWS ON TOP Three more Chinese crews finished first in their heats, boosting the total to five top spots in the first two days of Olympic competition and increasing the host nation's chances of winning its first gold medal in rowing. 
Rain postponed competition right before the women's eight and the men's eight. 
(AP)
