
WHETHER the tuba is in a marching band on the football field or in a brass quintet playing Christmas carols at the mall, chances are it came from the Tuba Exchange in Durham, N.C.
With tubas apparently growing in popularity, the company, started in 1988 by Vincent F. Simonetti, is the only national retailer that sells nothing but tubas.
As narrow as its business is, Tuba Exchange Inc., which sells about 1,000 new and used tubas a year, nevertheless finds itself brushed by the rapid shifts in world trade. 
The company has long imported most of its instruments from a manufacturer in Russia, because the price and quality are right, it says. 
In the past year or so, a rival tuba maker in China has started trying to push its way into the market with lower prices, though so far the Tuba Exchange has resisted.
Operating out of a canary-yellow, Victorian-style house that he used to share with a bakery, Mr. Simonetti darts about in a light blue surgical smock, which protects his starched business shirts from the oils that lubricate the valves of the shiny tubas in his showroom. 
The huge horns are everywhere -- new and used as well as not-for-sale antique tubas that Mr. Simonetti has collected. 
Residents of a nearby retirement home as well as schoolchildren make trips to see his collection, which includes a Civil War tuba from the Confederate army, with the bell facing backward so the troops marching behind could hear it.
"When I got into this business, people said I was crazy," said Mr. Simonetti, who until 1975 was the principal tubist for the North Carolina Symphony and now plays in a Dixieland band. 
"No one thought I'd be able to make any money."
Sales at the Tuba Exchange, which is privately held, will reach $2.8 million this year, he said, a 20 percent increase over last year. 
He would not disclose profits.
After leaving the symphony, Mr. Simonetti, then married with three small children, tried his hand selling pianos. 
But "I was just limping along," he said.
In 1988, he met a tuba maker from Nuremberg, Germany, at a National Association of Music Merchants Convention in Chicago. 
"He was looking for someone to sell his tubas, and I saw a chance to sell something nationally," he said. 
"Pianos are a very local business."
From his years as a musician, Mr. Simonetti knew tuba sellers were few and far between. 
And no one sold tubas exclusively. 
Today, the Tuba Exchange's competitors, notably the Woodwind and Brasswind of South Bend, Ind., and the Custom Music Company, in Ferndale, Mich., sell an array of instruments.
"Your level of confidence goes up when tubas are all they sell," said Donald L. Strand, principal tubist with the Atlanta Opera and the Atlanta Ballet. 
He has bought two tubas from Mr. Simonetti and also refers his students at Columbus State University in Georgia to him. 
Mr. Simonetti also refurbishes tubas and redesigns them to fit players' needs in terms of range and tone.
But the price of a tuba can be steep: typically $3,000 to $7,000. 
"Imagine your sticker shock if you're a parent of a kid who wants to play the tuba," Mr. Strand said.
Customers of the Tuba Exchange range from novices to concert professionals as well as the major United States military bands. 
But most of Mr. Simonetti's sales are to schools and universities. 
He markets the instruments to band directors at various conventions and clinics, like the sprawling Midwest Bandmasters Conference in Chicago and the Texas Music Educators Association Conference in San Antonio. 
"We've got tubas in schools in all 50 states," Mr. Simonetti said.
Though no one keeps statistics on the number of people playing the tuba, anecdotal evidence suggests that it is increasing. 
"It used to be only a few people, maybe 7 or 10, would show up at an audition for an orchestra position," said James M. Akins, principal tubist with the Columbus Symphony in Ohio. 
"Now hundreds apply."
And more tuba students are applying to music schools.
"We can be far more selective nowadays," said Mr. Akins, who is also a tuba professor at Ohio State University in Columbus. 
In another sign of the instrument's popularity, composers are writing more music for tubas. 
"We're seeing an end to the stereotype of the tuba as a lumbering, background instrument," Mr. Akins said. 
"We have a range of six octaves and can play anything, even 'The Flight of the Bumblebee.'
"
The Tuba Exchange's best seller is the St. Petersburg tuba, a Russian instrument made to Mr. Simonetti's specifications. 
Tubists like Mr. Strand and Mr. Akins say the Russian tubas are well made, with excellent tone. 
They are also competitively priced, at about $3,200.
Mr. Simonetti started pursuing a contract with the instrument's maker, the St. Petersburg Musical Wind Instruments Factory, in 1994 after admiring one of its tubas during a performance of the Moscow Symphony in Raleigh, N.C. 
"I thought I'd seen every tuba, but this one was different and had really great sound," he said. 
For two months, he sent faxes to the factory, which was founded in 1875, but received no response. 
"They finally called and told me to quit sending faxes, I was bugging them so much," Mr. Simonetti said.
Then came some wrangling with the factory's manager and part owner, Alexander Mikheev. 
"We met at the Frankfurt Music Fair, and the guy must have smoked 10 packs of cigarettes during our negotiations and put his face right in my face," Mr. Simonetti said. 
"After glasnost, they were very vulnerable and worried about Westerners coming in and stripping their factories bare."
But he was able to convince Mr. Mikheev that they could have a mutually beneficial relationship. 
After the Russian company tweaked the design to fit Mr. Simonetti's standards, the Tuba Exchange started importing about 500 instruments a year. 
"That's more tubas than most factories make for the entire world," much less a single retailer, Mr. Simonetti said.
LABOR is relatively cheap in Russia, keeping the price low. 
The most expensive tubas come from Germany and Italy, while those made in Japan and the United States -- American brands include Bach, King and Conn -- are in the middle.
The St. Petersburg company was sold three years ago to a Russian conglomerate that also has oil and real estate interests, Mr. Simonetti said. 
"The new guys are more bottom-line oriented, without much attachment to the factory or its history," he said.
He worries that they may raise prices, so he has kept the card of a Chinese tuba manufacturer who approached him last year at a convention in Nashville. 
"The Chinese really want to break into the U.S. market" and promise extremely low prices, he said.
But for now, he is sticking with the Russians. 
"What with our two countries' blooming relationship after Sept. 
11, I'm thinking that might improve our bargaining position with our manufacturer in St. Petersburg," Mr. Simonetti said. 
After briefly pondering tuba diplomacy, he said, "Well, that might be pushing it."
Big and Brassy
Tubas, invented in 1835, are among the youngest brass instruments. 
There are several types. 
The upright tuba, the most familiar, comes in four keys. 
Sousaphones, invented by John Philip Sousa, are larger and wrap around the shoulder so they can be played in marching bands. 
The euphonium, or tenor tuba, is smaller and plays an octave higher than upright tubas. 
Finally, the tuba family also includes the cimbasso, which looks something like a praying mantis, or like a mangled trombone. 
The cimbasso was favored by Verdi and Puccini and is used in authentic productions of their operas. 
The cimbasso's bell faces forward, as does the sousaphone's, while the upright tuba and euphonium have bells that face upward.
