WHETHER they were withdrawing from one doomed corporate takeover or apologizing (with cash) for another, multinational companies spent the week closing the books on several ill-fated and ill-advised business decisions.
The economy, meanwhile, gained strength, undeterred by stubbornly high energy prices that jumped again -- as oil spiked above $62 a barrel in New York -- after a death in the Saudi Arabian royal family.
SUNNY DAYS -- Good news popped up in almost every part of the economy, topped off by yesterday's robust labor report.
Employers hired 207,000 workers in July, more than expected, and the fastest pace since April. 
Unemployment remained at 5 percent.
Consumer spending continued its brisk growth in July, rising 0.8 percent, while incomes showed a relatively vigorous gain of 0.5 percent. 
Factory orders rose 1 percent in June, building on a 3.6 percent jump in May; declining inventories suggest further gains are coming.
At the same time, companies reported generally strong profits. 
Based on companies that have reported so far, aggregate earnings grew well over 10 percent in the second quarter, which would be the 13th consecutive quarter of double-digit growth.
The major stock market gauges rose to their highest levels in four years, before falling by the week's ends on fears of more interest rate increases.
A growing economy and high oil prices have increased economists' concerns about inflation. 
To address that worry, Federal Reserve policy makers are expected to raise interest rates another quarter-percentage-point when they meet again on Tuesday.
GIVING UP, FOR NOW -- China backed away from a political confrontation with the United States when one of its government-controlled oil concerns, the Chinese National Overseas Oil Company, withdrew its $18.4 billion bid for Unocal. 
The decision opens the door for Chevron to buy Unocal for about $17.7 billion in cash and stock.
The Chinese company, known by its acronym Cnooc, touched off a debate within the United States government about whether China's economic rise and its growing thirst for oil and other resources posed a strategic threat -- and if so, what to do about it.
Cnooc's withdrawal has undercut the urgency of that debate, but analysts said similar conflicts were almost inevitable as China's economy and political ambitions grow.
China may try to retaliate against Chevron for having stoked American political opposition to Cnooc's bid, analysts said. 
Chevron works with Cnooc on oil projects near China and Australia.
A DUBIOUS RECORD -- Enron may have failed in its ambition to set a standard for profitability or growth, but it has certainly helped to raise the bar for class-action lawsuit settlements.
Banks and other corporate enablers have agreed to pay $7.1 billion to settle lawsuits by investors who were picked clean by Enron's accounting schemes. 
The latest to pony up was the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, which offered $2.4 billion -- more than its profit for all of last year -- to atone for repeatedly helping Enron to conceal its debt and inflate its revenue.
The total Enron settlements, which include $2.2 billion from J.P. 
Morgan Chase and $2 billion from Citigroup, surpasses the $6.2 billion that banks -- including some of those involved with Enron -- paid to settle investor lawsuits over the collapse of WorldCom in another accounting scandal. 
Several other banks, including Deutsche Bank, Credit Suisse First Boston and Barclays, as well as Merrill Lynch, are still party to the class action.
Even if those companies settle, the 55,000 investors who are part of the lawsuit are likely to recover only a fraction of the $47 billion they lost in Enron's collapse. 
The lawyers representing investors, however, are in line to get $680 million, plus 10 percent of any further settlements.
TIME TO SETTLE -- Speaking of settlements, Time Warner agreed to pay $2.4 billion to settle lawsuits filed by shareholders who asserted that the 2001 merger of Time Warner and America Online was based on erroneous and misleading financial statements. 
It also set aside another $600 million to settle other claims, including those of Time Warner employees.
While it agreed to the settlements, Time Warner admitted no wrongdoing. 
Nor did it do so when it agreed earlier to pay $450 million to settle similar claims with the Department of Justice and the Securities and Exchange Commission. 
Time Warner's auditor, Ernst & Young, agreed to contribute $100 million to that settlement.
Time Warner said it agreed to the settlements to permit it to move ahead with its strategy for the underperforming AOL part of its business. 
It has equivocated about whether it may sell or spin off the unit.
A ROYAL PASSING -- The death of King Fahd bin Abdel Aziz al-Saud of Saudi Arabia, the world's largest oil-producing nation, caused oil prices to rise above $62 a barrel in New York, a nominal record. 
News of an orderly transition of power to his half-brother, however, did not bring prices down much.
Crude oil remained above $62, largely because of unrelated developments. 
In Texas and Louisiana, for example, accidents closed big refineries owned by Exxon Mobil, BP and Valero, renewing worries that tight supplies of gasoline, diesel fuel and heating oil might not keep pace with demand. 
Iran's decision to reopen a uranium-enrichment program rekindled fears that the country, OPEC's second-largest oil producer after Saudi Arabia, may clash with the West over the potential spread of nuclear arms.
The new monarch, King Abdullah, has been Saudi Arabia's effective ruler since King Fahd suffered a debilitating stroke in 1995. 
The kingdom's role as the world's swing producer -- one with enough idle capacity to cover shortfalls in supplies -- is not expected to change.
