
Here's how many miles I just spent to get one free business-class ticket from New York to Shanghai and back next November -- and not even on the days I had originally wanted to fly: 240,000.
My wife, my mother-in-law and I are going to Shanghai to visit relatives. 
My wife booked her business-class award ticket and her mother's more than six weeks ago. 
Their tickets cost 270,000 miles for the two.
I waited till the other day to book mine. 
Because guaranteed frequent-flier awards, which the airlines call unrestricted awards, take more points as available seats on a flight become more scarce, my dallying added 105,000 miles to what my wife paid for each ticket. 
So the grand total for three round-trip tickets on Northwest to Shanghai and back -- next November -- was 510,000 miles.
Do I feel fleeced?
I do not. 
Instead, I feel like Diamond Jim Brady on a roll at Saratoga. 
What's a half million miles these days for a swell trip to China for three?
To have actually purchased those three business-class tickets would have cost $17,600, based on Northwest's current fare for that itinerary. 
(The miles were all accumulated on Continental, which doesn't fly to China but has a code-share alliance with Northwest. 
Helpful Continental agents smoothly booked all three awards tickets through on Northwest).
So I am finally practicing what I have recently been preaching. 
I'm unloading the miles. 
I feel like a guy walking out into the sun from a casino with a sack of shiny quarters.
Let me explain why lots of other frequent fliers are now making runs on the mileage bank. 
As I have been reporting here, there is a crisis brewing in airline frequent-flier programs, and it is not outlandish to suggest that the structure could one day collapse like a house of cards. 
Consumer faith in mileage programs is dissipating as it becomes harder than ever to claim a free ticket on a desired route at a desired time, especially for those looking to claim it for 25,000 miles, the minimum price for a coach ticket.
Airlines, for their part, insist that they're not cutting back on the number of awards. 
This is true, but numbers can be deceiving. 
Annually, the major airlines report that award trips account for about 7 percent to 9 percent of their passenger load. 
For example, in 2003, award trips represented 9 percent of total passenger miles flown on Delta Air Lines. 
That was the same percentage as in 2002 and one percentage point higher than 2001.
What has changed, and sharply, is the number of outstanding frequent-flier miles chasing those awards. 
As of 2002, according to estimates by Randy Petersen, publisher of Webflyer.com, an online site for frequent fliers, a total of 120 million members of frequent-flier programs (about two thirds of them are in the United States) had about 9 trillion miles stashed away. 
That compares with about 1.2 trillion miles 10 years earlier.
When American Airlines introduced the first frequent-flier program in 1981, you basically got miles by flying on airplanes. 
But actual miles flown now account for only about 43 percent of miles awarded annually. 
As we all know, the main reason for the astonishing run-up in miles is that airlines in recent years have been bolstering revenue by selling a large number of miles to third parties, like credit card companies and retailers, who then offer the miles to their own customers as incentives.
For some time now, the smart money has said it is not a good idea to squirrel away miles because those miles are losing value over time.
''I've been saying this for three years: cash out, and cash out now,'' said Joe Brancatelli, the publisher of www.joesentme.com, a Web site for business travelers. 
''You should never treat your miles like a bank account. 
The airlines do a terrible job being airlines. 
Why are you trusting them to be a bank?''
While airlines promote the availability of travel awards, they're a little coy about promoting the fine print, including the ever-tightening blackout dates and restrictions regarding availability, especially at the minimal level. 
Customers should not be surprised to know that they are playing in a lottery, he said.
''What part of restricted did you think they were kidding about?'' he asked.
On the other hand, he does credit some of the major airlines for redesigning their Web sites to make it easier for award seekers to see when open dates are available, and at what cost in miles. 
''We now can get a much better look at the inventory,'' he said.
For those, typically business, travelers with large mileage accumulations looking for sensible ways to spend down account balances, he pointed to new international routes now being laid on by domestic carriers, many of them starting in the spring and summer.
''The best payoff for your miles, restricted or unrestricted, is an international premium-class ticket,'' he said. 
''That's the highest fare out there, even though it is outrageously overpriced. 
Airlines are going to be a lot more willing to deal for this summer, but remember that some of those routes they're adding on may not survive through the winter.''
So that's the smart money talking. 
Raid your mileage account. 
Take a friend to Australia for Christmas. 
Go see Berlin before it turns into London. 
Fly business class, swilling Champagne through the clouds and snoozing under cozy duvets on flat-bed seats. 
In short, if you got 'em, spend 'em.
Soon.
