
GOUGH STREET, in the Central district of Hong Kong, runs for just two blocks between Shing Wong and Aberdeen Streets, and for much of its modern history has been home to mom-and-pop printing presses and old beef-brisket noodle shops.
Then fashionable restaurants, including a private supper club, arrived. 
The printing presses began moving out, and their spaces were soon filled with clothing boutiques, design shops and trendy bars. 
With colonial-era Hong Kong serving as a historic and gritty backdrop, the street has emerged as a cooler alternative to the nearby, expatriate-dominated Soho, the South of Hollywood Road area.
A mix of design shops has fueled the style offensive. 
The most notable may be Addiction (No. 15; 852-2581-2779), a large, spare space that opened last December. 
The store specializes in contemporary designers like Jason Miller -- a mainstay of the design scene in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn -- whose products include a ceramic lamp shaped like deer antlers (2,780 Hong Kong dollars; about $348 at 8 Hong Kong dollars to the U.S. dollar), a plastic picnic table with hand-carved graffiti (26,000 Hong Kong dollars) and a lounge chair made of duct tape (38,000).
The street's underground sensibility appealed to the store owners. 
''We don't want to be seen as an overly trendy design shop,'' said Estelle Chen, 41, a former brand consultant who opened Addiction with the designer Anthony Tao.
Other design shops include Homeless (No. 29; 852-2581-1880; www.homelessconcept.com), which sells lamps by Tord Boontje, chairs by Karim Rashid and design novelties like mirrored ashtrays and oversized writing utensils.
Fashion boutiques have arrived, too. 
The newest transplant is Ranee K (No. 16; 852-2108-4068; www.raneek.com), known for the designer's modern interpretations of traditional cheongsam dresses.
''I just really liked the 'qi' of the street,'' said Ranee Kok, a Hong Kong-based designer, referring to the Chinese concept of spiritual energy. 
So Ms. Kok relocated her store from SoHo to Gough Street.
Some are drawn to the street's scrappy, more authentic Hong Kong flavor, partly as a reaction to the sparkling shopping malls and pricey, not-so-intimate restaurants that dominate much of the city.
That was the thinking, anyway, behind the restaurant Palate (No. 35-37; 852-9465-5380; www.palate.hk). 
Housed in a former butcher shop, Palate looks like a modern Chinese restaurant in Paris, with tinted glass windows and steel mesh dividers. 
The menu is fusion, blending Eastern and Western cuisines: pan-seared salmon glazed with miso, and osso buco tinged with traditional Asian flavors. 
Dinner for two costs about 550 Hong Kong dollars.
''If you look at every corner, there are still the two steps of stone leading up to the entrance,'' said Arnold Mok, who opened the restaurant with his sister, Karen Mok, a classically trained chef. 
''You still see the old Hong Kong, with Grandpa and Grandma, and people hanging clothes outside.''
At night, the formerly desolate street now comes alive with young partygoers. 
Among the newest bars is Meilanfang (14 On Wo Lane, basement; 852-2152-2121), a small, dark space under the Homeless boutique (with an entrance on another street) that draws a mostly gay and fashionable crowd.
''Gough Street is really about the old SoHo,'' said Mr. Mok of Palate. 
''If you walk down Gough Street, it is still very quiet and peaceful.''
