
A historian based in Hong Kong was sentenced to 13 years in a Chinese prison after being convicted of leaking state secrets, his family and a rights group said today.
The historian, Xu Zerong, 46, was sentenced on Jan. 
17 by the Shenzhen Intermediate People's Court in southern China to 10 years in prison for leaking state secrets and 3 years in prison for illegal business operations, said the rights group, the Information Center for Human Rights and Democracy.
He was also fined $6,024 and stripped of his political rights for three years, said a close relative in China, who declined to be named for fear of reprisals.
Mr. Xu was detained in August 2000 by state security agents in the southern province of Guangzhou, where he was working as a university researcher.
The court accused him of providing restricted research materials on Chinese military strategies and other secret state information from the Korean War era to an unnamed person from Hong Kong, the center said in a news release. 
The court also accused him of selling unauthorized Hong Kong publications in China.
"He loved talking about his studies and wrote so many articles about all sorts of things," his relative said. 
"I just knew he would get into trouble sooner or later."
The relative said that no one was allowed to visit Mr. Xu in jail but that court officials had told the family he was in good health.
"He should bear responsibility for what he has done, but we think the sentence was too heavy," the relative said. 
"We're planning to appeal."
Mr. Xu earned his doctorate in international relations from Oxford in 1999, and a group of university lecturers there pleaded for his release last year. 
He also spent time at Harvard, his family said.
Meanwhile, a Chinese scholar connected with a Chinese-American professor, Li Shaomin, who was detained last year on spy charges, was sentenced to two years in prison by the Shenzhen court for leaking state secrets, the center said.
The court accused the scholar, Shi Xianmin, of giving Mr. Li, a business professor at Hong Kong's City University, an internal party document categorized as a state secret, the center said.
Mr. Shi plans to appeal for medical parole, it said.
Mr. Shi was an associate professor and economics researcher at the Communist Party school in Shenzhen, which borders Hong Kong, and was arrested in April 2001, two months after Mr. Li was detained. 
Mr. Li was convicted on espionage charges, which he denied, and then sent home.
The Shenzhen Intermediate People's Court was closed today, and no one was available for comment.
