
SOON after the Sept. 
11 attack, the garment shop where Mei Yu Zou worked as a seamstress closed down. 
For the next 18 months, she bobbed along, floating from one part-time garment job to another.
Ms. Zou, who immigrated from China in 1988, began growing tired of the grueling work and part-time pay and started thinking of finding a new career. 
That was when a friend told her of a program that taught computer skills to unemployed and underemployed apparel workers.
So now she is taking a five-week course in which she learns basic computer skills that include using a mouse, Microsoft Word and the Internet. 
Every weekday she and 15 other Chinese garment workers take three hours of computer classes and two hours of English classes -- the first step, she hopes, toward getting a steady office job.
"This is a lot of fun," Ms. Zou said with the help of a translator. 
"I know computers are better than a garment job."
Ms. Zou is happy that the course is free. 
It is conducted by the Consortium for Worker Education, a union-affiliated organization that trains 110,000 people a year, making it the city's largest job-training group.
Even though Ms. Zou is not a union member, she can take the course because the consortium, having shown its success in training unionized workers ranging from nurse's aides to carpenters, has been given government and foundation contracts to train thousands of nonunion members as well.
A recent study by the Center for an Urban Future, a public-policy research group, praised the consortium and other labor-affiliated training efforts, saying they generally do a better job than programs run by nonprofit organizations or the government.
"While nonprofits funded with public money struggle to achieve even moderate success in job training, unions and labor-management partnerships are running a parallel system that trains and upgrades the skills of over 200,000 people a year," the report said. 
"Union-based training is focused on real jobs, is geared directly to employers and is solidly successful in helping people prepare for a better career."
The report concluded that union-based programs outperformed nonunion ones because they were better financed, worked closely with employers and provided longer training for workers. 
The report also noted that union-affiliated programs often took skilled or semiskilled workers with high school degrees or greater who were motivated to move to higher-paying jobs. 
In contrast, many programs run by nonprofit groups are for workfare recipients who are high school dropouts with few job skills.
"If you're not at the top of your profession, this is the way you can get training you need to advance, for free or very close to free," said David Jason Fischer, author of the report, titled "Labor Gains."
The report praises the way that the consortium and 1199/S.E.I.U., New York's largest health care union, often work together to train home-care workers or nurse's aides to become licensed practical nurses at double the pay.
Joseph McDermott, executive director of the Consortium for Worker Education, at 275 Seventh Avenue at 25th Street in Manhattan, said that even though the bulk of its training was for union members, it trained thousands of nonunion members each year. 
The consortium offers training for nonunion workers to become commercial truck drivers, child-care workers, computer operators, construction workers and bakers.
Many of its programs for nonunion workers are financed by foundations and by federal, state and city money. 
Some of the programs are for nonunion workers who lost their jobs because of the Sept. 
11 attack. 
Ms. Zou's computer training program is financed by the September 11 Fund.
Bonnie Potter, executive director of the New York City Employment and Training Coalition, said union programs were much better financed than government-financed programs. 
"In the public-funded system, you're required to get people out of training as soon as possible," she said. 
"In the labor-funded system, they try to provide people with the training that each person requires, and they have the time and resources and flexibility to do that."
