
Nothing beats a good trek movie. 
On Tuesday Zeitgeist is to release Ulrike Koch's documentary "The Saltmen of Tibet" on cassette and DVD. 
At the outset a song tells us that we are in the Kingdom of Ling, at the center of the world, a blue-turquoise place. 
Nomads are preparing to drive 160 yaks on a monthlong pilgrimage to Lake Tsentso to collect salt to trade for grain.
Nomadic salt traders drove their yaks across the peaks in Eric Valli's "Himalaya," a fictional trek movie set in Nepal, released on video in March by Kino. 
Keeping its mountains in the distance, Ms. Koch's film follows the Tibetans across a land of snow, rock and sand. 
"I'm interested in people who manage life in the desert," she said this week by phone from Zollikon, Switzerland. 
Here they go about their work with a mesmerizing intensity.
When the film opened in theaters in 1998, Stephen Holden wrote in The New York Times, "The entire movie, in fact, could be described as a kind of spiritual palate cleanser because of the force with which it conveys a life reduced to its essentials but still vibrant with faith."
.
Salt traders have gone to the lake for 2,000 years, but for various reasons having to do with modernity and Chinese politics, they have discontinued the practice. 
Ms. Koch, a German-born filmmaker, Sinologist and ethnographer, convinced a group to go again for posterity's sake. 
Counting all the time it took to clear arrangements with the Chinese government, her film project went on for seven years.
Since working with standard equipment would have delayed clearance further, the movie was shot in digital video and transferred to film in Switzerland. 
The look is rich but spare, in keeping with the surroundings. 
It is a quiet, watchful work. 
Salt traders in baggy garments pad about in harmony with the harsh conditions, never straining against hardships. 
A freezing rain turns to stinging sleet, which clings in little ice balls to yaks and horses' manes. 
Dumplings and stews burble in deep pots.
Without much grass, yaks sometimes eat dirt, which can tie their intestines in knots. 
"What do we do with this sick little yak?" a salt trader asks. 
A yak surgeon puts his ear against the yak's belly. 
"It goes nyok-nyok," he says. 
There's nothing to be done, alas.
In a tent lashed down against a shrieking gale, storytelling gives life to inanimate objects. 
In one tale the wood talks about going into the salt traders' fire. 
"I don't want to," it says. 
By now the salt traders have passed the "stone goat" in a particular cliff side and are locked into their highly ritualized approach to the lake.
Salt, it seems, can be scared off like a living quarry. 
Negative thoughts can affect yield along with weather conditions and other factors. 
One year, for example, a woman put too much salt in her pockets, which angered a god. 
From then on women were kept off the lake for fear of having the yield shut off altogether.
This time, though, there is plenty of salt to be raked into piles and shoveled into sacks. 
If you appreciate the right way to load a pack animal, this is your movie.
