
Tung Chee-hwa submitted his resignation to China's leaders on Thursday after nearly eight years as Hong Kong's chief executive, beginning the first transfer of power since Britain returned the territory to Chinese rule in 1997.
The second-ranking official here, Donald Tsang, who will take over at least through this summer and probably well beyond, now faces the tricky balancing act of assuring China of his loyalty without antagonizing the many Hong Kong residents who want a leader willing to stand up to Beijing, especially on democracy and civil liberties.
Mr. Tsang, 60, will stand in after a difficult tenure for Mr. Tung during which Hong Kong weathered the Asian financial crisis, a collapse in property prices, the SARS epidemic and sharply rising unemployment. 
The succession of problems here gave rise to the biggest democracy movement in China since the Tiananmen Square protest of 1989, with huge demonstrations here in 2003 and 2004.
But Mr. Tsang, a longtime civil servant who was knighted by the British, comes to the top job with two obvious power bases. 
The territory's large civil service reveres him for administrative efficiency. 
And in a city where many hold a high, sometimes Confucian regard for civil servants, Mr. Tsang is consistently among the highest-scoring officials in opinion surveys.
But Mr. Tsang, who favors bow ties, is less popular with the city's business and political elite. 
Business leaders are wary of his career-long government service. 
Pro-Beijing politicians here have been leery of his past loyalty to the British crown, and have been silent on his promotion.
''They really don't trust him, they think he is really not a patriot for China, but only cares about his personal glory, or, at most, about Hong Kong,'' said Sing Ming, a political scientist at the City University of Hong Kong.
Mr. Tsang has repeatedly sided with Beijing in favoring very slow progress toward democracy, and this has made democracy advocates wary of him as well, although some say that anyone may be better than Mr. Tung.
James To, a senior Democratic Party lawmaker, said that Mr. Tung's resignation was at least partly a victory for street protesters who have been calling for him to step down for two years to take responsibility for the territory's economic weaknesses and political disputes.
''His resignation is at least partly due to people power, so it is partly the people's victory,'' he said.
Mr. Tung, 67, said at a news conference that his resignation two years before the completion of his second five-year term in 2007 was solely due to declining health and advancing years. 
Under the Basic Law, Hong Kong's constitution, a chief executive can only step down because of ill health or governmental paralysis involving relations with the legislature. 
He denied widespread speculation that Beijing officials had demanded his resignation.
By stepping down this week, Mr. Tung ensures that his successor will be elected by current members of city's Electoral Committee, most of whom are strongly loyal to Beijing. 
Their five-year terms run until July 13.
Mr. Tung said that mainland officials would decide whether the candidate chosen this summer will serve a full, five-year term or only the two years remaining in Mr. Tung's term. 
In any case, Mr. Tsang is widely seen as the front-runner because he has far more experience at the senior ranks of government than any potential rivals.
The best measure of Chinese leaders' dissatisfaction with Hong Kong may be their decision to choose a successor for Mr. Tung as chief executive who is his opposite. 
Mr. Tsang is just that.
Mr. Tung is an outspoken Chinese nationalist who tried to push through stringent internal security laws two years ago.
Mr. Tsang, who goes by Sir Donald when traveling overseas but not in Hong Kong, represented the city's interests under British rule in discussions for its transfer to China, but has since hewed closely to Beijing's resistance to greater pluralism.
Mr. Tung is the Shanghai-born heir to a shipping fortune, a British university graduate who has always spoken Cantonese, the dialect here, with a very heavy Shanghai accent.
Mr. Tsang is the son of a police constable and third-generation Hong Kong resident who went straight to work on graduation from a Catholic high school here.
But more than those differences speak for Mr. Tsang, who is widely admired for having handled many of the most difficult issues here over the last two decades, like how to allocate just 50,000 British passports, allowing emigration to Britain, among more than six million residents before the transfer.
He was the financial secretary during the Asian financial crisis in 1997 and 1998, and ordered large government stock purchases in a successful effort to fight off speculators betting on a devaluation of the Hong Kong dollar.
Unlike Mr. Tung, a solitary workaholic, Mr. Tsang is very social. 
He goes out every night of the week to elegant dinner parties and neighborhood gatherings alike, often with his wife, Selina, and, again unlike his predecessor, shows an easy charm in mingling with people from all walks of life.
