
For filmgoers who might have caught Maggie Cheung battling a 500-year-old Ming Dynasty eunuch in "Heroic Trio," or flicking her tongue with erotic glee while snatching flies in "Green Snake," or shoving a cake into Jackie Chan's face in "Police Story," her latest incarnation as the muse of Wong Kar-wai's "In the Mood for Love" might come as something of a surprise.
In the late 80's and early 90's, the go-go years of Hong Kong cinema, the industry churned out 30 films annually, nearly a third starring Cheung. 
By 1994, sick of her frenetic career, Cheung dropped out. 
"I always played a really helpless cute girl who the hero came and saved," she says of such films as the piquantly titled "It's a Drink, It's a Bomb."
"I was fed up with the parts I was playing," Cheung explains. 
"All the films seemed the same to me."
"In the Mood for Love," which opens in New York this week, is one movie that won't blend into the haze of forgettable Hong Kong exploitation fare. 
Coming on the heels of Edward Yang's "Yi Yi" and Ang Lee's "Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon," the film, already a hit in Paris, is poised to capitalize on America's new-found appreciation for Asian cinema. 
Swoony, saturated in a lush romanticism, it is an almost Hitchcockian examination of wordless yearning. 
Cheung and her co-star Tony Leung play neighbors in 1962 Hong Kong who discover their respective spouses (never seen on-screen) are having an affair and embark on their own elliptical mating dance.
Cheung embodies the film's lonely core: a woman trapped in loveliness and convention, her tightly repressed suffering a mocking rebuke to the putative powers of beauty. 
"Maggie can tell a story with her body," says Wong, who has directed her in three other films. 
Indeed, Cheung's lithe figure is at once flirty and feline, and she wears her high-necked, floral-patterned dresses like armor.
There was a time when critics didn't expect much of Cheung. 
Yet her maturation has mirrored that of Hong Kong itself. 
While its commercial film market was crumbling in the last few years, mostly because of piracy, Cheung lent her star power to emerging directors like Wong, Peter Chan, Anna Hui and Stanley Kwan, talents more interested in alienated dislocation than in the theatrics of traditional martial arts fare. 
Her early, almost cartoonish acting style has softened into an easygoing grace. 
Her face has lost its girlish roundness, leaving sweetness unmarred by sentimentality and a sad worldliness in her eyes.
The 36-year-old actress was born in Hong Kong, reared in Kent, England, (where she was the only Chinese kid in her class), and lives in Paris with her husband, the French director Olivier Assayas, to whom she speaks mostly in English. 
She is less a product of China than a citizen of the world, a perfect export for the globalized film business. 
And yet, she identifies with the Chinese and admires what she sees as their "great tolerance to pain and suffering."
"It's natural not to express our grief on our faces like Western people."
Wong, the most imitated Hong Kong director, never wrote a complete script, but simply built the film around Cheung and Leung. 
"He couldn't tell me about the character because he didn't know," says Cheung, who every morning was given freshly written pages, in a fugue of exploratory filmmaking that lasted 15 months. 
"My character changed six times. 
I was annoyed," she says, adding of Wong, "I thought I had thought too highly of him all these years."
They didn't argue explicitly, because as Cheung notes with a laugh, "A smart guy would never fight with an actress."
But she secretly vowed never to work with Wong again. 
"It was only after I saw the film that I lost all my anger."
In 1996, she was lured out of retirement to star as herself, "Maggie Cheung, Asian superstar" in "Irma Vep," a French satire about filmmaking, directed by her husband, then only an acquaintance. 
Instead of playing the role as a larger-than-life diva, Cheung decided to just be herself and "not act," she says. 
The experience was liberating. 
"It made me click on something. 
This is modern acting. 
It should be so natural that you don't feel people are acting at all. 
This is the direction I want to explore more, and refine it."
