
The government here ended a public comment period today on plans for tough internal security laws, including a ban on the mere possession of "seditious" publications, brushing aside objections from businesses, human rights groups and foreign governments.
The government said it would introduce legislation as soon as practicable, with the goal of winning final passage by July. 
However, the government indicated that adjustments would be made to its plans based on the public comments that have been received.
Timothy Tong, Hong Kong's acting secretary of security, said tonight that while officials were aware of polls showing that up to 70 percent of the residents here had a negative view of the plans, they would still start the legislative process by February.
"Hong Kong, being an inalienable part of the People's Republic of China, has both moral and constitutional obligations to protect national security," he said at a news conference.
Yet after receiving more than 90,000 comments on the proposal, government officials are likely to revise some provisions, Mr. Tong said.
"We will consider how best we can improve on our proposals and allay as far as possible worries raised by different sectors, such as those over the possession of seditious publications, increased police powers and unauthorized access to protected information." he said. 
"We believe there will be some adjustments to our proposals in the light of the views received."
Britain handed over this territory to China in 1997 after receiving a promise, enshrined in the territory's Basic Law, that China would respect Hong Kong's separate legal and economic systems for at least 50 years under the principle of "One Country, Two Systems."
But the Basic Law also contains a provision, Article 23, that requires new internal security laws after the handover.
A wide range of critics, from the American Chamber of Commerce to Amnesty International to the European Parliament, as well as democracy advocates here, had urged the government to issue a draft text of the legislation for public comment before asking the Legislative Council to take up the issue. 
The critics complained of ambiguities in the so-called consultation document in which the government outlined its plans.
"The government spent four years to draft that consultation document but has only given us two months to look at it," said Bella Luk, the director of the Hong Kong section of Amnesty International, which also petitioned unsuccessfully today for an extension of the comment period.
An additional period of public comment for a draft text of the legislation would give opponents another chance to oppose provisions like one that would allow even fairly junior police commanders to order searches and seizures without a warrant in security cases, and another that lengthens prison sentences and increases fines for sedition.
Banks and other businesses have been particularly alarmed by proposals for stringent penalties for the unauthorized release of government information, fearing that, as on the mainland, such a provision could be used to inhibit free speech about economic indicators or even the financial health of Chinese state-owned enterprises. 
Mr. Tong said that this concern would receive attention and might prompt revisions.
The government here has repeatedly pointed out that its proposal would actually narrow the grounds on which residents and foreigners could be tried for some offenses. 
Hong Kong already has fairly stringent security laws on its books.
Mr. Tong said tonight that the executive branch here would proceed with its original plan to send the new internal security laws directly to the Legislative Council in February as a so-called blue bill, which discourages filibusters and amendments.
The bill would go through numerous hearings, but under the rules, the Legislative Council would be compelled to vote on the bill before adjourning in July. 
The measure is expected to pass.
Some Chinese nationalists here have embraced the government's proposal, contending that the laws will help make sure that Chinese rule over Hong Kong is never threatened.
They also contend that recent American antiterrorism efforts show that Hong Kong's efforts are part of an international trend toward balancing respect for civil rights with security worries.
"You need a lock for your door to prevent a thief from breaking in," said Ma Lik, the secretary general of the Democratic Alliance for the Betterment of Hong Kong, a pro-Beijing political party.
