
Tens of thousands of demonstrators gathered tonight before the legislature building here to call for free elections and the resignation of Hong Kong's leader.
The crowd was sizable, filling a downtown avenue and two parks, but came nowhere near the estimated 500,000 people who marched on July 1, mainly to protest a stringent internal security bill that the territory's government was trying to push through the Legislative Council.
On Monday, the government postponed a vote on that bill after it became clear that it would lose.
Richard Tsoi, a spokesman for the Human Civil Rights Front, which organized both rallies, said the peaceful gathering tonight drew the 50,000 people that the group had expected even before the government delayed the bill on Monday.
The police estimated that at least 30,000 people were present halfway through the two-hour rally. 
Speakers called not only for the security legislation to be redrafted but for all of Hong Kong's lawmakers to be elected by popular vote, making the territory a democratic model for the rest of China.
Demonstrators also chanted many times for the resignation of Hong Kong's chief executive, Tung Chee-hwa. 
Record unemployment of 8.3 percent, falling home prices and Hong Kong's slow initial response to the SARS epidemic have sapped Mr. Tung's popularity.
Beijing has shown no interest in letting people here play a greater role in choosing their leaders. 
James Tien, the chairman of the pro-business and pro-government Liberal Party, who compelled the government to postpone the security legislation by resigning from the cabinet on Sunday evening, said today that Hong Kong was not ready for more democracy.
The minority of lawmakers who are already elected by the general public are not friendly enough to the business community and lack expertise in business issues, Mr. Tien said at a news conference.
He also complained that democratically elected politicians here were too reluctant to accept financial contributions and other help from business leaders that might produce closer ties to the corporate sector.
Eric Li, a political independent chosen by the territory's 22,000 accountants, said in a telephone interview that he believed that all Legislative Council seats should be filled through universal suffrage someday.
But he said business executives should continue to be allocated special seats in the 2004 and 2008 legislative elections, contending that the political parties were not well enough developed yet to attract technically qualified candidates.
An 800-member Election Committee, chosen by 3 percent of the population, mainly pro-Beijing business people and professionals, selects the chief executive, under a system devised before Britain handed over Hong Kong to China in 1997.
Hong Kong's Basic Law, the closest thing it has to a constitution, calls vaguely for the government to seek more democratic means of choosing the chief executive in 2007 and Legislative Council members in 2008. 
But Sing Ming, a political scientist at the City University, said that unless political reformers gained power in Beijing, officials here "will try to procrastinate as much as they can."
