
The Hong Kong Observatory, the local government's meteorological agency, on Monday issued an early warning of a strong storm arriving in the days before the Olympic equestrian events start here.
After a tropical depression formed nearby over the weekend in the warm waters of the South China Sea, the observatory forecast that it would soon strengthen into a tropical storm. 
The observatory meteorologists forecast that it would pass about 50 miles south of Hong Kong on Wednesday morning, with wind speeds of 52 miles an hour.
The storm is expected to pass even closer to Macau, a former Portuguese colony 40 miles southwest of Hong Kong that is being used by many Olympic teams as a staging area before sending athletes to smoggy Beijing. 
While the United States basketball team has already left Macau, as previously scheduled, the British and other teams still have athletes there.
The slow-moving storm, which has not yet been given a name, is forecast to move well into southernmost China by Thursday morning, two days before the first of six Olympic equestrian events begins in Hong Kong on Saturday morning. 
The storm is not likely to affect the opening ceremonies in Beijing on Friday evening.
All six Olympic equestrian events are being held in Hong Kong because mainland China was not able to satisfy international veterinary authorities that it could prevent valuable Olympic horses from being exposed to equine influenza and other livestock diseases.
The Hong Kong Observatory issued hourly bulletins on the tropical depression Monday, in what could become a training exercise for how Hong Kong would respond if a full-fledged typhoon, and not just a tropical storm, arrived during the Olympics. 
An elaborate drainage system has been installed at the main Olympic venue for dressage and show jumping. 
Drainage has also been improved at the cross country venue, a modified golf course scheduled to be used next Monday.
When 16 inches of rain fell in two days in June, the equestrian course there remained usable, although the rest of the site became muddy, said Dr. Leo Jeffcott, the senior international veterinarian for the Hong Kong events. 
''We could have run the horses around, but the spectators would have been in a bit of a mess, and the officials,'' he said in an interview last week.
Lam Woon-Kwong, the chief executive of the Hong Kong Equestrian Company, which was set up to manage the Olympic events here, said at a news conference Monday that if any events are postponed, they might be rescheduled, but possibly without spectators, as it would be difficult to arrange on short notice. 
The equestrian events are scheduled to be held from Aug. 
9 to 21. 
That leaves two days, Aug. 
22 and 23, before the closing ceremonies in Beijing in case a typhoon forces a suspension of equestrian events in Hong Kong.
