
In a reflection of China's growing prominence in international finance, Hong Kong is set for a banner year in global markets: More money will be raised by companies selling shares to the public here than on the biggest exchanges in New York and London.
And on Friday, pricing will be set for the world's largest offering ever, that of China's biggest bank, Industrial and Commercial Bank of China.
This week, long lines of individual investors showed up at downtown stalls to grab prospectuses for the bank's initial public offering, while institutional investors have swamped the underwriters with orders.
The offering, scheduled for Oct. 
27, is expected to raise $16 billion in Hong Kong. 
And in a twist from conventional offerings, the company will also raise about $6 billion in Shanghai that day. 
Because of its size, this deal, and a $10 billion initial public offering by the Bank of China in June, will account for more than half of Hong Kong's volume this year. 
But can Hong Kong hold onto its lead next year?
Investment bankers doubt it and Hong Kong's fame may be short-lived.
''It's not obvious as to what the next $10 billion trade is, but having said that, we continue to think that there will be meaningful I.P.O. volume coming from China,'' said Gokul Laroia, a managing director at Morgan Stanley and the company's head of global capital markets in Asia.
Forecasting a year out is not always so easy. 
At this time last year, UBS officials said that they had only 8 to 10 pending deals. 
Now, in contrast, they are working on two dozen initial public offerings of Chinese companies, expected to raise a total of $9.2 billion next year.
''There is no evidence that the flow is drying up in any way, shape or form,'' said Steven Barg, UBS's head of equity capital markets for Asia.
He predicted that Chinese companies in a variety of industries might go public, including in consumer goods, power, insurance, mining, steel, real estate, retailing, telecommunications and transportation.
Two public offerings expected to be at least $1 billion each next year are the China Pacific Insurance Group and Jinduicheng Molybdenum Mining.
Investment bankers say that the deals from China next year are likely to be smaller but more numerous. 
UBS, Goldman Sachs and other investment banks say they have many deals in the pipeline for next year.
The total raised next year in Hong Kong through initial public offerings, though, could dwindle by a third, from as much as $40 billion this year, bankers said. 
Mr. Laroia predicted that it could take three to five years to match this year's peak in dollar terms.
According to Thomson Financial, the London Stock Exchange has been the biggest market for initial public offerings so far this year. 
But London, at $32 billion, is only $14.8 billion ahead of the Hong Kong Exchange, a gap that will be easily closed once the Chinese bank transaction is completed.
With further Chinese deals planned before the end of this year, including an initial public offering of the China Communications Construction Group that is expected to raise $1.5 billion to $2.5 billion, bankers expect Hong Kong to finish the year in the lead as well.
Even if the value of the deals shrinks next year, senior executives at the biggest investment banks see no need to cut staff in Hong Kong or Shanghai, as smaller deals often require almost as much work as large ones. 
The fees of investment banks also tend to be larger for deals less than $1 billion, running around 3 percent of the money raised, compared with less than 2 percent for very big deals like the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China.
''We have a very healthy backlog and we feel pretty good about the breadth of that backlog,'' which includes listings in China's domestic market and the listing of Chinese companies on international markets, said David Ryan, a managing director at Goldman Sachs who is the co-head of the company's finance group in Asia except for Japan. 
''People feel like they're going to be working pretty hard.''
Mr. Laroia cautioned, however, that, ''The total volume of fees, given the total volume of activity, will be lower.''
A lingering question now for investment bankers is whether investors' appetite for Chinese stocks will flag after many have stuffed their portfolios with Chinese bank stocks over the last year.
After its initial public offering, the market capitalization of the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China and the Bank of China is likely to play a sizable role in stock indexes for Asia and especially for Hong Kong.
As a result, Romeo Dator, the portfolio manager of the $75 million United States Global China Region Opportunity Fund in San Antonio, said he and many other investment managers had little choice but to buy shares in the big Chinese banks to insure that their results did not diverge too widely from the overall indexes.
But he said he would select carefully among future share offerings based on the strength of each company.
''Since we're done with the big banks,'' he said, '' I don't think we'll see the same level of demand.''
But many investment bankers disagree, saying that a minority of the investment in Chinese stocks these days comes from fund managers or individuals who are comparing the stocks to Chinese or Asian indexes.
Global hedge funds have been opening or expanding their offices in Hong Kong at a rapid pace, contributing to soaring rents for office space and apartments alike. 
Oil-producing countries have been putting large chunks of their new wealth into Asia, in contrast to their heavy investments in the United States and Europe when oil prices were high in the 1970's.
''That capital is looking eastward, not westward,'' said Mark Renton, a Citigroup managing director who is the company's head of investment banking in Asia.
With the exception of Chinese technology companies, which have listed on Nasdaq so they can be traded on the same market as comparable companies from around the world, most Chinese companies have stayed closer to home, listing in Hong Kong or occasionally Shanghai.
Some investment bankers attribute that to Chinese wariness of the Sarbanes-Oxley requirements on corporate governance, but others say that Chinese companies are not venturing to New York or London in appreciable numbers simply because the world's financiers are coming to Asia instead, and bringing their wallets with them.
''I.C.B.C. is able to access the capital markets without resorting to an overseas listing,'' Mr. Renton said, ''because the pools of capital have moved.''
