
THE BASICS -- Opened in September, the 399-room Four Seasons Hong Kong caps the final phase of development for the city's International Finance Center (IFC), a grand business and shopping complex parked on the Central neighborhood's waterfront. 
The hotel isn't the company's first foray here --Four Seasons managed the Regent before InterContinental Hotels bought it out in 2001 -- but it is the first major new hotel to open in Hong Kong in 15 years. 
There are five restaurants and bars, including a busy lobby lounge. 
The service is almost uniformly excellent, but some of the concierge staff may have been selected on the basis of language skills and appearance rather than local knowledge. 
(On a recent visit, a request for a good wonton-noodle restaurant resulted in a trip to a tea house with a decided lack of wonton noodles).
THE LOCATION -- Smack in the middle of Central, Hong Kong's business district, convenient to the Star Ferry terminal, downtown offices and the MTR subway. 
Just downstairs in the IFC complex, you can hop on the Airport Express, a super-fast 23-minute train to Hong Kong International Airport (you can even check in for your flight at the station).
THE ROOMS -- On less-smoggy days, there are expansive views of Victoria Harbor -- one of the world's busiest, with barges, fishing vessels and ferries in constant motion -- from 70 percent of the rooms. 
Some are done up in Chinese-style decor, heavy on the brocade, while other rooms reflect a sleeker Western aesthetic, with lots of pale woods and silk-paneled walls. 
All are relatively spacious (even the standard ones are almost 500 square feet) and have floor-to-ceiling windows and 42-inch plasma televisions.
THE BATHROOMS -- The works: Marble baths, soaking tubs, separate glass-walled, double-headed showers and L'Occitane dental and shaving kits.
THE CROWD -- About half the clientele consists of business people from other Asian nations, and another 10 percent from mainland China. 
The rest consists largely of Western business travelers and vacationers stopping on their way to other Asian destinations.
AMENITIES -- A 22,000-square-foot spa with 18 treatment rooms and two spa suites with floor-to-ceiling windows, plasma televisions and private bars (the common areas include waterfall Jacuzzis, steam rooms and saunas). 
Two magnificent outdoor infinity pools -- perfect for lap swimming, except for the air pollution -- are tiled in iridescent blue mosaics that recall Victoria Harbor's waves and white dolphins. 
The fifth-floor fitness center is large and well equipped with machines and weights. 
If you want to get work done, bring your laptop -- the top floor (45th) business center is open 24 hours, but there are only three computers, and they cost you a usurious 50 Hong Kong dollars (about $6.60 at 7.6 Hong Kong dollars to $1) for 15 minutes.
ROOM SERVICE -- Available 24 hours, with different menus throughout the day. 
Fresh orange juice, poached eggs, sausage, toast and hot coffee (200 Hong Kong dollars ) arrived within 20 minutes.
THE BOTTOM LINE -- A beautiful modern hotel that has the best location on Hong Kong Island, hands-down. 
Many tourists may opt for the old-world elegance of the Peninsula Hotel or the legendary views from the InterContinental across the harbor in Kowloon, but business travelers may well prefer the sleek contemporary conveniences at the Four Seasons and its proximity to the Airport Express. 
The IFC Mall, with its many restaurants and designer flagships, also offers a serious new draw for upscale shoppers, one that rivals the famous Harbour City in Kowloon. 
Doubles start at 3,200 Hong Kong dollars for the bed-and-breakfast package. 
Four Seasons Hotel Hong Kong, 8 Finance Street, Central; (852) 3196-8888; www.fourseasons.com/hongkong. 
BONNIE TSUI
