
With most of the vote counted, advocates of greater democracy appeared to have scored modest gains in elections here on Sunday, but fell short of winning a majority in the legislature.
Democracy proponents captured a less sizable majority than expected of the popular vote, which elects half the legislature. 
But democracy supporters fared better than expected among previously pro-Beijing professional groups and industries that choose the rest of the legislature's members.
The pro-democracy opposition captured 24 seats. 
Candidates leaning toward the democracy camp took two additional seats, while two independents who occasionally side with the democratic side were re-elected.
The democrats have controlled 22 seats for the past four years.
The loss of several seats in the 60-member Legislative Council still leaves Beijing fairly able to retain control of legislative developments in this former British colony, although local leaders may have to make more concessions to prevent defections. 
Some businessmen representing industries in the legislature have treated their legislative work as part-time jobs, and the government will need to persuade them to show up regularly for votes to avoid defeats.
Democracy proponents gained some power to delay, but probably not block, legislative initiatives favored by Tung Chee-hwa, the territory's Beijing-backed chief executive.
A series of irregularities marred the election. 
Ballot boxes overflowed early and long lines formed as more boxes had to be dispatched to polling places. 
Election workers in some polling places reportedly opened boxes that were supposed to stay sealed in order to compress the ballots and allow more to be inserted. 
Embarrassed election officials said they had failed to take into account the greater size of ballots this year in estimating how many ballots would fit in each box.
A democracy advocate from a minor party trailed by 300 votes of 356,000 cast in a six-seat district on Hong Kong Island. 
The main opposition, the Democratic Party, sought and obtained a recount of all the votes in the district, but lost the recount.
The outcome on Sunday was far from the serious setback for Beijing's allies that had been expected as recently as early July, when several hundred thousand residents marched to demand a greater say in how they are ruled.
Since then, the mainland government organized two military parades, dispatched all of its Olympic gold medalists for athletic demonstrations here and even sent what is reputed to be the relic of one of Buddha's fingers. 
In addition, the local economy strengthened in recent weeks.
During the same period, a series of sexual and financial scandals involving the Democratic Party dominated the news.
''The scandals definitely had some effect on some voters,'' said Clement Y.K. 
So, a political analyst at Chinese University of Hong Kong. 
''Apart from the scandals, there was nothing else in the last few weeks.''
Business executives with operations both on the mainland and in Hong Kong have complained of pressure from Chinese officials to make sure their Hong Kong employees did not vote for democracy advocates; in the spring, three pro-democracy radio talk show hosts quit, with two abruptly leaving the territory after receiving what they described as threats.
At least one of Mr. Tung's most acerbic critics, Leung Kwok-hung, an activist with waist-length hair who describes himself as a Marxist, appeared to have won a seat in the legislature. 
His election promises to make debates more interesting, as well as giving the Democratic Party another ally on democracy issues.
''It is a very clear protest vote,'' said Shaw Sin-ming, a local political commentator.
Three independents -- Andrew Wong, David Li and Bernard Chan -- occasionally vote against the Tung administration in the current legislature as well, but preliminary voting results showed that Mr. Wong almost certainly lost his re-election bid.
The turnout set a record, with 55.6 percent of registered voters casting ballots. 
Before the scandals, democracy advocates had hoped for a turnout of 60 percent or higher.
The elections were the most important here since the birth of a large street protest movement in the summer of 2003, when the government tried to force stringent internal-security laws through the legislature. 
After nearly a tenth of the territory's population marched against the plan, the government withdrew the legislation, but it reserved the right to reintroduce it after the legislature elected Sunday is seated on Oct. 
1.
In interviews on Hong Kong Island and on Kowloon Peninsula, voters expressed dismay at the unpleasant tone of the campaign but said they wanted to take part in the democratic process anyway.
''All the parties are not good because they fight for their interests,'' said Ng Shui-sheung, a 41-year-old housewife, after voting at a community center in Kowloon tucked between an outdoor jade market and a large Taoist temple flanked by banyan trees with dangling roots. 
''The independent candidates are better.''
The 3.2 million registered voters here were choosing 30 of the 60 members of the Legislative Council. 
That is an increase from 24 directly elected members in the legislature that has sat for the past four years, as government officials pointed out on Sunday. 
''I am sure this symbolizes Hong Kong society becoming more open and more people are participating in the governing of it,'' said Donald Tsang, the chief secretary and second-ranking government official here.
Only 200,000 residents, corporations and associations are allowed to vote for the other 30 Legislative Council members, who represent industries and professions like banking and the law. 
Eleven candidates from these so-called functional constituencies ran unopposed and were automatically elected while the remaining races are to be decided by the voting on Sunday.
