
Hong Kong asked the Chinese government on Wednesday to issue a legally binding decision on how long the next chief executive will serve here. 
Such a decision would be the third intervention by Beijing in the legal system here.
Democracy advocates strongly criticized the government for seeking the interpretation, saying it represented another surrender of Hong Kong's autonomy and undermined the rule of law here.
But Donald Tsang, the acting chief executive, said a binding decision from Beijing was needed to make sure legal challenges did not prevent elections for the next chief executive from being held as scheduled on July 10.
The Basic Law, the mini-constitution written for the territory by mainland lawyers before Britain returned the territory to China in 1997, calls for chief executives to serve five-year terms. 
But there is no provision stating the length of the term of a chief executive elected when a previous one cannot finish a term.
Tung Chee-hwa, the Beijing-anointed chief executive since the transfer, resigned on March 12, citing health problems. 
His second term was to run through June 30, 2007, and Beijing officials have voiced their preference that the next chief executive serve only the balance of Mr. Tung's term.
A two-year term would give the Chinese government considerable leverage on anyone elected this summer. 
Mr. Tsang is widely regarded as the leading candidate, but he is deeply distrusted by pro-Beijing politicians here because he is a former colonial civil servant who was knighted for loyal service to the British crown.
The Hong Kong Bar Association and other groups of lawyers have insisted that the Basic Law is very clear in calling for only five-year terms. 
But two mainland lawyers have stepped forward to say that they recall discussions during the drafting of the Basic Law in the late 1980's in which it was assumed that chief executives would serve only the balance of a term if elected to fill a mid-term vacancy.
The government here has said it has found documents to support this position, but has not released them. 
As an example of why it was important to settle the matter so the election can go forward, Mr. Tsang alluded to a lawsuit by a 67-year-old tenant in public housing that forced the government to postpone indefinitely the $2.73 billion sale of shops and parking spaces at public housing projects. 
An unemployed man, citing the tenant's success, filed a legal challenge on Monday to the legality of limiting the next chief executive to a two-year term.
''Our recent experience with judicial review shows there can be many uncertainties,'' Mr. Tsang said at a news conference on Wednesday evening. 
He said it would be unfair to potential candidates to hold an election in which it was unclear how long the winner would serve.
The Basic Law says the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress, the Communist Party-controlled legislature of China, has essentially complete discretion in deciding how the law is interpreted.
The committee interpreted the law in 1999 to overturn a decision by the Hong Kong courts that would have allowed many mainlanders with a Hong Kong parent to claim residency here. 
The committee issued another interpretation on April 26 last year ruling out allowing the general public to vote in elections for the chief executive in 2007 and for all seats of the legislature in 2008.
The committee will meet again in late April, and is expected to order a two-year term.
