
''Hao qiu!'' your caddie is apt to murmur sweetly if you manage an even halfway decent drive after teeing off in China. 
Good shot!
If you hit a ''bu hao'' -- a stinker -- there will be a moment of embarrassed silence.
As in the rest of Asia, caddies are mandatory everywhere in China -- nobody would dream of carrying his own bag. 
And in China caddies are almost always women. 
They wear white gloves sometimes and long-billed hard hats, designed to protect them from both the sun and errant shots, and they bring to their profession a level of devotion undreamed of in the West. 
They tote your bag in a hand-pulled trolley, or else, like liveried footmen, they ride on a running board welded to the back of a golf cart and scurry from cart path to fairway bearing fistfuls of clubs. 
At the tee box, they present your driver as if it were a ceremonial sword, and after you're done, they carefully swaddle the head back in its cover.
Chinese caddies do everything, in fact, except hit your shot for you. 
They hand you your tee; give you your yardage; fill your divots; rake your traps; mark your ball, clean it and then replace it with the logo pointing along the proper line to the hole. 
They also emote with you, sharing your joy, feeling your pain. 
When I plopped my second shot into the water on the par-5 14th hole at Sheshan Golf Club in Shanghai last fall, my caddie gave me a look of such surprise and distress it was as if I had drowned our child.
Golf is now an international language, and people in China speak it everywhere, lining up their putts like Jack, following through like Freddie. 
You even spot them in airports, practicing their swings with invisible clubs. 
But the Chinese version of this language has a subtext. 
Golf and the imagery of golf, which you see all over, on TV commercials and highway billboards, are a kind of code for the new China, the one where the economy is growing at close to 10 percent a year and where, even though the average wage in the countryside is less than $100 a month, hordes of newly minted millionaires are not in the least embarrassed about flaunting their wealth. 
Much more than in America, golf in China stands for money, power and social exclusivity.
For all intents and purposes, golf in China is just 20 years old. 
The first modern course, an Arnold Palmer design, opened in 1984. 
Another dozen or so were added in the decade following. 
But in the last 10 years the total has soared to 230, making China second in Asia in terms of golf course acreage (behind Japan), and though there is supposed to be a moratorium on constructing courses, new ones seem to spring up every month. 
In some ways, the most significant thing to happen to Chinese golf was the SARS epidemic of 2003, when some offices were closed for as long as six weeks and Chinese businessmen, who place great stock in personal relationships and face-to-face meetings, began making their deals outside on the fairway. 
Golf has now replaced karaoke as the preferred way of entertaining business clients.
What all this means, though, is that golf hasn't evolved in China: it has arrived more or less full-blown, in its high-end and even slightly decadent form. 
If you think of the country as a kind of golf laboratory, it's one that skipped over all the populist experiments -- the developmental stage of public links and pitch 'n' putt and little rural nine-holers -- and went straight to the exclusive clubs and the gated golf course communities whose manicured fairways are lined with McMansions. 
There are no munis, just a handful of daily-fee courses, and the membership at most clubs would set you back more than it would at Winged Foot.
Officially the Chinese government appears to be ambivalent about golf, which it eradicated, along with other vestiges of Western luxury and elitism, in 1949. 
In Shanghai, for example, where the British introduced golf to the Chinese in the 19th century and where the most famous club, Hung-Jao, was taken over by the municipal authorities and turned into a zoo, government officials are still discouraged from playing. 
Many do, anyway. 
They just use assumed names.
It has been said that if Hu Jintao, the country's president, were ever photographed holding a club, a million new golfers would come leaping out of the closet. 
Occasionally you also hear that China is in danger of turning into Myrtle Beach, S.C., with more courses than there are players to keep them profitable. 
But you would never think so from visiting Chinese clubs, which teem with golfers from dawn to dusk. 
At Mission Hills, the country's largest golf complex, outside the city of Shenzhen, people play under the lights until two in the morning.
''You must be boss,'' Wang Yuhong, the vice general manager of the Shanghai Lujiazui Golf Club, said to me one sweltering Saturday morning after watching me take a few swings with a borrowed club. 
The Lujiazui is not, strictly speaking, a golf club at all. 
It's a two-story driving range -- 98 stalls -- on what must be some of the most expensive real estate in the world: five acres in the heart of Shanghai's financial district, where skyscrapers sprout like weeds. 
All around me young men in their 20's or early 30's were flailing and slashing at balls. 
They all had top-of-the-line equipment and trunk-size leather golf bags stamped with the logos of Callaway, Titleist or Mizuno. 
Out by the 150-yard marker, a guy was pushing a hand-operated ball retriever surrounded by a protective cage. 
He looked a little like a gerbil on an exercise wheel, and some golfers were trying to hit him -- without a great deal of success.
One of the consequences of being a 20-year-old golf laboratory is that few people in the lab have grown up with the game, and most are self-taught. 
The average handicap at most Chinese clubs is probably 26 or 27, much higher than it would be at equivalent American clubs. 
And even Chinese with access to instruction sometimes resist it. 
''These people are so wealthy, some of them, that they're used to getting everything they want right away,'' said Linford Jacquelin, an Australian pro who teaches at the David Leadbetter Golf Academy at Mission Hills. 
''Some of them are impatient about taking lessons.''
Wang explained that in China the bosses were the golfing pioneers. 
In any office, he said, the boss is always the first to take up the game, followed by the office manager and then by ambitious employees who want to emulate him. 
The growth of golf in Shanghai, he added, has been directly tied to the city's growth as a world financial center. 
''See those buildings?'' he said, pointing to the skyscrapers out beyond the giant net stretched behind the 250-yard marker. 
''They weren't here when we start.''
That was in 2000, and there were hardly any golfers then, either. 
The few who did show up were mostly from Taiwan or Hong Kong, where golf has much older roots. 
But starting in 2002, Wang said, the skyscrapers began shooting up, and soon the stalls at Lujiazui were filled with eager hackers. 
One of them, a young man named Chow Wei, who now has quite a practiced swing, said: ''Golf is like social status. 
People play because they think they're rich, or because they want you to think it.''
A yearly membership at Lujiazui costs about $250, which is a bargain by Chinese standards. 
You get to book a slot in advance, and a uniformed caddie will tote your bag to the stall, where another caddie, pushing a drinks cart, will very quickly turn up. 
There is also a pro shop, a restaurant and a snooker room. 
The place is a sort of training club, where you can park yourself while you save up the roughly $124,000 it costs to join Tomson, one of the best-known of the 15 or so clubs in the Shanghai area.
Tomson, the site of the BMW Asian Open since 2004, is just 20 minutes from downtown, and from practically any spot on the course you can see the crowded cityscape and Shanghai's two most famous landmarks: the Oriental Pearl TV Tower, which looks like a shish kebab skewer with an onion in the middle, and the cloud-piercing Jin Mao Tower. 
But like many Chinese clubs, Tomson is otherworldly, a gated community enclosing hundreds of classical-style villas and condos, and the course itself is so manicured, so stylized, that it doesn't seem quite natural. 
It was designed by the Japanese architect Shunsuke Kato and resembles a giant Japanese rock garden or, in its hokier moments, a miniature golf course blown up to life size. 
The fairways, narrow and lined with ornamental trees, are gently mounded along the sides, and strewed around, just for looks, are lots of handsome white boulders. 
Hundreds of them are stacked across the fairway of the fourth hole, to replicate the Great Wall of China -- there is no free drop -- and in the middle of the 18th fairway there's an enormous conical pile of them, which you can hit either over or around, depending on how bold you are. 
This is the highest elevation by far on the golf course, and I was baffled as to its purpose. 
''What is that?''
I asked Aileen Zhou, an assistant manager at Tomson. 
''Mount Fuji,'' she said matter-of-factly.
About 45 minutes away, on the city outskirts and in the shadow of a real mountain -- or what passes for a mountain in the otherwise flat, scrubby landscape of the Shanghai region -- is Sheshan Golf Club, the newest and most exclusive of the Shanghai clubs. 
According to David Townend, the general manager, ''We set out to be the first truly private and exclusive golf course in Shanghai.''
Sheshan is only a year old, and had you signed on at the beginning, before ground was broken in October 2002, you could have joined for $30,000 (plus the monthly dues); current memberships go for $165,000, and there are only a few left. 
If Premier Golf, a bimonthly magazine published by the club, is any indication, the members tend to be corporate bigwigs, and what they are looking for is not just a place to play golf but a full-service haven: in this case, a little slice of Tuscany. 
The hundred or so villas and equal number of town houses surrounding the course are clad in stone, with Italian archways and terra-cotta roof tiles. 
There are fountains, a bell tower and an arched Tuscan bridge linking the clubhouse to the fairway on 18. 
The clubhouse itself, big enough to contain a Tuscan village in its entirety, includes in the locker room a more than passable vision of what the Baths of Caracalla in ancient Rome might have been like.
Thanks in part to a connection with IMG, the giant sports-management agency, Sheshan was selected as the site for last November's HSBC Champions tournament, whose $5 million in prize money, the richest purse in Asia, was sufficient to attract even the likes of Tiger Woods, on only his second visit to China. 
When I was there in September, the place was already quivering with anticipation. 
''Tiger Woods!'' one member said after spotting me as an American. 
''I will be here!''
The Chinese revere Woods. 
They're fascinated by him for all the reasons we are, and also because his mother is Thai. 
''Tiger Woods is Asian,'' Jim Liu, a member at Mission Hills, explained to me one morning while watching his two sons, 6-year-old Andrew and 8-year-old Michael, take a golf lesson. 
''And a lot of Asians think that if he can do it, then it means they have a chance too.''
As it happened, Tiger, who finished second, at 17 under, shot the lights out at Sheshan. 
So did most of the field. 
The course is not a pushover, though; it's just young, having had insufficient time to grow championship-quality rough. 
And unlike many of the courses in China, which have an unreal, theme-park quality and seem as if they were rolled out like a magic carpet on alien ground, Sheshan actually looks as if it belongs where it is. 
This is in part an illusion, like the look of most modern golf courses. 
An enormous amount of earth had to be bulldozed to give the land some contour and elevation. 
But the shaping was done tastefully and judiciously, and the result is a course that's both pleasing to look at and, for an amateur, challenging to play. 
The back nine also benefits from a 250-foot-deep natural quarry, which the finishing holes circle or cross.
I played this nine one afternoon with Townend and the club's resident touring pro, Li Chao. 
Townend did a stint on the Australian tour and still has a sharp game, though like most people in the golf industry he complains about never getting out on the course. 
Li, who is 25 and, at 6-foot-5, unusually large for a Chinese, is thought to be China's most promising young player. 
He effortlessly knocked off five birdies. 
I fell apart, and tied him on just one hole, a par-3 that he bogeyed.
''Listen to that,'' Linford Jacquelin, the Mission Hills pro, said to me one morning while we were playing the Nick Faldo course, my favorite of the 10 layouts at the complex, which is the largest not just in China but in the world.
''What?''
I said.
''Birds,'' he answered.
Bird song is rare in parts of China because the countryside is being developed so rapidly. 
Like most golf courses in China, those at Mission Hills are comparatively ecofriendly. 
(In a country where labor is so cheap, it's just as efficient to pick weeds by hand as to nuke them with chemicals.) But Mission Hills is a world unto itself: gated and guarded by uniformed security personnel who snap off military salutes to incoming and outgoing vehicles and use dogs to patrol the landscaped grounds of the adjoining, clubhouse-size villas. 
Surrounding the complex are the industrial cities of Dongguan and Shenzhen, which were designated as part of a special economic zone in 1979 and are now the engine room of Chinese manufacturing. 
For miles in every direction, the roads are lined with low-rise apartment buildings and sprawling, fenced-in factories and their grim adjoining dormitories.
Mission Hills -- with a lavish clubhouse, a five-star hotel, pools and spas, and a mall-size pro shop -- is a sort of factory itself, turning out rounds of golf on an industrial scale. 
There are 2,000 caddies on duty: a red-uniformed army, battalions of which are always standing at parade rest in a staging area where golfers assemble before deploying to the courses. 
The caddies, most of whom are in their late teens or early 20's, live in convent-like barracks, work six days a week and send home much of what they make (from $150 to $400 a month, depending on seniority). 
The majority come from remote parts of China, where work is hard to find. 
One of them, Linda Ren, told me that her village in Jilin Province was 35 hours away by train.
Mission Hills is the brainchild of David Chu, a native of Hong Kong who was one of the first entrepreneurs to see opportunity in mainland China after the country opened to foreign investment in 1979, and who quickly made a fortune in the corrugated-packaging business. 
Chu is not much of a golfer himself, but he nevertheless guessed that the game would catch on among tycoons and executives. 
In 1992, he obtained a lease on some scrubland outside Shenzhen and hired Jack Nicklaus, Jumbo Ozaki, Ernie Els and Vijay Singh to design golf courses. 
(The Faldo course was added a little later at a separate site down the road, and though less touted than some of the others, it is actually one of the most pleasing because of its more human scale.) The Nicklaus course, the first to open, was the site of the 1995 World Cup tournament -- such a big deal at the time that Chu was able to persuade the government to build a new road that cut the driving time to Hong Kong from three hours to less than one.
In 2002, Chu decided to build five more courses (giving him a ''Guinness''-certified world record of 180 holes altogether) on a vast spread of mountainous land in nearby Dongguan and enlisted five more celebrity designers: Greg Norman, David Leadbetter, Annika Sorenstam, Jose Maria Olazabal and David Duval. 
It normally takes at least two years to build a golf course; the Dongguan courses were built all at once and in just 18 months by 30,000 people working in shifts around the clock to knock the tops off mountains, fill in hollows and push dirt around to create tees, bunkers and greens. 
Building the pyramids was probably easier.
The result is golf on such a scale and in such variety that it's almost unnerving. 
The original Mission Hills complex is a more or less traditional golf resort; the Dongguan addition, with a towering clubhouse now bulking up, is golf infused with growth hormone. 
The celebrity designs aren't just gimmicks. 
Each of the courses is worth playing, and each really does manifest something of its creator's personality. 
Duval's is old-fashioned and straightforward, with no blind shots or tricky doglegs; Sorenstam's, with six par-3's and six par-5's, is friendly to the short hitter; Olazabal's, in tribute to his mastery as a sand player, has a desert's worth of bunkers, including 24 on the 15th hole alone; and Norman's is long and tough, a forbidding, ball-devouring beast. 
(Norman probably didn't plan on this, but in addition to all the other hazards, the course is also blessed with the occasional cobra slipping through the rough or sunning itself in a bunker.)
The courses are so different, in fact, that they don't really harmonize with one another, or even with the surrounding landscape, which looks just like the kind of Chinese mountainscape you see in scroll paintings. 
The place feels like a virtual landscape, or a golf fantasy -- calendar art come to life -- and when you board the shuttle bus and head down the hill, out the gate and past the factories and bleak concrete apartment buildings, dodging bicycles and flocks of pedestrians trudging along the road, it's like waking from a reverie. 
Starting with its name, in fact, there is very little about Mission Hills that is recognizably Chinese, except for the excellent Chinese food. 
The $10 million villas, for example, with their elevators, porticoes, marble floors, tiled pools and walk-in humidors, are built in what a brochure calls the ''perfect blend of Italian and Hawaiian style.''
The most familiar thing about Chinese golf, and also the most retro, is its fledgling pro tour. 
In its first year in 2005, the China Tour, promoted by the World Sport Group, a Singapore firm, consisted of only four events and was intended as a training ground of sorts for golfers and fans alike. 
(At the 1995 World Cup at Mission Hills, many of the spectators turned up in business suits or high heels, and it was widely assumed that balls sprayed into the rough could be plucked as souvenirs.) The purses were tiny ($100,000 per tournament) and the golfers an eclectic, ragtag bunch from all over China. 
A few, like Li Chao, the prodigy from Sheshan, and his classmate Shang Lei, were products of Secondary School No. 77, an elite sports academy in Beijing that nurtures athletes from several sports. 
Some were athletes who, in their 20's or 30's, had switched over from other sports. 
Qi Zengfa, for example, was a former international rower; Ouyang Wen was a former national champion in wushu, the Chinese martial art. 
Many more were self-taught, guys who had picked up the game from hanging around golf courses as caddies or maintenance men.
The first stop on the China Tour was Beijing's Elephant Club in August. 
I caught up with the second stop, at the Kunming Country Golf Club, in September. 
The Kunming course is hardly a championship layout: it's short, open and full of almost right-angled doglegs. 
On the other hand, compared with the clubs in Shanghai, it's homey and down-to-earth, and during the first two days of the tournament, when play was delayed by rain, the atmosphere in the clubhouse resembled that at a country club member-guest tournament. 
The golfers napped and smoked, waggled a few sample clubs provided by Mizuno, the event's sole sponsor, or else slouched on sofas and swapped yarns, their arms around one another in the companionable, unself-conscious way that Chinese men show affection.
The coolest guy by far, and the one everybody else seemed to be aware of, was Zheng Wengen, who is said to be one of China's first professional golfers along with Zhang Lianwei, the first Chinese ever to play in the Masters. 
The process of becoming a pro in China is a little mysterious, and I got the sense that back in the early 1990's, when there were no pro tournaments to speak of, Zheng simply anointed himself. 
Handsome and fit at 39, however, he looks like a pro (unlike the younger players, he never turned his hat backward) and radiates a Seve Ballesteros-like glamour and self-confidence.
The most ebullient player at Kunming was Zhou Xunshu, who at 32 was playing in his first professional tournament. 
Through an interpreter, he told me that he was a former army man who went to work as a security guard at Guangzhou Luhu Golf and Country Club, and one day, when no one was looking, he picked up a driver and on his third try hit a ball 300 yards. 
He practiced by himself for a year or so, using a broken shaft of a club to which he had attached a chunk of concrete, and then began sneaking out on the course in the evenings -- until he was caught. 
For two years after that, he didn't play at all, and then in just eight months he lowered his handicap to single digits.
Listening to Zhou's story and to others like it, I suddenly had the realization that this must have been what our own pro tour was like in the 30's -- a bunch of self-taught caddies and hustlers, characters most of them, all newly in love with golf and trying to make a buck from it. 
I mentioned this idea to Johnny Liu, who is the deputy general manager of Kunming and deputy secretary general of the provincial golf association, and he said: ''Yes, golf is still in its infancy here. 
The other day someone from the foreign press asked one of the golfers if his father had played, and we all just looked at him. 
Golf!
That guy's father was probably trying to find food for his family. 
I'm 37, and I still remember what it was like to be hungry.''
On the first day of the tournament, Li Chao, who had won the first tour event, in Beijing, had seven birdies and jumped off to a substantial lead over the rest of the field, most of which failed to break par. 
But on the second day, he completed only three holes because of the rain delays, and on the third and last day, after playing 15 makeup holes, he melted down on his final round and shot an 81. 
Ouyang Wen, the wushu champ, got in a snit the first day, complaining that the officials had unfairly penalized him for slow play, and he never fully recovered his momentum. 
He was defended by his caddie, a 16-year-old named Jordan Chu, who is also Ouyang's pupil. 
Chu, who speaks excellent English, comes from a well-to-do family from Singapore that has resettled in Shanghai and, unusual in China, has a genuine golf pedigree. 
His grandfather, three uncles and two aunts all played. 
And with his family's encouragement he dropped out of school to pursue his own golf career full time. 
He had recently enrolled at the David Leadbetter Golf Academy in Orlando, Fla., he told me, but left prematurely because he didn't agree with Leadbetter's style of teaching.
''My goal is to become a professional golfer and get my card in two or three years,'' he said. 
''My other goal is to break all the Asian beliefs that the Chinese are no good. 
I don't want to offend you, but frankly, there are other styles of instruction besides the Western ones. 
My coach understands me,'' he added, pointing to Ouyang Wen, who, as if in a martial arts movie, leapt straight up in the air and spun around twice before nailing a perfect landing.
Zhou Xunshu, the guy who had learned from swinging concrete, turned out to have a slashing, Arnie-style swing. 
After a strong opening round, he hung on and finished 36th, at 10 over par, pocketing $950 -- not too shabby for a first-timer.
The winner was the 26-year-old Richard Qiu Zhifeng, who had also gotten his start sneaking on at Guangzhou but who since 2001 had lacked the money to travel to tournaments and had been thinking of giving up and starting a pro shop. 
He began the final round two strokes back, but nipped the leader, Liao Guiming, with a 70. 
''I want to cry, but the tears won't come,'' he said afterward, and added that he would use the prize money -- some $17,000 -- to buy a house.
If You Go
Teeing it Up in China
Round-trip flights to Beijing typically cost less than $900, including taxes and fees. 
Last month, for example, Northwest Airlines (www.nwa.com) was offering round-trip fares from New York for $757, Chicago for $847 and Los Angeles for $730. 
Make sure you have a valid passport and a current visa, which is required to enter the country. 
The application forms can be downloaded at www.chinaembassy.org/eng.
For trips within China, travelers can either use a travel agent or buy tickets at individual airports there. 
Air China is the major domestic carrier.
In Shanghai you can practice your shot making at Shanghai Lujiazui Golf Club (501 Yin Cheng Zhong Road, Pudong; 86-21-6887-1700; www.lujiazui-golf.com). 
Getting a tee time at the members-only Tomson Golf Club (1 Longdong Avenue, Pudong; 86-21-5833-8888) is difficult, but not impossible. 
The club has arrangements with several upscale hotels -- the Grand Hyatt Shanghai (88 Century Boulevard, Pudong; 86-21-5049-1234; http://shanghai.grand.hyatt.com) and the InterContinental Pudong Shanghai (777 Zhangyang Road, Pudong; 86-21-5835-6666; http://shanghai.intercontinental.com), among others -- and will accommodate their guests. 
Sheshan Golf Club, unfortunately, is open only to members and their guests.
In southern China, Kunming Country Golf Club (Anshi Highway, 14 kilometers from Kunming; 86-871-742-6658) is open to all visitors. 
Located near the Hong Kong border, Mission Hills Golf Club (1 Mission Hills Road, Shenzhen; 86-755-2802-0888; www.missionhillsgroup.com) is a members-only club, but guests at its five-star hotel, the Mission Hills Resort, can play any of the 10 courses. 
James Watson
