
IS China, with its mix of raw capitalism and tattered Leninist politics, edging toward a more liberal, middle-class state or is it hurtling toward a political seizure?
Hunting for clues, Western experts track such things as the government's treatment of dissidents, its willingness to experiment with real elections and the frequency of labor demonstrations. 
They search for an emerging Communist leader who might speak like a Gorbachev, if not a Jefferson.
By those measures, progress toward democracy is glacial at best. 
Yet even the casual visitor to China senses a society in the throes of change.
So perhaps there are other, more telling markers of change. 
Following is an idiosyncratic list of seven trends that bear watching, based on observations made while I was a correspondent of The New York Times in China from 1998 to mid-2003, a period of extraordinary growth and hints of unrest in China.
1. THE RETURN OF TALENT -- In the 1980's and 1990's, many of China's brightest students went abroad to graduate school and never returned. 
They saw vastly more opportunity to pursue business or science or scholarship in the United States, Europe and Japan.
In the last few years, lured by China's awesome economic growth and a hope of greater freedoms, significant numbers of Chinese-born professionals and even artists are moving back. 
Many work in the private sector but some are taking government jobs.
The trend is still tentative. 
Those who have gained permanent residency in the United States, for example, are hanging onto their green cards, even as they test the waters at home. 
If these returnees stay and join the Chinese establishment, this may indicate that the rule of law is spreading and that party hacks are losing their grip. 
But if many are fed up and leave again, whether because of unbearable corruption, red tape or repression, watch out.
2. MIGRANT LABOR: WAGES -- As much of the countryside stagnates, more than 100 million villagers are off doing construction or menial labor in cities, or working on assembly lines in the coastal factory belt. 
Often they work for $50 to $100 per month, struggling to send money home and build a little nest egg. 
Their home villages, meanwhile, can seem all the more desolate, populated only by children and the elderly, who live off remittances from afar.
A central question haunting China's development and future stabilityII is this: Will these migrants gain a toehold to pull their children and extended families up toward eventual prosperity?
Or are they stuck on a treadmill of poverty, with meager wages consumed by survival and the land taxes they still must pay in the home village?
3. MIGRANT LABOR: RIGHTS -- A large share of migrant workers have no legal status and are subjected to both official and informal discrimination in education, housing and employment. 
They are treated almost like illegal aliens, even as they perform vital work. 
Such treatment of migrants may be China's most widespread human rights abuse and is kindling resentment among the victims. 
Some scholars and civic leaders have begun to acknowledge the injustice, indicating a possibility -- but no certainty -- that migrants' lives will improve.
4. CHILDREN OF LAID-OFF WORKERS -- As China has closed down decrepit state industries, the country has been rocked by demonstrations, usually by laid-off workers who feel abandoned or cheated. 
But extensive conversations with laid-off state workers -- including those who have demonstrated over unpaid pensions or executive corruption -- suggest that many are resigned to their fates.
In case after case, the degree of resentment or rebellion hinged less on the older workers' own plights and more on the prospects for their children. 
Those with a son or daughter who is getting higher education or is ensconced in a modern-sector job tend to be hopeful still, and they are numerous. 
The most disaffected are those who face multigenerational unemployment and despair.
5. YUPPIE POLITICS -- The pressures for reform may flare most powerfully not from the downtrodden, but from the new, property-owning middle class, which will demand accountability from officials.
In 2003, the most vociferous illegal demonstrations in Beijing were staged not by desperate workers but by young professionals who said they had been cheated by developers of their apartment complex, abetted by local officials.
6. WEB SURFERS -- The spread of Internet use has left many experts wondering about its effects on China's politics. 
Even in a modest-sized town in Tibet these days, young people are crowding Internet bars late into the night. 
But virtually all of them so avidly typing and scrolling are playing Web-based games, or posting messages in frivolous chat rooms.
Scholars and determined members of the intelligentsia take advantage of the Internet to learn things the controlled press conceals, and the government's Web police arrest those who are caught spreading ''seditious'' literature. 
But the subversive potential of the Internet will be realized only if large numbers of game players start using their computer literacy for more serious pursuits.
7. HUMAN RIGHTS FOR DOGS, AND VICE VERSA -- This is no joke. 
Visitors to Beijing and other big cities may notice an eerie absence of dogs on balmy weekend afternoons. 
This is not because they are regularly eaten; in fact, the Chinese love their pet dogs as much as any people anywhere. 
But because of outdated and draconian laws, tens of thousands of pet owners in Beijing alone must keep their dogs in the closet, as it were.
In Beijing, dogs are not allowed outside in the daytime; those caught outdoors are confiscated and killed. 
They are not allowed in parks, on grass or on elevators -- even when elderly owners live on the 14th floor. 
They may not grow taller than knee-high, on pain of death. 
And licenses are expensive.
The predictable result: many dogs never go outside. 
Thousands are confiscated each year for being in the wrong place at the wrong time, or growing a little too big. 
In the back alleys, where the police can't drive, families flout the law and play with their pets outside during the day. 
In fancier parts of town or near any major street, nobody dares.
Many dog owners are seething, even as their pets suffer. 
And as China becomes more developed and socially atomized, with a huge increase in elderly people living apart from their children, the yearning for canine companionship is certain to grow.
Can a rickety urban government respond to this change in social attitudes and practices?
Matters like this, as much as censorship of the press and the jailing of dissidents, may determine the fate of the Communist Party.
