
HSBC Holdings and its Chinese partner, the Bank of Communications, have set up a business to offer local currency credit cards, the second venture for HSBC in China, a market with $1.46 trillion in savings.
The Bank of Communications has a three-year agreement to sell credit cards under the HSBC brand, the Chinese lender said in a statement Thursday. 
Zhang Dandan, a spokeswoman in Shanghai for HSBC, confirmed that the credit card unit had been set up.
HSBC, based in Britain, owns 19.9 percent of the Bank of Communications, one of China's largest banks. 
HSBC agreed in August to pay $1.75 billion for its Bank of Communications stake. 
HSBC also sells credit cards with the Bank of Shanghai; it has an 8 percent stake in that bank.
HSBC and Citigroup are among international lenders chasing a slice of the credit card market in China, the world's most populous nation. 
Overseas banks are required to issue credit cards through partners in China, where consumer loans to domestic customers are off limits to foreigners until the end of 2006.
''The strategy for foreign banks is to get fully prepared for liberalization at the end of 2006,'' said Dominic Chan, a bank analyst at CLSA in Hong Kong. 
''HSBC is expanding its customer base through local partners. 
Bank of Communications is a much larger bank than Bank of Shanghai.''
Citigroup, the world's largest financial services company, offers its credit cards with the Shanghai Pudong Development Bank; it holds a 4.6 percent stake in Shanghai Pudong.
''We set up a credit card unit instead of a joint-venture company mainly because of regulatory hurdles,'' Song Feng, a spokesman for the Bank of Communications, said in a phone interview.
The two lenders are also discussing possible cooperation in the fund management business and risk management, Mr. Song said. 
HSBC, based in London, has 10 branches in China and plans to add another 15 to 20 in 10 years, according to David Eldon, executive director at HSBC Holdings and chairman of two of Hong Kong's three biggest banks.
''We've got good growth in China and we want to keep that growth going,'' Mr. Eldon said in Singapore, without giving details of the earnings outlook for this year. 
''Our investments will prove to our shareholders that right choices were made.''
HSBC's profit from China operations more than doubled in 2003 to 324.7 million yuan ($39.2 million), as it increased lending and received more deposits.
Gross domestic product per capita in China will rise to $5,078 in 2030 from $1,139 this year, UBS said in an August report. 
MasterCard International estimates that the country's middle class -- with earnings of at least $5,000 a year -- will more than double by 2010 to 160 million people, exceeding the populations of Germany and France combined.
China's market has three types of cards, the most popular being the 621 million debit cards, which are linked to savings accounts and requiring deposits. 
China also has 24 million secured credit cards, which require users to put up collateral.
Chinese banks had issued a total of 714 million bank cards by the end of June, with the combined value of transactions surging 60 percent from a year earlier to 12.1 trillion yuan, The Shanghai Securities News reported on Sept. 
23. Most are debit cards, which cannot be used to buy goods on credit.
American Express is teaming up with the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China, the nation's largest lender, to issue cards.
Separately, Mr. Eldon denied speculations that HSBC might be interested in buying the LG Card Company, the South Korean credit card company, which its creditors plan to sell.
''I don't think so,'' Mr. Eldon said. 
''No discussions have ever taken place on that issue.''
