
THEY were a pitiful sight here the other day, four adults and three children from the distant countryside, wandering through Beijing looking scruffy and slightly dazed. 
Several were already ill from their H.I.V. infections. 
They had boarded a train and arrived in the capital in hopes that someone, somehow could help.
They spoke of going to a hospital, but changed their minds, saying there was no cure anyway and that hospitals were too expensive. 
They spoke to some foreign reporters about conditions in their village, where AIDS is rampant. 
Then they feared they might be detained for disturbing the capital's peace and they took the all-night journey by train and bus back home, back to the place, filled with fresh graves, where they began.
Chinese researchers believe that hundreds of thousands of people in the seven villagers' home province of Henan alone were infected with H.I.V. when they sold blood for use in medical products. 
The purchasing companies were often run by local government agencies, and right into the mid-1990's -- far into the global AIDS epidemic -- they used recklessly dangerous blood-collection methods. 
The buyers pooled the blood of many people, extracted plasma to sell and then re-injected the remaining pooled cells back into the donors -- perhaps the most efficient method ever devised to spread blood-borne diseases like AIDS and hepatitis.
Chinese leaders say demands for Western-style democracy and an independent press are still esoteric and alien concerns in this giant, poor country with 5,000 years of its own history. 
They say that such ideas are championed only by a tiny elite of dissidents, and that an impoverished country must give priority to the far more basic human rights of food and shelter and life itself.
But the AIDS epidemic in Henan, which local officials have tried to cover up and have done little to relieve, is only the latest of many indications that this distinction between freedom from hunger and political freedom -- especially the freedom to tell the truth when officials lie -- is too glib. 
For it has long been clear that China's most widespread human rights violations, by any standard, afflict the country's poor masses most of all, endangering their physical as well as political welfare, and that official silence about bitter truths undermines public faith in the political system itself.
The most egregious human rights problem, in terms of numbers affected and the suffering that results, may be China's rigid system of residence controls, which prevents most rural people from moving legally to cities, or from holding high jobs there if they do. 
The system subsidizes those lucky enough to have been born in cities and severely restricts the opportunities of the majority -- tens of millions of whom are forced to join a furtive underclass of migrants, doing the unwanted dirty work in dangerous mines and unwelcoming cities. 
Many discriminations are even enshrined in regulation: to gain scarce university entrance slots, for example, high school students from villages and small towns, where they are usually at an educational disadvantage, must test considerably higher, not lower, than urban youths. 
This is justified with the twisted logic that urban students are likely to fare better in college, but it also reflects the constant bias of the party toward placating the more politically dangerous urban population.
THE number of democracy campaigners who are now in prison or in labor camps is probably only in the thousands. 
But hundreds of thousands of others, accused of petty crimes, have been sent to labor camps for up to three years, with no due process at all. 
Torture and framing of suspects by the police are so commonplace in China that even the official press has cried for change. 
The corrupt and high-handed official measures that have set off so many angry demonstrations by workers and farmers -- a burgeoning threat, according to a new report from a top research group of the Communist Party -- arise directly from the lack of accountability and scrutiny.
Among villagers in Henan, awareness is just dawning of the medical disaster wrought by gross official negligence; in other countries, the afflicted people now might expect generous compensation and a thorough accounting of how it happened. 
But in Henan, that same provincial government has obstructed research on the scale of H.I.V. infections and persecuted those working to prevent the further spread of the disease, making more deaths a certainty.
About 40 years ago Henan was an epicenter of an even bigger man-made catastrophe. 
Historical and demographic records have shown that tens of millions of Chinese died of starvation and related diseases because of the senseless farm policies of Mao's Great Leap Forward of the late 1950's. 
The ensuing famine was concealed and its reach broadened by the routine lies passed up the bureaucratic chain, and through the press, about harvests and village conditions.
In a published 1998 reminiscence, Zhang Shupan, a former party official in Henan, told of being castigated for questioning the preposterous official reports that grain yields had multiplied tenfold under Mao's inspiration. 
He recalled the vicious campaign against peasants for supposedly concealing their bountiful grain -- this after the drought of 1959, which came on the heels of the Great Leap's ill-conceived collectivization and led to mass starvation.
Times have changed, of course. 
Today, such a huge calamity could not be entirely hidden. 
But some of the basic causes persist. 
Officials still tend to refer to Mao's famine as the "time of natural disasters" rather than a policy debacle. 
And, although the central government has begun to act against AIDS, and is said to be concerned about events in Henan, central officials have not spoken out about the coverup there, apparently putting the party's reputation and stabilityII first.
The same week that those seven villagers made their sad foray to Beijing, Dr. Gao Yaojie, a 74-year-old retired gynecologist in Henan, was supposed to travel to Washington to receive a prestigious public health award. 
Not a dissident, but a doctor who is out to save lives and considers herself too old to mince words, Dr. Gao has used her own time and money to visit the province's afflicted villages and teach people about the dreadful new disease, and she has spoken frankly about the devastation and the blood trade to some Chinese and foreign journalists. 
For this, she has been harassed by the police, and she was denied a passport to go accept her award; Henan health officials said she was being "used by anti-Chinese forces."
It would be presumptuous and foolish to assert that China must duplicate Western multiparty democracy to solve its problems. 
At the same time, events here constantly make clear the heavy costs of the controls on information and political choice.
If Chinese reporters had a longer leash, it would be inconceivable for a smuggling ring in the southern city of Xiamen to bribe hundreds of top customs, police and party officials for years without exposure. 
If the people of Henan had freewheeling access to world news, they surely would have known well before 1995 that the injection of pooled, untested blood into people was asking for trouble; if unscrupulous companies went ahead and did it anyway, a critical press could quickly have sounded the alarm.
It may be true, as Chinese officials like to say, that people are freer in their daily lives than ever before. 
And there are glimmers of progress in protection of rights. 
When a schoolyard explosion in southern China killed scores of children and teachers, villagers openly contradicted the official line that the school had not served as a fireworks factory, causing a remarkable public retraction by Prime Minister Zhu Rongji.
China's leaders increasingly acknowledge the existence of acute social ills like inequality and corruption, and constantly promise to correct them. 
But the long and continuing history of official lying has left the public skeptical of assurances and done more to corrode support for the Communist Party than the arrest of any number of democracy advocates.
WHERE and how fast China could go politically in the coming years without flying to pieces is open to legitimate debate. 
It is plausible to argue that the late Deng Xiaoping was a genius in the late 1970's, as China emerged from Mao's turmoil, when he decided to open up the economy but keep the lid on politics. 
The country enjoyed a measure of stabilityII -- though it was enforced with bullets in 1989 -- and a period of spectacular economic growth. 
The fear of chaos he voiced to justify continuing political controls is real and understandable, and shared by ordinary people who suffered through decades of upheaval.
Still, many Chinese, including many party insiders, sense that Mr. Deng's vision has run its course. 
The leaders have already decided that radical new jolts to the economy are needed to keep it booming, hence the risk-laden quest for membership in the World Trade Organization. 
But in the political arena they have offered little but defensive crackdowns, platitudes and speculation about more "democracy" inside a one-party state, which history suggests is an impossibility. 
Unless the new leaders taking over in the next few years offer a sweeping and inspiring vision of political change, many Chinese intellectuals say, the country may get that dreaded chaos anyway.
