
The chief executive of Vodafone, Arun Sarin, who steered the cellphone operator in a sometimes tempestuous five-year pursuit of growth, will resign at the end of July, the company said on Tuesday.
He will be succeeded by Vittorio A. Colao, his 46-year-old deputy chief executive, who said he would continue Mr. Sarin's push to expand into Africa and Asia.
Mr. Sarin came to Vodafone in July 2003, three years after Vodafone acquired AirTouch Communications, a San Francisco-based wireless operator where he had been president. 
Vodafone, based in Newbury, England, has 260.5 million customers, second only to China Mobile, with 370 million.
The timing of the announcement surprised some analysts, because Mr. Sarin had recently solidified his leadership after a rough start.
''This was the right time to leave. 
We are now well-positioned strategically,'' he said in discussing the company's results. 
In the year through March 31, Vodafone's profit rose to $:6.6 billion ($13.2 billion), up 6.7 percent from $:6.2 billion a year earlier.
Under Mr. Sarin, Vodafone nearly doubled the number of customers, to 260 million from 133 million in March 2004, primarily by entering relatively untapped markets in India, Turkey and Eastern Europe.
Shortly after Mr. Sarin took over, British investors opposed his bid in 2004 to acquire AT&T Wireless, at the time the third-largest American carrier. 
The purchase would have made Vodafone, which owns 45 percent of Verizon Wireless, the largest cellular operator in the United States. 
Instead, AT&T Wireless was bought by Cingular, and the combined company is now the market leader in America.
''Ironically, the collapse of the AT&T bid proved to be a watershed for the company, and allowed Arun Sarin to really recover and put the company back on track again,'' said Mark Newman, an analyst in London at Informa Telecoms & Media, an industry research firm.
Around the same time, growth in saturated European markets, which still make up about 70 percent of sales, was slowing. 
Write-downs on acquisitions by Mr. Sarin's predecessor, Chris Gent, began to hurt Vodafone's performance and share price.
For the fiscal year that ended in March 2006, Vodafone reported a $:21.9 billion loss, described as the largest in European corporate history.
Mr. Sarin trimmed Vodafone's presence in Western European markets by selling operators in Sweden and Belgium, where penetration approaches 100 percent, but added operations in relatively underdeveloped markets like Romania. 
Vodafone also sold its mobile business in another saturated market, Japan, where it had been losing market share to its larger competitors, NTT DoCoMo and KDDI.
''Shareholders in the U.K. basically blocked the AT&T Wireless bid. 
That was certainly a setback and the low point for him over here,'' said Mark Newman, an analyst in London at Informa Telecoms & Media, an industry research firm. 
''But ironically, the collapse of the AT&T bid proved to be a watershed for the company, and allowed Arun Sarin to really recover and put the company back on track again.''
Mr. Sarin followed with two large acquisitions, both in emerging markets: the $10.7 billion purchase in May 2007 of Hutchison Essar, India's third-largest operator with 44 million customers, and the 2006 purchase of Telsim Mobil, the Turkish wireless operator, for $4.6 billion.
Mr. Colao, an Italian who was the former chief executive of Omnitel Pronto Italia, which Vodafone acquired in 2000 when it purchased the German operator Mannesmann, said he would continue the focus on cost-effective acquisitions.
''As we have said in the past, we are interested in large markets in Asia and Africa, where there is potential for growth and where any acquisitions will be weighed against our strict financial standards,'' Mr. Colao said.
Vodafone is also looking to invest in China, where it already owns a 3.3 percent stake in China Mobile, currently worth about $10 billion. 
In Africa, Mr. Sarin said Vodafone wants to acquire control of Vodacom, the South African wireless market leader in which it has a 50 percent stake, and use the company as a springboard to acquire other operators.
