
Five miles up a highway from this new break in the barbed wire wall across Korea, visitors may glimpse the peninsula's economic future: the building shells for the first industrial park where North Koreans are to work in South Korean factories.
The potency of this marriage between North Korea's rock-bottom wages and South Korea's capital and technology has so excited Seoul that on Oct. 
20 almost a quarter of South Korea's National Assembly members are to travel by bus to Kaesong, North Korea, to inaugurate the Kaesong Industrial Park.
From an initial kernel of 13 South Korean companies -- notably garment manufacturers, a shoemaker and a watchmaker -- the plan is for Kaesong to expand over the next 20 years until it spreads over 25 square miles. 
About 130 South Korean companies are already on a waiting list to open factories there, and it is expected eventually to draw billions of dollars in investments and employ 730,000 North Koreans and 100,000 South Koreans in more than 1,000 South Korean companies.
Ultimately, the park would add $600 million a year to North Korean coffers through wages and corporate taxes, the Bank of Korea, South Korea's central bank, estimated last summer.
The Koreas are keeping a low profile about their joint project, to the extent of closing the inauguration to foreign reporters. 
With nuclear weapons talks suspended, the Koreas seem to fear that the United States could try to sabotage the park by boycotting its products or blocking the transfer of computers needed to run factories in North Korea.
''I want to stress that the U.S. fully supports the efforts made by South Korea on Kaesong,'' Christopher R. Hill, United States ambassador to South Korea, told reporters in Seoul on Oct. 
7. ''Export control issues are not those that will determine the success or no-success of Kaesong.''
Economic strategists trying to pull South Korea out of its economic doldrums envision Kaesong, which has benefited from about $322 million in infrastructure spending by the South Korean government, as playing a crucial role in igniting a new phase of South Korean growth.
''Future plans call for Seoul serving as a financial hub, Inchon as logistics hub and Kaesong as industrial, manufacturing hub,'' said Chung In Moon, a commissioner for the Northeast Asia Initiative Commission, a government body backing the Kaesong project. 
Noting in an interview that Kaesong is 90 minutes by highway from Inchon, home of South Korea's busiest airport and its second-busiest seaport after Busan, he added: ''Organically and functionally, Kaesong is to be linked to Seoul and Inchon. 
The success of Kaesong will have a real impact on the success of the South Korea economy.''
Recently, South Korea's growth has lost steam. 
In September, company start-ups fell to 2,103, the lowest level in five years. 
Also in September, South Korea's quarterly exports grew at an annual rate of 3.1 percent, compared with an annual rate of 60.4 percent in February.
A new dynamism could come if South Korea succeeds in developing North Korea as a huge back office. 
Companies in the park are to pay a minimum wage of $57.50 a month, far less than the $100 to $200 typical in China and $449 in South Korea. 
Corporate taxes in Kaesong will range from 10 percent to 14 percent, compared with 15 percent in China and 23 percent to 28 percent in South Korea.
''The biggest advantage is the cheap labor,'' Lee Soo Young, a director at the Kaesong Industrial Complex Project, said at the park's promotion office, which opened in Seoul on Oct. 
5. The Kaesong development is promoted by its two owners: the Hyundai Asan Corporation, a private company, and the Korea Land Corporation, a government company.
At the Romanson Company, South Korea's largest watch manufacturer, Chang Ho Sun, an executive, explained why his company was one of the pioneers to enter Kaesong, planning to employ 800 North Koreans eventually. 
Skilled watchmakers earn $26,000 a year in South Korea, but Mr. Chang calculated that his company would pay North Koreans 4 to 5 percent of that amount.
''We speak the same language,'' he said citing another advantage to working in North Korea. 
''We also expect North Koreans to have the same attitudes toward work.''
Im Hwang Yong, director of SJ Tech, a plastic products company that hopes to start production in Kaesong by the end of this year, said: ''The only thing we are concerned about is the ideological differences between North Koreans and South Koreans. 
There isn't a union in North Korea, but the differences in thinking may cause work stoppages.''
The workers in Kaesong will be paid $50, most of their monthly wage, in dollars, a big draw to most. 
But communist thinking and North-South rivalry could also create difficulties, some have speculated.
With Kaesong and other inter-Korean projects, South Korea has another not-so-hidden agenda: to develop the North in hopes of lowering the eventual bill for reunification.
''If North Korea pursues the development of its economy with funds secured from leasing the property, it may narrow the gap between the North and South Korean economies and will ultimately reduce reunification costs,'' South Korea's central bank said in its report last summer.
[On Monday, President Bush signed into law the North Korean Human Rights Act, which is aimed at promoting democratic and open-market changes in North Korea. 
The same day, South Korea's prime minister, Lee Hae Chan, said to reporters in Austria, ''In no way do we want a collapse of North Korea.''
He said South Korea had learned from the 1989 collapse of East Germany that ''it is not desirable to have a collapse of North Korea.'']
China is also pushing North Korea to move in the direction of an open-market economy. 
In one sign of an economic recovery, North Korea's officially registered trade with China jumped by 38 percent last year to hit $1 billion, mostly in goods from China.
But world opposition to North Korea's nuclear weapons makes investing in North Korea a risky business, many South Korean business leaders say.
In a Federation of Korean Industries survey last summer, 68 percent of the 404 major companies surveyed said the primary obstacle to investing in the North was the international standoff over North Korea's nuclear weapons program.
In the survey, 76 percent predicted that Kaesong would be successful, and the same percentage said the industrial park would be more competitive than comparable sites in China. 
But 54 percent said they had little interest in setting up there, and 24 percent said they had no interest.
Smaller companies, presumably bigger risk takers, were most interested in the park, according to the private business federation. 
The initial 13 companies have invested about $50 million in the project, Mr. Lee said at the promotion office in Seoul.
To cut risks for investors, South Korea's government-run Export-Import Bank announced in September that it would reimburse South Korean companies in Kaesong for 90 percent of losses incurred for such causes as war, confiscation of wealth or blockage of remittances.
Separately, to encourage South Korea to trade with North Korea, last summer the Inter-Korean Cooperation Fund in Seoul started to cover 50 percent of losses incurred by the nearly 500 South Korean businesses that trade with the North. 
The loss limit is $437,000 and the losses must be caused by circumstances beyond the southern companies' control.
By investing $130 million in a four-lane highway, new railroad and new customs and immigration station here, South Korea's government is steadily moving to lower the hurdles of dealing with the North.
In late September, a shuttle bus service began between Seoul and Kaesong. 
The bus departs every weekday morning and returns every weekday afternoon, traveling 43 miles in one hour. 
The round-trip ticket costs $17. 
Trucks and buses now regularly cross the demilitarized zone here, and South Korea plans to send a test freight and passenger train through here to Kaesong at the end of October.
In November, Woori Bank, a major South Korean bank, plans to set up a branch inside the Kaesong Industrial Park to offer such services as currency exchange, trade financing and bank transfers.
If the first South Korean investments go well at Kaesong, North Korean authorities have said they may allow other foreign countries to make similar, wholly owned investments there.
Several European companies, notably from Germany, have shown interest in setting up manufacturing operations in the zone. 
Earlier this year, the European Union Chamber of Commerce in Korea opened an office in Pyongyang, complementing its office in Seoul. 
The first foreign law firm in North Korea, Hay, Kalb & Associates, set up by a British lawyer, opened its office in August on Kim Il Sung Square in Pyongyang, catering to foreign investors.
For half a century, Kaesong has been remembered as the site of the 1953 Korean War armistice negotiations. 
Now, Kaesong is starting to symbolize the peninsula's new economic thaw.
''We feel we are summoned to be involved for the future of our country,'' said Mr. Im, the plastics company director, who also is spokesman for the 13 South Korean companies initially approved for Kaesong. 
''It will be a mission for us to educate capitalism to North Koreans, step by step.''
