
The hangover and the bills arrive the morning after the closing ceremony of the Olympics. 
Happens every four years. 
Traffic reverts to its normal ghastly congestion, and the locals look at each other to ask, ''Who is going to clean up this mess?''
That was the mood in Athens on the Monday morning after, four years ago, when radio talk-show hosts roared about buildings that were already starting to rust.
Just guessing, but public gnashing of teeth is not going to be noticeable Monday morning, when Beijing tries to get back to normal, if normal means anything in this country on the move. 
The Paralympics are still to be held, but the main party is over, and it was quite a nice party at that.
The Monday morning blues are predictable at the Olympics and other major events, when merchants deal with bric-a-brac unsold, meals un-served and rooms unrented. 
Sports fans don't necessarily spend money the way the merchants have been told they will.
In Beijing, the government was the big speculator, and probably will not share the budget figures with the citizenry. 
The phrase often used here was ''coming-out party,'' to note that the world was discovering Beijing. 
That was the point of the Games, beyond the gold medal fest Chinese athletes produced.
Because Chinese people traditionally respect the notion of community, they understand that parties are not designed to make a profit. 
By that standard, the 17 days in August, which end Sunday with the closing ceremony, were a major success.
People came out to the northern side of Beijing to snap photos of the striking Bird's Nest, the national stadium, and the aquatics center, the Water Cube, which looked like a rectangular Tiffany lamp, with its panels constantly glowing and bubbling in the dark. 
Those images will be part of the Olympic legacy for a long time.
The Chinese were great hosts, thinking of everything including the bright notion that journalists and fans need be scanned only once, entering the central campus, with no need to scan everybody again while entering the arenas. 
Everywhere we went, somebody had enough English to solve the problem.
Sometimes a visitor would glimpse inflexibility, particularly from the robotic officials at daily press briefings. 
Details were hard to come by -- except for the gold medal count, of course.
Having been told that Liu Xiang, the great hurdler, was the symbol and hope of these Games, the Chinese fans grieved when Liu was injured, but the next day parents were buying ice cream for their children under the young trees on the Olympic green, and taking pictures of each other appearing to hold the Olympic flame in the palm of their hands. 
Life went on.
Aside from one disturbed man killing an American visitor at random, there was little violence at these Games, although a few attacks were made by fanatics far from Beijing. 
The air was nasty for a few days, but not as bad as outsiders like me had feared. 
The government closed down factories for many miles, to clear up the air. 
So people missed six or eight weeks of work?
It was for the good of the country.
There were no major protests mainly because protesters were denied visas to enter or licenses to protest. 
Tibet and Xinjiang and Darfur and Falun Gong and the labor camps still remain issues the morning after the party.
Michael Phelps of the United States won eight gold medals in the Water Cube and Usain Bolt of Jamaica broke two sprint records and helped set a third in the Bird's Nest and thousands of athletes had their human dramas. 
But the Olympics did not move back toward relevance in an age glutted with sport, which is not China's problem.
The International Olympic Committee went into this with its eyes open in 2001, when it selected China. 
There was a palpable feeling of betrayal when the government blocked Web sites from journalists seeking information on controversial subjects, but the singsong response of the I.O.C. was journalists had enough sites to ''do your work.''
None of this should have been a surprise.
The Games made the world more aware of its modern tourist comforts, the new green look to its vastness. 
Hard economic times around the world may affect the economy here, but the elite of the big cities will continue to grow richer. 
The Olympics are not likely to help the country people who moved to the city and are not skilled enough to work in the service industry. 
Their concerns are not likely to be heard in the next day or two, as Olympic visitors get out of town. 
And we always do get out of town.
In China, which has been unafraid to flood the Yangtze valley and obliterate the hutongs, or urban courtyards, the government plans to raze some of the stadiums that held baseball and other minor sports. 
I tried the phrase ''white elephant'' on some sharp English speakers, but it was a very foreign concept.
The latest word is that the Water Cube may be used as a shopping mall and maybe even indoor tennis courts while the Bird's Nest will be converted into shops, restaurants, a hotel and become a home field for the Beijing Guo'an Football Club. 
You can bet that American football will show up here -- and naming rights are being sought, no surprise in this entrepreneurial nation.
Those 17 days in August 2008 will become instant nostalgia, as the hosts deal with the broken dishes and the wine spilled on the carpet. 
China threw a very nice party, and it spoke English better than most of us could ever speak Mandarin. 
But I did learn to say one thing: xie-xie, thank you.
