
THE seven girls and two boys paying close attention to a language class at the Huaxia Chinese School of Westchester Community College one recent morning were English-speaking Chinese-Americans ranging in age from 3 to 9. 
Chinese was as foreign to them as it was to their non-Chinese adoptive parents, who sat in the back of the class and joined the children in reciting the Chinese words for fruits and numbers as taught by the teacher, Cao Hong. 
Later, the parents would gather for their own language class while the children played outside.
All the children were adopted from Chinese orphanages, where large numbers of abandoned baby girls wind up, largely as a result of China's ''one child'' policy and the Chinese preference for boys. 
Among the students was Gia DeWitt, 9, of Atlantic Highlands, N.J., who practices piano and flute every day, and Polly Adler, a Scarsdale 4-year-old who is a whiz at gymnastics. 
Their parents say they don't know what might have become of the girls if they had not been adopted. 
The orphanages, run by the government, might have helped educate them beyond elementary school, but the chances are slim, the parents say, given the large number of abandoned children and the limited resources.
''She probably would have become someone who sweeps the streets,'' said Leslie Lippai, Polly's adoptive mother. 
Instead, Polly and the others are learning about their native culture through a program whose creator, Jianping Wang, dean of arts and humanities at Westchester Community College, is a Chinese emigre herself. 
Ms. Wang, 47, learned about the plight of abandoned babies in China after immigrating to the United States in 1989 to pursue a graduate degree in college administration. 
She was enrolled in a doctoral program at Harvard and working as a teaching assistant when, she said, she was appalled to discover, by means of a research project, that ''tens of thousands of baby girls were being abandoned'' in her native country.
''I, being a female, was emotionally determined to do something,'' said Ms. Wang (who is not adopted herself, and has two biological children).
So in 1991 -- a year before China passed a law allowing foreigners to adopt Chinese babies, and well before the current centralized adoption system was established -- she wrote the civil affairs departments of more than 20 Chinese provinces on behalf of Alliance for Children, a Boston-based international adoption agency. 
Sixteen provinces responded, and the process of finding homes for abandoned infants began.
''We were pioneers,'' Ms. Wang said. 
''Everything was from scratch.''
Last summer Polly, Gia and their families, along with families from Michigan and Ireland, spent two weeks in Shanghai as part of the program. 
The visit was hardly the typical tour of the Great Wall and other tourist destinations. 
Instead, the children spent their days immersed in Chinese culture: studying the language, singing Chinese songs and playing with newfound friends.
Their parents' schedule included daily language classes; exercise, calligraphy, pottery and cooking classes, and visits to a medical research institute and other informational sites. 
The point of the program, according to Ms. Wang: to reconnect the children to their roots, with the parents sharing in the process.
''They were abandoned, and it's great that they have families,'' she said. 
''But later they will look at their parents and say: 'Where do I come from?
Why am I here?'
In the school-cafeteria culture they won't belong in any group. 
If they don't know a thing about China they will be 'lost identity' kids. 
It will be like a second-time abandonment.''
Gia's parents, Joel and Margaret DeWitt, have embraced their daughter's native culture, celebrating the Chinese New Year and other holidays. 
During a two-week stay in China last summer, they took Gia -- a ''very Americanized'' fourth grader, according to her mother -- on a side trip to the south, to visit the orphanage near Guangzhou where she was adopted when she was 10 months old. 
''I liked seeing all the babies,'' Gia said after class here. 
''I wanted to take them all home.''
Ms. Lippai and her husband, Andrew Adler, took Polly on a similar voyage of discovery, to her former orphanage in Hunan Province. 
At the age of 3 months, Polly had been abandoned at the institution's gate; at the time of her adoption, she was suffering from eczema and developmental problems, which were eventually alleviated by specialists in the United States.
Dr. Ayame Takahashi, an assistant professor of psychiatry at Weill Medical College of Cornell University in White Plains, said that Ms. Wang's program, which she leads with Julian Shen of Chappaqua, could provide a ''perspective and a grounding'' for the children.
''Most of these kids know from day one that they're adopted,'' Dr. Takahashi said. 
''They look different from their parents.''
Immersion in Chinese culture, she said, gives them ''a real image of the place and a real-life sense of what their lives might have been like if they had stayed there.''
Ms. Wang and Mr. Shen are planning another roots-oriented trip to China next summer. 
''You can't go to therapy to get your identity back,'' Ms. Wang said. 
''You can't go to lectures and eat Chinese food. 
The only way to do it is to dive deep into the culture.''
