
The Olympic torch made a strange and lonely procession through central New Delhi on Thursday, with the event so overshadowed by fears of the anti-Chinese protests that marred its appearances in other cities that the public was not allowed close enough to witness it.
The 70-odd Indian athletes and celebrities who carried the torch down the widest avenue in New Delhi, the capital, were outnumbered by thousands of members of the Indian security forces, who stamped out any pomp and excitement, turning the occasion into a tense security operation.
The police said later that 276 protesters, largely Tibetans, had been arrested, under preventive charges, while trying to breach the security cordon.
The authorities sealed off much of the heart of this city of 16 million for hours before the event, anxious to avoid the disruption that had plagued earlier stages of the torch relay and concerned that Tibetan exiles in India would sabotage the occasion.
India has the world's largest population of Tibetan exiles, about 100,000, who fled their homeland after China crushed an uprising there in the 1950s. 
Their presence had made Olympic organizers particularly anxious about this stage of the torch's journey to Beijing, where the Olympics will begin on Aug. 
8.
Demonstrations did not disturb the relay, but made many small attempts to breach the heavy security in the streets nearby.
Just before the event, seven protesters ran toward the barricades near India Gate before being stopped by police officers wielding sticks. 
The protesters were bundled into a truck.
Officers used wooden sticks to hit the feet of two protesters who had tried to resist detention by sitting in the road. 
Limping, but shouting, ''Free Tibet,'' they, too, were lifted into the back of an open truck and driven away.
As the relay began, the roads around Rajpath, the imposing avenue that cuts through the heart of what once was British colonial Delhi, had been cleared of cars and pedestrians, and an unusual peace descended on the area. 
The singing of birds, usually drowned out by the roar of traffic, was audible.
On Thursday morning, hundreds of Tibetan protesters marched through the center of the city shouting, ''Die for freedom.''
Demonstrators lighted their own torch at the spot where the ashes of Gandhi are buried and mounted a parallel, peaceful torch relay. 
Many students and large numbers of Tibetans who had traveled from places across India to join the march carried banners declaring ''Justice Raped in Tibet'' and ''Gold Medal for China in Torture.''
The noise and excitement of the march were in stark contrast to the scenes of highly controlled calm along the route taken by the Olympic flame.
Despite the heavy police presence, Tibetan exiles sprang small surprise protests near the airport on Wednesday night, shortly after the torch arrived from Pakistan, and later at the luxury hotel in central New Delhi where the torch was kept before the relay.
The success of the demonstrators in breaching heavy security in the days before the torch arrived embarrassed the New Delhi police and intensified the organizers' determination to prevent disruption of the relay, which was shortened to slightly more than a mile from the original distance of about five and a half miles because of security concerns.
