
Supporters of closer relations with Beijing won a surprise victory in legislative elections here on Saturday, as voters appeared to reject President Chen Shui-bian's increasingly forceful calls in the past two weeks for greater Taiwanese independence from mainland China.
The success of the Nationalist Party and its allies, the People First Party and the New Party, in preserving their slim majority in the legislature could reverse some of the rising hostility lately between Taiwan and the mainland.
The Nationalists and their allies have vowed to block President Chen's plans to write a new constitution for the island and take other actions that Beijing has labeled as provocative and possibly leading to war.
''It will be much more difficult for him'' to pursue his agenda, said Wu Chih-chung, a political expert at Dongwu University here. 
''The tensions between Taiwan and China will be reduced.''
In Beijing, there was no immediate comment from the Chinese government on the election.
Washington has been increasingly critical of President Chen's efforts to pursue more of the trappings of independence. 
But the success of the Nationalist Party's coalition could pose new headaches: unlike President Chen, the Nationalists have been very reluctant to approve the purchase of $18 billion in weapons that President Bush offered the island in 2001 to defend itself against the mainland.
The Nationalists have questioned the size and cost of the purchase, and have suggested that not all the surveillance and antimissile systems may be needed if relations with the mainland can be improved.
Beijing has regarded Taiwan as a renegade province ever since the Nationalist forces of Chiang Kai-shek fled to the island after losing China's civil war to the Communists in 1949.
The loss by candidates of President Chen's Democratic Progressive Party is especially significant because it comes after nearly two decades of steadily rising support for pro-independence candidates.
President Chen took personal responsibility for the defeat as his party's chairman. 
The party's secretary general and two deputy secretaries general submitted their resignations, to be considered at a meeting of the party leadership on Tuesday.
''The result did not meet our expectations, and we deeply regret this,'' President Chen said at a news conference Saturday night.
Nationalist supporters spent the evening waving flags and lighting celebratory firecrackers outside the party's headquarters. 
Lien Chan, the party chairman, said the outcome represented a vindication of the party's position on Beijing.
''We call on Chen Shui-bian to respect public opinion,'' he said, also warning that the vote would make it difficult to proceed with the purchase of American weapons, which he criticized as overpriced.
Democratic Progressive officials said campaign decisions had hurt them. 
Chang Chun-hsing, the party's secretary general, said the party had nominated too many candidates in many multiseat districts, so the candidates took votes from each other.
Lee Ying-yuan, one of two deputy secretaries general, said party supporters in these districts had voted in such large numbers for their party's weaker candidates that the strong candidates got too few votes.
The defeat ''is more technical than policy,'' Mr. Lee said in an interview. 
He added that although he expected President Chen to try to proceed with plans to rewrite the constitution in the next several years, the election results would make it harder for the president to carry out his agenda.
Voters did seem leery of angering Beijing. 
''We should focus more on the economy,'' said Kevin Chang, a 30-year-old bank worker, after he voted Saturday morning.
Trade with the mainland has propelled a vigorous economic recovery here this year, and business people broadly favor a more conciliatory Taiwanese stance.
Since taking office in May 2000, President Chen has repeatedly antagonized Beijing by suggesting that two separate countries now exist and by holding a national referendum here on China's growing deployments of missiles aimed at the island.
But the Nationalist coalition's two-seat majority in the 225-member legislature has prevented President Chen and his governing Democratic Progressive Party from giving Taiwan the formal trappings of an independent state.
For months, polls had suggested that the Democratic Progressives and their smaller and more radical ally, the Taiwan Solidarity Union, would claim a majority in the new legislature.
But in the final weeks of the campaign, politics within the pro-independence bloc took an alarming turn for President Chen. 
Frustrated that he had not moved even faster toward independence after winning a second term last March, many hard-line advocates of independence began switching their support to the Taiwan Solidarity Union.
President Chen's own senior adviser for international affairs, Lai Shin-yuan, resigned from his administration and ran successfully for the legislature on Saturday as a Taiwan Solidarity Union candidate.
President Chen responded by moving away from the political center, even though polls have long shown that a substantial majority of voters are reluctant to jeopardize the status quo with the mainland. 
In the past week, President Chen and the Democratic Progressive Party called daily for dropping China from the names of state-owned enterprises and replacing it with Taiwan, and for using Taiwan in the name of the economic and cultural offices that it maintains in more than 70 countries that do not recognize it diplomatically, including the United States.
President Chen stopped short of embracing the Taiwan Solidarity Union's position that the island should change its official name from Republic of China to Republic of Taiwan. 
But his new position nonetheless upset the State Department in Washington, which criticized him for endangering the status quo.
Defying the criticism, President Chen urged voters on Friday to call their country ''Taiwan'' and to stand up to foreign pressure.
President Chen's last-minute tilt was partly successful: while polls just a few days ago showed the Taiwan Solidarity Union expanding its delegation in the legislature to as many as 20, from 13 in the last election, the final vote on Saturday showed that the party wound up with only 12 seats.
But the Democratic Progressive Party fared much worse than expected, picking up only 2 seats, to claim 89. 
The Nationalist Party gained 11 seats, for a total of 79, while the even more pro-Beijing People First Party lost 12 seats, retaining only 34, and the New Party kept its only seat. 
Independents maintained their 10 seats.
