
The Russian president, Vladimir V. Putin, today made his first visit to the capital of this old Soviet ally, which is fitfully trying to open its economy and catch up with the development boom in Asia.
From the Russian perspective, Mr. Putin had a good first day here on a tour that started in South Korea, though his motorcades through the bicycle-clogged streets attracted far less interest than did President Clinton's in November, which turned out large, enthusiastic crowds.
Mr. Putin made his mark by signing a "strategic partnership" with President Tran Duc Luong, and won for Russia the exploration rights on a 38-square-mile tract of Vietnam's oil-rich continental shelf in the South China Sea. 
He also opened talks to sell advanced Russian weapons and military equipment to Vietnam, as Mr. Putin tries to reinvigorate Russia's extensive military industries.
"Vietnam needs not just to maintain its existing weapons bought from the Soviet Union and Russia," Mr. Putin said at a news conference with Mr. Tran, "but it also needs modern weapons. 
Vietnam wants and can afford to buy new weapons."
No specific sales were mentioned, and Mr. Putin hastened to add that Russia would comply with international accords that prevent the sale of some technology, like long-range ballistic missiles. 
But one has only to taxi down the runway of Hanoi's airport, surrounded by fields of lush green rice shoots, to see the Soviet-era MIG-23 fighters, no longer serviced by Soviet and Chinese technicians, standing idle under concrete canopies and degraded by neglect and shifting national priorities.
Vietnam has clashed with China and others over claims to the Spratly Islands in the South China Sea, and Russian officials say Hanoi wants to maintain its military punch.
One topic not on the agenda apparently is the future of Russia's naval presence at Cam Ranh Bay, the sprawling base built by the United States in South Vietnam. 
The rent-free lease, signed with Moscow in 1979, expires in 2004. 
Vietnam has indicated it will ask for hefty payments under a new lease.
Russia's deputy foreign minister, Aleksandr Losyukov, said last week that he expected "long and difficult talks" on the lease. 
It is unclear whether Mr. Putin, who is trying to cut the size but improve the ability of Russia's military, is willing to bear the cost to maintain far-flung bases.
Mr. Putin also succeeded today in crafting a joint statement with Vietnam opposing any American plans to erect a regional missile defense system in Asia to protect American and allied military forces. 
It said the deployment could harm "the stability and security in the region."
During the trip, the Russian foreign minister, Igor S. Ivanov, pointed out that in his address to Congress this week, President Bush referred to his commitment to build a "missile defense," without actually using the term "national missile defense."
"If that reflects the beginning of a correction of the plans to deploy a territorial missile defense system by the United States, we can only welcome that," Mr. Ivanov said.
But recently Mr. Bush has adopted the shorter term, partly in deference to Europeans, who object to the plan. 
The new term is meant to convey to allies that what Washington plans is not a purely national defense.
A spokesman for the National Security Council in Washington, asked about Mr. Ivanov's comments, issued a statement tonight saying: "The president is committed to the development and deployment of effective defenses against missiles at all ranges, designed to protect our territory, our forces abroad and our friends and allies."
The question of Vietnam's Soviet-era debt, $11 billion, was also put to rest today, officials said. 
In September, Moscow forgave 85 percent of it, and Mr. Putin's aides today said that the debt had been further reduced, to $1.5 billion to be paid over 23 years.
