
Open door: snow fills the mountains
Sprinkling a skyful: quiet, a deep lane.
Heaped silk-white. 
Vast courtyard. 
Such leisure.
--Wang Wei, eighth century
MOST gardens put themselves to bed when their last brown stalk lies down to mold. 
The approach of winter stills their growth and, as leaves are shed, slows their respiration. 
Then a snowfall comes, like the one that covered New York early this month, and a garden can look like a sleeper who has turned and pulled the covers up over his head.
The Chinese Scholars Garden at the Snug Harbor Cultural Center in Staten Island is different. 
It is a building as much as a garden, and it is designed to make a point that is most clearly revealed in winter: nature and artifice need not be rivals.
There are plenty of places in the city where this is not the case. 
Think of squat concrete schools, treeless tract house developments and the dark and trashy underworld of the highway overpass. 
Then there is the rotting industrial waterfront that visitors pass on their way from the Staten Island ferry to the one-acre garden. 
But forget all that, at least while you're listening to the whoosh of blown bamboo and watching the boughs of woody bushes balance heaping hats of snow.
Only about 2,000 of the garden's 25,000 annual visitors go in winter. 
That's a shame, because to see the garden under snow is to best understand how a truce, even an exquisite poise, has been created between the organic and the built.
In the Western tradition, a beautiful building frequently serves as the backdrop to a garden, or vice versa. 
But in southern China in the 14th century, a group of Confucian scholars came around to a different idea. 
They put the garden in the house. 
The result is nature and architecture dwelling in the same big roofless room, with doorways shaped like banana leaves and walls with scalloped tops that resemble clouds.
In such a setting, snow melting on top of a finely carved wooden table seems somehow proper, as do glassless windows that frame far views and invite the weather in.
Kathleen Rafter, a 24-year-old advertising account executive from Sunset Park, Brooklyn, woke up on a recent Sunday and knew she would visit the garden. 
She arrived at 10 with a borrowed camera and made the first boot-prints in the snow. 
What struck her the most were the sunlight on the inside walls and a quiet that allowed her to discern the singular voices of a pair of waterfalls.
"You can hear the different sounds," she said. 
"Two bodies of water moving with different sounds."
She didn't know how many shots were left on her roll of film or if it was black and white or color.
But she'd gotten what she had come for, some time off the grid of the city, and some photos of a dreamlike place she can look at in seasons to come.
