
The company Anthony Salim heads, Indofood Sukses Makmur, might be the world's largest instant noodle manufacturer. 
But under Mr. Salim, the company and its parent, the powerful Salim Group, is much more.
''We are a major food company,'' said Mr. Salim, one of Indonesia's most influential businessmen. 
''There is no limit to how we can grow.''
Mr. Salim is trying to effect a remarkable transformation of what was, until 1998, Indonesia's largest private company and one of Asia's most influential overseas Chinese operations, with fingers in almost every lucrative area of the economy.
The story of Indofood and the Salim Group is one of survival and reinvention.
In his heyday, Mr. Salim owned Indonesia's largest retail bank, its largest cement plant and one of the world's biggest flour mills. 
The Salim Group was also involved in car manufacturing, television broadcasting, petrochemicals, textiles, construction -- the list goes on.
But when the economic crisis hit Indonesia in 1997-98, Mr. Salim lost his shirt as well as his chief patron, President Suharto. 
Mr. Salim and his family, including the patriarch, Liem Sioe Liong, also known as Sudono Salim and now 91, fled to Singapore as angry mobs burned their property.
When the storms settled, Anthony Salim set out to rebuild his shattered empire. 
But he lost valuable time: it has taken him nearly five years to restructure the group, shedding lucrative assets like Bank Central Asia and settling debts of 52 trillion rupiah (about $5.8 billion), with the Indonesian authorities.
Perhaps more important, now that the political landscape has changed and Indonesia has opened to more competition, it is unclear whether the Salim Group's operations will regain their former size and scope.
Still, there are some grounds for Mr. Salim's optimism. 
While the group has lost huge chunks of business in finance, cars and cement, it -- and Indofood in particular -- has survived.
''You look at other cronies in Indonesia, and they're basically gone,'' said Manggi Habir, a senior analyst at Standard & Poor's in Singapore. 
''Salim is still there, and he's a force to contend with.''
In the last five years, as Mr. Salim laid low and focused on restructuring, he retained control of Indofood through the First Pacific Company, a Salim-controlled investment and management company listed in Hong Kong. 
And through these tough years, Indofood's business grew, even if profits were sluggish.
Indofood's balance sheet, though encumbered with more than 7 trillion rupiah in debt, is reasonably healthy.
''The company has enough cash flow to secure the debt,'' said Michael Chambers, head of research at Credit Lyonnais Securities (Asia) in Jakarta.
To help him piece the empire back together, Mr. Salim is seeking to shore up his reputation as a solid manager. 
In June, he won appointment as the chief executive of Indofood, replacing a high-profile professional, Eva Hutapea.
But critics say Mr. Salim is gambling with the company. 
They fear that, as owner of nearly 400 companies under the Salim Group umbrella, he might not be able to devote enough time to Indofood. 
Mr. Salim insisted that it was important to put himself in the driver's seat to ''see if there was any problem for me at the helm of a public company.''
What he meant was that after the public outcry over his political connections in the Suharto era, he needed to see if it was safe to swim again in Indonesia's corporate waters. 
So far, Indonesians seem largely to respect Mr. Salim's business acumen and see his return to Indofood as a plus.
''To most bankers, Salim Group's reputation is much better than other conglomerates', and they are willing to lend,'' said Lim Chei Wei, an independent corporate analyst in Jakarta who has been strongly critical of some groups owned by Indonesian-Chinese. 
''I have to admit that the Salims actually know how to build a business and create value.''
But it is too early to say whether Mr. Salim can turn Indofood into an integrated regional food giant along the lines of the Charoen Pokphand Group in Thailand. 
Nor is it clear whether Indofood can reinvent itself as a new kind of business competing in the marketplace instead of relying on political patronage. 
For one thing, companies like the multinational giant Unilever and Wings, an Indonesian Chinese family-owned company new to the noodle market, are giving Indofood a run for its money as an increasingly open and competitive market takes hold in Indonesia.
Already, Indofood's market share in instant noodles has slipped to 80 percent from about 90 percent in the last five years. 
Annual net sales rose 9 percent in 2003 after a 12 percent increase in 2002. 
In August, the company, which sells around nine billion packs of instant noodles annually under the Indomie brand, forecast revenue growth of only 5 percent in 2004. 
And last year, net income slid to 603.4 trillion rupiah from 802.6 trillion rupiah in 2002.
Since Mr. Salim can no longer rely on the kind of government backing that had helped build Indofood into the world's largest noodle maker and its Bogasari Flour subsidiary into the world's largest flour miller, Indofood must expand overseas as well as continue grow at home. 
Some analysts, though, are skeptical that Mr. Salim can run a business as well in a competitive environment. 
According to Franciscus Welirang, a vice president at Indofood and Mr. Salim's brother-in-law, the idea is to exploit the region's expanding web of free trade agreements and establish operations in East and Southeast Asia. 
Mr. Welirang said Indofood was putting people and companies in place in countries like Malaysia, Thailand, Singapore and Vietnam. 
''Our products will follow,'' he said. 
''We're going international long term.''
Indofood currently gets 10 percent of its revenue from exports but is aiming to increase that to 20 percent.
Some analysts say the strategy is sound. 
''Indofood has an advantage over many Chinese noodle companies because it has learned how to make flavors that cater to different regional tastes,'' Mr. Chambers, the Credit Lyonnais analyst, said.
But as Mr. Salim has been busy, as Mr. Welirang described it, ''putting out fires in the kitchen,'' he has not focused on overseas expansion.
For example, Ms. Hutapea, the former Indofood chief, said the company should have taken over operations owned by the Salim Group in Nigeria and Saudi Arabia ''a long time ago.''
Investors also worry about the not always clear interrelationships among the 400 or so Salim companies. 
Indofood, for instance, is 51 percent held by Mr. Salim through First Pacific, in which Mr. Salim has a majority stake.
Indofood stock has languished on the Jakarta stock exchange in part because of a constant fear that Mr. Salim will engineer spinoffs or acquisitions that benefit himself and the group more than its other investors.
Analysts say that such concerns might hold up a planned $1 billion spinoff of the Bogasari flour mill operation, a sale Mr. Salim favors as the best way to tackle Indofood's debts and slash the group's debt-to-equity ratio by next year.
Meanwhile, Mr. Salim says he is taking the Salim Group deeper into industrial and property ventures in China, a move likely to heighten fears of a further squeeze on dividends to minority shareholders.
Mr. Salim has been extraordinarily lucky to survive, given the public anger over how the conglomerates had used government connections to keep prices of basic goods artificially high. 
Yet he appears to have no regrets about that era.
''In the early days, we supplied the government,'' he said. 
''We're not ashamed about that, because the only market was the government.''
