
HIGHER and higher: Whether it is consumer prices, raw material costs or the fines levied on miscreant corporations, all signs pointed up this week. 
One exception, besides stock prices, was the dollar, which continued to lose value against other currencies -- including China's yuan, which is all but pegged to the dollar.
PRICE SURPRISE -- Just a day after a barometer of wholesale prices suggested that inflation was under control, the Labor Department reported that consumer prices jumped unexpectedly fast in April, led by clothing, medical costs and air fares, as well as energy.
The Consumer Price Index leapt 0.6 percent, the biggest monthly rise since January, an increase from 0.4 percent in March and higher than analysts had expected. 
Without volatile food and energy costs, prices still rose 0.3 percent in the month.
Since January, so-called core prices -- which exclude food and energy -- have risen at a 3 percent annual rate, faster than the 2.2 percent rise for all of last year.
The Federal Reserve's open market committee has been raising interest rates for almost two years, seeking to curb inflation without stifling economic growth. 
After the Fed lifted its benchmark rate to 5 percent this month, some investors anticipated it might pause. 
That seems less likely now.
Fed policy makers are scheduled to meet next at the end of June.
HUNTER IS HUNTED -- Federal prosecutors charged a leading class-action securities law firm and two of its partners with illegally paying people to serve as plaintiffs in more than 150 lawsuits.
A federal grand jury in Los Angeles indicted the firm, Milberg Weiss Bershad & Schulman, for racketeering conspiracy, mail fraud, money laundering conspiracy and obstruction of justice. 
The charges are based on government accusations that the firm paid clients more than $11 million to be named in lawsuits, a practice that gave Milberg Weiss a better chance of being named lead counsel in class actions and reaping more in fees.
Melvyn I. Weiss, one of the firm's co-founders, denied all of the charges, as did lawyers for the two partners who were indicted individually, David J. Bershad and Steven G. Schulman.
The indictment could open the door to a class-action suit against Milberg Weiss or to the reconsideration of settlements made decades ago.
RECORD FINE -- Seeking to resolve a pair of problems that had tarnished its reputation and endangered billions in federal contracts, Boeing agreed to pay a record $615 million in penalties to resolve a civil lawsuit and avoid a criminal indictment.
In addition to paying a fine -- the biggest ever levied on a military contractor, prosecutors said -- Boeing agreed to ''accept responsibility'' for the actions of its employees in two widely publicized cases of corrupt practices. 
In the first, Boeing workers stole proprietary data from a rival, Lockheed Martin. 
In the other, Boeing agreed to hire an Air Force official who was still overseeing Boeing contracts at the Pentagon.
J. Michael Luttig, a former judge on the United States Court of Appeals in Richmond, Va., will succeed Douglas G. Bain as Boeing's general counsel in July.
PATENT DEPENDING -- The Supreme Court unanimously agreed that inventors were entitled to benefit from their ingenuity even if they did not use their patented ideas themselves, but added that courts should not automatically handcuff companies that infringe those patents.
In a widely anticipated ruling sought to clarify the rules of patent law, the justices told lower courts to reconsider the particular facts in this case before deciding if it should bar eBay from continuing to use the ''Buy It Now'' feature of its online auction business.
The matter returns to the district court to decide whether this case warrants an injunction against eBay while it negotiates a licensing agreement with MercExchange.
FUNGUS's TOLL -- Bausch & Lomb issued a worldwide recall for its ReNu With MoistureLoc cleaner for soft contact lenses after health officials in the United States linked the product to potentially blinding fungal infections.
Bausch said it had no basis to think that the problems extended to other ReNu products, but skeptics said 19 of the 122 cases of infection had been linked to ReNu MultiUse -- five times the rate for products from Alcon or Advanced Medical Optics, Bausch's main competitors.
The controversy appears to have hurt Bausch's sales. 
FTN Midwest Securities estimated that Bausch's share of the domestic lens care market was 43 percent at the end of March, but had tumbled to 26 percent recently.
Analysts said it was too soon to know what Bausch's legal liability could be, although numerous lawsuits have already been filed.
RULES OF THE GAME -- As some Republican members of Congress introduced a bill to weaken audit rules adopted after a rush of corporate scandals earlier in the decade, the Securities and Exchange Commission said it would begin applying the rules to more and smaller companies. 
The S.E.C. also moved to make the rules easier and less expensive to apply.
The law, called the Sarbanes-Oxley Act after its principal sponsors, was passed after the Enron and WorldCom scandals. 
It established the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board to regulate the auditing profession, and it required corporate executives to report to shareholders on the adequacy of internal financial controls.
Jurors in the trial of the two former Enron chief executives, Kenneth W. Lay and Jeffrey K. Skilling, began deliberating about whether they defrauded investors by lying about Enron's financial condition. 
A verdict could come as early as next week.
CHINA RISING -- The Chinese currency, the yuan, crept up in value by one-tenth of a percent against the dollar -- a small change on its face, but symbolically huge because it meant that for the first time it took fewer than eight yuan to buy a dollar.
China let its currency strengthen days after the United States Treasury stopped short of accusing China of manipulating the value of the currency. 
China has controlled the exchange rate of its currency since 1994, when it set the official rate at 8.7 to the dollar.
Allowing the yuan to appreciate may help China keep inflation in check because it will make gasoline, diesel fuel and other commodities priced in dollars less expensive in yuan.
MOST POPULAR -- Following are the most popular business news articles on nytimes.com from May 13 through May 19:
1. What Happened to the Fortune Michael Jackson Made?
2. On Some Flights, Millionaires Serve the Drinks
3. In a Scientist's Fall, China Feels Robbed of Glory
4. In Case of Disaster, Have a Backup Plan for Your PC
5. Dell's World Isn't What It Used to Be
Links are at nytimes.com/business.
