
International
ZIMBABWE RIVALS SIGN PACT
To Chart a New Route to Future
Brutal enemies sat face to face, signed an agreement and even shook hands. 
After an election season punctuated by blood, bullets and screaming, President Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe and his political rival Morgan Tsvangirai met to sign a pact. 
They agreed to work together and hammer out a way to dredge their country from a morass of political violence and chaos. 
Page A6
FEARS OF U.S. 
ACTION IN PAKISTAN
The problem of how to curb Taliban and Al Qaeda activity in Pakistan has led the United States to make strong suggestions that it may have to step in directly. 
The Pakistani press, along with an anonymous official, warned this could have the opposite effect, producing chaos and driving more people to the side of the militants. 
Page A8
IT AMOUNTS TO SORE JAW MUSCLES
The two-page proposal Iran offered at nuclear talks in Geneva stepped neatly around the six-power demand for curtailing uranium enrichment. 
In fact, the Iranians themselves called it a ''None Paper.''
It called for meetings and then some talks followed by negotiating a ''formal agreement'' for rewards promised if uranium enrichment ceases, but enrichment has to cease before any such talks can begin. 
Page A8
VICTORY, BUT BY A NARROW MARGIN
President Nicolas Sarkozy of France won approval for his proposed constitutional changes. 
Among them are new term limits for the President and requiring Parliament's approval for certain appointments. 
But they also allow him to address Parliament in ''State of the Union'' speeches, which had been previously banned, ensuring separation between the legislature and the presidency. 
Page A10
BUS EXPLOSIONS KILL 2 IN CHINA
Two public buses exploded during rush hour in Kunming, killing at least 2 people and injuring 14 others. 
China described the attacks as deliberate as the country tightens security for the coming Olympic Games, but provided no information that the attacks were coordinated or that they were the work of terrorists. 
Page A6 SOMEBODY ALERT DON QUIXOTE
The Dutch are building windmills. 
Again. As much a trademark of Holland as tulips, Gouda cheese and perhaps clogs, this new breed of windmill creates electricity, instead of grinding grain. 
It's a little bit of national pride mixed with green thinking, and the need to find alternative forms of energy is high on the agenda of many countries. 
The Netherlands is no exception. 
Just don't call them modern wind turbines. 
Page A11
