
A three-day conference that begins here Tuesday was supposed to tie up the loose ends for China's entry into the World Trade Organization, after 15 years of trying.
Instead, all eyes are on one big remaining obstacle: the squabble between the 15-country European Union and the United States over access to China's vast life insurance market.
Whether the matter can be resolved smoothly may depend on the outcome of a meeting between the chief United States negotiator, Jeffrey Bader, and his Chinese counterpart, Long Yongtu, to discuss whether the American International Group can keep the commanding presence it has built up in China over the last decade.
In general, when new members join the 142-nation group, the advantages of any preferential market access the new member has granted to some trading partners are supposed to be extended to all members. 
The talks in Geneva are meant to complete this process for China.
Because A.I.G.'s operations in China are wholly owned by the company, the Europeans say, any expansion would run afoul of an agreement they reached with China last year that insurers setting up shop in China be at least 50 percent Chinese owned.
The company, backed by the Bush administration and business groups, responds that new branches are simply an outgrowth of its current structure, and should not be subject to the 50 percent rule.
Maurice R. Greenberg, A.I.G.'s chief executive, said he remained committed to an agreement worked out between the United States and China two years ago, which provided that his company would continue to operate wholly owned units in China, as well as open new branches on the same basis.
"We were grandfathered under that agreement, going forward as well as backward," he said. 
"I had no concerns whatever until the Europeans negotiated their W.T.O. agreement."
Mr. Greenberg said he had had no role in the negotiations. 
But in an interview he suggested a compromise position: Instead of changing the terms of A.I.G.'s operations in China, let European insurers also operate without joint venture partners.
"I have no objections if the Chinese desire to give the Europeans the same opportunities we have," Mr. Greenberg said.
Diplomats and trade specialists say the Chinese are unlikely to jump at Mr. Greenberg's proposal because they are primarily concerned about protecting their fledgling domestic insurance industry.
The United States trade representative, Robert Zoellick, said in a statement: "China made commitments on insurance as part of its bilateral accession agreement with the United States."
"We expect China to uphold all of its commitments and obligations," he added.
One European Commission official in Brussels said: "It's an American issue; we are assuming the usual W.T.O. rules apply and everyone has the same rights and obligations."
So far, China appears to agree with both sides. 
A spokesman for the Chinese government, Hu Ping, said today that Beijing's "position is well known," referring to the trade pact it signed with the European Union in May 2000. 
But it has also, A.I.G. says, given the company "firm assurances" that it "will not be required to reduce ownership of any of A.I.G.'s existing 100-percent-owned insurance operations in China."
The A.I.G. statement did not address future expansion.
The company, which was founded in Shanghai before World War II, was the first foreign insurer to be readmitted to the country by the Communist government, in 1992.
Other potential roadblocks to China's membership have been greatly reduced. 
China has yet to complete a bilateral deal with Mexico, but the Mexican government has said it will not object to formal approval of China's membership.
