
In a sign that Taiwan's political standoff with China is starting to alienate its corporate customers, Dell Computer has criticized the reluctance of the authorities on Taiwan to establish direct trade and transportation ties with the Chinese mainland.
Max Fang, Dell's senior representative in Taipei, the island's capital, said he told senior economic and trade officials last week, "How can you expect to be an Asia-Pacific procurement center if you are isolated from the biggest market in the region?"
The president of Taiwan, Chen Shui-bian, has been under increasing pressure from industrialists there to establish direct links with China. 
But this is the first time that a foreign company has joined in the call.
Dell, based in Austin, Tex., is no ordinary foreign company. 
It is the largest buyer of laptop computers from Taiwan's suppliers, ordering 3.5 million to 4 million machines this year.
Taiwan has built its economy over the last two decades by becoming the subcontractor of choice for the global computer industry. 
Companies there make 53 percent of the world's laptops and 25 percent of desktop PC's. 
Most are sold under American brand names like Compaq, Gateway and Dell.
"Dell is just looking for the best way to do business," said Horace Tsiang, chief executive of First International Computer, a PC maker in Taipei. 
"They've been the price leader; they want to stay the price leader."
As if to underline its point, Dell moved its top procurement executive to Hong Kong earlier this year. 
The executive, Robert Shanks, said he wanted to be closer to plants on the Chinese mainland, most of them owned by Taiwan companies, that manufacture Dell desktop and laptop computers.
"The lack of a direct flight between Taipei and Shanghai is a big disadvantage," said Mr. Shanks, who scouted Taipei before settling here. 
"They will lose out over time if they don't change the situation."
The political gulf between Taipei and Beijing means that travelers from Taiwan to mainland China must go through Hong Kong. 
That turns a 90-minute hop into all-day travel. 
Similarly, components made in factories in China must be routed through Hong Kong, on their way to Taiwan.
Officials in Taipei acknowledge that direct trade and transportation links with China are inevitable. 
The question is when, and the answer depends on political rather than economic calculations.
China is eager for such links, expecting that this will stimulate its economy and accelerate the integration of Taiwan and the mainland. 
But the Chinese leaders, who call Taiwan a renegade province, insist that Mr. Chen recognize a single China, governed in Beijing.
In January, when Mr. Chen authorized trade and transportation between the mainland and two outlying islands -- Kinmen, known in cold war times as Quemoy, and Matsu -- Beijing dismissed this as an empty gesture. 
Mr. Chen is reluctant to make a grander gesture to Beijing, feeling that the Communist officials have scarcely acknowledged his existence.
"If the P.R.C. is willing to talk to us, the links can happen," said John C. C. Deng, vice chairman of the Mainland Affairs Council of Taiwan. 
"If they stick to their current position, they won't happen."
For the last few months, Mr. Deng has been making the rounds of Taiwan and foreign technology companies, listening to their concerns about relations across the Taiwan Strait. 
Today, he had lunch with Mr. Fang of Dell.
"Dell is our customer and we treasure that relationship," Mr. Deng said. 
"But on the issue of direct links, I think we recognize that there are some things we can control, and other things we cannot control."
Within two weeks, Mr. Deng said, Taiwan will relax its restrictions on trade with the mainland to allow cargo shipped from the south China city of Xiamen to be unloaded in southern Taiwan, transferred to the Taipei airport, and exported to the United States or Europe by plane.
The rules are aimed at foreign computer companies, which use air shipments for components that are needed quickly in their home markets. 
Mr. Deng said routing air cargo through Taipei instead of mainland airports would save two days.
Direct flights are a thornier issue, he said, because they involve granting landing rights to flag carriers. 
That raises the dispute over sovereignty involving Taipei and Beijing, separated since Mao Zedong's victory over the Chinese Nationalists in 1949.
Dell executives show little patience for the diplomatic nuances. 
They are laboring in a fiercely competitive industry, during an economic downturn, when extracting the lowest prices from contractors is critical.
"Nobody talks about Communism versus capitalism," Mr. Tsiang of First International Computer said. 
"They just think of where they can get the lowest cost."
The risk for Taiwan, he said, is that it will lose not just low-end manufacturing, which is gravitating toward the cheap labor market in China, but research and development. 
Companies might prefer to keep such operations on Taiwan, but their bosses are put off by the roundabout trip across the Taiwan Strait.
Mr. Shanks of Dell would not say how much of the company's manufacturing is done in mainland Chinese factories. 
But companies like First International are building plants near Shanghai to produce laptop computers. 
Already, the bulk of scanners, and half the disk drives, sold by Taiwan companies are made in China.
"We're migrating more and more to China," Mr. Shanks said. 
"The soft economy may be accelerating that."
Dell's decision to put its procurement headquarters in Hong Kong is a little triumph for the city, a special administrative region of China and until 1997 a British crown colony.
But it may be a fleeting one. 
Mr. Shanks said that Dell had set up offices in other cities, including Shanghai, where much of the investment in technology is flowing. 
As Shanghai becomes even more of a technology magnet, Mr. Shanks said he could foresee relocating from Hong Kong.
"This is business, so we don't let emotion get in the way," he said.
