
The Sina Corporation, one of China's biggest Internet portals, said Monday that it would acquire a large piece of Focus Media, one of the leading advertising and digital media companies in China, for about $1 billion in stock.
The deal, which was announced late Monday in Shanghai, pushes Sina, which controls Sina.com, into the business of outdoor and in-store advertising on liquid-crystal display monitors, diversifying an Internet giant that evolved as a kind of Chinese version of Yahoo, with news, blogs and online entertainment.
The deal also breaks up or substantially alters Focus Media, a company based in Shanghai that just over a year ago was one of China's high-flying advertising companies, valued then at more than $7 billion, after a successful listing on Nasdaq a few years earlier.
Both companies are now struggling to deal with fierce competition in China and an advertising slowdown that is expected to accelerate further in 2009.
Shares of the two companies, both of which trade on Nasdaq, fell sharply on the news Monday, apparently over worries that Sina was paying a high price for the assets and that Focus Media was going to change its focus because of the sale.
Shares of Sina were down 17 percent, to $24.25, late Monday. 
And shares of Focus Media, which have fallen from about $60 a year ago, were down 16 percent in late trading Monday, to $9.20.
The companies said that the boards of both companies had already approved the asset sale and that no shareholder vote was necessary. 
Sina will issue about 47 million shares to Focus Media shareholders to acquire the assets.
According to the deal, Sina is expected to acquire most of the core holdings of Focus Media, including its out-of-home advertising networks, its LCD display network, and its in-store network, which together would amount to more than 100,000 advertising monitors around the country.
Those assets accounted for about 52 percent of Focus Media's revenue and 73 percent of its profit through the first nine months of this year, the company said.
Focus Media, which is expected to have about $800 million in revenue this year, said it would retain its fast-growing online advertising assets, its movie advertising network, its commercial location networks and its traditional billboard business.
Sina, whose revenues are estimated to be close to $360 million this year, called the deal a merger of great properties.
''The transaction is intended to combine the forces of two of the most powerful new-media advertising platforms in China,'' Charles Chao, Sina's chief executive, said in a statement.
Executives at Sina and Focus Media are familiar with each other. 
Since 2005, Mr. Chao of Sina has served on the board of Focus Media, alongside that company's founder and chairman, Jason Jiang.
While Sina.com competes fiercely against other strong Chinese Internet companies, like Baidu, Sohu and Tencent, analysts have considered Focus Media an innovative company because it has grown fast, essentially by acquiring competitors and placing monitors in stores, residential buildings and even on busy commercial streets in some of China's biggest cities, including Shanghai.
The monitors recycle short television advertising spots produced by a wide variety of brands, including global companies like Nike and Apple.
Focus Media was founded in Shanghai by Mr. Jiang, who has been listed by Forbes for several years as one of China's wealthiest entrepreneurs.
