
LAST year, Yoon Heung-Soon remembers, representatives of South Korean credit card companies buttonholed well-dressed people "at subway stations and on street corners," pressing new cards on them.
"We were able to spend a lot last Christmas," said Ms. Yoon, a 42-year-old office worker and a first-time credit card holder. 
Then, focusing on the $85,000 debt she racked up buying clothes and presents with 10 cards, she said gloomily: "I wish there were no Christmas this year."
In 2000, South Korea broke with modern Asia's tradition of encouraging economic development by sacrificing consumer desires on the altar of ever higher export surpluses. 
In a deliberate government policy, consumers were coddled with credit, partly to jump-start an economic recovery, partly to make sure that sales taxes, often avoided on cash transactions, were collected.
It worked. 
In 2002, fueled largely by consumer spending, South Korea's economy leapt by 6.3 percent. 
Now, China and Thailand, Asia's two fastest-growing economies in 2003, are taking a play from South Korea's book, using easy credit to make consumers a pillar of growth.
But South Korea may be one unfortunate step ahead of Asia's growth champions: about 16 percent of South Korean working adults -- 3.6 million people -- are debt defaulters, up from 2.5 million a year earlier. 
Like first-generation car owners, first-generation credit card holders have more than their share of financial wrecks.
Despite ads pitching "prices of 10 years ago," spending in October at Seoul's three largest department stores was 11.2 percent below last year's level, the ninth consecutive month of depressed spending. 
Spending at discount store chains was down 5.7 percent from October 2002.
Credit card companies are shedding workers and pursuing delinquent borrowers in a fight to stay afloat. 
Though exports hit a record of $19 billion in October, the depressed consumer spending means this year's overall economic growth rate is around 3 percent, about half the forecasts of a year ago.
In a far cry from the days when card companies gave out gifts to induce passers-by to accept a card, Kookmin Bank, the nation's largest lender, reported that last year's profits have evaporated, largely because of a $447 million infusion this fall to prop up its credit card division. 
Woori Financial, South Korea's third-largest financial services company, also moved into losses in the third quarter after pumping $546.5 million into its credit card division.
On Nov. 
23, creditors extended a $1.7 billion bailout of the LG Card Company, which promised to trim its work force by the end of September. 
Over the next year, LG, the nation's largest card issuer, plans to write off $7.6 billion in bad consumer loans.
With Seoul's soaring real estate prices added to the mix, South Korea's central bank is warning that consumer defaults could touch off another financial crisis. 
According to the Bank of Korea, consumer loans account for 29.7 percent of total bank assets, compared with 11.8 percent in 1997, the time of the last financial crisis. 
In five years, consumer loans quadrupled, to $170 billion in 2002, the central bank said.
With the desperate debtors a growing political force, South Korea's National Assembly is struggling to fashion a bailout before April's elections. 
One bill would use $3.8 billion in tax money to help pay credit card bills for one million people.
"Every other household on my street is affected by this problem," said Park Hyun-Sook, who had come with her friend, Mrs. Yoon, to a new government-run credit counseling center. 
Mrs. Park, who owes $40,000, said that credit card company representatives used to visit her office and hand out free cards to many employees.
In two years, the number of credit cards in South Korea nearly doubled, peaking at 104.5 million at the end of 2002. 
Since then, the number has receded to 92.5 million, about 4 for every South Korean with a job. 
In a five-year leap, South Korea's ratio of household debt -- credit cards, loans and mortgages -- to gross domestic product doubled, to 80 percent, the level of the United States.
To many critics, Korean banks stumbled from a corporate loan crisis in the late 1990's to a consumer credit crisis today. 
In both cases, credit was extended without conducting serious risk analysis.
One year ago, credit card executives and Ministry of Finance officials were brushing off reporters' questions as alarmist. 
Today, they are trying to figure out how to deal with billions of unpaid bills. 
Under a new, stricter accounting system, the Financial Supervisory Service estimated in late October that 27 percent of all South Korean credit company loans were overdue.
At first, credit card companies responded to the delinquencies by raising interest rates on overdue bills to 60 percent or more. 
This provoked highly publicized suicides, which moved the government to work on debt relief. 
Kookmin Bank says it has started personal workout programs for 250,000 customers. 
Generally, annual interest rates are lowered to 7 percent, from as high as 60 percent, and repayment terms are stretched to seven years from payment on demand.
This consumer debt overhang may take the bloom off growth for 2004 in South Korea, Asia's third-largest economy after Japan and China. 
The nation is not expected to bring consumer debt under control until next summer. 
While confidence indexes among corporations point to a sunny future, depressed consumer spending is expected to hold growth down to 4.9 percent in 2004, according to a recent forecast by Andy Xie, a Hong Kong-based economist for Morgan Stanley. 
With the United States and China, the two largest markets for South Korean goods, experiencing high growth, exports will once again drive South Korea.
To try to prop up consumer spending, South Korea's central bankhas cut interest rates twice since April, to 3.75 percent, a record. 
After lowering sales taxes on cars, flat-screen televisions and other electronics goods, the government is considering an across-the-board cut in the nation's 10 percent sales tax.
But, just as the scene at the credit-counseling center here was an unhappy one, consumer confidence indexes point to a somber future.
"Last year, I purchased clothes and cosmetics for gifts," Mrs. Park said. 
"This season it will be hard. 
It will be quiet this Christmas, without any credit cards."
