
His economy in distress, his banks teetering and his currency sinking, Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi of Japan has embarked on a whirlwind tour of Southeast Asia to promote a vision of regional economic cooperation and trade liberalization -- only to find that his country is now seen as more hindrance than help.
A decade ago, when Tokyo talked, Southeast Asia listened. 
But as Japan's economy has stumbled, its influence as Southeast Asia's largest investor and lender has withered. 
Today, the global electronics market and the threat of China's rapid rise as a rival for trade and investment matter much more.
Mr. Koizumi is scheduled to wrap up his tour here on Monday with a speech sketching the outlines of a broad East Asian economic and trade bloc that would stretch from Japan to Australia and New Zealand. 
Japanese officials said that Mr. Koizumi had planned to offer the proposal in September, but the terror attacks in the United States obliged him to shelve the trip and the speech. 
Then, in November, Premier Zhu Rongji of China stole some of his thunder with an agreement to establish a free-trade area with Southeast Asia within 10 years.
Now, what the countries in the region are most concerned about is not Japan's vision of the future but its attempts to contain its troubles of today by letting the yen fall in value, potentially threatening its neighbors' economic health.
"It's a highly politicized issue," said Pieter van der Schaft, an economist at Barclays Capital in Hong Kong. 
"In the past, Japan has held back on pursuing a weak yen policy because it would have been accused of pursuing beggar-thy-neighbor policies."
No longer, evidently. 
The yen has fallen 10 percent against the dollar in just two months, reflecting the country's poor short-term economic prospects, and officials in Tokyo have not tried to stop it. 
A cheaper yen means a relative loss of competitiveness for Japan's neighbors.
Reaction in Asian markets has been relatively muted so far. 
But during his stop Thursday in Malaysia, Mr. Koizumi found himself fielding questions about the yen from Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad of Malaysia, who has been one of Japan's greatest admirers in the region. 
Mr. Mahathir also appeared to throw cold water on Mr. Koizumi's pan-Asian vision.
Mr. Koizumi was more warmly received by President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo of the Philippines on Wednesday and by Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra of Thailand today. 
And he will have a substantive achievement to point to on Monday, when he is scheduled to sign a free trade agreement with Singapore, Japan's first such pact with any nation.
Singapore's leaders have called repeatedly for greater regional economic linkages, but they have backed away from the kind of "economic socialism" represented by Japan's developmental model of the past. 
If Mr. Koizumi's new plan more resembles the careful deregulation approach being pursued in Singapore, it may also go down well here.
Economists said the yen would probably go on making Mr. Koizumi's message of cooperation ring somewhat hollow, however. 
Mr. van der Schaft said the yen could slide by one-third, to 200 to the dollar, before stabilizing, making Japanese exports much more attractive and possibly buying Mr. Koizumi time to push through his politically difficult austerity and deregulation program.
Southeast Asian economies depend even more heavily on exports than Japan's does, and the Japanese are vital customers. 
Many regional policy makers fear that a falling yen will worsen a slump in their own nations' competitiveness abroad and widen the region's trade deficit with Japan. 
Worse, they fear that their own currencies will be forced lower.
Mr. Mahathir warned today that the yen's fall might force Malaysia to end its policy of pegging the Malaysian ringgit at 3.8 to the dollar. 
Mr. Mahathir established the peg during the Asian financial crisis of the late 1990's, and he has said the peg, along with capital controls that have since been lifted, is what spared Malaysia from the volatility and turmoil that sent Thailand and Indonesia into the arms of the International Monetary Fund.
Past shifts in the yen's strength have been pivotal for Southeast Asia. 
The Plaza Accord of 1985, which sent the Japanese yen surging, touched off a wave of Japanese investment in the region, as Japanese exporters moved production overseas to lower costs. 
In 1995, the Group of 7 industrialized nations agreed to push the yen down against the dollar, leading to a steady decline in Japanese lending and investment to Southeast Asia that some economists say helped ignite the Asian financial crisis in 1997.
Today, though, many economists say Southeast Asia has less to fear from a decline in the yen than it stands to gain if the Japanese economy -- nearly eight times the size of all of Southeast Asia's taken together -- were to recover and start growing again. 
Japan the customer looms larger than Japan the competitor.
"Compared to 10 or 20 years ago, they are probably able to stand on their feet more easily," said Rebecca H. Patterson, global currency strategist at J. P. Morgan in New York. 
"You don't have the same financial dependencies you did in the early 90's."
