
On the final day of these Summer Games, the investigation regarding possible age falsification on the Chinese women's gymnastics team continues, leaving four Olympic medals in question as competitors pack up and leave the Olympic Village.
''This process may take some time,'' the international gymnastics federation, known as the F.I.G., said in a statement, ''but in due course, the F.I.G. will make a full report of our findings to the International Olympic Committee.''
Prompted by a request from the Olympic committee, citing ''information that was concerning enough,'' the world governing body of gymnastics started an inquiry last week into the ages of the Chinese gymnasts.
Since then, the Chinese Gymnastics Federation has submitted more evidence of the gymnasts' ages. 
Those documents included passports, national identity cards and family registration booklets from five of the six members of the Chinese women's team that won six medals here, including the team gold.
''At first sight, they seem to be O.K.,'' Jacques Rogge, the president of the I.O.C., said of the documents. 
He added that the gymnastics federation would continue to analyze the documents, which are in Chinese.
The New York Times reported last month that at least two of the six members of the team -- He Kexin and Jiang Yuyuan -- were under age, according to official online records. 
A gymnast must be 16 during an Olympic year to compete in the Games, the minimum age since 1997.
The Associated Press has since reported that a third member of the team, Yang Yilin, might also not have been eligible to compete.
Cui Dalin, the deputy director of China's General Administration of Sport, said Sunday that the gymnasts were ''perfectly qualified for the rules'' and that the age discrepancies were a misunderstanding.
Cui said that He, the gold medalist on the uneven bars, switched teams last year and her age was registered incorrectly with her new team.
''The mistakes made have led to a series of misunderstandings,'' Cui said.
GOLD FOR SOUTH KOREA South Korea won the gold medal and capped an improbable Olympic run Saturday night in Beijing with the country's biggest win yet in international baseball, a 3-2 victory against the defending champion, Cuba.
The South Koreans (9-0) pulled off an impressive win in what will long be remembered as an upset in baseball's last Olympic hurrah for at least eight years.
Reliever Chong Tae-Hyon got Yuliesky Gourriel to ground into a 6-4-3 double play with the bases loaded to end the game after a drama-filled ninth inning.
Cuba (7-2), a perennial world powerhouse and the lone representative from Latin America in the eight-team Olympic field, dropped only two games in China -- both to South Korea, a first-time gold medalist in the sport.
The United States (6-3) defeated Japan, the other favorite going into the Games, 8-4, to win the bronze medal. 
Taylor Teagarden hit a tie-breaking two-run double in the fifth and Jason Donald followed with a two-run homer off the left-field foul pole.
Baseball has been dropped from the Olympic program for the 2012 London Games.(AP)
ARGENTINA RETAINS GOLD Argentina defeated Nigeria, 1-0, at the Bird's Nest in Beijing to win the gold medal in men's soccer.
Between Lionel Messi's darting runs and Juan Roman Riquelme's long, low passes to Sergio Aguero, meeting Aguero in stride as he ran at goal, Argentina controlled most of the first half.
Both teams were slowed by the searing sun and midday heat. 
The temperature on the field at the National Stadium reached 107 degrees.
In the 58th minute, Messi sent a perfectly timed through ball to Angel Di Maria, who was not well marked, streaking down the left side. 
Di Maria ran in on goal alone, expertly chipping from 18 yards over the advancing goalkeeper, Ambruse Vanzekin. 
JEFFREY MARCUS
FIRST GOLD FOR DOMINICANS Felix Diaz won the first gold medal in Olympic boxing for the Dominican Republic with a 12-4 battering of the defending champion Manus Boonjumnong of Thailand. 
(AP)
