
BEST IN SHOWThe News -- James, a 6-year-old English springer spaniel, was designated Best in Show at the 131st Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show in Manhattan. 
Behind the News -- James, a k a Ch. 
Felicity's Diamond Jim, kissed and nuzzled his handler but yawned for photographers.
Then he napped for two hours before a media tour that took him to four morning news programs, Martha Stewart's show, Sardi's and Charlie Rose's studio, where he reclined on the floor. 
Now he is retiring from show business and is likely to go back to being a therapy dog for Alzheimer's patients. 
HANDY WITH TOOLSThe News -- As far back as 4,300 years ago, chimpanzees in the rain forest of what is now the Ivory Coast used stones as tools to crack open nuts, according to a new report.Behind the News -- Archaeologists discovered several sites with evidence of the nut-crackers. 
Chimps in the wild were first observed using stone tools in the early 19th century. 
But researchers have suggested that if the chimps 4,300 years ago were not mimicking humans, their use of tools might have been inherited from the last ancestor that chimps and humans have in common, some seven million years ago. 
HOMELAND SECURITYThe News -- Dolphins and sea lions trained to detect and apprehend swimmers and scuba divers may be deployed by the Navy.Behind the News -- The Navy said it was seriously considering using the animals to bolster security at a base in the Northwest that is home to submarines and ships. 
Using their sonar, the dolphins would patrol for intruders, while the sea lions have been trained to clamp a cuff on the legs of waterborne intruders so authorities can reel them in. 
Up to 30 Atlantic bottlenose dolphins and California sea lions would be deployed.TAKEOUTThe News -- Colorado wildlife authorities have taken the unusual step of feeding deer, antelope and elk unable to find food in the deep snow.Behind the News -- A succession of storms and biting cold in southeastern Colorado is threatening the survival of thousands of deer, elk and pronghorn antelope. 
Wildlife workers have begun using snowmobiles to haul in food supplements tailored to each species. 
''We need to do what we can to help our big game herds survive the rest of this hard winter,'' said the state's wildlife commissioner, Ken Torres.GOOD VIBRATIONSThe News -- The Los Angeles Zoo paid $4,500 to an expert in the Chinese practice of feng shui to help in the design of a new monkey enclosure.Behind the News -- The $7.4 million enclosure will house three rare golden monkeys on loan for 10 years from the Chinese government. 
The monkeys, which live in the forests of China, are highly endangered. 
The zoo sought a design that would promote balance and comfort -- good feng shui. 
''It's very experimental,'' the consultant told The Los Angeles Daily News. 
''We don't have any books on feng shui for monkeys.''
