
Japan's prime minister said Tuesday that his country and China were close to resolving a dispute over offshore natural gas fields that had become a symbol of rising rivalries between Asia's two richest nations.
Prime Minister Yasuo Fukuda told reporters that the two sides were close to an agreement on developing a string of natural gas fields in a contested part of the East China Sea. 
While he did not provide details, Japanese newspapers said the agreement would allow Japanese investment in Chinese companies that would drill in the area, which sits roughly midway between Shanghai and the Japanese island of Okinawa.
''There is a strong likelihood that this dispute will be resolved,'' said Mr. Fukuda, who is preparing to host a summit meeting of the leading industrial nations next month. 
''We would like to turn the sea into a sea of peace and cooperation.''
An agreement would be the latest sign of a thaw in relations between the Asian neighbors, who remain divided over many issues, including the safety of Chinese food exports and Japan's responsibility for its military's actions before and during World War II. 
Mr. Fukuda has worked to improve ties that hit a low point earlier this decade when a previous prime minister, Junichiro Koizumi, angered Beijing with visits to a Japanese war shrine.
In another sign of improving ties, Japan's Defense Ministry said Tuesday that one of its warships would visit a Chinese port for the first time since World War II. 
In May, China's president, Hu Jintao, became the first Chinese leader to visit Japan in a decade.
While the contested gas reserves in the East China Sea are not believed to be particularly large, the dispute underscores the tensions caused as China bumps up against the interests of Japan. 
Not only are the two nations competing over energy resources to fuel their highly industrialized economies, they also are making conflicting claims to economic control in the East China Sea.
Parts of the gas fields sit in waters over which both Tokyo and Beijing claim exclusive economic rights. 
These claims have stirred strong emotions, as they touch on issues of national sovereignty. 
Four years ago, tensions over the disputed gas fields rose to the point that both sides sent in naval vessels and planes to patrol the area. 
Chinese patrol boats stopped a Norwegian ship hired by Japan from surveying the sea floor.
The expected agreement over the gas fields will probably sidestep the thornier dispute over economic rights by simply leaving it unresolved for now, according to Japanese media reports, apparently based on off-the-record briefings by Japanese officials. 
By allowing Japanese companies to invest in Chinese development of the gas fields, the agreement would allow Japan to share the profits from their development, the reports said.
The two nations have been in negotiations over drilling rights since 2004. 
The dispute over rights has extended even to the name of the biggest gas field in the area, which the Chinese call Chunxiao but the Japanese call Shirakaba. 
The gas reserves under the East China Sea are estimated at the equivalent of about 93 million barrels of oil, or enough to meet just three weeks of Japan's energy needs, Reuters reported.
