
Japan and South Korea lived the World Cup not so much as a global soccer tournament, but as a festival to change their countries for the better.
Interviews with dozens of Koreans and Japanese suggest that the first joint organization of the world's largest sporting event may have had far more than a passing impact on the two host countries, both drawing them closer together, and brightening people's attitudes about the future.
Despite having the world's 2nd and 13th largest economies, the Japanese and South Koreans, for years now, have suffered their own unique forms of depression.
For South Koreans, even as their country has zoomed up the global wealth rankings, there has been deep frustration that its economic achievements have never been recognized, coupled with a lingering sense of inferiority toward Japan, a traditional rival and onetime colonial master.
On match days, though, in Seoul and in other cities, South Koreans massed in the streets by the millions during the World Cup, all dressed in the colors of their team, the Red Devils, loudly chanting "Daehan Minguk," a slogan that roughly means, "great Korea people's country."
Koreans' self-confidence got a powerful lift when South Korea made it to the final four, dismissing European soccer powerhouses like Italy and Portugal on the way and finishing well ahead of regional rivals China and Japan.
"We did great," said Jie Yong Suk, an office worker. 
"We proved we were worthy of any opponents."
Kim Yu Min, a secretary in Seoul, came more sharply to the point. 
"Because our results were better than those of China and Japan, we could overcome some of our inferiority," she said.
Japan, long a global overachiever, has been depressed for more than 11 years now, with many seeing the country as having thoroughly lost its touch. 
Stirring performances in the tournament's early rounds provided not only Japan's first-ever World Cup victories, they furnished images of something that has become exceedingly rare here: energetic men reaping reward for total enthusiasm and commitment.
With its funky, dyed hair and resilience, Japan's World Cup team was a far cry from the dispirited salarymen whose gray, defeated countenance has become the symbol of this country's economic dead end.
"We didn't go as far as we would have liked, but won our games with an energy that we didn't even suspect Japan had anymore," said Eisuke Kawamura, a 24-year-old fan who attended Sunday's final between Brazil and Germany. 
"They have shown us that Japan can do better."
Japan's defeat in World War II left its people uncomfortable with mass displays of patriotism. 
At the World Cup last month, Japanese waved their country's distinctive red-disc flag, the Hinomaru, and chanted "Nippon, Nippon!" in larger numbers and more enthusiastically than they have at any time since the war.
"Flying the Hinomaru in front of your house on the emperor's birthday is very passe," said Tsunehiko Watanabe, a 28-year-old Tokyo businessman. 
"Waving it at the World Cup, though, is another thing altogether. 
It has nothing to do with political affiliation. 
At the stadium no one cares who is leftist or rightist."
Japan's comfortable exultation in national identity and reaching the last 16 was notable. 
Even more remarkable, however, were Japanese feelings toward the greater success of South Korea.
Traditionally, Japanese have served up a mixture of superiority and disdain to match the envy and loathing that Koreans typically express toward them.
Not only did the two countries host the tournament together, but once Japan's team lost, fans rooted strongly for South Korea.
Along the way, Japanese learned a bit of humility and, in one interview after another, remembered kinship rather than their traditional emphasis on distinction from other Asians.
"I thought Japan was superior to Korea, but that feeling was totally wiped out," said Keiichi Takenaka, 29, a factory worker who watched Korea's victory over Spain in a Tokyo sports bar. 
Asked if he had meant superiority in soccer, he said "no, as a country."
"I want Japan to become stronger and win next time," said Katsumi Sato, a 50-year-old unemployed man who spoke in downtown Tokyo. 
"Meanwhile, I am supporting Korea. 
They are our kin, and we share the same blood."
