
Japan detained two North Korean cargo ships in Japanese ports today, moves that North Korea denounced as sanctions and that Japan defended as safety inspections.
"We are ready to thoroughly inspect all North Korean vessels at ports across the country," Chikage Ogi, Japan's transport minister, said at a news conference, hours before her inspectors scoured the North Korean ships for violations.
The detentions were ordered a day after Bush administration officials said they were encouraging allies to put pressure on North Korean shipping by enforcing safety rules and searching for illegal drugs, a major North Korean export. 
The policy is part of a broader effort to force North Korea into negotiating an end to its nuclear bomb program.
Inspectors worked all day in Maizuru, a western Japan port that last year received about one-quarter of the 1,344 calls to all Japanese ports by 147 North Korean ships. 
After the inspections, Maizuru transport ministry officials ordered the detention of the Namsan 3, a 298-ton freighter, until its North Korean crew of 16 could fix three major safety violations: lack of charts of surrounding seas, a hole in its bulkhead, and a doorsill to the cabin that was too low to prevent water from flooding in.
Farther north, at Otaru port in Hokkaido, northern Japan, local transport officials ordered the detention for safety violations of the 178-ton Daehungrason 2, which was carrying a cargo of crabs.
During the last decade, several North Korean freighters have become stranded along Japan's coast. 
Invariably, the state company owners have walked away from the shipwrecks, refusing to pay fines or to remove the hulks.
The detentions today came after North Korean authorities suspended the country's lone ferry link with Japan to protest the new safety inspection policy. 
North Korea's state-run press denounced the inspections.
"If this is part of 'sanctions' against the D.P.R.K., we cannot but regard it as a very serious development," the official Korean Central News Agency said, using the initials of North Korea's formal name, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
It called the policy "part of the Bush administration's foolish and shameful moves to ostracize the D.P.R.K. politically and morally on the international arena and isolate and stifle it by terming it a 'rogue state.'
"
But for Japan, the largest economy in the region, North Korea's hostility only serves to strengthen the political standing at home of Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi. 
A survey by NHK public television broadcast on Monday evening showed that 59 percent of voters supported Mr. Koizumi's two-year-old government, up five percentage points from a poll in May.
While the United States and Japan are tightening a maritime noose on North Korea, China and South Korea seem increasingly neutral.
"Under the present circumstances, both sides should avoid taking measures which are likely to escalate the situation on the Korean peninsula," China's Foreign Ministry spokesman, Kong Quan, told reporters in Beijing today.
South Korea plans on Saturday to ceremonially mark the renewal of rail and road links with the North. 
Freight trains should be traveling from Seoul to Pyongyang by the end of September, Cho Myoung-gyon, a senior official at South Korea's Unification Ministry, said in a radio interview today.
