
Boots crunching on the packed snow of Siberia's largest car lot, Anatoly M. Kiselev passed row upon row of the cars that keep the Russian Far East rolling: Toyota Land Cruisers, Mitsubishi Pajeros, a delivery van from Osaka, and strings of sensible Hondas and Nissans, many still bearing stickers from parking garages in Tokyo.
Incomprehensible Japanese characters emblazoned on a Toyota pickup truck?
No problem. 
Left-hand drive in right-hand-drive Russia?
No problem. 
Everything sells.
"A Russian car, a Zhiguli for example, practically falls apart after 50,000 kilometers," said Mr. Kiselev, the fur-hatted sales director of Montazhny Rynok, described as "the largest car market in Khabarovsk."
There was not a Russian car in sight on a recent Saturday morning; virtually all the 414 cars, trucks and vans on the sales lot had already clocked 30,000 miles on the roads of Japan.
While the United States is the world's largest importer of new Japanese cars, Russia is now the largest importer of used Japanese cars.
With China and many Southeast Asian countries closed to imports of used cars, some analysts fear that Russia has become a magnet for stolen cars, with western Russia attracting stolen German cars and eastern Russia attracting vehicles stolen in Japan. 
The Japanese police have broken up several theft rings shipping cars to Russia. 
But stolen vehicles are thought to account for only a small part of the illicit flow, probably less than 5 percent.
Stolen or not, the high-quality Japanese cars are definitely improving things for a population long deprived of decent vehicles -- or any vehicles at all. 
On the streets of Khabarovsk, to listen to happy Russian owners, these swarms of preowned Toyotas, Hondas and Nissans are helping Russia make critical steps toward a democratic car culture.
"When I was a kid, only top officials had cars -- everyone else walked or took the tram," said Sergei Rudenko, 46, a retired Aeroflot pilot, as he contentedly piloted his 11-year-old Toyota Sprinter, a Corolla variant sold in Japan, down streets packed rock hard with snow. 
"See that Zhiguli over there?
The latest model costs $20,000 -- that's the price of four used Japanese cars."
Children in this city of more than 600,000 play the back-seat game of "spot the Russian car."
With Ladas, Volgas and Sputniks increasingly rare, it takes real hunting to find a Russian-made car on streets clogged with Japanese imports.
To listen to Russian and American carmakers, though, the flood of used-car imports is retarding the development of a national car industry and threatening to set back efforts by General Motors, Ford and other foreign auto producers to build modern new vehicles in Russia. 
In 2002, Russia's overall car production fell 5 percent, to 970,000, slipping below China's production for the first time. 
Against this background, Ford and G.M. are embarking on rival assembly projects, investments totaling nearly $500 million.
To listen to Japanese consumers, Russian drivers are getting a free ride -- or at least a subsidized ride -- as a result of Japanese laws that encourage owners to sell their cars after three years, giving an artificial lift to the Japanese automakers.
"In Japan, the older the car gets, the more expensive it is to register it," Christopher Richter, an HSBC auto analyst, said in Tokyo. 
"In reality, it is a subsidy of the car industry."
After three years on the road, Japanese cars face a formidable safety inspection that usually costs around $1,200. 
This is then repeated every two years for the life of the car.
"Increasingly, after your fifth year, you have to ask yourself, 'Is it worth it to keep the car?'
" Kurt Sanger, an auto analyst for ING Financial, said in Tokyo.
Still, Japan's economic stagnation is squeezing this bounty of used cars. 
More and more drivers are resisting the government's hint to go out and buy a new car. 
In 2002, sales dropped 2.3 percent, to 5.8 million vehicles, the lowest level since 1986, and there were 40 percent more sales of used cars than of new ones.
Japanese are holding on to their cars longer, about six years today, compared with four and a half years in 1990.
Still, there are plenty of good-quality 'driven only on Sundays" Japanese cars left over to keep Russia rolling. 
As many as 200,000 used Japanese cars were exported to Russia in 2002, according to an estimate by Toshio Kimura, an executive with the Japan Used Motor Vehicles Export Association, a trade group.
"The Russians like four-wheel-drive cars, strong off-road-type cars, because their roads are not very good," Chuzo Takayama, president of Honda Used Car Sales, said in Tokyo. 
The high-quality underbody treatments of Japanese cars generally hold up well on Russian roads, where salt is used liberally in the winter.
Officially, only about 25,000 cars were exported in 2002 to Russia. 
But many more were exported informally, on the thousands of Russian fishing boats and freighters that dock around the Japanese archipelago.
"As many as 7,000 fishing boats come here a year, bringing timber or fish," Mr. Kimura said. 
"They go home full of Japanese used cars."
Mr. Richter, the HSBC analyst, said: "They just boat these things across the Sea of Japan. 
They don't have to go too far."
Used cars now account for about 10 percent of Japan's annual vehicle exports.
Most of the cars arrive in the Russian Pacific port of Vladivostok.
"I came across a police car from Toyama prefecture, buses for a kindergarten, and for a Japanese country inn," Yoichi Funabashi, foreign affairs columnist for Asahi Shimbun, the big Japanese daily, wrote in late January of his car-spotting in Vladivostok.
From the Pacific Coast, many cars are driven here, an eight-hour, nearly 500-mile trip that nets the commercial driver only $50.
"At this site, the cars usually belong to sailors who bring them here and leave them until they are sold," Mr. Kisilev said. 
"We also have buyers from Moscow, St. Petersburg, Krasnodar, Chelyabinsk."
For these Western destinations, cars are shipped by train.
"Buyers from Yakutia just drive their cars home," he said, referring to winter tracks on frozen rivers that lead 1,500 miles northwest to Yakutsk, the region's capital.
Car sales reflect the income split between Russia's economically stagnant east and the expanding west. 
About 90 percent of the Toyotas sold in the Russian Far East are used. 
About 90 percent of the Toyotas sold in the more European-inclined west are new.
With Russians buying some 480,000 used cars in 2002, about a third of car sales, German models dominated in the west and Japanese models in the east. 
Thousands of stolen Mercedes and BMW's pass annually through Kaliningrad, a Russian Baltic outpost. 
Western police agencies have estimated that as many as half a million of the cars in Moscow were originally stolen in Europe.
In Japan, car thefts have nearly doubled in a decade, reaching 62,673 in 2002. 
After the police broke up several gangs shipping hundreds of stolen cars to Vladivostok, the government recently reinstated an old rule that allows the export of a car only after submission of proof that the registration has been canceled.
Russian automakers have lobbied hard to raise import tariffs. 
But the public debate provoked a 30 percent spike in imports. 
The Russian government is leery of angering consumers and at the same time unwilling to protect an inefficient industry. 
In October, it raised taxes on cars more than seven years old, to 35 percent, compared with the 25 percent duty on new-car imports.
The import surge caused several carmakers in Russia to close assembly lines intermittently, waiting for inventories to fall.
The wave of imports came as American companies were preparing to produce the kind of rugged, affordable cars that one day should be able to compete with German and Japanese castoffs.
In 2003, Ford plans to produce 10,000 Focus cars at a new plant near St. Petersburg. With this $150 million factory, Ford becomes the first foreign carmaker to own a plant in post-Soviet Russia.
General Motors plans to make 30,000 Chevrolet Nivas in 2003 in a $335 million joint venture with AvtoVAZ, Russia's largest car manufacturer.
In the meantime, Russians seem happy to drive their imports, often oblivious to the Japanese messages emblazoned on some vehicles.
A Toyota dealer in Vladivostok once repaired a car that was painted with the slogan in Japanese: "Return the Northern Territories!"
The slogan referred to four disputed islands, claimed by Japan, but occupied by Russia as the southern Kurile Islands since the end of World War II.
