
Prime Minister Shinzo Abe of Japan made a ceremonial offering to a controversial Tokyo war shrine last month but did not go himself, a shrine official said Tuesday.
Yasukuni Shrine, a Shinto memorial that commemorates Japan's wartime dead, including Class A war criminals from World War II, has been a focal point of Chinese and South Korean ire over what many in Asia see as Japan's lack of remorse for its wartime deeds.
Mr. Abe, who has worked to improve relations with booming China, has for months refused to say if he would visit the shrine. 
On Tuesday, Japanese news reports said Mr. Abe sent a small plant as a type of compromise -- a way of paying his respects and playing to his conservative base without making a visit, which the Chinese would surely take as an affront.
Mr. Abe sent about $425 last month to buy a plant that was presented to the shrine, said Sayaka Ishida, a shrine spokeswoman. 
She said Mr. Abe bought a six-foot-tall sakaki, a type of evergreen used in Shinto rituals.
The top government spokesman, Chief Cabinet Secretary Yasuhisa Shiozaki, later told reporters that the government could not comment because the offering was made by Mr. Abe as a private citizen and not in his capacity as Japanese leader.
However Ms. Ishida, the spokeswoman, said the plant carried a small wooden placard that read ''Prime Minister Shinzo Abe.''
The seemingly small gesture could take on larger symbolic significance in Japan's rocky relations with its neighbors, where memories of the Imperial military's wartime march through Asia remain raw. 
Mr. Abe has recently made progress in improving ties with Beijing and Seoul, one of the few major successes so far of his eight-month-old administration.
It is unclear if the action will hurt those efforts or be seen as a compromise that satisfies Japan's neighbors because he did not actually visit the shrine. 
. As of Tuesday morning, Xinhua, the official Chinese news agency, had not posted any reaction to the news on its Web site. 
South Korea's Foreign Ministry also made no comment on Tuesday morning.
Junichiro Koizumi, the previous prime minister, outraged many in Asia by making annual visits. 
They won him support from Japanese veterans groups and other conservatives, who viewed them as displays of respect for Japan's war dead.
Mr. Abe, who has pushed a conservative political agenda, has yet to make clear whether he will visit Yasukuni as prime minister, a move that would almost certainly anger China and South Korea. 
So far, Mr. Abe has tried to walk a thin line between appealing to his domestic conservative base and improving relations with Asian neighbors, with whom Japan has robust economic ties. 
One of his first moves after taking office in September was a trip to Beijing and Seoul that was widely credited with building good will.
The plant was offered during an annual spring ceremony at the shrine that was held April 21-23, shortly after a visit here by China's prime minister, Wen Jiabao, that was hailed as further mending of relations between the two Asian powers. 
The visit was the first in nearly seven years by a Chinese leader; China's top leaders had refused to come because of Mr. Koizumi's trips to the shrine.
Ms. Ishida, the shrine spokeswoman, said the last prime minister to make that type of offering was Yasuhiro Nakasone, in 1985. 
Prime Minister Nakasone also visited the shrine, angering Asian neighbors. 
Ms. Ishida said the shrine only allows high-ranking politicians and leaders of veterans and bereaved family groups to make such offerings.
Reuters reported that Japan's foreign minister, Taro Aso, told reporters he thought the gesture would have little impact on Sino-Japanese ties, which have improved markedly since Mr. Abe took office.
