
Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi fired his foreign minister, Makiko Tanaka, on Tuesday, ending a tumultuous nine-month alliance in which two of Japan's most popular politicians tried to balance their reformist tactics in the same government.
"I asked them if they were firing me, and the prime minister himself said yes," Ms. Tanaka said minutes after leaving a political meeting at Mr. Koizumi's residence. 
"The prime minister himself told me he was replacing me."
As the first woman to be Japan's foreign minister, Ms. Tanaka, 57, had won legions of followers by criticizing Japan's conservative old guard. 
But her constant feuding with bureaucrats made her a liability for Mr. Koizumi, who started the new year facing a worsening economic situation and a number of diplomatic challenges.
Her firing was seen by political analysts and voters alike as a sign that Mr. Koizumi was giving in to the conservative old guard in an effort to stabilize his weakening government. 
But Ms. Tanaka's departure could actually undermine Mr. Koizumi, alienating her supporters and leaving the prime minister and the ailing economy in the spotlight.
In early trading today, the bellwether Nikkei average of the Tokyo Stock Exchange fell below 10,000 for the first time since Nov. 
13. Market analysts attributed the drop in part to political uncertainty surrounding the Koizumi government.
A year ago, Ms. Tanaka was Japan's most popular politician, based on public opinion polls. 
But by the time a conference was held here last week on Afghan aid, she had been reduced to a figurehead.
This morning, Japanese newspapers speculated that Mr. Koizumi would try to tap another woman as foreign minister, Sadako Ogata, who won high praise as the co-chairwoman of the aid conference. 
Ms. Ogata, a Ford Foundation fellow who spends much of her time in New York, served for 10 years as the United Nations high commissioner for refugees.
After the roller coaster of Ms. Tanaka's tenure -- in which she was involved in controversies over government leaks, fired secretaries and a missed imperial garden party -- many Japanese say a professional is needed to run foreign policy.
During her time in office, Ms. Tanaka had complained that bureaucrats had cut her out of the flow of information, had not told her about meetings and had isolated her in an office that contained no international newspapers, foreign language dictionaries or even a map of the world.
Mr. Koizumi's decision to change foreign ministers comes just as a number of world leaders are arriving to do business with Japan. 
On Friday, Igor Ivanov, Russia's foreign minister, is to arrive here in an effort to break a half-century old logjam over four islands occupied by Russia and claimed by Japan. 
Ms. Tanaka had publicly criticized Mr. Koizumi's approach to the issue, which has prevented Japan from signing a peace treaty with Russia, sealing the end of World War II.
On Feb. 
17, President Bush is to come here for a two-day visit. 
Much of the visit is expected to revolve around American concern over Japan's worsening economy. 
On Tuesday, the government reported that unemployment rose to 5.6 percent in December after a 7.9 percent fall in industrial production last year.
In May and June, the World Cup soccer championship is take place in Japan and South Korea, two countries that often have complicated relations because of Japan's occupation of the Korean peninsula in the first half of the 20th century. 
Relations with China, Japan's new economic rival, will also be in the spotlight this year as a series of events are to mark 30 years since the nations reestablished diplomatic ties.
It was Ms. Tanaka's father, Kakuei Tanaka, who renewed ties with China in 1972 when he was prime minister.
Also fired on Tuesday night was Vice Foreign Minister Yoshiji Nogami, the ministry's top civil servant.
The two had contradicted each other in the national Parliament, the Diet, in recent days over the participation of two nongovernmental Japanese organizations in the conference on Afghan aid. 
The clash, with accusations of lying, pushed Ms. Tanaka to the point of tears in a television interview on Friday.
The incident further escalated when Prime Minister Koizumi responded: "Tears are women's greatest weapons. 
When women cry, men cannot compete with them."
In response, 18 female opposition members of the Diet went to the premier's residence on Tuesday to show solidarity with Ms. Tanaka, a member since 1993. 
They said in a statement, "The prime minister has biased views on women's expressions, anger and grief."
In a move that may dent his popularity -- a 72 percent approval rating in a poll released last weekend -- Mr. Koizumi said that he was too busy to receive the women because he was working on a supplemental budget.
An hour after the lower house passed the $19 billion budget additions, Mr. Koizumi summoned Ms. Tanaka to his residence and fired her and Mr. Nogami.
