
A senior official has said Japan might someday possess nuclear weapons, creating a furor here and enraging the country's neighbors.
The official, Cabinet Secretary Yasuo Fukuda, the most senior aide to Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi, told reporters on Friday that Japan might one day break with its so-called three non-nuclear principles, a decades-old policy officially forswearing weapons of mass destruction.
"The principles are just like the Constitution," he said. 
"But in the face of calls to amend the Constitution, the amendment of the principles is also likely."
The principles say that Japan, the only country ever attacked with nuclear weapons, will never make them, possess them or allow them on Japanese territory.
Mr. Fukuda was speaking to reporters on the condition that he not be identified, but the harshly critical reactions from Japan's neighbors and calls from opposition parties for the resignation of the official who made the comments prompted Mr. Fukuda to step forward today and acknowledge his statements.
"I only said there is a chance the government could take another look at the three non-nuclear principles in the future," said Mr. Fukuda, known as Mr. Koizumi's right-hand man. 
"There is absolutely no chance that this cabinet will discuss revising these principles."
Mr. Koizumi said the issue had been "blown out of proportion."
The prime minister, whose government has been on the political defensive and losing support for weeks, said no action would be taken against Mr. Fukuda. "Why is this causing such a stir?"
Mr. Koizumi said. 
"It makes me wonder because even I myself have never said I would review this policy."
But Mr. Koizumi's remarks did not placate Japan's neighbors.
"At the present time when peace and development have become the main themes of the times and continued progress is being made in international nuclear disarmament, it is shocking to hear remarks like this from a senior Japanese official," a Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman, Kong Quan, said, according to the New China News Agency.
South Korea also criticized Mr. Koizumi's government today.
