
Greece and Croatia qualified for the men's Olympic basketball tournament in Beijing next month by winning their respective matches at the qualifying tournament in Athens on Saturday.
The Greek national team defeated Puerto Rico, 88-63, to win entry to the Beijing Olympics. 
Greece, none of whose players play in the N.B.A., got double-digit scoring from six men.
Earlier, Croatia upset Germany, 76-70, to book its passage to China.
One Olympic berth remains, and it will be decided Sunday, when Puerto Rico and Germany face off.
The winner becomes the 12th team to qualify for Beijing.
According to Eurobasket.com, some 18,000 fans filled the OAKA sports hall to cheer Greece on in its match against Puerto Rico. 
The Greeks jumped to a 6-0 lead and never looked back, holding a 48-35 lead at the half and a 68-50 edge after three quarters.
Croatia won despite 30 points from Germany's Dirk Nowitzki, the Olympic qualifying tournament's leading scorer and a center for the Dallas Mavericks. 
Croatia was led by 21 points from Real Madrid guard Marko Tomas.
ANGOLA RUINS YAO'S RETURN Angola, the African champion, defeated China, 72-71, in the Stankovic Cup in Hangzhou, China, to sour center Yao Ming's comeback ahead of next month's Beijing Games. 
China rallied from a 14-point fourth-quarter deficit, but lost after Yao missed an offensive rebound as time expired.
Yao scored 16 points and had 7 rebounds in 20 minutes. 
It was his second game since coming back from a broken foot he sustained in February.
(AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)
DIVING PARTNERS LOSE APPEAL Laura Wilkinson and her diving partner, Jessica Livingston, lost their appeal to compete in 10-meter synchronized platform diving at the Beijing Olympics. 
An arbitrator ruled to keep 15-year-olds Haley Ishimatsu and Mary Beth Dunnichay as the synchro platform team for next month's Games.
Wilkinson and Livingston had filed a complaint against USA Diving and the United States Olympic Committee asking to be placed on the team or have another competition to see if they or Ishimatsu and Dunnichay should compete in Beijing.
Details of Friday's confidential American Arbitration Association hearing were not disclosed.
The younger duo was named to the Olympic team after they split four rounds with Wilkinson and Livingston at a selection camp earlier this month in Knoxville, Tenn.
Wilkinson and Livingston had a higher average score for the four contests, 329.88 points to 327.32.
But Ishimatsu and Dunnichay were chosen because they had the best individual score (346.98) of the four rounds of dives and because they had a higher score under a formula known as ''projected competition score,'' according to the complaint. 
(AP) SPRINTER HOPES TO COMPETE The British sprinter Dwain Chambers wants to compete in the 2012 London Games despite a judge refusing to overturn his lifetime doping Olympic ban before next month's Beijing Games.
Chambers's lawyer had hinted at the athlete's retirement during the hearing at London's High Court, saying that his client would ''go into the sunset'' if he was refused an injunction against the British Olympic Association's bylaw.
However, as Britain announced Craig Pickering and Tyrone Edgar as the final members of its 100-meter squad, Chambers said he would not retire.
''I just want to compete,'' Chambers told British broadcaster ITV. 
(AP)
