
Petty Officer Third Class Julie Sheil spent most of the past year learning Farsi, which seemed to put her on the fast track as a budding military linguist when President Bush identified Iran as one of the "axis of evil" countries.
But in April, the Pentagon's huge language school here began a new class in Dari, a language similar to Farsi that is spoken in Afghanistan, and Petty Officer Sheil found herself thrown into the eight-hour-a-day, 16-week crash course with instructors fresh from the region who rarely spoke English in class.
"It's been grueling," said Petty Officer Sheil, 28, a former eighth-grade teacher who joined the Navy nearly three years ago to become a linguist. 
"But people are calling from the field saying, 'We need Dari speakers now!'
"
The Pentagon's school, the Defense Language Institute, is a barometer of hot spots and American interests worldwide. 
The campaign against terror has exposed a shortage of linguists in the military and in government who can speak languages like Dari, Urdu and Hindi, and instructors here are rushing to fill the void.
"Given current events, we've got to be very flexible and very responsive to the needs of the services fighting the war," said Col. Kevin M. Rice of the Army, the institute's commandant and a fluent Chinese speaker who is a former Army attache at the United States Embassy in Beijing.
The institute teaches 3,200 students a year from the military services in 24 languages. 
Colonel Rice said 3,500 students would take courses next year. 
Languages that were important during the cold war, like Czech and Polish, were dropped this year. 
The number of students studying Russian has plummeted to about 400 from nearly 1,000 a decade ago when it was the most popular language here.
Now the language of choice is Arabic, with more than 600 students enrolled in a 63-week course that exposes them to dialects spoken in Iraq, Egypt and Syria. 
Demand for Chinese and Korean is also growing, and as the United States' relations with Central Asian countries expand in the wake of the war in Afghanistan, so are the requirements for Uzbek, Pashto and Tajik. 
Fifty students are enrolled in the new courses in Dari and Pashto.
With several thousand American troops still conducting peacekeeping operations in the Balkans, more than 100 students are studying Serbo-Croatian, an offering that drew scant interest a decade ago.
It takes time, however, to train linguists to the proficiency the military needs. 
The vast majority of students are newly enlisted troops fresh from boot camp who are immersed in a basic course lasting 25 to 63 weeks, depending on the language, and then sent on for additional training before they are assigned to a military specialty.
To plug the military's immediate linguistic gaps, about one-quarter of the institute's 85 senior enlisted language instructors -- experts with 10 to 15 years experience -- have been dispatched to the field for several weeks or months at a time, whether as interpreters for interrogators interviewing prisoners at the American base in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, or to assignments in Afghanistan.
Since founding its first language school 60 years ago to teach Japanese, the military has taught languages mainly to meet military intelligence needs: intercepting radio messages, interrogating prisoners and analyzing captured documents.
Listening and reading skills are still important for mastering translation and eavesdropping, but the emphasis here has shifted to speaking. 
This is important because the American military needs linguists not only for traditional humanitarian and peacekeeping missions, but increasingly also for counterterrorism training in places like Yemen and the former Soviet republic of Georgia.
A growing number of scientific, law enforcement and military exchanges also demand linguists who can speak on a broad variety of topics.
Life at language boot camp begins and ends on a foreign note. 
Students attend classes from 8 a.m. to 4 p.m., take a 90-minute break for physical-fitness training and then log another two to three hours a night in homework. 
Classes usually range from 6 to 10 students and are taught by two instructors who rarely speak English in class.
In one Arabic class here today, four students discussed the origins of the deadly West Nile virus with an instructor. 
The classes routinely watch broadcasts of Al Jazeera and the British Broadcasting Corporation's foreign service and tap into a wide array of Arabic-language materials on the Internet.
Students' dedication to their studies has intensified since Sept. 
11, instructors say, pointing to the drop in attrition, down to 8 percent this year from 17 percent a year ago.
"They realize how serious their assignments will be," said Luba Grant, dean of one of the institute's two Middle East schools.
The military spends $12,500 for instruction on each graduate in the 25-week French and Spanish courses, while the more difficult 63-week Arabic course costs the Pentagon $31,500 per graduate.
The Pentagon's goal is for at least 80 percent of basic-course graduates to be proficient enough to handle long descriptions and explanations in two of three categories -- writing, listening and speaking.
In recent years, since the greater emphasis was placed on practical speaking, the percentage of students attaining proficiency has increased to more than 80 percent now from 29 percent in 1985.
Technology is playing a more important role, as new computers and video conferencing are bridging the language gap for nonspecialists who need to learn basic conversation skills or to help institute graduates brush up on their skills.
The institute opened a new studio in January that serves 2,500 troops worldwide and can reach up to 320 classrooms operated by the National Guard. 
Four Army and Navy personnel in Hawaii, for example, hooked up by teleconference today with an instructor here who teaches Chinese.
The language school's $72 million annual operating budget has been steadily growing in recent years as the military's needs increase, and many students consider their second language a door-opener when their military careers are over.
Army officials originally assigned Specialist Jolene Narr, 23, to learn Korean, but after Sept. 
11, she switched to Arabic.
"I prefer the language, I'd prefer to go to the Middle East," Specialist Narr said, "and there's a lot more you can do with it after the military, in the business world."
