
Leaders from across Asia and Europe gathered in Beijing on Friday and Saturday and called for a coordinated response to the global financial crisis, in an event that underlined China's growing role as a diplomatic counterweight to the United States, but fell short of offering specific solutions.
In the difficult balance between preserving financial innovation and ensuring adequate regulation, the presidents, prime ministers and other leaders clearly tilted toward more regulation. 
A joint statement at the conference did not suggest how to accomplish this, but noted that ''necessary and timely measures should be taken.''
The statement did not exclude innovation, but indicated the preference of the attendees: ''Leaders were of the view that to resolve the financial crisis it is imperative to handle properly the relationship between financial innovation and regulation and to maintain sound macroeconomic policy. 
They recognized the need to improve the supervision and regulation of all financial actors, in particular their accountability.''
China said that it would attend the international conference in Washington on Nov. 
15 that President Bush has organized. 
But without directly criticizing the United States, Prime Minister Wen Jiabao of China noted that the effect of global financial turmoil on his country's financial institutions had been muted.
China has moved cautiously in allowing greater financial competition and in permitting money to flow in and out of the country. 
''We need financial innovation, but we need financial oversight even more,'' Mr. Wen said at a news conference in Beijing on Saturday, according to Reuters.
President Bush and his advisers have also accepted a need for more regulation in some areas. 
But in a subtle yet potentially important difference of tone that reflects many years of more market-oriented policies in the United States than in Europe or Asia, the Bush administration has repeatedly said that regulation should not prevent banks and other financial institutions from finding effective yet safe ways to meet their customers' needs.
David H. McCormick, the under secretary of the Treasury for international affairs, said in a speech in Hong Kong on Wednesday that, ''we have undoubtedly learned that our own financial system is in need of reform.''
But he later added, ''It would be unfortunate if, as a result of this turmoil, policy makers in China mistakenly abandon their pursuit of financial sector innovation and liberalization that has been so important to supporting China's growth in productivity and macroeconomic stabilityI.''
The event in Beijing drew heads of state and other top officials of the 27 member countries of the European Union, the 10 members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations as well as China, Japan, South Korea, India and Pakistan.
Asian nations do not share the close economic policy coordination that the European Union has fostered, and pan-Asian gatherings seldom put forth detailed proposals for international economic policy changes.
This pattern showed up again with the lack of specifics in the statement issued at the conference. 
It declared that, ''Authorities of all countries should demonstrate vision and resolution and take firm, decisive and effective measures in a responsible and timely manner to rise to the challenge of the financial crisis.''
