
When the little-known party secretary of Shanghai, with his big glasses and a grin, was anointed to lead the Communist Party in the chaotic aftermath of the Tiananmen massacre in 1989, his main brief was to return political and economic stabilityII to a country in the throes of upheaval.
It was clear this week, as Jiang Zemin retired after 13 years from his position as Chinese Communist Party general secretary, that he had done more than that. 
With his cautious nature and pragmatism, he has presided over an impressive national transformation: China today is a major player on the world diplomatic stage, a member of the World Trade Organization and an economic powerhouse that has enjoyed growth rates nearing 10 percent for years.
Still, Mr. Jiang's record is auspicious but mixed. 
After achieving stabilityII and prosperity, the party he leaves behind now has to face both the social problems born of his economic reforms as well as a tide of rising expectations from the more sophisticated population he has helped to create. 
It has shown little skill at this task.
Indeed, as Jiang Zemin basked in his final days as the leader of China's Communist Party this week, the proceedings in the Great Hall of the People seemed something of an anachronism compared to the vibrant society outside.
In its tribute to Mr. Jiang, the official New China News Agency printed the lyrics of what it said was a popular song -- one that could have come from the Maoist 1960's: "China is witnessing a relay race which will guarantee its future as our pathbreaking leader is guiding us to a new era."
Likewise, he leaves the new leadership with a host of domestic problems, from unemployment to social security, that his single-minded quest for stabilityII failed to address. 
"The workers and peasants have lost some of their voice and are unhappy," said Zhong Dajun, director of China Economy Watch On Line, a private research institute. 
"There is no obvious solution and the new leadership will have to deal with that."
Just before the Party Congress, the China Social Survey Institute, a private market research firm, polled 3,000 mostly urban Chinese about their views on government performance, offering a a glimpse of how they would cast their ballots if they had a chance to vote.
There was widespread satisfaction with Chinese economic growth and the rise in its international standing and influence, said Li Dongmin, the Institute's director. 
But people also cited serious concerns, about issues like corruption, China's poorly functioning legal system and their lack of voice in government.
"Ten years ago, the frequent concern was getting access to decent food, like meat and vegetables," Mr. Li said, "but after a decade of stabilityI and economic development people have aspirations that go way beyond that."
They even extend into the political sphere, he said.
"There is the general hope and expectation that, after the Party Congress, there will be slow steady progress in the legal system and improving our political institutions," he added, noting that people specifically mentioned a desire to expand local elections to higher levels of government and to improve methods for appointing officials.
Two-thirds hoped that those new methods would be "quite different and improved from the present one -- one that allows expressions of public opinion," he said.
Chinese citizens already enjoy an expanded array of personal freedoms compared to a decade ago, in addition to a vastly better living standard. 
When asked about Mr. Jiang's legacy, many will first offer praise for that.
"Of course he's done well," said Gan Yu, a retired cadre from Beijing, who was out strolling this week on Tiananmen Square. 
"We have a good life now -- we can travel and enjoy ourselves -- my income has quadrupled in just a few years."
It is an impressive record for a man who was pulled from relative obscurity as party secretary of Shanghai by China's paramount leader, Deng Xiaoping, to lead the party. 
Former colleagues in Wuhan, where Mr. Jiang worked for several years, still recall their shock at hearing that the competent and amiable engineer had been named to the job.
This week it was clear that Mr. Jiang had far surpassed expectations. 
But it was not until Deng died in early 1997 that Mr. Jiang was able to fully emerge from his shadow and exert leadership in his own right.
"He had to be cautious in doing things and invoked the name of Deng Xiaoping a lot," said Pan Wei, a political scientist at Beijing University. 
"He was not charismatic leader, like Mao or Deng. 
Jiang is a capable, hard-working person and that is probably more appropriate for where China is right now."
In the end, he had sufficient support to have his own theory, the "Three Represents," enshrined in the party constitution. 
A convoluted Marxist justification for allowing capitalists into the Communist Party, it was repeatedly cited as Mr. Jiang's crowning achievement at the Party Congress this week. 
But there are far more concrete accomplishments.
On the economy, Mr. Jiang's mandate was simply to nurture the economic reforms pioneered by his mentor, Deng, and he did so for most of the 1990's. 
But in 1999, he wholeheartedly threw his by then considerable political weight behind China's bid to enter the World Trade Organization, insuring the integration of China into the world economy.
In foreign affairs, with no real diplomatic experience to speak of, some episodes were marked by indecision and missteps that allowed hard-liners to hold sway over foreign relations, experts say. 
In 2001, for example, when a Chinese fighter collided with an American spy plane off China's southern coast, China's angry invective scuttled a number of important exchanges with the United States; military-to- military cooperation has still not resumed.
Mr. Jiang nonetheless managed to move China from the isolated, introspective country that it was in 1989 to the regional power it has become today. 
In the last 18 months, in particular, observers and diplomats say, he has injected a new maturity into China's policy toward the outside world, particularly on the sensitive issue of Taiwan, and in making China a key ally in the United States campaign against terrorism.
"I think he deserves a lot of credit for giving China a higher international profile, for making it a player," said Minxin Pei. 
"He's the most traveled statesman by far and under his leadership, China has been more willing to join international organizations and to be more active in them."
But it is at home where the party he has shaped will face its gravest challenges. 
Indeed, while the Communist Party retains absolute power here, Mr. Jiang has done little to promote its relevance to an increasingly skeptical public.
He has allowed popular political reforms first proposed in the 1980's to stagnate, from experiments with local elections to suggestions that the Communist Party step back from local government affairs.
Also, as he officially welcomed China's influential new entrepreneurial class into the party in an attempt to co-opt it, he subordinated the concerns of the workers and farmers who formed the party's traditional power base.
Unemployment in China is higher than ever before, there is no effective social welfare system, and the income gap between rich and poor in this former land of equals now rivals that in many Western nations.
"Under him, China has survived a lot of crises that should have brought it down," said Richard Baum, a political scientist at the University of California. 
"China probably needed someone dull and boring and gray who straddled the fence. 
But he's left a lot of problems that will take someone more than a Jiang Zemin to clean up."
