
Seated at a riverside teahouse on a recent foggy afternoon, Guan Jin peered intently into his client's ear canal, scraping methodically inside with a variety of scalpel-like instruments. 
With long tweezers, he withdrew the debris from Wu Jiying's ear, dropping it on the dirt with the leaves, cigarette butts and peanut shells.
As Mr. Wu leaned back in his white plastic lawn chair, staring dreamily at the sky, Mr. Guan used long metal swizzle sticks topped with cotton tufts to buff and massage the ear's depths. 
For the grand finale, he swept a large tuning fork from his back pocket, banged it on the edge of the chair, and touched it to the stem of the stick he was using -- creating a sort of makeshift ear vibrator.
"It's really comfortable, better than a massage," Mr. Wu said, drawing on a cigarette after his 20-minute session. 
"And there's another good point: You can hear more clearly afterward."
Ear cleaning is part of traditional teahouse culture here in Sichuan Province, a odd but accepted leisure-time activity practiced for relaxation, as much a part of the scenery as mahjongg and mugs of green tea.
As Mr. Guan probed his client's ears at the table, Mr. Wu's two friends continued their conversation, occasionally directing a question to their reclining friend. 
Seemingly oblivious to gobs of bloody ear wax, they nonetheless declined a cleaning themselves: "Those tools are too close to your brain!" said one, a teacher.
To the uninitiated, the process does not look in the least bit pleasurable, more evocative of a visit to the dentist than a good back rub.
But there are plenty of fans, said Mr. Guan, a professional itinerant ear cleaner, who works at teahouses by day and at saunas by night. 
He said he moved to this little city, 50 miles from Chengdu, the provincial capital, several years back, because "competition in the profession there was too intense."
He said most clients were, like Mr. Wu, hard-working folks looking for an escape.
And so it was that Mr. Wu summoned him over on a recent foggy Saturday, at one of the many open-air teahouses that dot the water's edge in this sleepy city, across the river from the huge Leshan Buddha and cater-corner from a tiny restaurant advertising dog meat and bullfrog hot pot.
A trendy 30-year-old with a buzz cut and a quick laugh, Mr. Wu had whiled away the hours under spindly trees, sipping green tea, playing cards and chatting. 
After a busy week toiling in a factory, he said he was looking to relax.
So when he saw the familiar man in the brown windbreaker winding his way between tables, brandishing the bouquet of sharp, gleaming surgical instruments, he immediately called to him, ready for the rummaging near his lobes.
"It's a popular practice, a way of relaxing," said Liu Fushen, deputy director of the Sichuan Culture Research Center in Chengdu. 
"You can do it yourself but it doesn't feel the same."
Although no one is sure exactly how the ear-cleaning industry started, it is regarded as something of a traditional craft here. 
Sichuan is the epicenter, although some ear cleaners can be found in other parts of southwest China.
"Sichaunese people are famous for their love of leisure and of teahouses," Mr. Liu said. 
"We have many historical records dating back to the mid-19th century of how people would relax in teahouses and have their ears cleaned, although it was certainly around even earlier than that."
A stout, serious man with browning teeth, Mr. Guan learned how to clean ears as one learns any trade: by serving as an apprentice. 
He used to own a sauna, but decided this was better work. 
No overhead. 
No taxes. 
No electricity bills.
In a province where the average urban worker earns about 8,000 yuan a year, or about $960 at the official exchange rate, ear cleaning has put him firmly in the middle class. 
He does about 10 cleanings a day, for 10 yuan each, providing a comfortable monthly income of up to 3,000 yuan.
Mr. Wu, a regular client, said he had his ears cleaned once a month, if he was tense or if his ears felt itchy.
But, alas, in some ways, ear cleaning is now at risk of becoming extinct, a casualty of China's rapid economic development.
For one thing, many of Sichuan's teahouses -- particularly those in big cities like Chengdu -- have moved indoors, taking on a more polished, up-market air. 
In such places, the byproducts of ear cleaning are not appreciated.
Then there are the pressures of modern life. 
"Like many people, my life is much busier than it was in the past," Mr. Liu said. 
"So it's hard to find the time to get your ears cleaned."
Indeed, as he prepared to move on to the next client, Mr. Guan was asked if he, himself, enjoyed professional ear care. 
"I can't," he answered, with regret. 
"Too busy."
