
When Citibank was casting around for a brand name speaker at its annual retreat here, the bank spurned the usual Western investors. 
Instead, Citibank chose the Chinese ambassador, Lu Shumin, one of a new generation of diplomats from Beijing who speak flawless English and play a mean game of golf.
The envoy's presentation was relentlessly upbeat: what Southeast Asia sells, China buys. 
Oil, natural gas and aluminum to build bigger bridges, taller buildings, faster railroads to serve the country's flourishing cities, like Shanghai, which is beginning to make New York City look like a small town. 
Palm oil for frying all that food for the swelling middle class, even eggs from faraway New Zealand on the region's southern periphery.
China's buying spree and voracious markets provide the underpinning, he said, for the peaceful coexistence that everyone wants.
Contrast this with the dour message from the United States. 
Congratulations, said President Bush to the Indonesians during his short stopover in October, for "hunting and finding dangerous killers."
Cannily, China has wasted little time in capitalizing on the United States preoccupation with the campaign on terror to greatly expand its influence in Asia.
A new team of leaders in Beijing who came to power last spring -- President Hu Jintao and Prime Minister Wen Jiabao -- have led the charge, personally traveling in the region bearing sizable investments and diplomatic warmth. 
In fact, some forward leaning analysts think China may already have become Asia's leading power.
"After Afghanistan, after Iraq, after bringing democracy to the Middle East, when the United States refocuses on Asia, it will find a much different China in a much different region," James J. Przystup, a research fellow at the National Defense University, wrote recently.
Beyond the economics and the diplomacy, something else is going on. 
China has the allure of the new. 
A new affinity is developing between the once feared China and the rest of Asia.
Karim Raslan, a Malaysian lawyer and writer who traveled to Washington recently on a Fulbright scholarship, put it this way. 
The American "obsession" with terror seems tedious to Asians, he said. 
"We've all got to live, we've all got to make money," said Mr. Raslan. "The Chinese want to make money and so do we."
So as American tourists have vanished from an area made uninviting by State Department travel warnings,Chinese tourists have started to arrive. 
They are pouring into Malaysia (with a substantial minority Chinese population) and Singapore (majority Chinese) where they can talk to the locals and are not afraid to go out at night. 
They are beginning to buy big-ticket items -- five-figure diamond watches, designer clothes -- that used to be favored by modish Japanese and American tourists.
This affinity is a two-way street. 
Singapore's newspapers are filled with stories giving advice on how Singaporean professionals -- who face a tough job climate at home -- should behave when they work in China. 
(Don't lord it over the Chinese, is one of the tips.)
Most disturbing for the United States, China's surging economy has much to offer America's most important Asian allies. 
Japan's rebound is being driven by a surge in exports to China. 
Australia's healthy economy is being kept that way by Chinese investments in liquid natural gas projects. 
China is now South Korea's largest trading partner.
Among Southeast Asian countries with significant Muslim populations, places where the American concentration on terror is particularly unappealing, China is on a buying spree.
In Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines (and to a lesser extent Thailand), Washington's primary concern is the presence of Islamic militants. 
China's main interest is to scoop up what it can for its modernization. 
Indonesians have come to call this new relationship with Beijing as "feeding the dragon."
As Asia warms to the confident new China, Asians say they are not betraying the United States. 
"We don't have to choose," said a Singaporean businessman.
This is because relations between the United States and Beijing have rarely been warmer. 
In the Bush administration's book, China has emerged from the diplomatic doghouse.
In a speech at Texas A&M University devoted to China last month, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell listed all the positives. 
China has stated its support for the campaign on terror, and has voted with Washington at the United Nations. 
It is playing a major role in trying to solve the North Korea problem. 
Mr. Powell jocularly portrayed his relationship with the Chinese foreign minister, Li Zhaoxing, as being so chummy that one of their Saturday telephone conversations was interrupted by the secretary's barking terriers, a knock at the front door, and his wife, Alma, calling from upstairs.
For all China's burst of activity, the United States remains the biggest foreign investor in Asia, and Washington maintains by far the most significant military presence in the region. 
No one is suggesting that China's antiquated armed forces are about to catch up with the might of the world's superpower.
But the People's Liberation Army is doing its own diplomacy, and naval exercises last month by China and India -- the first between the two old rivals -- caught people's attention. 
Militarily they did not add up to much, but the symbolism of an Indian destroyer at the Shanghai docks was widely noted.
Not everyone is convinced that China's courtship of the region will last forever. 
"They're making progress because we're invisible and distracted; or bull-headed when we do show up," said Robert L. Suettinger, the author of the recent book "Beyond Tiananmen" and a member of the National Security Council during much of the Clinton administration. 
"There's no natural condominium for China in Southeast Asia. 
But I think it would behoove us to pay a bit more attention."
But the more provocative Mr. Przystup counters, "Today, China is East Asia's great power."
