
My eye -- but perhaps fortunately not my ear -- was caught the other day by a photo in The New York Times showing a celebration on the 100th birthday on Aug. 
22 of Deng Xiaoping, the ''paramount leader'' of China, held in the city of Shenzhen. 
The photo showed 128 pianos and pianists, part of 200 performers playing together at the Shenzhen Citizens Center. 
Surely they made a mighty racket, but to what end?
The concert was typical of the organized populist spectaculars favored by the Chinese regime. 
Titled ''Ictus of Times,'' it offered official Communist piano potboilers like ''Story in Spring'' and ''Yellow River,'' along other ditties like ''Edelweiss,'' ''Do Re Mi,'' ''The Blue Danube'' and the ''Ode to Joy'' theme from Beethoven's Ninth Symphony. 
''Ictus,'' according to the dictionary, means ''rhythmic or metrical stress, or accent.''
The 200 pianists ranged in age from 8 to 82, and the ''audience of thousands,'' as reported by The Shenzhen Daily, included the vice mayor (where was the mayor, one wonders?) and the director-general of the municipal culture bureau. 
The rest were invited (dragooned?) from ''various housing communities and garrison troops.''
There were 28 grand pianos of various sizes and 172 uprights. 
The event will be submitted to the Guinness Book of World Records.
Whether it will qualify is another matter. 
Quite apart from the backdrop of the Chinese (and North Korean) compulsion for massed dances, concerts and gymnastic displays, the competition dates back to the 19th century, with the Western love -- especially the British and American love -- for mighty spectacles. 
One reads of orchestras in the hundreds and choruses in the thousands, but maybe Shenzehn will win its record, after all. 
Most of the anecdotal documentation speaks of concerts of up to 10 pianos (Louis Moreau Gottschalk had a special predilection for such pianistic herds), but rarely more.
Like pipe organs, pianos served in the 19th century as a way for solo musicians to emulate the sound of the ever-growing symphony orchestra. 
Unlike most orchestral instruments, pianos can play full and complex chords and replicate busy contrapuntal lines. 
As the instrument itself outgrew ancestors like the clavichord and the harpsichord, as fortepianos morphed into the ever-larger, ever-louder gleaming monsters we know on concert stages today, they fought a losing battle to keep pace with the Wagnerian-scale orchestra. 
When rock amplification entered the fray, allowing three scrawny kids to deafen an entire outdoor stadium, the piano had lost the war, the war being the production of sheer volume.
Multiple-piano concerts aren't just about generating masses of sound. 
Soloists don't always want to play alone, or be heard playing alone. 
That is one reason for the popularity of piano concertos, which pair this orchestral instrument with an actual orchestra. 
And the popularity of piano trios, quartets and quintets, which pair them with a reduced ''orchestra'' of solo string players.
But sometimes, it seems, even apart from the slightly dated desire to overwhelm an audience with sheer noise, pianists like to play with other pianists. 
Most of the two-piano and piano-four-hands arrangements were born of the desire to generate even more fully than a single piano could the sound of an orchestra. 
Most such sheet music was sold to amateurs who wanted to hear not just the ''Ode to Joy'' but entire Beethoven symphonies at home before the advent of recordings, and when opportunities to hear them in concert were considerably fewer than they are today. 
(Blessedly so, maybe, since rarity and unfamiliarity made each concert more special.)
But the sound of two pianos found its own audience, and two-piano teams proliferate to this day. 
The repertory, apart from arrangements of orchestral music, often by well-known composers like Liszt, consists largely of the 19th-century music produced for that market. 
Three and four pianos are not unheard of, either, on their own, in concertos like those of Bach and Mozart and in more modern pieces like ''Les Noces'' of Stravinsky.
The mention of Bach and Mozart might sound alarm bells. 
Their multiple-keyboard concertos were conceived with the sound of the harpsichord and the light fortepiano in mind. 
Play them on giant modern Steinways or Bosendorfers and you get an entirely different sound.
To my ears, that sound tends to be clotted, thick and unpleasant. 
Overtones overlap and clash, difficult as it is to get two such complex instruments entirely in tune. 
The sustaining pedal, however lightly applied, further clutters things up. 
Occasionally two orchestras get together, as has happened recently under conductors like Zubin Mehta, Lorin Maazel and Valery Gergiev. 
That can sound unwieldy, too, but at least there's enough sonic variety in an orchestra to help keep things sounding plausibly uncluttered.
Arthur Loesser, whose ''Men, Women and Pianos'' remains an unsurpassed trove of pianistic lore, had a fondness for two-piano compositions and arrangements, but not for more. 
''Two pianos,'' he wrote, ''it was generally realized by connoisseurs, could in many ways make more music than a single one; three, however, could add very little to what two could do; and four or more were a superfluity, if not a nuisance.''
Still, with the right repertory and hall acoustic, and above all with the right pianists, that density can occasionally be so lightened that even those resistant to the genre can enjoy the miraculously attuned interplay. 
That happened with a recent multi-piano concert telecast on PBS from the Verbier Festival in Switzerland, with the likes of Martha Argerich, Evgeny Kissin, James Levine and Mikhail Pletnev tickling their various ivories.
By and large, however, multiple-piano recitals seem more intended to give pleasure to the players, or to audience members who play well enough to address such repertory themselves, than to the general concert-going public.
None of which quite explains the allure of such elephantine events as Shenzhen's tribute to the once-paramount leader. 
In their book, ''Rhapsody in Red: How Western Classical Music Became Chinese'' (Algora, 2004), Sheila Melvin and Jindong Cai have traced how classical music took root in China, was derailed by the Cultural Revolution and has made such an extraordinary comeback since. 
Indeed, some of the most exciting new composers around right now (Tan Dun, Chen Yi et al.) come from China.
Yet the cheesier side of Chinese arts, and of state-supported populism as applied to classical music, is hardly a thing of the past. 
Maybe it was fun to participate as a pianist, and maybe the sheer clatter was amusing to hear, too. 
One doesn't want to be a killjoy. 
But given my prejudices against even smaller numbers of pianists playing together, I'm glad I wasn't invited to that particular party.
