
Japan's economy grew at a slower pace than previously reported in the most recent quarter, government officials said Friday, a sign that a long expansion may be losing steam.
The economy grew 0.2 percent from July through September, the Cabinet Office said, revising downward a previous estimate of 0.5 percent growth. 
On an annualized basis, that means Japan's $4.7 trillion economy, the world's second largest, expanded by 0.8 percent instead of the 2 percent previously reported.
The new figures showed a drop in corporate investment in new factories and equipment. 
Consumers also spent less than previously thought, particularly on home purchases.
Over all, domestic demand shrank during the quarter, a reversal from the small growth that was previously reported, the data showed.
Only strong growth in exports kept the economy expanding at all.
''One issue is what on earth is happening to consumption,'' said Richard Jerram, chief economist at Macquarie Securities in Tokyo. 
''Weak data has certainly scared a lot of people.''
A slowdown in domestic consumption is what economists have feared might happen here. 
While Japan's economy has been growing over all since February 2002, its longest expansion since World War II, the advance has depended heavily on strong sales of Japanese goods in foreign markets like the United States and China.
This export-driven growth has helped the country pull out of its long doldrums and breathed new life into cities like Tokyo and Nagoya, Japan's auto capital. 
But for Japan to truly regain its economic health and emerge as an engine of global growth, domestic demand must become the main driver, economists say.
In particular, this means more spending by the nation's 120 million consumers, many of whom remain cautious about their job prospects and future retirements despite recent growth. 
Until they feel more confident about their future, specialists warn that Japan's growth prospects remain limited.
Economists said they had expected a slowdown, but the drop was slightly larger than anticipated. 
Recent surveys had shown that most expected annualized growth around 1.1 percent.
One of the biggest changes was in private demand, the measure of all spending by individuals and companies. 
It slipped to a decline of 0.2 percent in the quarter from a previously reported gain of 0.4 percent.
Housing purchases fell 0.3 percent, in contrast to a 0.1 percent rise. 
The pace of growth in corporate spending dropped to 1.5 percent from the previous 2.9 percent.
In another sign of domestic weakness, imports shrank 0.5 percent instead of the 0.1 percent decline reported earlier. 
Exports, however, remained robust, growing at an almost unchanged 2.5 percent.
Economists said the data also showed a shift in Japan's overseas markets. 
The strong exports came despite a slowdown in Japan's traditional market, the United States, indicating that the country was relying more heavily on China and other Asian nations.
''Can the U.S. have a recession and Japan doesn't care?
Maybe,'' Mr. Jerram said.
Signs of a slowdown in Japan may also present a challenge to Japan's new prime minister, Shinzo Abe, who has yet to lay out a clear set of economic policies since taking office in September. 
Many here wondered whether Mr. Abe would continue to push for deregulation and other free-market changes advanced by his predecessor, Junichiro Koizumi.
Economists credit Mr. Koizumi's changes for spurring Japan's current economic revival by cleaning up the banking system and allowing a new, more aggressive type of capitalism to take root. 
Mr. Abe has spoken of Japan's growing social inequalities, suggesting that he may slow the pace of pro-market changes.
An economic slowdown may also stay the hand of the nation's central bank, which ended an effectively zero-interest policy in July and began raising rates for the first time in six years. 
The bank has signaled that it wants to continue raising short-term interest rates from the current 0.25 percent if the economy keeps improving.
Japanese officials played down the new growth figures, saying they showed that the economy was still growing.
The economy is in a solid condition, the finance minister, Koji Omi, told reporters on Friday, adding that there is no change in the overall trend.
