
Eric Shanteau knows himself.
''I have a history of thinking myself crazy,'' he said Wednesday. 
''A lot of people don't know that.''
He now has something to focus on -- the diagnosis of testicular cancer he received in mid-June. 
As he swims his practice laps, training for the Games, he lives with the reality that the cancer is there, waiting for the surgery that must take place.
But first, he will swim in the Olympics. 
Waiting was his decision, backed up by his doctors and his parents. 
He swims and he rests, and he talks about survival rates the way other swimmers obsess about fractions of seconds and the number of laps and all the other minutiae of this sport.
Shanteau dwells more on the figures 95 percent and 5 percent. 
The ratio for testicular cancer used to be the other way around, he has been told, but now a vast majority of people who come down with it are cured.
''Normally, you get to the Olympics, you put pressure on yourself,'' he said, adding that his illness had given him a different perspective.
He would not normally be getting this kind of attention, as a marginal member of the United States squad who narrowly missed making the last two Games in Sydney and Athens. 
But now he is in Beijing, and he draws a crowd.
On Wednesday, select American swimmers gave a news conference in the main auditorium of the press center, the one reserved for the biggest stars. 
The room was nearly packed with perhaps 500 journalists for Michael Phelps, the man who will try to win eight gold medals, and Dara Torres, the 41-year-old who is a medal contender again. 
On this day, Shanteau was the best story because, as he sat on the stage, everybody knew he was bearing a disease.
''You have to take ownership of it,'' Shanteau said. 
He is 24 years old, from the Atlanta area, slender and restrained -- not a presence, a mass of power, like Phelps and Torres. 
This was his year to make one more try for the Games, in relative anonymity. 
In mid-June, he felt a small lump that had not been there days before. 
His girlfriend told him to get it checked, and in short order, a specialist told him he had cancer.
''It will be a defining day in my life,'' he said Wednesday, admitting that his first reaction was, ''Why me?'' and ''I've got the trials.''
The doctors gave him the options -- surgery right away, or wait. 
They assured him that his kind of testicular cancer is slow-growing, so he felt comfortable in putting off the surgery, accompanied by weekly testing.
''If certain tests had come back elevated, my parents would have stepped in,'' he said.
He went to the trials in Omaha and finished second in the 200-meter breaststroke, qualifying for the Games. 
His teammates thought he was behaving a bit blase about finally getting to the Olympics, but they had no idea what was really on his mind. 
A couple of weeks later, when the team assembled in California to prepare for the trip to China, Shanteau decided to tell his teammates in a group.
''If you guys knew how the swimming world works,'' Shanteau said to reporters, adding that he thought it was pretty good he kept his frightening secret for more than three weeks.
''We thought he was acting coy,'' said Aaron Peirsol, a teammate.
''Many rumors were flying around. 
We started a few.''
Peirsol added that the way Shanteau had handled his illness ''gives you a different perspective.''
Brendan Hansen, who failed to qualify in the 200 breaststroke at the trials but who made the team in the 100 breaststroke, said Wednesday, ''The Olympics look smaller when you're dealing with cancer.''
Shanteau has had a role model through his crisis. 
He had moved to Austin, Tex., the home base of Lance Armstrong, who recovered from an advanced stage of testicular cancer that had reached his brain, and later won the Tour de France seven straight times.
''I looked up to that guy long before I got cancer,'' Shanteau said.
Armstrong, who is an inspiration to thousands of cancer survivors, has let Shanteau know that he considers him a kindred soul. 
Shanteau can take solace that his cancer was diagnosed at an earlier stage than Armstrong's was.
Shanteau hopes to be competing for a medal in the finals on Aug. 
14. No matter what happens in the pool, he will hang out in China for about five days before heading home to Atlanta around Aug. 
20. He expects to have the surgery about a week later at Emory University Hospital. 
He does not mind admitting that his mind wanders to cancer when he is not in the pool.
''I am human,'' he said. 
''This isn't just the flu, it's cancer. 
When I am in my downtime, I look to the people around me. 
It is on my mind. 
I can't help it. 
That's just the way it's got to be.''
