
The executive board of the Asian Development Bank, representing countries from Japan and China to Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan, unanimously approved a $40 million loan to Georgia at the lowest possible interest rate on Friday, the latest sign of Asian dissatisfaction with Russian military action there.
Juan Miranda, director general of the bank's Central and West Asia Department, said that the loan had been scheduled for board consideration on the Friday before Russian troops moved into Georgia a month ago. 
But the Russian military action strengthened support at the bank for helping Georgia, he said.
The 32-year loan carries an interest rate of just 1 percent for the first eight years and 1.5 percent for the remainder of the loan, making it a soft loan on preferential terms.
The loan was so popular with the 12-member board that if it had not already been on the most generous terms available from the bank, ''we would have softened it,'' Mr. Miranda said.
The bank is also studying the possibility of making an emergency loan to Georgia to help it cope with budget problems after the brief war with Russia. 
''The month of August was not a very good month for tax collection,'' in Georgia, Mr. Miranda said.
Russia's military incursion into Georgia has alarmed other Asian countries that also have potentially separatist regions and do not want a big power to align itself with any of these regions.
The presidents of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, a Central Asian security group in which Russia and China both play important roles, did not back Russia's military action at a meeting in Dushanbe, Tajikistan, on Aug. 
28. The organization chose instead to take a neutral stance and urged Russia and Georgia to resolve their disagreements peacefully.
China has been wary of separatists in Tibet and in the western region of Xinjiang and has been leery of projecting military power abroad for fear of attracting a hostile reaction. 
China expressed ''concern'' about the Russian action in Georgia a day before the Shanghai meeting, but Beijing officials have mostly avoided the subject since.
China names one of the 12 directors of the Asian Development Bank and has considerable influence over which loans are approved. 
The Chinese directors have had a policy over the years of not commenting to the news media on bank matters, and the Chinese office at the bank had no comment Friday on the loan.
Indonesia, which reluctantly let East Timor become independent in 2002 and reached a peace agreement with separatists in Aceh on the island of Sumatra only after the devastating tsunami in December 2004, has also been wary of Russian activities in Georgia. 
Indonesia was among the members of the United Nations Security Council that called for an immediate halt to hostilities during last month's conflict.
Russia has been seeking membership in the Asian Development Bank since 1997. 
It has been blocked by the United States, which has been wary of any increase in Russian influence in the region. 
The bank does not proceed on the admittance of new members until a consensus has emerged on the board.
The United States, China and Japan each name a director to the board. 
The other members, including 17 European nations, share representation by the remaining nine directors.
Georgia, the newest member of the Asian Development Bank, joined last year. 
The loan approved Friday is for the Municipal Development Fund of Georgia, which in turn will relend the money to municipalities to pay for sewage works, clean water supplies and other basic services.
