
Lucent Technologies, Motorola, Nortel Networks and Ericsson are among 10 big Western suppliers that have won nearly $1.5 billion in phone equipment contracts from one of China's largest cellular providers, the companies disclosed today.
The Chinese operation, China United Telecommunications, known as China Unicom, did not provide a financial breakdown. 
But Lucent said its contract was the biggest, at $420 million, and Ericsson valued its agreement at more than $200 million. 
Motorola's contract totaled $407 million and Nortel's $275 million, those companies said.
China Unicom said the winners would supply equipment for a nationwide wireless network, based on Qualcomm technology, that would serve as many as 15.2 million subscribers by 2002. 
The contracts had been delayed when the collision of a Navy reconnaissance plane and a Chinese fighter jet over the Sea of China early last month raised fears that Beijing might withhold contracts from American companies.
"We have been looking forward to this for a long time," said Scott Erickson, Lucent senior vice president for mobile communications in Hong Kong. 
"It shows Unicom's confidence in our technology."
In trading today, shares of Qualcomm rose $2.58, to $59.50, and Motorola fell 78 cents, closing at $14.96, both on heavy volume.
Qualcomm owns patents on code division multiple access technology, or C.D.M.A. 
Its technology competes with one called global standard for mobile communications, or G.S.M. 
That system currently supports more than 100 million mobile phone users in China, which is expected to overtake the United States as the biggest wireless market.
Motorola and two partner companies will supply gear in 11 provinces and Beijing. 
The network's capacity in those areas can serve about four million subscribers, a Motorola spokesman, Roderick Kelly, said.
Nortel said its equipment would serve 2.57 million subscribers in six provinces and the city of Chongqing, in Sichuan province. 
The networks are expected to begin operating in the fourth quarter.
Unicom also awarded contracts to Shanghai Bell, Shenzhen Zhongxing Telecom, Datang Telecom Technology, Jinpeng Telecom, Eastern Telecommunication and Huawei Technologies. 
The company's Hong Kong-listed unit, China Unicom Ltd., plans to rent the wireless network in 12 provinces.
