
When Las Vegas Sands Inc. opened the first American-operated casino in the People's Republic of China here last week, the scramble of would-be customers was a reminder of this former Portuguese colony's chaotic past.
Drawn partly by false newspaper reports that the Sands Casino would hand out $25 chips to the first bettors on opening day, a mob estimated by the police at 20,000 knocked over crowd-control barriers and ripped doors off their hinges in a rush to get inside. 
But when people were told that there were no free chips, they quickly settled down to gambling.
The incident underlines Macao's recent transformation from a place of seedy gambling dens to something more like the Las Vegas of the East.
Heavily tattooed members of Chinese gangs known as triads have stopped shooting and bombing the police, gambling regulators or one another. 
East European prostitutes no longer openly solicit business on casino floors. 
Many new regulations are being drafted, including a new money-laundering law to replace the very weak statute now on the books.
In the late 1990's, gang killings were so frequent here that a top police official tried to reassure tourists by telling them they were unlikely to be caught in the cross-fire because the city had ''professional killers who don't miss their targets.''
China began cracking down on the triads in 1999, the year Portugal handed over the colony, stamping out most violent crime and making Macao safe instead for an invasion by American gambling companies.
Beijing also broke the monopoly on gambling in Macao that Stanley Ho, a Hong Kong billionaire with a dozen small casinos here, held for four decades. 
With gambling illegal in most of East Asia, including the rest of China, Macao's casino industry is set to grow rapidly, with plans under way for a Vegas-like strip of 20 large casino resorts and 60,000 hotel rooms. 
The local government accepted bids for new gambling licenses in 2002, and the Sands is the first to open.
The wealthy Lui Chi Wo family of Hong Kong, the partner of Las Vegas Sands in the Sands Casino, is scheduled to open another here this summer. 
Wynn Resorts, led by the Las Vegas entrepreneur Stephen A. Wynn, plans to break ground this summer for a much larger casino, a project that had been delayed in part by a dispute over Macao's laws on extending credit to gamblers.
The big question now is how Mr. Ho's gambling empire, known here as S.J.M. 
-- short for the company's Portuguese name, Sociedade de Jogos de Macau -- will respond to the new competition.
Manuel Joaquim das Neves, the director of Macao's gambling regulatory agency, said in an interview here on Monday that he expected S.J.M. to conclude some kind of corporate alliance soon with MGM Mirage, which did not win a gambling license of its own here. 
''I think very probably we will get an agreement, and we will get another operator in Macao,'' he said, adding that MGM might be allowed to open casinos as a subconcessionaire using S.J.M.'s gambling license.
S.J.M. had no immediate comment Monday. 
A spokeswoman for MGM Mirage, Yvette Monet, said it was ''very interested in Macao -- if anything should become finalized, we will announce it accordingly.''
Before the Sands opened, there were questions about how many hard-core gamblers in the Chinese market would be willing to leave the low-ceiling haunts they had frequented for years. 
The Sands responded by offering dancers in skimpy blue outfits scampering in front of a soft-rock band, a 65-foot ceiling over the baccarat and blackjack tables, an indoor tea terrace offering 200 varieties of free tea, and slot machines that pay off with a triple 8, a lucky number in Chinese culture, instead of triple 7.
The combination appears to be working. 
The Sands was packed on Sunday evening and again on Monday afternoon, and was surprisingly busy even Monday morning. 
By contrast, there were more dealers than bettors in the cramped, smoky Oriental Casino next door on Sunday evening, and at Mr. Ho's flagship, the Lisboa Casino, on Monday morning.
In a written reply to questions about his new rivals, Mr. Ho struck a diplomatic tone. 
''We welcome competition, as long as it is friendly and constructive to the economy,'' he wrote. 
''We have lots of confidence in Macao's future, and we believe that under friendly competition, together we will contribute to the continuing healthy development of the gaming industry in Macao. 
The pie is going to be bigger and bigger, and we all could get a fair share of it.''
A spokeswoman for Mr. Ho said it was too soon to assess the effects of the Sands on his own casinos.
In truth, Mr. Ho may gain over all even if his casinos falter in the short run, because his business interests extend beyond gambling to dominate the broad economy of Macao -- like Hong Kong, a special administrative region of China. 
He controls the hydrofoil ferries that make 80 hourlong trips a day across the Pearl River estuary between here and Hong Kong; he owns luxurious hotels like the Westin and the Mandarin Oriental, and the only television station; and he has stakes in the airport, a local airline, the electric utility and the racetrack.
If anything, the gambling market here appears likely to expand even faster than anyone expected because of developments in Hong Kong. 
China, trying to use economic growth to defuse a democracy movement there, has in the last year dropped many of the restrictions against individual visits by mainlanders to Hong Kong and Macao, while retaining those restrictions on travel elsewhere.
A result has been a flood of tourists from an economy growing so fast that regulators are now trying to slow it down for fear of overheating. 
The number of mainlanders crossing the land border into Macao quadrupled the day the Sands opened.
The chairman of Las Vegas Sands is Sheldon G. Adelson, who built the Comdex computer industry trade show into one of the world's largest conventions and then sold the trade-show business in 1995 to Softbank of Japan for $860 million. 
Macao is now so important to him that he flies here from Las Vegas every four to six weeks.
He is about to trade in his Gulfstream 3 jet, which must land and refuel twice each way, for a Boeing Business Jet, a long-range 737 that can make it from Las Vegas to Macao with just one stop, and then cruise back again with the jet stream on its tail without stopping at all. 
Mr. Adelson said he had personally overseen a lengthy fitting out of the new jet's interior, including his private bedroom.
The gambling industry in Macao still faces problems, among them the large number of loan sharks. 
These lenders accompany borrowers to the gambling table and claim a share of any winnings as well as their principal and 10 percent interest, according to Fong Ka Chio, the research coordinator at the Institute for the Study of Commercial Gaming at the University of Macao. 
Losers are typically given a week or two after returning home to settle their debt, Mr. Fong said; after that, ''how they collect it, you can imagine.''
Mr. Wynn has argued strongly that Macao should start allowing the casinos themselves to provide credit to gamblers, in the form of chips. 
The territory's legislative assembly is close to passing the necessary legislation, but the bill does not now include provisions for casinos to write off bad debts against profit -- an important matter in Macao, which gets two-thirds of its tax revenue from a 35 percent tax and 3 percent surcharge on gross gambling profits. 
Mr. Joaquim das Neves said the deductibility question was a difficult one and that the city would not make a decision on it until next year.
Two senior colleagues of Mr. Joaquim das Neves, who was born in Macao and educated in Portugal, were shot in the neck in separate incidents during the violence of the late 1990's. 
One died instantly, at lunchtime next to the Lisboa Casino; the other survived.
Next to such incidents, the disorder at the opening of the Sands last week paled; there were no serious injuries, although a few people were reported to have fainted in the crush. 
Mr. Adelson said he did not believe that any of his rivals in the gambling industry had started the free-chips rumor. 
Mr. Ho's newspaper, Jornal do Cidadao, did not publish it.
Lei Siu Peng, acting commissioner of the Macao police, said in an interview at the city's aging colonial-style police headquarters on Monday that his investigators suspected that some travel agents might have started the free-chips rumor to lure more visitors into buying tickets to come here. 
But he acknowledged this would be difficult to prove.
Just the same, he said, the police are considering buying some sturdier crowd-control barriers.
