
They did not have the live soundtrack, the four barges, or the simultaneous telecast on NBC. 
Instead, they had twinkle shells and tiger tails that looked close enough to touch.
Last night, as many New Yorkers packed themselves in along the East River or gazed at their television sets from the comfort of their living rooms, dozens of towns across the region topped off their afternoon picnics with spectacular but intimate fireworks displays.
Insurance was purchased. 
Permits were granted. 
Fire marshals were deployed. 
And on this Fourth of July, themes of patriotism were interwoven with an undercurrent of concern, and for some parents a measure of sadness, for local sons and daughters deployed across the world with the American military.
Shortly after 9 p.m., when the last vestiges of sunlight had disappeared, the noisy hum of conversation was replaced by the hush of awestruck crowds.
''You can feel the explosions in your chest rather than just see it,'' said Brian Strom, 22, after he watched the half-hour-long display at Beach Haven, N.J.
The sulfur residue hung in the humid air above high school football fields and the burning embers trailed so far down that spectators feared they might have to flick them away. 
''They were so close, I felt like they were going to touch me, especially the big mushrooms at the end,'' said Rebecca Strubby of Woodbury, Conn., who watched the display in Washington, Conn.
Another advantage of attending a smaller-town fireworks display is that the logistics are simpler. 
Many waited until an hour before the Tarrytown display was scheduled to begin, knowing they would not have to stake out a perch hours in advance.
''We can walk, watch fireworks and walk back,'' said Sunil Samanta, 50, a Tarrytown resident who had been mired for hours in Manhattan's Fourth of July crowds in the past. 
''Manhattan is definitely better and more exciting, but it's very crowded.''
Among those experiencing their first Fourth of July fireworks display was a group of high school students from Shanghai and Taiwan. 
''The people from Shanghai didn't want to come because they thought it was better in China,'' Tim McBride, an administrator with E. F. International School of English who chaperoned the group to Tarrytown. 
''We had to convince them.''
Then again, many of the fireworks used last night celebrate the founding of the United States were imported from China. 
Frank Coluccio, president of Legion Fireworks, said he travels to China every year to find new, innovative pyrotechnics; his company supplied 18 July 4th fireworks shows for small towns around the New York region this year.
While he cannot afford the same size shells as in the Macy's display, ''I still do the same thing they do, all the colors and effects,'' Mr. Coluccio said. 
''I just don't do it on a grander scale."
Along the Hudson River, colorful floral bursts exploded north and south of the Tappan Zee bridge. 
Tarrytown residents said they could see four or more fireworks displays from Pierson Park, including those from Irvington and Yonkers. 
''If it's clear, we'll see Manhattan,'' said Dan Rizzi, 74, who was wearing an American flag T-shirt and lounging with a dozen friends in the park. 
''Your head is going all over the place.''
With a 25-minute display costing as much as $20,000 or $30,000, the expense is often defrayed with local donations and T-shirt sales.
''Macy's and all of them probably have much bigger budgets, but we do the best we can,'' said Carolyn Kasunich, a member of the Red, White and Blue Committee of Beach Haven, N.J. 
She said that their budget was raised entirely through donations. 
She has helped plan the Beach Haven fireworks display every year since 2001, but this was the first year her son, Jason MacAvoy, 20, was not able to critique her handiwork. 
A reservist, he was deployed to Balad, Iraq.
In Washington, Conn. 
-- a clapboard-filled town that broke off from Woodbury in 1779 to name itself after General George Washington -- patriotism runs deep. 
Members of the Daughters of the American Revolution were out in force selling chocolate cupcakes with red, white and blue sprinkles at the picnic. 
And yesterday, the town sold Fourth of July T-shirts that commemorated Steve Reich, a local West Point graduate who died in a helicopter crash in Afghanistan.
His father, Ray Reich, organizes the fireworks display each year. 
Steve Reich died less than a week before last year's Fourth of July celebration. 
Mr. Reich ran the show anyway. 
''We celebrate it whether it is convenient or not because the Founding Fathers decided that the Fourth was our birthday,'' Mr. Reich said.
