
Holiday recipes that explore the "interesting and symbiotic" relationship between Jewish and Chinese cultures.
A sudden rise in Native American voter turnout in North Dakota.
Forgotten artifacts from Vermont's vaudeville era.
These offerings on National Public Radio are probing, offbeat and unassailably well meaning, but to paraphrase Oscar Wilde's observation on the death of Little Nell, one must have a heart of stone to hear an NPR pledge drive without laughing.
A parody of public radio, therefore, might seem unnecessary. 
But WNYC, the principal public radio station in New York and NPR's largest affiliate, has crafted "Pledge This!," a radio comedy about a local station, WACLU ("87.1 -- All the way to the left on your radio dial"), which broadcasts a news-and-dulcimer-music format out of cramped studios in the fictional Blandon Park Mall.
Written by Bob Garfield and Brooke Gladstone, the hosts of WNYC's weekend show "On the Media," "Pledge This!" can be heard this weekend during the regular time slots for "On the Media," which in New York are Sunday at 10 a.m. on WNYC-FM (93.9) and 4 p.m. on WNYC-AM (820) and on Saturday at 7 a.m. on WNYC-AM.
The half-hour special serves up outre left-wing pieties and public radio stereotypes in the deadpan manner of Elaine May and Mike Nichols. 
"WACLU, all the way to the left, underwritten this hour by Dr. Tom Richards's Lipo Depot, pleased to support WACLU's continuing commitment to broadcasting excellence and all of your cosmetic surgery needs; and by Funeral Shak, the last word in the last purchase you'll ever make."
It helps that Janeane Garofalo, who perfected the role of the sardonic sidekick on "The Larry Sanders Show," Garry Shandling's spoof of late-night talk shows, here plays WACLU producer Mary Demarest. 
She writes questions for the show's host, Trent Rosenblitt, and fends off the more unsavory sponsors, known in public radio and television as underwriters, courted by Mr. Pringle, the station manager (played by Tony Shalhoub). 
In the first act, Horatio Chung, director of public outreach for the People's Republic of China, seeks to "reposition the brand" by placing ads on WACLU for "the Middle Kingdom, where labor is cheap and expression is dear."
WACLU employees eat takeout Ethiopian kik alecha. 
The sound effects on their news programs include baby seals crying, the Chinese national anthem and the hum of an electric wheelchair.
Though some NPR devotees may take offense, most listeners will probably find this somewhat rare display of self-mockery amusing. 
At a time when public television and cable news networks like CNN tremble before their conservative critics, it is refreshing to hear a liberal radio program like "On the Media" make fun of its liberal orthodoxies and political correctness. 
As Mr. Garfield put it in the introduction, "This is an utterly indecent, outrageous, unforgivably self-indulgent exercise in biting the hand that feeds us."
