
Morgan Hamm can rest easy now, knowing that his spot on the United States Olympic men's gymnastics team is safe.
The International Gymnastics Federation announced Tuesday that it would not appeal the United States Anti-Doping Agency's decision to give Hamm a public warning -- and not a suspension -- for receiving a cortisone-like shot without obtaining clearance.
Hamm, who will be competing in his third Olympics, received the warning July 3 after failing a drug test in May at the United States championships. 
Under a physician's care, Hamm was given an anti-inflammatory shot in his injured left ankle in early May, but he never filed the necessary paperwork with the antidoping agency. 
The medication triggered the positive test several weeks later.
The antidoping agency and the United States Olympic Committee cleared Hamm to compete in the Olympics. 
They said the public warning and the nullification of scores from the day he tested positive at the championships did not affect his status on the Olympic team.
But the international federation, known as the F.I.G., had yet to review Hamm's case and make a decision. 
It took three and a half weeks to do so.
''Although this is the result we anticipated, we are glad to have the final ruling so we can focus on final preparations for Beijing,'' Steve Penny, president of USA Gymnastics, said in a statement. 
''We appreciate the F.I.G.'s handling this case in a timely manner so the matter was resolved prior to the start of the competition in Beijing.''
Hamm, 25, is set to travel with the team to China, where he will compete in his first Olympics without Paul, his twin.
Paul Hamm withdrew from the team Monday, saying he was not healthy enough to compete.
INTERNET CENSORSHIP Olympic organizers are backtracking on another promise about coverage of the Beijing Games, keeping in place blocks on Internet sites in the main press center and other locations where reporters will work.
The blocked sites will make it difficult for journalists to retrieve information, particularly for articles about political and human rights. 
On Tuesday, the sites for organizations like Amnesty International or any search for a site with Tibet in the address could not be opened at the main press center, which will house about 5,000 print journalists when the Games open Aug. 
8.
''This type of censorship would have been unthinkable in Athens, but China seems to have more formalities,'' said Mihai Mironica, a journalist with ProTV in Romania. 
''If journalists cannot fully access the Internet here, it will definitely be a problem.''
The censoring of access to the Internet is the latest broken promise on press freedoms. 
When they were bidding for the Games seven years ago, Chinese officials said the news media would have ''complete freedom to report.''
In April, the senior members of the International Olympic Committee who are overseeing the Games, Hein Verbruggen and Kevan Gosper, said they had received assurances from Chinese officials that Internet censorship would be lifted for journalists during the Games.
China routinely blocks Internet access for its citizens.
Gosper, however, issued a clarification Tuesday. 
He said the open Internet extended only to sites that related to Olympic competitions.
''My preoccupation and responsibility is to ensure that the Games competitions are reported openly to the world,'' Gosper said.
He noted that the changes the I.O.C. negotiated with the Beijing Olympic organizers, ''which required Chinese legislative changes,'' had do with reporting on the Games. 
Gosper said, ''This didn't necessarily extend to free access and reporting on everything that relates to China.''
Journalists trying to use the Internet on Tuesday expressed frustration. 
(AP)
RADCLIFFE TO JOIN BRITISH TEAM The marathon world-record holder Paula Radcliffe will join the British Olympic team this weekend in a bid to recover from an injury in time to compete in the race Aug. 
17 in Beijing.
The 34-year-old Radcliffe, who has a stress fracture in her femur, will travel Sunday to the British training camp in Macau.
''I'm glad Paula's flying out on Sunday,'' said Dave Collins, the performance director of UK Athletics. 
''I'm sure she will have been maintaining her professionalism in training.''
Radcliffe withdrew from the London Marathon in April because of a toe injury, before doctors discovered the femur problem in May.
She was the favorite to win the gold medal in the marathon at the 2004 Athens Games, but she dropped out in the final miles because of stomach problems. 
A few days later, she dropped out of the 10,000 meters with eight laps remaining.
Radcliffe's training for the Beijing Games was interrupted by a toe injury in September, when she finished second in a half-marathon. 
The race was her first in 20 months after having a child.
She won the New York City Marathon in November, achieving her Olympic qualifying time. 
But the toe injury flared again and forced her to miss the London Marathon. 
In 2003, she set the world record of 2 hours 15 minutes 25 seconds at the London Marathon. 
(AP)
WOMEN'S POLE VAULT RECORD Yelena Isinbayeva of Russia added to her world record in the women's pole vault Tuesday at the Monaco Grand Prix in Monte Carlo, and Asafa Powell of Jamaica ran his fastest 100 meters of the season.
Isinbayeva cleared 16 feet 6 1/2 inches to break her record of 16-6, set July 11 in Rome.
Powell won in 9.82 seconds. 
Darvis Patton of the United States, who also will compete in the Olympic 100 meters, was second in 9.98.(AP)
