
AT a New Year's Eve party in Hong Kong, welcoming 1997, a student activist calls for every-one's attention, places a gun in his mouth and commits very public suicide. 
In CHINESE BOX (1997), the party guests include an expatriate British journalist (Jeremy Irons) who soon learns that he's terminally ill. 
Deciding not to tell his family back home ("I don't want the look in their eyes to remind me I'm dying"), he drinks and smokes too much, gets disruptive at bars, attempts videotaped interviews and longs for another man's mistress (played by Gong Li, the filmmaker Zhang Yimou's longtime muse). 
Directed by Wayne Wang, the film is a vivid, lyrical metaphor for the passing of Hong Kong from Britain's rule to China's - Friday at 8 and 10 p.m. on Bravo, Sunday/Early Monday at 2:15 a.m., Friday at 11:30 p.m. and Friday/Early Saturday at 3:15 a.m. on IFC.
Set in Greenwood, Miss. 
Mira Nair's MISSISSIPPI MASALA (1991) is the story of an Indian family who immigrates to the American South. 
Years later, the daughter, Mina (Sarita Choudhury), 24 and still living with her parents, finds Denzel Washington, an ambitious young African-American man with his own carpet-cleaning business. 
This does not go over well with Mina's parents; then the whole town turns against them - Sunday at 8 p.m., Sunday/Early Monday at 2 a.m. and Monday at 11 a.m. on WE.
Daniel Day-Lewis and Brenda Fricker won acting Oscars for MY LEFT FOOT (1989), the story of Christy Brown, the remarkable Irishman who became a successful artist despite crippling cerebral palsy. 
At first, Christy (Mr. Day-Lewis as a adult, Hugh O'Conor as a boy) is seen as a burden, and the neighbors feel sorry for his mother (Ms. Fricker), calling the boy "a terrible cross to the poor woman."
And he is, until it becomes clear that he's brilliant. 
Mr. Day-Lewis gives one of those rare inspirational but treacle-free performances you can't take your eyes off. 
This was his first film collaboration with the director, Jim Sheridan - Saturday at 11:25 p.m. on Channel 13.
It's not that Sydney Pollack's 1995 remake, with Julia Ormond, was dreadful. 
It's just that Billy Wilder's original SABRINA (1954) is magical. 
Audrey Hepburn stars as the title character, the chauffeur's wide-eyed daughter, who is madly, schoolgirlishly in love with the boss's son. 
He's a reckless, irresponsible rich boy (played by William Holden), and nothing could thrill Sabrina more. 
It's just a hopeless crush until she goes away to Paris to learn how to cook and comes home a very grown-up sophisticate who knows how to charm. 
Mr. Holden's character notices - in a big way. 
Nobody thinks a romance between them is a good idea, so the boss's other son (Humphrey Bogart), the serious, businesslike one, steps in, with unexpected results - Monday at 8 p.m., Monday/Early Tuesday at 12:30 a.m. and Tuesday at 3 p.m. on AMC.
Guns, drugs, $91 million deals - who cares?
The appeal of THE USUSAL SUSPECTS (1995) isn't the crime; it's Christopher McQuarrie's Oscar-winning screenplay and the cast. 
Gabriel Byrne, Stephen Baldwin, Chazz Palminteri, Dan Hedaya, Kevin Pollak, Benicio Del Toro, Pete Postlethwaite, Giancarlo Esposito and Kevin Spacey, who won a well-deserved best supporting actor Oscar for his role. 
Bryan Singer directed this crime tale about a mysterious, all-powerful gangster, Keyser Soze, who may not even exist. 
The real joy is watching Mr. Spacey's on-screen talent explode. 
Followed shortly by his ego - Saturday at 8 p.m. on Channel 9. 
- Anita Gates
