
IN the village of Huang Chun, in the south-central province of Anhui, a wealthy Chinese pawnbroker named Huang commissioned an elaborate house of wood and stone more than a century ago. 
He called it Yin Yu Tang, or Hall of Plentiful Shelter. 
The house had 5 bays, 16 rooms and 2 fishponds. 
Complicated feng shui calculations dictated that the house face north, instead of south, where it would have received the most sunlight.
To ensure that the pawnbroker's descendants would have ample food and wealth, carpenters placed chopsticks where the many columns met the roofbeams, and they buried coins where the columns met their carved stone bases.
Yet, despite these precautions, some family members encountered bad luck: legend has it that one son squandered his inheritance on operas staged for village celebrations. 
Another heir was robbed and murdered by pirates, his corpse thrown in the Xin'an River. 
The family fortune ebbed. 
Rooms had to be sold off to distant relatives.
By the mid-1980's, Yin Yu Tang sat vacant. 
Four years ago, the pawnbroker's descendants gathered to vote on selling it -- at which point it would most likely have been torn down, its ornate wood traceries and cedar beams sold for salvage, its ancestral documents and furnishings scattered among relatives or auctioned off.
But on that day, when the family had come from hundreds of miles away, Nancy Berliner, the curator of Chinese art and culture at the Peabody Essex Museum in Salem, Mass., happened to be walking along the narrow dirt path outside. 
The door was open, and following Chinese custom, she just walked in. 
A handful of relatives milled around the courtyard, taking a last look at their ancestral home. 
Ms. Berliner admired the house. 
The relatives told her they had just decided to sell it. 
"I think it was a wonderful coincidence that blossomed into a collaboration," she said.
Thus, Yin Yu Tang came to America: all 2,735 wooden parts, packed in handmade pine crates, which filled 19 containers in a cargo ship bound for Manhattan. 
The house is being restored in a warehouse here and will ultimately stand on the grounds of the Peabody Essex Museum, as part of a $100 million expansion designed by the architect Moshe Safdie.
The Chinese pawnbroker's house is believed to be the first antique Chinese house to be dismantled and re-erected in the United States. 
It has received an enthusiastic welcome from scholars in this country, who are newly focused on Chinese vernacular architecture at a time when it is endangered by neglect and new development. 
Even now, more than a year before the house's unveiling at the museum, curious students of Chinese history are showing up at the 119,000-square-foot warehouse to inspect what one called "this small-scale mansion."
The study of regional architecture, said Jerome Silbergeld, who teaches Chinese architecture at the University of Washington, "is just beginning to take root."
Regionality is "the hot button issue, not only here but in China," he said. 
"As China decentralizes, the regions are discovering their own local pride."
Americans think there is a prototype Chinese dwelling, said Ronald G. Knapp, a professor of geography at SUNY College at New Paltz, who has written three books on Chinese architecture in the last two years. 
"They don't appreciate the extraordinary number of Chinese dialects -- some are as different as Italian and French -- and that Chinese vernacular architecture varies just as much."
Architectural historians will get an intimate and detailed record of everyday life in a Chinese village. 
Besides the house's aesthetic merit, it comes with exhaustive genealogical records and the accumulated furnishings of more than 100 years of one family. 
On April 28, the China Institute in New York will sponsor a symposium, "House, Home, Family: Living and Being Chinese."
Ms. Berliner will give a talk on preserving Yin Yu Tang.
While records of daily life are exhaustive, Ms. Berliner still cannot date the house, beyond saying that it is more than 100 years old. 
Although the house was erected relatively late in Chinese history, Mr. Silbergeld said the house is a significant tool to "educate people in the West that Henry Ford wasn't the first to invent the assembly line: the house's thousands of beams, brackets, columns and carvings were probably prefabricated elsewhere."
For all the benefit to scholars, the reassembly of Yin Yu Tang raises thorny preservation issues. 
Preservationists worry that uprooting a rural house from its setting contradicts current preservation doctrine.
"It is not unlike what happened in the early days of the last century," said Bonnie Burnham, president of the World Monuments Fund, "when Americans disassembled huge wings of important European houses and brought them back."
To put Yin Yu Tang onto museum grounds "is a collector's instinct, not necessarily a preservationist's instinct."
On the other hand, Ms. Burnham acknowledged that the purchase may have rescued the antique house from sure destruction. 
In Beijing, Ms. Burnham added, "they're losing houses so fast, they don't even have time to document them."
She paused. 
"I guess you could say I'm ambivalent."
THE new museum buildings, including the Chinese house, will not open until 2003. 
In the meantime, Yin Yu Tang is being restored, room by room, paving stone by paving stone, in a bleak metal warehouse in this small town a 30-minute drive southwest of the museum in Salem.
Two carpenters, Zhu Jiming, 48 and Zhu Yunfeng, 37, who are distantly related, help to weave the house back together, splicing rotted pieces to firm remnants of beams. 
The carpenters have already been flown back and forth four times from their homes in China, a few miles from the house's original site. 
Meanwhile, Chinese stonemasons have replaced missing stone paving and chiseled new foundation stones.
Museum officials declined to provide the Yin Yu Tang project's cost, but others close to it estimate it could easily reach $15 million, including fees paid to the Chinese government and money to restore a 1531 shrine and three other local houses. 
The Peabody Essex, backed by a foundation endowed by Fidelity Investments of Boston, is also donating books for the primary school in the Huang Chun and sponsoring an exchange program between students from high schools in Anhui and in Newton, a well-to-do Boston suburb.
The museum has long embraced things Chinese because Salem was the principal port for America's 19th-century China trade. 
Having Yin Yu Tang join the museum's holding of historic New England houses, museum officials said, is a natural.
When the partly reassembled house is disassembled again and moved to the museum in 2002, its central courtyard will be covered by a glass skylight to protect the delicate wood-tracery windows. 
But its exterior wooden walls, veneered with brick and stone and coated with lime cement, will be exposed to the New England weather, and to the thousands expected to visit each year.
Two weeks ago, Zhu Jiming straddled a log of yellow pine, using a 60-year-old wooden tool he inherited from his father, also a carpenter. 
The tool, a zhu jia zi, is unlike anything found in the West: it resembles a well-worn flat-edge slingshot, which opens to grip the log. 
Along with it, he used a six-inch piece of bamboo, inscribed with Chinese characters, to mark and measure points along the log.
The two carpenters are able to translate the antique Chinese construction methods. 
"If they can just make out a few of the old symbols on a rotted beam, they can extrapolate to see what is missing," said Jan Lewandosky, a Vermont timber framer, who is acting as job foreman. 
The restoration plan calls for the missing parts to be made with as many of the old tools as possible. 
The two Chinese carpenters arrived, not only with the zhu jia zi, but also with an extraordinary collection of adzes, axes and mallets. 
The carpenters and their native tool kits are indispensable to the project.
One of their projects is to recreate a kitchen for Yin Yu Tang. 
Although the house once had a row of three kitchens, the museum had space for only one. 
When Ms. Berliner first saw the house four years ago, they had all collapsed, but the stone foundations were still extant.
Workers measured the traces, and relatives described how the kitchens looked, right down to the kitchen god, a clay or wood figure built into a small temple in the chimney or stove. 
Architects are still working on the kitchen plan, but the carpenters have begun cutting and planing the pine beams.
The two carpenters were among those who disassembled the house in China. 
Zhu Jiming said the villagers had no reaction to the taking down and dismantling of the house.
But Zhu Yunfeng disagreed. 
"Some people have very deep feelings, but the houses are so deteriorated that people think they might as well be torn down," he said. 
"Others are good and strong, like the house my father built in 1962. 
There is no reason to tear it down."
When the two carpenters built their own houses for their families, they chose to build wooden houses like Yin Yu Tang, not the popular new concrete houses. 
"Most people don't make houses like that, of wood," Zhu Jiming said.
"I don't have any interest in these concrete houses," Zhu Yunfeng added. 
"These chemical things have a bad impact on human bodies."
A new-style house has already been built on the site of Yin Yu Tang. 
It is covered with pale blue tiles. 
In a color photograph tacked to the wall of the warehouse, it looks boxy and is completely different from the old houses on either side.
John G. Waite, whose architectural firm was hired as the project architect after Yin Yu Tang was dismantled, said he still had qualms about having moved the historic house. 
He and Ms. Berliner said, however, that there were extenuating circumstances: "This is a region that is very poor, but is very rich in architecture," Mr. Waite explained. 
"These houses are unique to the region, they are very special, but there are hundreds, if not thousands, of them."
Still, their numbers are dwindling because of development of the house's mountainous area as a tourist spot, mostly for Chinese and Japanese visitors. 
"You need to go quickly," Mr. Waite said. 
"The region wasn't open to visitors 20 years ago, it was so remote. 
But now money is coming into the area. 
They're building a new hotel to attract tourists."
Mr. Waite said he was sickened by the new house built on the site of Yin Yu Tang. 
"They built a half-baked Western-style house. 
Yin Yu Tang was very sophisticated in terms of how it was designed for the climate and feng shui. 
They built this awful, really awful, Western house because that's what they find in America."
Because the family had abandoned their house, and it probably would have been torn down anyway, Mr. Waite said he reluctantly endorsed moving it. 
Chinese preservationists, he said, "were very proud that it has been taken out of the country and assisted with it."
"They hope," he added, "that getting publicity may kindle a sense of pride in the Chinese of the region -- not to abandon these old houses and save some of the rest. 
Dozens, hundreds will be torn down unless something is done."
The Peabody Essex Museum chose Wang Shu Kai, a Chinese documentary filmmaker, to act as liaison for the negotiations. 
As a result of his role, Mr. Wang decided to make a film about the destruction of the old houses.
"It depends who you talk to," he said. 
"The old people might feel very attached to the old-style houses where they lived all their lives."
He said that Yin Yu Tang "is more than just a house: it represents a crystallization of history and culture."
Nevertheless, his film, in the works for two years and still without a title, also includes many interviews with young Chinese who believe the old wood and stone houses with their fishponds and fancy traceries lack amenities.
"The young people prefer to live in modern buildings," Mr. Wang said.
