
Rupert Murdoch, who once famously declared that satellite television posed "an unambiguous threat to totalitarian regimes everywhere," has asked Jiang Zemin to allow him to organize a media summit meeting in Shanghai later this year to coincide with the gathering of regional leaders for the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum.
Mr. Murdoch has worked hard to restore relations with Beijing since angering the country's Communist Party elders with his anti-totalitarian remark made in 1993 shortly after he bought the Star TV satellite network that beams programming in English and Chinese across China.
Since making the statement, Mr. Murdoch has quietly steered his media empire away from confrontation with China, a potentially huge market that is still closed to foreign media.
In 1994, he removed BBC news broadcasts from his Star TV lineup and softened the television network's other news offerings. 
He later sold The South China Morning Post of Hong Kong, a newspaper often critical of Beijing, to a pro-Beijing businessman. 
And last year, the News Corporation's HarperCollins subsidiary canceled a contract to publish the memoirs of Hong Kong's last colonial governor, Chris Patten, whom Beijing abhors.
He has made slow progress in his mollification campaign. 
China still prohibits its citizens and cable television systems from receiving foreign satellite broadcasts, including Star TV, but a cable system in the southern province of Guangdong has begun buying and disseminating some Star TV programming in an arrangement tolerated by Beijing. 
And in December, Star TV, a wholly owned News Corporation subsidiary, was given a license to open a representative office in Shanghai.
The summit meeting proposal is his latest good will gesture. 
Mr. Murdoch met with Mr. Jiang in Beijing on Sunday and met with Shanghai's mayor, Xu Kuangdi, on Monday afternoon to discuss the idea. 
The mayor's office told Mr. Murdoch that if the central government approves, the city would help with the media summit meeting, people familiar with the meeting said.
