
THEY remember the good times that came before Sept. 
11, and they remember the bad times, too. 
They lighted candles during blackouts, sold apples on street corners during the Depression and went through air raid drills during World War II. 
But most of all, when they look back over their many decades in the city, they simply remember change and how it chisels away at life.
They are the city's elderly residents, longtime New Yorkers from all parts of its ethnic stew, grappling one more time with an unruly home in distress.
And though for some old New Yorkers this is the worst thing they have gone through -- so much unexpected death and destruction close to home -- they give off an air of optimism and resilience. 
They have seen the city rise, fall, and rise again. 
As they stare into the current abyss, they, like the city, may be badly bent but not broken.
On his morning walk in Morningside Heights one day last week, Chin-Tsing Hsia, a retired professor of Chinese literature at Columbia University, eagerly offered his views on the crisis. 
But first, he said, he needed a place to sit.
The waitress at Tom's Restaurant on Broadway was miffed by the coffee order. 
There was a $4 minimum for table service, she said. 
The cast of "Seinfeld" smiled out from an autographed poster on the wall. 
But to Mr. Hsia, 80, who lived through revolution and war in China and who funneled students through an underground passageway to his Columbia classroom during the campus unrest of 1968, nothing was an obstacle, including the $4 minimum. 
He ordered apple pie, too.
"I tell you as a man of experience, don't panic," he said between zestful bites of pie. 
"America is strong. 
America is confident. 
If you are really strong, you don't have to please people."
No coffee refills were offered, none were asked for.
It may be small comfort, but New York has a history of bouncing back from dangerous and difficult times, said Felix Rohatyn, 73, the former chairman of the agency that oversaw the city's bailout during the fiscal crisis of the 1970's. 
Near bankruptcy was a different crisis, Mr. Rohatyn acknowledged, one that many people said was caused by the city's own spending policies. 
The city laid off firefighters and police officers, even as the number of fires and crimes increased.
What led the city out of danger then, as it can now, Mr. Rohatyn said, was strong political leadership. 
"We've got to work together," he said. 
"If we put together the institutions that need to work on this, part of the problem will be solved."
In Brooklyn Heights one warm night last week, retired friends met for their usual cocktail klatch at the Heights Cafe. 
Inside the dimly lighted bar, talk among the handful of friends unavoidably turned to what had changed their lives on Sept. 
11.
Jerry Cohen, a retired State Supreme Court judge, sipped a beer and tried to put the terrorist attack in perspective. 
There was the War of 1812, which had brought killing to the nation's shores, and Pancho Villa's New Mexico massacre in 1916. 
Mr. Cohen stopped. 
But when he thought about it, which he did all the time, the terrorist attack at the World Trade Center was worse than anything else.
"It's not that it's going to wear off," said Mr. Cohen, 76. 
"But we're going to gain more insight from it. 
It's a growing-up process, and we're growing up all our lives."
Even though it was worse than anything he had seen since fighting in the Pacific during World War II, Mr. Cohen said he still felt that the city would pull through.
"Look," he said. 
"Everyone is always talking about the good old days, but in reality, they weren't that good. 
We had a Depression. 
You put newspapers in your shoes with a rubber band around them to keep the water out. 
But it wasn't hardship, because everyone was doing it."
During the Depression in Mr. Cohen's Coney Island neighborhood, six families gathered twice a week at the home of Vince D'Agostino on 20th Street to cook in his kitchen to share fuel and food costs.
One week after the attacks, Mr. Cohen went ahead with plans for a barbecue for the Heights Cafe regulars: retired lawyers and accountants, and young Annie, the bartender. 
It felt odd at first, but he thought people needed to be together more than ever. 
They had another barbecue the next week.
At the Manhattan Valley Senior Center on West 106th Street, a group of women found solace with one another as they sewed and crocheted around a large table covered with turquoise and brown potholders that had been crocheted for the fall bazaar. 
"I feel sorry for my grandchildren," said Lola Menendez, 84. 
She was not worried about herself. 
Her son died young 11 years ago, and with him went most of her self-concern.
Even so, in the wake of the attacks, young New Yorkers' concern for those who had seen so much already seemed to increase.
On a Third Avenue bus, an old Russian man sat and listened as the young woman driving the bus talked about the bombing and her subsequent terror of public places. 
"Yes, yes, it is terrible," he said.
As the bus rumbled across 34th Street, he stood for his stop. 
"Please sit down until we get there," the driver said gently. 
"I don't want anything to happen to you."
