
With Japan's population set to shrink further and faster than that of any other economically advanced country over the next half century, foreigners like Steven Gan are acquiring something of the aura of pioneers.
As a rare Westerner who settled here for the long term, Mr. Gan neatly fills the bill for a government that realizes that Japan must attract people from elsewhere in dramatically increased numbers, and yet remains jittery about large-scale immigration.
What is more, as Mr. Gan has built up a successful debt-collection business here, he has shaken up what had been a cottage industry with an unsavory reputation, and perhaps injected a bit of vigor into the country's sluggish economy.
"For most people the image of the Japanese collection industry is the yakuza, or mafia," Mr. Gan said. 
"But as a foreigner I've been able to get beyond that, and lend some legitimacy to the business. 
There are over 7,000 collection agencies in the United States, but when I started out there were only five or six in all of Tokyo.
For years Americans have complained that Japanese culture was impenetrable, that companies here only wanted to buy Japanese and that after a polite initial reception, those who sought to settle down here were often made to feel less than welcome. 
But Mr. Gan, and other Americans who have started their own businesses, bought homes or even gone to work for Japanese companies, say that things have been changing subtly in this society.
With only 1.7 million foreigners in Japan, out of a population of 127 million people, the country faces a huge task in attracting the 600,000 immigrants a year that the United Nations estimates it will need in order to stabilize its population and prevent wrenching labor and fiscal crises.
If nothing is done, according to the Japanese government's projections there will be 100 million people in 2050 and only 67 million at century's end.
Of the foreigners who live here, a million or so are Korean and Chinese residents who have long complained of discrimination. 
Many of the other foreigners here are actually people of Japanese ancestry who immigrated to Japan from Brazil and elsewhere during the economic boom years of the 1980's.
Although Japan has recently set a priority of attracting skilled immigrants, and people who can make an economic contribution right away, there are only about 45,000 Americans living in the country, according to government statistics. 
Hong Kong, with a population of only six million, has roughly the same number.
Though discrimination in housing and other areas, like the academic world, still exists, many of the new professionals from the West share the belief that the Japanese work world is not as impermeable or unfair as long reputed. 
Moreover, they say, the influx of outsiders is increasingly appreciated for introducing badly needed new ways of doing things.
After spending a year as an exchange student at a Tokyo university, Jake Adelstein transferred there outright. 
Though he got his degree and was offered a job with the Sony Corporation, he decided to try his luck with the newspaper industry's famously difficult hiring examinations. 
"I never believed I would be hired by a Japanese newspaper, especially a major one like the Yomiuri, and never on the same terms as a Japanese person," said Mr. Adelstein, who is 32. 
"People had told me that was just impossible."
He took a cram class to prepare for the exam. 
But when he showed up at the Yomiuri Shimbun for the first of his interviews in 1992, Mr. Adelstein said, "at the reception desk people kept hinting to me that I was in the wrong place."
Japanese labor experts say that cases like these suggest that although a national effort is just beginning, the country will be able to attract talented immigrants. 
"Japanese companies cannot find human resources within their own organizations anymore, and there are few people who move from business to business with the skills that companies need," said Jiro Nakamura, a professor of labor economics at Tokyo Metropolitan University, who said that Japan had little choice but to lure more foreign workers.
William Stonehill, a Chicago native, also arrived in Tokyo planning to study, hoping to add a graduate degree in Japanese to one he had already earned in Chinese, and like Mr. Adelstein, he eventually decided to settle.
"When I looked around, I noticed that there were no imports here," he said. 
"I had studied watch making, so I got into importing Swiss watches and German clocks. 
It is like wildcatting. 
You don't need a license or anything, so I got into business, walked into a shop and threw some stuff on the counter and asked if they would like to buy any of this merchandise."
Before he got his start in watches, Mr. Stonehill said he had worked as a door-to-door salesman, selling courses in English and "terrorizing housewives to buy stuff for junior."
"You ask a lot of foreigners in business here how they got started here, and they'll say the same thing. 
Nobody ever told them that it was impossible, so they just went out and started a business."
