
China is rapidly modernizing its military with the goal of countering American power in the Pacific and pressing Taiwan to accept unification, according to a Pentagon study released today.
The report, the first assessment of the Chinese military under the Bush administration, said that despite major strides in improving its armed forces, China would still have trouble invading Taiwan.
But the report concludes that Beijing, aware of its military's technological deficiencies, has developed less conventional strategies for asserting its power in the region. 
Those strategies would employ a broader range of tactics and weapons, including computer viruses, naval blockades, increasingly accurate nuclear-tipped missiles and quieter diesel submarines, the report contends.
"These enhanced capabilities have given rise to and will sustain a trend in which China's war-fighting strategies increasingly favor coercive over annihilative approaches," the report said. 
"Beijing is pursuing the ability to force Taiwan to negotiate on Beijing's terms regarding unification with the mainland."
Though many of the report's findings are similar to three assessments completed under the Clinton administration, the new study is more hawkish in its analysis of China's ambitions in the region and potential threat to the United States.
It concludes, for instance, that China's military modernization could pose a threat to Japan and the Philippines, as well as Taiwan. 
It also estimates that China is spending far more than had been previously thought on its military -- as much as $65 billion a year, more than triple the $20 billion China publicly reported in March.
The report, which has been required annually by Congress since the late 1990's, is likely to be used by the Bush administration and its Republican allies to defend two policies: building missile defenses and selling more sophisticated arms to Taiwan.
In April, President Bush announced that the United States would sell Taiwan diesel submarines, P-3 naval reconnaissance planes, Kidd-class destroyers and minesweeping helicopters to counter China's growing military might. 
But Taiwan is still hoping to purchase more advanced Aegis radar systems and Patriot antimissile batteries.
The report's harsher tone was also in keeping with the Republican Party's conservative wing, which excoriated President Clinton and Congressional Democrats for being soft on China.
Still, both Democratic and Republican foreign policy analysts said there had been a fierce debate within the Bush administration over how tough the report should be. 
Some administration officials, particularly in the State Department, see China as a potentially valuable ally against terrorism.
Among the major concerns raised by the report were these:
* China is replacing its current arsenal of 20 DF-5 intercontinental ballistic missiles, which can strike the western United States, with a longer-range version. 
China is expected to have 60 of the longer-range missiles by 2010, the report concludes.
* China is expanding its inventory of short-range ballistic missiles, now at about 350, at the rate of 50 a year, and is improving the accuracy of those weapons. 
Many of those missiles are massed in Fujian Province bordering the Taiwan Strait.
* China has acquired two Sovremenny-class destroyers carrying Sunburn antiship missiles capable of sinking an aircraft carrier.
* Russia has also sold China 4 Kilo-class diesel submarines, which are among the quietest in the world. 
The acquisition could significantly enhance China's ability to establish a blockade around Taiwan, the report contends.
William C. Triplett, a former Republican counsel on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, said the report's conclusions about China's ballistic-missile program should trigger alarm bells about China's intentions.
"This is clearly the most destabilizing arms control event of past two decades," he said, referring to China's long-range missile program. 
"When everybody else in the world is winding down their programs, they are extending their nuclear threat capability."
Kurt M. Campbell, who helped write the China assessments for the Pentagon during the Clinton administration, said Beijing should recognize that there is bipartisan concern in Washington about China's military advances.
"I think the report lays out some troubling developments in terms of accumulation of short-range missiles, doctrinal innovations and military purchases from Russia and elsewhere," said Mr. Campbell, now an Asia specialist with the Center for Strategic and International Studies, a Washington policy group.
