
Nokia, the maker of mobile phones, said yesterday that its second-quarter profit rose 43 percent, the biggest increase in more than three years, on growth in China and India and sales of more expensive handsets in Europe.
Net income was 1.14 billion euros ($1.44 billion), or 0.28 euro a share, compared with 799 million euros, or 0.18 euro a share, in the period a year earlier, the company said.
Sales rose 22 percent, to 9.81 billion euros, from 8.06 billion euros.
Nokia is increasing sales by introducing cheaper handsets aimed at China and India, while offering multimedia phones with music players and cameras in Europe and the United States.
Nokia's profitability is under pressure as competition from Motorola and the Samsung Electronics Company pushes average prices lower. 
Motorola posted profit and sales on Wednesday that beat analysts' estimates.
''Despite the nice stories about growth in China and India, it's clear the competition in all segments, not just emerging markets, is fierce,'' said Theo Maas, a money manager at the ABN Amro IT Fund in Amsterdam.
Nokia, which is based in Espoo, Finland, said its market share in the second quarter was 34 percent, down from 35 percent in the first quarter and up from 33 percent a year earlier.
''They probably lost some market share'' to Motorola in the United States, said Jan van der Hout, a fund manager at Van Lanschot Asset Management in Den Bosch, Netherlands.
North American revenue rose 5 percent, to 674 million euros, while unit sales fell 13 percent in the region, suggesting more expensive phones were sold.
Sales in Europe rose 13 percent, to 3.64 billion euros.
Sales in China rose 44 percent, to 1.24 billion euros, while revenue elsewhere in the Asia-Pacific region, including India, gained 47 percent, to 2.06 billion euros.
Nokia said it shipped 78.4 million phones in the second quarter.
Operating profit at the multimedia division, which makes phones with music players and browsers, more than doubled, to 304 million euros, with sales up 37 percent, to 1.89 billion euros.
Operating profit at the unit making the most basic handsets, the largest division, rose 24 percent, to 979 million euros, and sales gained 21 percent, to 5.88 billion euros.
