
In March, during an otherwise routine budget hearing, Michael D. Griffin, the NASA administrator, warned members of Congress that China's aggressive space program could ''easily'' put humans on the Moon before American astronauts are able return to the lunar surface under the space agency's proposed Moon-Mars project.
The China card can be a strong selling point on Capitol Hill, and Mr. Griffin, trying to finance an ambitious human spaceflight program with Mars as the ultimate goal, plays it as well as anyone.
This is America's great space-age paranoia: that the United States has frittered away 35 years of space superiority, and a new generation of rivals is about to shove it into second place.
China is the challenger du jour. 
It became the third nation to send a human into space in 2003, it put a two-man crew in orbit in 2005 and it plans to send an unmanned orbiter to the Moon this year. 
It plans to launch three astronauts and conduct its first spacewalk in 2008.
In January, China's military destroyed one of its own derelict satellites with a guided missile in a provocative demonstration of ballistic prowess. 
Although it is unclear what the Chinese intended, the test left no doubt that space hardware -- everything from crucial navigation and communication assets to secret spy satellites -- is a very soft target. 
And no one has more space hardware than the United States.
Despite its achievements, experts say, China is decades away from developing the full array of space expertise and infrastructure that allows the United States to simultaneously launch astronauts, send unmanned craft to explore outer planets, take spectacular pictures from orbiting telescopes and profile the eye of a hurricane. 
''We are leagues ahead of everyone else, and it's going to take a lot of time, effort and money to counter that superiority,'' said Joan Johnson-Freese, chairwoman of the Department of National Security Studies at the Naval War College.
Still, what China can do is ''match, compete with or even supplant'' the United States ''in piecemeal ways,'' said Eric Hagt, head of the China program at the independent World Security Institute. 
By putting humans in space, China wins significant prestige, Mr. Hagt said. 
Putting their own man on the Moon before the United States can return would put the Chinese first in the world.
China is not the only player with space aspirations. 
India is developing a human spaceflight program and hopes to have astronauts in orbit by 2014. 
Europe and Japan, which routinely fly astronauts aboard the space shuttle, also have highly developed space science programs. 
Japan's innovative mission to orbit the asteroid Itokawa has produced a journal's worth of research papers, and next year the European Space Agency expects to bring its 30-satellite Galileo navigation network online as an alternative to the Global Positioning System in the United States.
Russia, once America's only rival in space, has been out of the game since the breakup of the Soviet Union. 
But the Russians these days are flush with petrodollars and looking for ways to reassert their power.
''Russia has the capabilities, the big industrial base, the trained cadre of people and the ability to launch in all kinds of weather,'' said John Logsdon, a space historian at George Washington University. 
''It has a relatively unambitious space plan for the next few years, but that could change.''
Fifty years into the space age, human spaceflight and space science remain the most traditional measures of prestige and accomplishment, but space has also become a lucrative business and a new territory for military competition.
The big money is still in building spacecraft for governments, and the major aerospace companies worldwide, like Boeing, Lockheed, the European Aeronautic Defense and Space Company, and RKK Energia, a Russian company, focus on that. 
Building commercial satellites is a much more modest undertaking. 
Since 2004, the world has produced 80 of them; China has built 3.
Space's other cottage industry is a Russian monopoly: running a ferry service to the International Space Station with its venerable Soyuz spacecraft. 
Since 2001, five well-heeled space tourists have paid $20 million apiece or more to visit the station. 
Soyuz also carried American astronauts to the station after the 2003 Columbia accident grounded the space shuttle fleet.
With plans for the shuttle to be retired in 2010, the United States is developing new launching vehicles capable of returning astronauts to the Moon and eventually taking them to Mars. 
That is the kind of big, high-risk idea that has always defined space leadership, and that is where China is competing.
China launched its first satellite in 1970, but its space program languished during the chaos of the Cultural Revolution and internal power struggles. 
Estranged from both the Soviet Union and the United States, China learned to fend for itself. 
In 2003, a Long March rocket carried Lt. Col. Yang Liwei aboard the Shenzhou V spacecraft. 
Colonel Yang returned safely to Earth after 14 orbits and became a national hero.
The Chinese share little information about their programs, but Zhang Oinwei, who heads construction of the Shenzhou spacecraft, said the human space flight program spent about $2.3 billion in the years leading up to Colonel Yang's flight.
In 2005, Shenzhou VI, carrying two Chinese army colonels, orbited Earth for five days. 
Shenzhou VII, scheduled for launching in 2008, will carry three crew members who will attempt China's first spacewalks.
The Shenzhou (it means ''magic vessel'') spacecraft are patterned after the Soyuz but are slightly larger. 
China has said that its goal is to use the Shenzhou to develop orbiting skills and technology and eventually to build a small space station.
Although the Chinese have not formally announced plans to send humans to the Moon, the Shenzhou flights, coupled with plans for science missions to orbit the Moon, put robotic rovers on the lunar surface and return soil samples to Earth show that China has read the Apollo playbook.
Mr. Griffin of NASA has described the Shenzhou program as having reached the Gemini stage, recalling the two-man American flights in the mid-1960s that prepared astronauts for the Apollo missions. 
He told Congress in March that it would ''easily be possible'' for the Chinese to mount a lunar mission within a decade. 
If so, China could put humans on the Moon by 2018, a year earlier than the United States, under current American budget projections.
The United States, worried about China's military ambitions, has regarded the Chinese space program warily in recent years, imposing export restrictions on commercial technologies that might also have military uses.
Last year, Mr. Griffin accepted an invitation from Chinese officials to tour their space facilities in the hope of broadening ties. 
After cordial talks and meetings with civilian space scientists and engineers, however, Mr. Griffin cut his visit short when the military refused to let him visit the human spaceflight training facilities at the Jiuquan Satellite Launch Center in the Gobi Desert.
''If we are to conduct human space flight activity together, we have to have a great degree of trust, a great degree of sharing, a great degree of openness,'' Mr. Griffin told reporters at the end of his trip. 
''Transparency and openness mean being able to see and touch and ask questions and get answers, and China and the U.S. are not at that point.''
Despite China's achievements and aspirations, there is no evidence that the Chinese can soon compete with the United States in technical skill or space infrastructure. 
''This is about political will,'' said Dr. Johnson-Freese of the Naval War College. 
''They are challenging what we are willing to do, or willing to pay for.''
Congress seems solidly allied with Mr. Griffin on the need to finance the Moon-Mars project, but the Bush administration's insistence on paying for the program without increasing NASA's overall budget has put some spaceflight advocates on edge. 
At the same time, scientists interested in robotic missions and space research worry that Mr. Griffin's interest in spaceflight will shortchange those programs.
For those concerned about China, however, there was plenty to worry about after the Chinese shot down a Fengyun-1C weather satellite in January. 
The destruction of the satellite created more than 900 new trackable pieces of debris, increasing by 10 percent the amount of hazardous space junk circling Earth. 
China made matters worse by refusing for 12 days to acknowledge responsibility for the satellite's destruction, which was viewed by most of the rest of the world as pure folly.
Western analysts have offered several reasons for China's wanting to shoot down the satellite. 
China may have wanted to test its ability to destroy enemy satellites in a confrontation over Taiwan; it may have wanted to show the United States how vulnerable satellites are and encourage participation in talks aimed at banning weapons in space; or, it may have just been a long-scheduled test that the military conducted without informing the government.
Some considered the incident as evidence of another cold war rivalry. 
Representative Dana Rohrabacher, Republican of California, long a space program advocate, said the Chinese ''are already in a space race with us, and we haven't recognized it.''
But others say the time is ripe to sit down with the Chinese and co-opt them. 
Dr. Johnson-Freese said the United States should encourage China to put more satellites in space, to ''make them as dependent on space assets as we are,'' and just as vulnerable.
