
INTERNATIONALA3-11
Iraqi Archbishop's Body Is Found After Kidnapping
The body of Archbishop Paulos Faraj Rahho, leader of the Chaldean Catholic Church in Mosul, was found two weeks after he was abducted. 
A10
China Cracks Down in Tibet
Chinese security forces were reportedly surrounding three monasteries outside the Tibetan capital after hundreds of monks took to the streets in what are believed to be the largest Tibetan protests against Chinese rule in two decades. 
A3
Palestinians Unite in Anger
In a display of Palestinian unity rarely seen since the militant Islamic group Hamas seized power in Gaza, a general strike was observed as thousands of men and women attended prayers and the funerals for four local militants killed by Israeli undercover forces in a raid. 
A11
U.S. Studies FARC Records
A senior American official said that American investigative teams were working to pull information from recently seized computers to try to better understand the operations of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC. 
A8
Ahmadinejad Ally Now Critic
Mohammad Khoshchehreh, an economist running for re-election to Iran's Parliament, used to appear often on behalf of President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad. 
Now he is one of Mr. Ahmadinejad's most outspoken critics. 
A9
NATIONALA12-18
In Day of Political Theater, House Passes Budget
The House passed a $3 trillion Democratic spending plan as Congress engaged in a day of budget theater that had as much to do with the political bottom line as federal fiscal policy.A17
Because of a cap on work visas resulting from a Congressional standoff on immigration, small-business owners across the country say they are scrambling to find replacements for foreign workers who can't fill seasonal job openings.A12
Obama Discloses Earmarks
Senator Barack Obama disclosed three years' worth of earmarked spending requests, and his campaign challenged Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton to do the same.A14
The chairwoman of Florida's Democratic Party promoted her plan for a new mail-in primary for the state's 4.2 million registered Democrats but conceded the embattled plan had little chance of survival.A14
Scandal Echoes in Detroit
The swift resignation of New York's governor, Eliot Spitzer, after he was linked to a prostitution ring has put new pressure on Detroit's embattled mayor.A12
Chicago Police Shake-Up
New police commanders have been assigned to almost every district in Chicago in an effort to improve internal affairs of the city's long-troubled police force, the department announced.A12
NEW YORK/REGIONB1-8
New York's Next Governor Addresses the Press
Lt. Gov. David A. Paterson gave his first news conference as governor- in-waiting -- with sorrow, seriousness and a dollop of humor -- since Eliot Spitzer's resignation. 
He pledged his continued commitment to Mr. Spitzer's agenda, but broke markedly with the governor's style. 
A1
Federal prosecutors are investigating whether Mr. Spitzer used campaign funds in connection with his meetings with prostitutes, including payments for hotels or ground transportation, people with knowledge of the investigation said. 
A1
BUSINESS DAYC1-10
Averting the Next Crisis
The Bush administration outlined a plan to prevent a future credit crisis like the one that now grips the economy. 
Treasury Secretary Henry M. Paulson Jr. blamed financial institutions that failed to grasp the risk involved in complex securities instruments. 
A1
U.S. Economy in a Vise
The dollar slipped as the prices of oil and gold hit new records. 
Mortgage rates rose and retail sales fell. 
C1
As the dollar weakens, those who hold it diversify to other currencies, sending it down further. 
C1
Today in BusinessC2
EDITORIALSA22-23
Editorials: Not too early?; preventing another genocide; HUD has mail; Eduardo Porter on calculating how much to spend today on arresting global warming to keep the future from boiling over.
Columns: Paul Krugman and David Brooks.
