
China Mobile said Thursday that it had acquired a 19.9 percent stake in Phoenix Satellite Television of Hong Kong from the News Corporation.
The deal, worth an estimated $180 million, gives China Mobile, one of the world's largest cellular phone service providers, a sizable stake in Phoenix Satellite Television, China's largest foreign-owned television broadcaster.
The agreement also signals a divestment of sorts for the News Corporation, which is controlled by Rupert Murdoch. 
The company had been aggressively seeking to expand its television offerings in China's tightly controlled media market.
Before the deal, a News Corporation subsidiary, the Star Group in Hong Kong, held a 38 percent stake of Phoenix Satellite Television. 
Along with the company's founder, Liu Changle, it was the largest single shareholder. 
He now has a 38 percent share.
The Star Group will retain 17.6 percent of the company.
The Hong Kong business newspaper The Standard reported the pending deal Thursday morning. 
The agreement was formally announced later in the day in a joint statement by China Mobile, Phoenix and the Star Group.
The companies did not disclose the value of the deal, but based on market prices, a 19.9 percent stake is worth about $180 million.
The Star Group did not disclose why it chose to reduce its holdings in Phoenix Satellite Television.
Phoenix has become a force within China because it reaches more than 140 million viewers and has its own Chinese-language news broadcasts, a privilege no other private company has. 
Phoenix also broadcasts Chinese-language programs in North America, Europe and other parts of Asia.
Foreign media companies like the News Corporation, Time Warner and Viacom have only limited access to China's huge TV market, mostly reaching upscale hotels, luxury apartments and parts of southern Guangdong Province, near Hong Kong. 
All three media giants are eager to expand their presence in China.
But when television programming restrictions tightened last year, there were published reports that the News Corporation was seeking to shed all of its holdings in Phoenix Satellite Television. 
News Corporation officials denied the rumors.
The venture has been an important one for the News Corporation, which gained an early foothold in China in 1996 through its investment in Phoenix Satellite Television.
Mr. Liu, the company's founder and chairman, is a former People's Liberation Army soldier.
Officials at China Mobile, which is based in Beijing and becomes the second-largest shareholder in Phoenix, said the deal would allow them to form a strategic alliance to jointly develop, market and distribute new media content on mobile phones with the high-speed 3G technology, now in development in China.
