
The Nissan Motor Company said Thursday that a shortage of steel would force it to temporarily halt production at three of four of its auto factories in Japan, an unusual step made necessary in part by a surge in demand for steel in China.
Nissan, Japan's second-largest carmaker, said it would suspend work at the plants for five days starting at the end of this month, a move that will reduce its output by some 25,000 vehicles. 
The carmaker plans to make up for the setback by increasing production early next year and said it did not expect the temporary shutdown to hurt its profits much.
None of Nissan's Japanese rivals reported having problems with steel supplies, though analysts said Nissan's troubles could spill over to other manufacturers. 
Toyota, the No. 1 automaker in Japan and the world's second largest, said in a statement that ''we are doing our best to secure steel through various measures,'' including reducing the kinds of steel it uses.
The supply shortage arose for Nissan after it offered six new models in Japan this year, and stronger than expected sales of some of these exacerbated already thin supplies, a spokeswoman, Mia Nielsen, said.
''There's a tight supply squeeze globally,'' she said, ''and that's why we can't get the steel we need.''
The company is curbing production of four compact cars that are sold primarily in Japan, including the Tiida and March hatchbacks. 
The action will not affect production at Nissan's factories in the United States.
Its steel suppliers, Nippon Steel and JFE Steel, are already operating at capacity and have not been able to increase their production enough to meet Nissan's requirements. 
JFE Steel aims to increase its capacity by about 10 percent next year to meet the strong demand industrywide, a company spokesman told Reuters.
Steel prices have risen and supplies have dwindled in the last year, much of that the results of demand from Chinese builders and manufacturers as the country pursues economic growth.
With the acquisition of a dominant stake in Nissan by the French automaker Renault, Carlos Ghosn took over as Nissan's chief executive four years ago. 
He led a drive to cut costs by decreasing the number of suppliers and pressing those that remained to lower their prices. 
The cost-cutting campaign helped turn Nissan, then nearly bankrupt, into one of the world's most profitable automakers.
While trimming the supply chain may be partly to blame for the shortages Nissan faces today, analysts here say that the company is still better off because of the effort.
''The benefits that have been accrued far outweigh any potential losses that they are facing now,'' said Kurt Sanger of Macquarie Securities. 
Mr. Sanger said he expected the lost production might cut Nissan's profit at most by a few billion yen. 
The company forecast a net profit of 510 billion yen, or $4.96 billion, for the fiscal year ending in March.
