
Barry Bonds has not received an offer from a major league team, an issue that will be examined by the players union as part of its annual review of the free-agent market.
Less than two weeks before opening day, the 43-year-old Bonds remains unsigned.
''He's in playing shape right now,'' Bonds's agent, Jeff Borris, said Tuesday. 
''He just hasn't hit off live pitching. 
I've had conversations with Barry. 
It would probably take him about two weeks to get ready.''
Bonds, the career home run leader, was indicted in November on four counts of perjury and one count of obstruction of justice, charges stemming from his 2003 grand jury testimony in which he denied knowingly using illegal performance-enhancing drugs. 
He has pleaded not guilty.
Tampa Bay acknowledged last month that it had internal discussions about the prospect of pursuing Bonds. 
St. Louis Manager Tony La Russa had interest in Bonds, but Cardinals management decided against talks.
The union executive director Donald Fehr said his staff would examine possible collusion against Bonds and others. 
''We always look at the free-agent markets every year and make judgments about them, and if we come to the conclusion with respect to any player that there's a matter worth pursuing, we'll pursue it,'' he said. 
''But I'm not going to make any suggestions or accusations unless and until we come to that conclusion.''
Bonds hit .276 last year with 28 home runs, 66 runs batted in and a major-league-leading 132 walks.
PARK UPSET AT BEIJING SECURITYDodgers pitcher Chan Ho Park was still upset Tuesday about an incident in Beijing over the weekend in which he was kept from signing autographs for a large group of Korean fans.
Chinese security forces refused to let Park through to his fans after he pitched in Saturday's exhibition game between the Dodgers and the San Diego Padres.
''It was hundreds of Korean people, young kids who go to school in China and those who came a long way to watch the game and then wait a couple hours to get my autograph,'' said Park, a sports hero in his native South Korea.
SHERRILL NAMED AS CLOSER George Sherrill was named the Baltimore Orioles' closer Tuesday, an unlikely assignment for a one-time situational left-hander who spent the first four years of his career in the independent leagues.
