
The North Korean leader, Kim Jong Il, today toured a Buick plant run in a venture with General Motors.
Apparently Mr. Kim, who also visited the city's stock exchange, is interested in seeing how economic reforms have reshaped this city since he last visited here in 1983.
China's prime minister, Zhu Rongji, flew in from Beijing to accompany the reclusive North Korean leader whose visit was kept so secret that few residents knew he was here.
At the General Motors plant, the Chinese president of the joint venture showed Mr. Kim around.
Mr. Kim is a renowned lover of luxury automobiles, but few employees at the Buick plant were allowed to see him. 
. A group visiting from Thunderbird, the American Graduate School of International Management, in Arizona, was even trapped in a conference room at the Buick plant by the blanket of security that descended when Mr. Kim's entourage unexpectedly arrived.
Mr. Kim also visited the Shanghai Stock Exchange, the most important of China's two stock exchanges in the city's gleaming financial district. 
But again, few other people at the exchange caught a glimpse of the North Korean leader or were even aware that he was there. 
China's 10-year-old stock markets, while still immature by Western standards, have played a key role in financing state-enterprise reform.
In addition, Mr. Kim was reported to have visited China's most advanced semiconductor plant, a joint venture with NEC of Japan.
Reporters scrambling around town for a sighting finally spotted Mr. Kim this evening leaving the Grand Theater after a private concert of Chinese folk songs and orchestra music. 
But the reporters were kept behind a fence about 25 yards away.
The consensus among analysts of North Korean politics and media pundits is that Mr. Kim, whose country's economy is in shambles after decades of Stalinist policies, is considering Chinese-style reform. 
Shanghai is the country's showcase of those reforms, which have been gradual and have been accompanied by tight political controls.
Mr. Kim is expected to leave Thursday for Shenzhen, the special economic zone bordering Hong Kong where China's most aggressive economic reforms began.
