
North Korea declared today that it saw no purpose in continuing nuclear talks with the five nations it met in Beijing this week and was left with no choice but to strengthen its nuclear deterrent.
Meanwhile, American officials, responding to the threats North Korea made on Thursday to conduct a nuclear test, said that if the country exploded a nuclear device, President Bush would be forced to press for an economic quarantine, a step North Korea has said would be an act of war.
The North Korean announcement today -- delivered first at the Beijing airport as negotiators left the country, then in a statement issued in North Korea -- sharply contradicted a Chinese announcement as the talks concluded on Friday that all sides had agreed to further talks within two months. 
As always, it was unclear if North Korea was bluffing, but administration officials in Washington and several Asian diplomats said there was significant danger that the crisis would intensify.
"The United States is saying to us that it is not interested in any further talks if the North Koreans test their nuclear device, or if there is no progress during the next two months," one senior Asian official who was deeply involved in the talks said today. 
"Their public position is that this all went well, because the North Koreans saw how many countries are lined up against them. 
But there is a real fear that Kim Jong Il," the North Korean leader, "sees that the U.S. is distracted in Iraq, and thinks this is the moment to make it clear he has the bomb."
President Bush said nothing about the North Korean crisis as he left his ranch in Crawford, Tex., to return to Washington. 
But he was regularly updated during his monthlong vacation, and his aides say that as soon as American negotiators return from Beijing, the White House will have to revisit strategies for intercepting North Korean ships carrying missiles and drugs and review its limited military options if North conducts a test or fires off missiles.
American intelligence agencies have seen no evidence of an imminent nuclear test, administration officials say. 
But the intelligence agencies have missed such signs in the past, notably failing to forecast the exchange of nuclear tests in Pakistan and India in 1998.
North Korea has over the past several years tested conventional explosives that could be used to detonate a nuclear device and appears to have received some foreign assistance in developing that technology, intelligence officials say.
A North Korean Foreign Ministry spokesman quoted by the official KCNA news agency in Pyongyang, the capital, today dismissed the negotiations in Beijing as a "trick" intended to disarm North Korea. 
The spokesman said such talks were no longer of use.
"The talks have made us believe that we have no other choice but to strengthen our nuclear deterrent force as a self-defensive means," the spokesman was quoted as saying. 
"We are not interested at all in this kind of talks and do not have any hopes" for continuing the negotiations, he said.
The comments were echoed by an unidentified member of North Korea's negotiating team, who told reporters as he left the Chinese capital that the talks were a failure. 
"We're not longer interested," he said.
It was not immediately clear if the statements were meant to reflect a formal change in policy by North Korea or were an attempt to increase its leverage ahead of the next negotiations. 
North Korea regularly issues barbed statements and vows to inflict harsh punishments on its enemies, but it often does not deliver on its threats.
North Korea discovered in the course of the six-party talks that it had no allies willing to take its side against pressure from the United States to dismantle its nuclear program, Bush administration officials and Asian diplomats said. 
Analysts said North Korea might have decided that it had nothing to gain by extending the dialogue, or might simply be seeking to change the venue, the format or the negotiating partners in the next round.
The Chinese government issued a statement today saying that the issues were so complex that much more negotiation would be needed. 
Chinese officials made no comment on the North Korean statement today.
But some hawks within the Bush administration clearly hope that North Korea's threats on Thursday, and its rejection of talks today, may lead China to join in imposing economic penalties on the country. 
China is North Korea's main supplier of oil.
During the three-day talks, Kim Yong Il, North Korea's chief representative at the discussions, said his country had nuclear weapons and might stage a nuclear test if the United States did not offer it a nonaggression treaty. 
The United States has ruled out offering such a treaty until North Korea verifiably dismantles its nuclear program.
Even if today's statement turns out to be more posturing, it raises fresh questions about North Korea's relationship with China, its largest aid donor and trading partner and the only country that has successfully mediated its relations with the United States.
At the conclusion of the negotiations, North Korea joined the United States, China, South Korea, Japan and Russia in pledging to hold another round of negotiations and to refrain from taking any provocative steps to heighten the situation in the meantime. 
China announced the agreement amid some fanfare, and Beijing's state-controlled newspapers trumpeted the arrangement for new talks as a sign that China's efforts to bring about a diplomatic solution had borne fruit.
North Korea's quick disavowal was "a major slap in the face to China," a leading political analyst here said, noting that Beijing would have been certain to make sure North Korea supported the text of the announcement before issuing it.
Chinese foreign policy experts say that Beijing treated the talks as a test of North Korea's sincerity in seeking a peaceful solution to the nuclear problem. 
Beijing has been lobbying to keep the United States from pursuing more aggressive actions against North Korea while diplomatic channels remain open.
Shi Yinhong, an international affairs expert at People's University in Beijing, said it was too early to tell how China would react, especially given North Korea's long history of using "fierce language."
But he said that China had economic tools to bring pressure on North Korea and might consider using them.
"If it turns out that North Korea wants to destroy the talks, then China may stop taking soft steps," he said.
At the least, North Korea's angry reaction would appear to support the contention by Bush administration officials that the talks succeeded in putting fresh pressure on North Korea, making it clear that it had no rational choice but to scrap its nuclear program.The officials said they hoped that when negotiators relayed the details of the talks to Kim Jong Il the country would reassess its strategy.
