
North Korea has processed 8,000 spent fuel rods that could be used for nuclear bombs, but does not intend to export its atomic capabilities, a top North Korean official was quoted as saying by China's official news agency.
The remarks by Vice Foreign Minister Choi Su Hon marked the first time that reclusive North Korea has said it has processed the rods, which can provide plutonium to make fissile material and which were sealed under a 1994 agreement with the United States.
Mr. Choi said the North had already "processed 8,000 fuel rods" and had also "changed the purpose of these fuel rods," the New China News Agency reported.
"We have no intention of transferring any means of that nuclear deterrence to other countries," he told reporters at the North's mission to the United Nations in New York.
The United States has been increasingly anxious about whether North Korea has a nuclear weapon since the North it said last October it possessed enriched uranium and, this year, expelled United Nations inspectors, pulled out of the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty and took its nuclear plant in Yongbyon, where the rods are stored, out of mothballs.
American officials have voiced fears taht North Korea might try to export any nuclear technology it might possess and have said the North could already have one or two nuclear devices. 
If it has processed the fuel rods, that could give North Korea access to enough plutonium eventually to produce as many as five or six devices.
Mr. Choi refused to disclose the scale of North Korea's nuclear arsenal, the news agency said. 
"One thing we can tell you is that we are in possession of nuclear deterrence and we're continuing to strengthen that deterrence," he told Chinese reporters.
His remarks came as the United States and important Asian allies are trying to persuade North Korea to hold another round of six-way talks to resolve the tense deadlock.
"Since the United States has threatened the D.P.R.K. with nuclear weapons to launch a pre-emptive nuclear attack against the D.P.R.K., we have no choice but to be in possession of the nuclear deterrence," Mr. Choi said, referring to the country by its official name, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
