
Drawing on its best cold war oratory, North Korea today denounced the sinking by Japan of an unidentified boat in a high seas gun battle last Saturday as "a crime" that is "nothing but the brutal piracy and unpardonable terrorism of a modern brand that could be committed only by samurais of Japan in defiance of international laws."
"The Japanese reactionaries are spreading a sheer rumor that the unidentified ship might be a 'spy ship from North Korea,' describing their piracy as a 'measure for self-defense,"' continued a dispatch by the Korean Central News Agency, the official news service of what is formally called the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. 
"This proves that their loudmouthed case of the 'unidentified ship' is another trite charge and a grave provocation, products of the anti-D.P.R.K. policy of the Japanese reactionaries."
Asked by reporters to comment on the North Korean broadside, Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi said merely: "Hmm. 
They say a lot of things, don't they?"
Japanese officials said today that in 1999 North Korea also denied any link to a drug-running boat that, after completing what the officials said was a drug transfer, narrowly escaped Japan Guard patrol boats.
Japan would like to contract with a private company to salvage the ship, which sank in waters about 300 feet deep. 
But high winter waves may force a delay until spring. 
Also, since the ship sank inside China's economic zone, any salvage attempt must be coordinated with China, a historic ally of North Korea.
On Saturday night, high swells may have saved the patrol boats from disaster, Coast Guard officials said. 
With the boats bobbing up and down gunmen on the mystery ship missed when they fired at least two rockets at Coast Guard boats, the officials said. 
Analysis of holes on the Japanese ships indicate that they had been sprayed with bullets from two makes of AK-47 automatic rifles, the workhorse weapon of the former Soviet bloc, the officials said.
Today, more information emerged to indicate that the mystery boat had been disguised as a Chinese squid fishing vessel. 
The Coast Guard said a Chinese name had been painted on the bow, and the ship had been painted in a shade of blue often used by Chinese fishing boats. 
From a pole on the stern, the ship flew a Chinese-style red flag. 
When challenged by the Coast Guard, some crew members responded by waving red flags.
Infrared photo analysis reportedly shows that the engine was in the bow, and that a fake exhaust pipe had been placed in the stern to make it look like a fishing vessel. 
The fact that the ship kept moving after receiving sustained fire to the bow indicates to Coast Guard analysts that the engine area was armored.
According to press reports here today, a Japanese defense communications unit intercepted Korean language communications on a frequency used by the North Korea government. 
The United States government reportedly warned the Japanese last week about the intrusion of a North Korean boat into Japanese waters.
More clues about the boat's origin and mission may come after experts have had a chance to study 130 pieces of boat wreckage recovered from the site. 
On Thursday, autopsies are to be performed on the two bodies that were recovered, each wearing a life jacket with Korean writing. 
An estimated 13 other crew members are missing and believed dead.
