
North Korea said Sunday that it was not bound by a United Nations Security Council resolution imposing weapons-related sanctions on it, and insisted it would ''bolster its war deterrent'' in every way.
The Security Council acted with ''irresponsibility'' by voting unanimously on Saturday for a resolution requiring nations to prevent North Korea from acquiring missile-related items, an unidentified North Korean Foreign Ministry spokesman was reported to have said.
''Our republic will bolster its war deterrent for self-defense in every way, by all means and methods, now that the situation has reached the worst phase due to the extremely hostile act of the U.S.,'' the spokesman was quoted as saying by the official Korean Central News Agency.
North Korea refers to its military buildup and its unconventional weapons programs as its war deterrent, contending that the United States military presence and drills on the Korean peninsula are a prelude to war against it.
The United States says its 30,000 troops are deployed under an alliance with South Korea to deter a military threat from North Korea.
On Sunday, President Hu Jintao of China called for a resumption of six-nation talks aimed at persuading North Korea to give up its nuclear weapons program.
''Both sides expressed their commitment to maintain peace and stabilityI on the Korean Peninsula,'' he said after a meeting with President Bush on the sidelines of the Group of 8 meeting in St. Petersburg, Russia.
''Both sides agreed to continue their efforts to move forward with the six-party talks so that at the end of the day the entire Korean peninsula can be denuclearized in a peaceful way through dialogue and negotiation,'' Mr. Hu said.
The Security Council resolution condemns the missile launchings by North Korea on July 5, and demands that it suspend all missile activities and return to the stalled talks.
The resolution requires United Nations members to prevent imports and exports of any material or money relating to North Korea's missile programs or unconventional arms. 
It demands that North Korea ''suspend all activities related to its ballistic missile program,'' and resume a freeze on launching missiles.
The 15-member Security Council wrangled for 10 days over a response to the test firings by North Korea of seven missiles, including a long-range Taepodong 2, which may be able to reach the continental United States but fell into the Sea of Japan.
The Security Council was divided until hours before the vote over whether to cite Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter, which allows for military force if another specific resolution is adopted.
China had threatened to veto the measure if Chapter VII were mentioned, noting that the American-led invasion of Iraq had occurred without specific Security Council authorization. 
So Japan, the United States, Britain and France, which had supported including that phrase, had no choice but to drop it. 
But they said they still considered the language of the resolution tough and binding.
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice praised China for supporting the resolution. 
She said it helped underscore the commitment to the six-nation framework of talks, which have included the United States, North and South Korea, Russia, Japan and China.
China, North Korea's closest ally, sent a mission there but failed to persuade it to return to talks. 
North Korea has insisted that the United States first lift financial sanctions.
