
Disrupting a recent mood of friendliness, North Korea attacked the South Korean government on Thursday for granting asylum this week to nearly 460 North Korean defectors, characterizing Seoul's actions as ''abduction and terrorism.''
North Korea, which has enjoyed good relations with the government of South Korea's president, Roh Moo Hyun, broke two days of silence during which two groups of North Korean defectors were airlifted by the South Korean authorities to Seoul. 
The defectors came through Vietnam, according to human rights groups in Seoul.
As more details emerged of what has amounted to the largest arrival of defectors in South Korea, it became clearer that the group's size had resulted from the increasing popularity of a smuggling route out of China, and not from an increase in people fleeing North Korea. 
The recent flow of people out of North Korea has remained steady or has perhaps diminished, experts said, because China has tightened security on its border with North Korea.
The South Korean government brought the North Koreans to Seoul on Tuesday and Wednesday in an operation it tried to keep secret, refusing to even disclose the origin of the flights. 
Clearly fearful of antagonizing North Korea, as well as the other countries through which the defectors had traveled, South Korea said only that they had come from a Southeast Asian nation.
South Korea has have not officially commented on the matter. 
A Foreign Ministry official, speaking by phone from Seoul and on the condition that his name not be used, acknowledged the political consideration behind the government's efforts to minimize attention on the defectors.
''There's no reason for North Korea to get angry,'' he said, since the defectors were traveling to Seoul voluntarily, ''but we don't want to make North Korea unnecessarily angry.''
In North Korea, however, the Committee for the Peaceful Reunification of the Fatherland issued a statement Thursday declaring that ''South Korean authorities will be held wholly accountable for the ensuing consequences, and other forces who supported them will have to pay a high price for them,'' according to the Korean Central News Agency.
In recent years, many South Korean church and human rights groups have become increasingly organized in helping North Koreans defect. 
With the impenetrable demilitarized zone separating the two Koreas, the only way out of North Korea has been to cross into China and then Southeast Asia before going to South Korea. 
According to human rights groups, the safest and cheapest route, and thus the most popular, has been through Vietnam.
Kim Sang Chul, president of the Commission to Help North Korean Refugees, which has helped North Koreans come to South Korea, said that because of the popularity of the route through Vietnam, North Korean defectors last fall began streaming into Ho Chi Minh City faster than they could be sent to South Korea. 
Mr. Kim's organization sent three officials to Ho Chi Minh City in May to investigate the defectors' condition.
''We found that they were experiencing many difficulties living in Vietnam because they had been waiting to come to South Korea for three to nine months,'' Mr. Kim said.
The Foreign Ministry official, while refusing to identify where the defectors had been waiting, confirmed the details of how they had ended up there. 
The defectors were staying in cramped lodging provided by private Koreans and given food by the South Korean Embassy, the official said. 
South Korean officials worried that the defectors might despair and become violent.
''The situation was not manageable,'' the official said, adding, ''One man tried to commit suicide.''
Human rights officials in Seoul said Vietnam was afraid that sending such a large group of defectors to South Korea would offend the Chinese and North Koreans, two allies.
The Foreign Ministry official said that after two-and-a-half months of talks with the country sheltering the defectors, it agreed at the end of last month to let them leave by airlift.
According to South Korea's Ministry of Unification, 3,763 North Korean defectors were living in South Korea as of June. 
Last year, 1,281 arrived in South Korea; this year, 760, as of June.
China, which considers defectors illegal economic migrants and not political refugees, has recently tightened security at the border with North Korea, building iron fences and installing security cameras. 
Tens of thousands of North Koreans are believed to be living in China.
The North Koreans typically pay Korean missionaries or human rights groups $2,000 to $3,000 to smuggle them out of China, said Do Hee Yoon, secretary general of the Citizens' Coalition for Human Rights of Abductees and North Korean Refugees. 
The price can go up to $10,000 for professional brokers. 
Experts say the North Koreans earn the money in China, or rely on relatives in South Korea or on the settlement money provided by Seoul.
In its statement on Thursday, North Korea also accused Seoul of working with the United States House of Representatives, which last week passed the North Korean Human Rights Act. 
The act calls for American support for North Korean refugees and pressure on the North Korean government on human rights. 
North Korea said Seoul's airlift of the defectors was part of a ''campaign the U.S. is escalating by using a lot of money and materials in a bid to destroy people-centered socialism of Korean style.''
