
Readers respond to Paul Krugman’s Mar. 
6 column, “Feeling No Pain“
Swapan Sanjanwala, Cincinnati, Ohio: I am an Indian and your great admirer. 
Everything you say on outsourcing is correct. 
But you statement on nuclear proliferation is incorrect. 
There are facts on nuclear proliferation that rarely get highlighted in the American media or by the non-proliferation hawks here. 
After all, Indian security is the last of their concerns. 
But without understanding that, they are not going to solve any problems. 
For once, Bush is right here.
Indians are generally amazed at the hypocrisy of being lectured by a country which has an arsenal large enough to destroy the world many times over asking us not to maintain a very minimal arsenal to address our security needs. 
India is in a very dangerous neighborhood. 
Around 20 Chinese missiles are pointed at India. 
China claims many Indian states as its own territory — but those states border Tibet, not China. 
As if this were not enough, China has blatantly sent nuclear weapons and missiles to Pakistan — a fact corroborated by intelligence leaks from American agencies. 
I am amazed that these facts find hardly any mention in the American media. 
Given this, it is blatantly unfair to ask India, a democracy, to roll back its nuclear program while allowing China, an authoritarian regime, to maintain its weapons. 
Any solution that neglects these facts is not going to succeed. 
No government in India will rightly accept that.
There are other things I can point to. 
India has voluntarily placed a moratorium on testing nuclear weapons. 
China has not. 
And for that matter, the U.S. has not. 
The Pentagon worries that Chinese missiles might reach U.S. cities in 10 years, whereas all Indian cities can be targeted by the Chinese missiles in China as well as the ones they supplied to Pakistan.
And India is strongly committed to global nuclear disarmament, but not in the form of the current non-proliferation agreement, which gives unlimited rights to some countries and comprises the legitimate security concerns of a country like India. 
When testing nuclear weapons, India did not break any international treaty or rules. 
Both North Korea and Iran are signed, but both are still trying to develop nuclear weapons. 
It is simply ridiculous to compare rogue regimes with a country like India. 
If people are really concerned about preventing proliferation, the only real way is to work for global nuclear disarmament.
The current deal allows an authoritarian regime like China unlimited access to nuclear technology and weapons, while placing all kinds of restrictions on a peaceful democracy of a billion people for choosing to address their legitimate security needs by maintaining a small nuclear deterrent.
Robert Bultman, Louisville, Ky.: Workers get outsourced not because they don’t have the right education, but rather due to the savings gained via outsourcing. 
It is the lack of the right training that is given as the excuse for the necessity of outsourcing. 
But companies are unwilling to train workers with the right education due to the costs and time involved. 
It is far cheaper to find someone that has already been trained in a specific area than to train someone already on staff. 
This same lack-of-training argument has been given in the past as a way to lay off older workers who lack certain skills, and is now being used to outsource knowledge workers to India.
No one ever talks about the original reason given for creating engineering or other centers in China, India, and elsewhere — the 24-hour workday in those countries. 
This sounds like a great way to enable companies to get their products to market faster. 
If executed properly, it would. 
However, it means doubling the staff in two locations. 
Why do that when a staff can be moved to a low-cost country?
It lowers overall costs and improves margins.
Still, I believe that the greatest way to remain a valuable employee immune to outsourcing is to continuously upgrade one’s talents and skills. 
This requires effort and possible expense on the part of the individual. 
Education does not end when one leaves the university — it must continue as long as one wishes to remain in the workforce. 
This is required of medical professionals and should be the desire of knowledge workers as well.
Lisa Hastings, Philadelphia: I hope you are right that the vast majority of Americans — everyone who isn’t a have or have more — sense that Bush does not care about them. 
More importantly, this vast majority needs to get some self-respect and expect some respect from their leaders. 
One thing that has always bothered me about Americans in general is that the majority of people seem to still hold very rich people in very high esteem. 
Even for people who aren’t greedy or social-climbing, there is a sense in this country — reinforced by Reagan and his legacy — that rich people deserve to be rich and the poor and middle classes deserve to be less rich. 
It’s all self-determination, and this makes it hard to break the increasing tendency of Congress and society to make things easier for the wealthy and harder for the non-wealthy. 
Until people get over the idea that all rich people are rich because they deserve to be rich, and that poor people are poor because they choose to be, there will probably never be a healthy uprising against pro-wealth policies.
It’s one of the reasons the G.O.P. has taken over many formerly Democratic voters — it has painted itself as the party of economic and success, while at the same time appealing to the anti-intellectual bias of many.
Fabrice Klein, New York: I am glad to see you turn your attention to the topic of outsourcing in today’s column. 
While I always enjoy reading your factual approach to this administration’s decisions in foreign policy, healthcare or taxes, I think that this issue, and world trade in general, are not debated enough in this country.
The debate is raging in Europe, which is rightfully extremely concerned about the prospect of increasing competition from countries with much lower standards of living and non-existent social protections.
In the U.S., the assumption is always that trade is good. 
While this is generally true, I believe it needs to be managed properly so that workers and shareholders on both sides benefit fully. 
The other common assumption in the U.S. is that we outsource those tasks we don’t really feel like doing, keeping for ourselves those with the highest value added. 
What happens when countries we trade with decide that they want and can do those as well?
Finally, in terms of foreign policy, what should we be entitled to demand from those countries we help develop economically?
David Korfhage, Scotch Plains, N.J.: I’ve greatly appreciated your columns, and I’m glad you’re calling attention to the growing income inequality in this country. 
I was particularly struck by your recent column, in which you pointed out that even within college grads, the income inequality has grown tremendously.
Some colleagues and I were discussing this today, and also the dismal state of science education in this country–in particular, the fact that so few Americans are studying science and technology. 
One colleague commented that when she was younger, being a scientist or engineer was a high-status occupation, but that seems to have changed. 
I pointed out that in talking with my students — I am a high school teacher — I realized that a lot of them don’t know that you can make good money working as a scientist. 
But someone else pointed out that students were perhaps just responding to incentives. 
Why study science if the real money is in finance, especially given that succeeding in science can take years of training, whereas any newly minted B.A. can in theory go to work on Wall Street?
That got me wondering — could the shortage of Americans going into science have something to do with the growing income gap even among the college educated?
Perhaps it used to be the case, 20 or 30 years ago, that there wasn’t that much of a difference in income between financier and scientist, but now there is a much larger gap, and so the incentives to abandon science are much higher now.
Paul Krugman: I’m working on the issue of why the U.S. seems to be lagging in science and engineering education, and will eventually write about it. 
But I haven’t learned enough to say anything coherent yet.
