
A leading Chinese oil producer, CNOOC, is considering making a competing bid to Chevron's $16.4 billion offer for Unocal, as soaring demand puts pressure on China to find new oil supplies.
''The company announces that it is continuing to examine its options with respect to Unocal,'' CNOOC said in a statement to the Hong Kong Stock Exchange on Tuesday. 
''These options include a possible offer by the company for Unocal, but no decision has been made in this respect.''
Energy industry analysts in Beijing say that divisions between CNOOC's foreign nonexecutive directors and its Chinese management have delayed any firm decision on Unocal, which has extensive oil and natural gas reserves in Indonesia, Bangladesh, Thailand and Myanmar.
Energy consumption has been soaring in China, which is the world's fastest-growing economy and is now the second-largest consumer of oil, behind the United States. 
To increase energy security, the government has urged CNOOC and two other major oil companies, PetroChina and China Petroleum and Chemical, to seek investments in offshore oil and gas reserves. 
''We think China will rely on imports for the next 20 years, especially crude oil, and the government is also trying to increase the amount of natural gas in the consumption mix,'' said Ma Shang, an energy analyst for Fitch Ratings. 
A bid for Unocal would be ''a good chance for CNOOC to get a large amount of reserves,'' he said.
If CNOOC did win Unocal, it would be China's biggest overseas investment, dwarfing the Lenovo Group's $1.75 billion purchase of I.B.M.'s personal computer business. 
That purchase was completed last month.
China's demand for oil has far outstripped domestic production, and the country last year imported 123 million metric tons of oil, according to Chinese news reports. 
These imports accounted for more than half of consumption.
If CNOOC does make a bid for Unocal, it would need to top Chevron's cash-and-stock offer made on April 4. 
Unocal had earnings of $1.2 billion on revenue of $8.2 billion last year.
A successful bid would also have to take into account a $500 million fee that Unocal agreed to pay Chevron if its offer was terminated for another deal.
Energy industry analysts said the size of the potential deal had revived divisions on the board of CNOOC. 
The government owns 70 percent of the company.
Mr. Ma said the Chinese directors, including the chief executive, Fu Chengyu, backed a bid because it would deliver oil and gas reserves, and provide some relief as dependence on imports is set to climb. 
The foreign independent directors, however, say a bid would force the company to take on excessive debt.
Market analysts point to the departure of Erwin Schurtenberger, a high-profile independent director and former Swiss ambassador to China, who resigned soon after the Chevron offer was announced, as possible evidence of high-level disagreement and tension. 
CNOOC said Mr. Schurtenberger resigned for health reasons.
