
The best-selling book in China right now is ''The Tibet Code,'' by He Ma, a novel whose title is a deliberate knockoff of you-know-what, which was an immense success when it came out here in translation.
But according to Patricia van Daalen, the rights manager for Shanghai 99, a new publishing house here, the resemblance may end there. 
''The book is much more serious than 'The Da Vinci Code,' '' Ms. Van Daalen said. 
''It's very well researched, with a lot of facts about Tibet and Tibetan culture.''
Also doing well is ''The Social Climbing of Du Lala,'' by Li Ke, which sounds like a Judith Krantz novel without the furs and the shopping. 
It's about a young woman from the provinces who, all on her own, rises in just eight years from an entry-level job to become the head of human resources at a big corporation.
But Chinese publishing is still mostly in the doldrums. 
Nothing is selling all that well, and no one is bringing out anything new. 
The situation is a little like that in the United States, where many publishers are reluctant to release anything important this fall until after the presidential election.
The great distraction here is the Olympics, of course, and to a certain extent the aftermath of the Sichuan earthquake and related disasters in May.
''Publishing is always a little slow in the summer,'' said Jo Lusby, the manager of Penguin China. 
''But there's also a feeling that right now nobody is paying any attention to books. 
Some publishing people have just left town.''
The Beijing International Book Fair normally takes place in August, but because of the Summer Games, it has been rescheduled to early September this year, and moved to Tianjin, an hour away.
''I guess they wanted to keep it clear of all the other events,'' Ms. Lusby said. 
''But there's a lot less interest. 
Not many people at all are going.''
Alexandra Pearson, the owner of the Bookworm, a bookstore and cafe in the Sanlitun neighborhood, was also disappointed by the fair's rescheduling.
''It was just starting to build up some momentum,'' she said, adding that she knew many writers who had left town for the duration of the Olympics. 
''They've gone to Thailand or even to the States,'' she said. 
''Writers feel it's not their event -- they have no stake in it.''
The Bookworm is probably the center of literary life in Beijing -- the English edition, anyway. 
(The One Way Street Cafe, run by Qin Liwen, holds a similar rank among Chinese speakers.) Ms. Pearson, who came in the early 1990s for graduate work at the Central Conservatory of Music and never left, hosts two or three readings a week at her shop.
On a recent evening her guest was Michael Meyer, a volunteer grammar-school teacher here and author of ''The Last Days of Old Beijing: Life in the Vanishing Backstreets of a City Transformed'' (Walker & Company), which is partly about how, to primp for the Olympics, the government razed some of the city's hutong neighborhoods, historic districts of single-story structures, narrow lanes and courtyards.
Mr. Meyer gave a slide show for a sold-out crowd -- mostly ex-patriates, it appeared -- and afterward said, reflecting on the Olympics: ''The great question is, who will interpret China for the West?
The Olympics is supposed to be a kind of coming-out on the world stage, but it's also a domestic showcase for the Party, and a lot of the message -- about cleanliness and civility -- is aimed at other cities.''
He added that for his students, if not for the literary community, the Games were ''the biggest thing that's happened to them in their young lives. 
They've been getting ready for years.''
