
The choice of Beijing to be the host city for the 2008 Summer Olympics might initially appear to give NBC the time zone problem it had last year in Sydney when 15 hours separated Australia from the Eastern time zone of the United States. 
NBC showed only one Olympic event live in prime time.
Paris and Toronto, which finished second and third to Beijing in yesterday's vote by the International Olympic Committee, offered greater chances for some live coverage.
But Dick Ebersol, the chairman of NBC Sports, said that the Eastern time zone's 12-hour difference from Beijing will be easier for the network to cope with. 
"There are plenty of events we can carry live," he said in a telephone interview from Beijing. 
"A fair amount of good events will take place in the morning."
Although schedules will not be determined for three years, it is possible that some indoor events, like gymnastics, swimming or diving, could take place in the Beijing morning to be shown live in the United States.
Neal Pilson, an industry consultant, said NBC's coverage of the men's finals of Wimbledon last Monday -- carried live on its cable channel, MSNBC, and then followed on tape on NBC -- offers a model for Beijing eight years after viewer discontent over the taped Sydney broadcasts. 
"We may be ready for live events at 9 a.m. on cable followed by a full prime-time kaleidoscope on NBC," Pilson said. 
"I think they will have that in mind as they ponder their options for Beijing."
Ebersol said the tape-or-live equation is less important than scheduling the 2008 Games in July, unlike the last two weeks of September, when the Sydney Games were held.
"I'm convinced that the most important reason that our ratings were not at the levels we expected in Sydney was because we were dealing with children back in school and adults back to work," he said.
NBC's prime-time rating for its telecasts from Sydney fell by 36 percent from the 1996 Summer Games in Atlanta and 21 percent from the 1992 Olympics in Barcelona, Spain.
NBC is the largest financial contributor to the Olympics. 
The 2008 Games will be the last in a cycle of five Olympics that NBC acquired in a 1995 deal for $3.5 billion.
NBC is paying $894 million to carry the first Olympics in China, where its parent company, General Electric, sells aircraft engines, medical equipment and steam turbines, and has investments in joint ventures or subsidiaries totaling $1.5 billion.
Forty-nine percent of NBC's payment will go to Beijing's Olympic committee and the rest to the I.O.C., to give to international federations and national Olympic committees.
Unlike NBC, worldwide sponsors have fewer worries about time differences between the United States and Beijing. 
Their aim is to expand existing business in China or break into its vast market.
For that reason, Beijing's selection is the sponsor's pot of gold, an opportunity that is viewed with more corporate glee than if the I.O.C. had made Paris, Toronto, Istanbul or Osaka, Japan, the host in 2008.
"For existing and potential sponsors, China was the first choice, which the I.O.C. probably knew," said Jim Andrews, the editorial director of IEG Sponsorship Report, an industry newsletter in Chicago. 
"It's the market everyone wants to go after."
There are 10 global sponsors in the I.O.C.'s TOP Program for the 2002 and 2004 Olympics. 
Two of them, Coca-Cola and Kodak, have extended their contracts to cover the 2006 to 2008 period.
In 1998 and 2000, IEG said, the 11 TOP sponsors paid a total of more than $600 million. 
Andrews said the sponsors for 2002 and 2004 will pay an average $60 million each, while those for the 2006 Winter Games in Turin, Italy, and the 2008 Beijing Olympics may pay much more.
"Olympic sponsorship values will soar in the next quadrennium," said John Krimsky, the former chief marketer of the United States Olympic Committee. 
"For sponsors who are primarily American companies, to ride the Olympic rings to China will be a totally unique opportunity."
Visa views the Beijing Games in a similar vein to the 1988 Summer Olympics in Seoul. 
Credit-card payment systems were new to South Korea then, as they are to China now. 
Visa's sponsorship greatly accelerated its Korean business.
"Business is growing relatively slowly for us in China," said Tom Shepard, the executive vice president of global sponsorships for Visa. 
"There's been some activity with the government and how they plan to handle cards. 
I think they're looking to us for our expertise."
Coca-Cola, with 33 bottling plants in China that showed 10 percent sales growth last year, is looking to further expand its business there.
Kelly Brooks, a spokesman for Coca-Cola, said, "We're happy Beijing is chosen, but we would have been happy with any of the five."
But Xerox, which is signed through the 2004 Summer Games in Athens, has been reducing its involvement in China. 
Last year it sold its Hong Kong and mainland China operations to Fuji Xerox, its Japan-based joint printer venture with Fuji Photo Film, and later sold half its stake in Fuji Xerox to Fuji. 
Xerox is focused on its 2002 Winter Olympics sponsorship in Salt Lake City.
