
With their open boat skipping like a silvery stone along the Illinois River, the fish experts scan the mocha waters for what they call ''incoming.''
Bodies hunched in anticipation, they look left and right, front and behind; you never know, they say.
''If you put your guard down, you could easily get seriously injured,'' says Kevin Irons, one of the researchers, who once got hit in the head. 
A colleague, Matt O'Hara, nods in empathy from behind the mesh netting that protects the boat's driver from being knocked unconscious.
''I got hit in the back once,'' he says. 
''It left an imprint of a fish.''
A fish?
A first-time visitor to the river initially wonders whether Mr. O'Hara and Mr. Irons have spent too much time in the sun. 
Until their boat slows down, that is, and fish by the dozens, some weighing 10 pounds or more, explode out of the water as though shot from the cannons of an underwater armada.
The agitated fish, who perceive the boat as a predator, rocket like slimy torpedoes through the air, against the hull of the boat, into the netting, onto the floor. 
Your correspondent takes one in the leg and your photographer takes one in the midsection, but both fare better than the college biology major who had her lip split last week.
Though awesome and even unnerving to behold, the fishy fusillade is all too common on the Illinois River -- and it is not good. 
These are Asian carp, a ravenous, rapidly multiplying invasive species that in the last decade has threatened the well-being of native fish, affected commercial fishing and transformed the typical workday for these researchers into a scene from ''Apocalypse Now.''
The Illinois, a working river that supports both churning coal barges and great blue herons, is one link in a chain of waterways connecting Lake Michigan to the Gulf of Mexico. 
And the thought of Asian carp invading the Great Lakes haunts the dreams of environmentalists, business owners and government officials. 
That fishy downturned mouth; those unblinking, low-set eyes.
To prevent this nightmare from becoming reality, the Army Corps of Engineers is expanding an underwater electrical barrier it built a few years ago in Romeoville, about 170 miles northeast of here. 
The system, whose projected total cost is $36.5 million, emits electrical currents to dissuade the carp -- and all other fish -- from making their way to the lake. 
The project's name conveys its gravity: the Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal Aquatic Nuisance Species Dispersal Barrier.
The back story to the invasion of the Asian carp reads like a horror-movie script. 
In the early 1970s, bighead carp and silver carp were imported from China and eastern Siberia to eat the algae clotting fish farms in the South. 
But a series of floods over the years helped them to escape their controlled environment. 
Cue the ''Jaws'' theme.
Meanwhile, in 1991, two young men with a keen interest in fish began working for the Illinois Natural History Survey at a field station in Havana, a small city in central Illinois. 
One was the stocky Kevin Irons, from near Toledo; the other, the 6-foot-9-inch Matt O'Hara, from downriver in Beardstown.
They spent a lot of time on the placid Illinois, testing the water quality, tracking the abundance and diversity of fish. 
In retrospect those were halcyon days, Mr. O'Hara, now 38, said. 
''You didn't have to worry about duck and cover.''
Soon after they started, a commercial fisherman stopped at the field station to show them a strange fish he had caught: a bighead carp, with low-set eyes that all but said, What are you looking at?
Four years later, the men caught their own bighead. 
Then, in 1998, they came across a single silver carp. 
After that, it was an Asian carp here, an Asian carp there -- until 2003, when the silver carp population exploded, in and out of the water. 
''It was like popcorn,'' said Mr. Irons, 43.
Today this 80-mile stretch of the Illinois River may have the largest population of Asian carp in the world, said Greg Sass, the field station's director. 
''There's been an exponential increase in their numbers and biomass,'' he said.
This is bio-speak for: It's out of control.
Earlier in the morning, Mr. Sass had watched as Mr. Irons, Mr. O'Hara and a third employee, Matt Stroub -- known as Mini-Matt, or just Mini -- gathered their gear for a day on the river. 
''Keep your heads on a swivel,'' he had called out. 
''Hopefully you won't lose any teeth.''
Now the researchers are cutting fast again through the murky waters in an aluminum ''shock'' boat, which has equipment that can electrify the water, paralyzing fish long enough for the researchers to scoop them up and identify and measure them before tossing them back. 
Along with anchored nets, this is how they conduct three six-week fish counts every year.
In 2006, the researchers caught around 500 silver carp. 
In 2007, around 10,000. 
So far this year, with only two-thirds of the sampling complete, they have caught nearly 80,000 silver carp that now compete in an eating contest with native fish for the river's algae and zooplankton. 
The carp often win.
This explains why the shock boat has been customized to ward off carp attacks that have bruised bodies and damaged equipment, including one brand-new depth finder. 
It has wings around the sides to ''block the fish,'' Mr. Irons says, and netting fused to an aluminum frame to protect the driver.
''We were getting hit pretty frequently,'' says Mr. O'Hara, who is steering. 
''The driver is the lifeline. 
If he gets hit and knocked out, the boat's out of control.''
Turtles sunbathe along the banks. 
Bald eagles glide above the treetops. 
And Asian carp cut rippling V patterns along the river's surface.
The boat slows to a stop near Towhead Island, with so many silver carp leaping in the wake that fish and foam seem to blend. 
A dozen carp, some the size of brickbats, fling themselves into the boat, slap-sliming the floor with blood and ooze. 
This irks Mr. Stroub, 26, who says the boat now has to be cleaned every day, instead of every few days.
Mr. Stroub takes one in the shoulder -- Bam!
Not so bad, he says. 
''I saw it coming.''
Mr. O'Hara turns a couple of knobs on the boat's control panel, sending electric currents into the water and silver carp into the air. 
As he guides the boat back and forth along the island's bank, Mr. Irons and Mr. Stroub scoop up the paralyzed fish with nets and dump them into a water-filled tank.
After 15 minutes of stunning and scooping, the researchers begin to count and record. 
White bass. 
Black crappie. 
Bigmouth buffalo. 
Common carp. 
Silver carp. 
Silver carp. 
Silver carp.
Someday, perhaps, someone will develop a lemonade-from-lemons plan for these fish -- a commercially viable way to use them as fertilizer, or to export them to China and other countries, where they are a common food source. 
Mr. Irons says, by the way, that the carp are surprisingly tasty.
Until that day, these dedicated, bruised men dodge fish torpedoes in the name of science. 
Channel catfish. 
Long-nose gar. 
Silver carp. 
Silver carp. 
Silver carp.
At one point Mr. O'Hara looks up from counting fish -- bloody, oozing carp flopping about his feet. 
''And there I was,'' he says, in mock reverie. 
''On the Illinois River...''
