
MY friend Lilla flourished a blue sheet of paper headed ''Artists' Walking Tour of Southern Rural Japan.''
It promised Buddhist pilgrimage routes, picnics assembled in local supermarkets, hot-springs baths, contemporary art collections, traditional houses, ancient crafts and modern potters, hiking and tatami mats, ferry rides across the Inland Sea. 
I had never been to Japan. 
But I had reached the age when ''I want to do that when I have time'' has become ''I better do that while I still can.''
So I signed up.
Nothing about the trip turned out as I expected. 
Not Japan, not the etiquette of traveling with a group, not the experience of surrendering to the greater wisdom of a leader. 
It was all surprising. 
And at my age, surprise is the sweetest possible experience.
Lilla and I met our group at the Osaka airport: 4 men, 13 women, mostly artists, mostly past 50. 
Our leader, Steve Beimel, bright as a 6-foot-2 bunny, herded us onto an express bus for the two-hour ride to Naruto, our first stop on the island of Shikoku.
''Don't even sit down in your room,'' he said, as we arrived at our inn, the Shichishuen. 
''Go straight to the baths.''
And so, naked went the strangers. 
Separate baths for men and women. 
Big relief. 
A glass wall beside a hot bubbling pool looked over a soaring bridge crossing the swirling confluence of Pacific Ocean and Inland Sea. 
Our tatami room had futons and snuggly quilts, and hot water for tea.
For the next 12 days and 11 nights we would visit, by train, bus and foot, Naruto, Takamatsu, Iya Gorge and Uchiko on Shikoku Island, Naoshima Island in the Inland Sea, and Hagi and Omori on western Honshu. 
Some of those places I hadn't been able to find on a map. 
The first morning, we hoisted our daypacks and set off on a short bus trip to begin our walk to the first three temples on the ancient Shingon Buddhist Pilgrimage Route that winds through the mountains of Shikoku.
Steve, wearing a small microphone, whispered a concise history of Buddhism through our Walkman earphones. 
His voice, explaining and interpreting, became the ground note of the trip. 
For 12 years, Steve Beimel, president of Esprit Travel and Tours, has been taking pleasure in conveying groups to a deeper understanding of the East, and, if possible, of themselves. 
Our other leader was Gail Rieke, a collage artist from Santa Fe, whose special pleasure is leading what she calls travel journal workshops.
At the first temple, I bought a red brocade-covered accordion-pleated journal. 
Tentatively, I wrote a few notes.
A rice ball with a pickled plum in the middle is good for lunch. 
Miso soup helps cure jet lag. 
Coffee comes in cans, out of a machine, hot or cold. 
Not bad.
Custom requires small gifts. 
The Bunraku puppet master received a Kokopelli figure, maple sugar, a drawing of a codfish, and chocolate.
Dinner: a banquet, sitting on the floor, all of us in matching flowered cotton kimonos, joining in a rowdy, stamping folk dance -- not at all like gliding geishas. 
After dinner, we sat in a circle and introduced ourselves.
Next morning, breakfast featured perfectly flat, dried fish. 
I named mine Marvin, inked him and pressed the image of his handsome, slightly pungent four-inch form into my journal. 
Normally, I don't have time for such creative urges. 
I have usually traveled alone, spending half my time figuring out where to go and how to get there. 
On this group excursion it was very hard at first to just wait and see. 
Steve adroitly deflected my questions about what was going to happen next with a calm ''We will get to that answer.''
And we always did. 
Steve declared us to be ''pilgrims of the now.''
Compliantly we pilgrims progressed on the hourlong express train ride to Shikokumura, the 40-minute walk to the glorious Isamu Noguchi Garden Museum, the 30-minute taxi ride to Takamatsu station, and the peaceful hourlong ferry voyage to Naoshima Island.
If you like the Scottish Isles, or San Francisco Bay, or the waters off Maine, you will love the Inland Sea.
We have seen no other Westerners except for an offshoot of the Vienna opera traveling by train. 
Where are the others?
Are they all lost in translation?
The implausible array of art on remote Naoshima seems to be the result of a specifically Japanese kind of corporate whimsy. 
Benesse Corporation owns, among other things, Berlitz. 
Some years ago its president, Soichiro Fukutake, decided that a rocky peninsula should be crowned with an example of Tadao Ando's architectural genius and suffused with contemporary art. 
And so a hotel, Benesse House, of few but carefully designed Western-style rooms appeared, incorporating the open galleries and outdoor installations of the Naoshima Contemporary Art Museum, displaying such fashionable favorites as Bruce Nauman and Walter De Maria.
In time, the neighboring town of Honmura transmogrified from fishing village into the Art House Project. 
The rebuilt Shinto temple acquired glass-block steps, big as ice-house squares. 
A James Turrell installation, ''Backside of the Moon,'' was set inside a blank-walled Ando building into which we solemnly led each other by the hand into total darkness. 
We stumbled over benches, and waited. 
And waited. 
Long before our eyes adjusted and a ghostly rectangle appeared before us, I am afraid we began to giggle. 
As we returned to sunlight the townspeople giggled back.
So difficult to take pictures, write notes, learn, get to know 16 people, take shoes on and off, drag my backpack, walk and walk, and then be urged to take part in the ''journaling process'' by sharing what I am thinking about.
Did Goethe share when he wrote his Italian journal?
Back on Shikoku, during the two-hour express train ride to Iya Gorge, a Japanese man complimented me on ''the very nice Japanese way you use chopsticks.''
I was absurdly pleased.
Iya Gorge is one of the most remote and relatively unspoiled spots in Japan. 
Mist hung in pointed mountains, matching ancient landscape paintings. 
We climbed up in rain through a vertical village to Chiiori, a centuries-old farmhouse that has become a pilgrimage stop for people who mourn the loss of the old aesthetics. 
Alex Kerr, author of ''Lost Japan,'' began restoring Chiiori 30 years ago. 
It is now an educational and cultural center. 
The work is shared by Mason Florence, who has written Lonely Planet guides to Japan and Vietnam. 
We sat around a hearth sunk into the center of the floor, and Mason spoke of their vision of creating examples of sustainable village life and agriculture, and the $150,000 cost of rethatching the roof. 
Everywhere in Japan such houses are rotting in the woods. 
Most rural villages have been abandoned. 
But there is now a faint current running the other way. 
It is called Yu-taan suru, to make a U-turn, a simple phrase for a profound change.
By good fortune, my introduction to Japan was to the part that is still beautiful and coherent, not to the postmodern chaos of the big cities. 
Our last stops were in the old 17th- to 19th-century Edo Period merchant towns of Uchiko, Hagi and Omori. 
I am glad I saw this Japan, and saw it with so many pairs of appreciative eyes.
A two-and-a-half-hour express train ride took us southwest to Uchiko. 
The pale merchants' houses were built from the fortunes gained from manufacturing washi paper and a wax rendered from a species of sumac berry. 
The wax is still hand-rolled into fragrant candles around hollow wicks of washi paper wrapped with the thread of silk cocoons. 
Steve introduced us to Tadae Izumi, who, at 87, is the greatest master of the bamboo and lacquered rice-paper umbrella. 
Sitting beneath one feels like coming home. 
I ordered one with an indigo and white swirl.
My favorite Japanese art form is the presentation of food. 
At the hand-carved wooden counter at the Kawa Semi (Kingfisher) restaurant in Uchiko, I reveled in the glorious deployments of dishes, color and form complimenting each delicious tidbit, mouthful and morsel.
Seasonal delights: Persimmons and chestnuts and mushrooms. 
Little fish, standing up on skewers, begging for the grill. 
Sweets of every shape and form, but not sweet. 
Edible chrysanthemum, deep-fried lotus root, grilled miso-soaked figs, grape and Chinese pear salad, sake sorbet.
Our last two stops, Hagi and Omori, were all the way across Japan from Uchiko, on the western shore of Honshu Island. 
The five-hour trip involved a local train, a taxi, a two-hour ferry ride, another two-and-a-half-hour train ride. 
Yet it was a great deal easier than an American might expect. 
We had shipped our luggage ahead, as the efficient Japanese do, and the connections were seamless.
Every day's adventure was better than the one before. 
No doubt our itinerary had been planned with such a crescendo of delights in mind. 
The strangers I had met at the Osaka airport had turned into good-hearted, curious, entertaining friends. 
And after days and days of walking two to three miles a day, with a daypack, I had discovered I could ascend hills and temple steps like a feather on a breeze!
Alas, the ascension from my seat on the floor at meals was not yet as graceful.
Hagi is a medieval town famous for its potters and its 17th-century samurai houses. 
On the train as we approached, Steve's electronic whisper spoke to us of thousands of years of Japan's lust for pots, of step kilns and crackle glaze, of generations of potters. 
Through fields of cosmos we walked from potter to potter. 
We stroked their glazes, choked over their prices, lost our heads and proffered credit cards.
My favorite was the work of Hamanaka Gesson, displayed in his absolutely perfect traditional house. 
We were served green tea in bowls that looked very like first-grade efforts. 
That effect is called wabi-sabi, a cherished achievement in the spontaneous and lighthearted.
The green tea was The Tea, of the traditional Tea Ceremony, powdered, whisked and served by the quarter cupful. 
It tasted to me exactly like composted grass. 
And the effect was just like speed.
From the Tomoe Ryokan in Hagi, an elegant blend of modern and traditional comforts, we went exploring: riding bicycles to the beach, shopping in stylish boutiques tucked into samurai mansions. 
Some of us spent the afternoon sitting over lunch, looking at the Zen garden of the Hotoritei restaurant, and offering rhymes for a song Steve was writing.
A melancholy air of approaching conclusion and separation had begun to hover about us, thus heightening the pleasure of the completely unexpected grand finale. 
Omori, about three train hours from Hagi, is scarcely on the map, and doesn't want to be on major tourist routes. 
Instead, it wants to demonstrate to the Japanese themselves the joy of reviving a way of life that has been thrown away, involving crafts and community houses and vegetable gardens.
For four centuries Omori was a city of 200,000 people, most of them drawn to work in the silver mines. 
The men, poisoned by the mines, died young. 
There are groves of tombstones in all the surrounding hills. 
Now, only about 500 people live full time in Omori. 
All of them seemed eager to show us a good time. 
We exchanged gifts with a group of children, and sang our best rowdy songs to some fellow diners at a candlelit barbecue. 
The next day we again met our new pals in their studios and craft shops.
Omori encompasses scores of wooden houses, ancient narrow streets and small cavelike Buddhist temples set into hillsides; its abandoned mineshafts have been nominated as a World Heritage Site. 
The pioneers in the preservation effort have been Tomi Matsuba and her husband, Daikichi. 
Twenty years ago, they made the U-turn and moved back from the city to the town where the Matsuba family had for generations made kimonos. 
Tomi began to create clothes herself, rediscovering lost textile patterns and providing work for local people. 
Now the family sells artfully designed goods to stores across Japan. 
In the community guest house, a restored traditional building, where most of us stayed, Tomi cooked enormous meals at an old charcoal stove. 
We all made vats of rice balls and piles of okonomi aka, stuffed egg pancakes.
The last night of the last day, in the last place, ended with a banquet to celebrate Walt and Donna, who, after 16 years of marriage, renewed their wedding vows at a ceremony led by another member, Carolyn, a rabbi. 
On the long train ride back to the Osaka airport, Steve had, as usual, the last and defining word. 
''Ichigo, Ichi e,'' he said. 
And we all translated in chorus: ''Be grateful for this never-to-be-repeated moment.''
If you go
Esprit Tours and Travel provides small groups with authentic experiences of Asian culture by combining knowledgeable guides, lots of walking, and meetings with small groups of artisans. 
Tours for groups or individuals can be geared to such interests as crafts, textiles, gardens and modern architecture. 
This year's brochure offers trips ranging from $2,950 to $5,850 for rural walking tours of southern and northern Japan, Tokyo and the temples and gardens of Kyoto. 
There are new tours to Laos, China, Thailand and Vietnam. 
A tour similar to my 12-day trip last fall will be about $4,950, not including air fare. 
A farewell tip to the tour leader is suggested; otherwise, there is no tipping in Japan -- truly!
Contact Esprit Travel and Tours at (800) 377-7481 or (213) 346-9100, fax (213) 346-9120; www.esprittravel.com. 
JANE O'REILLY
