
IT has been revealed that Zhou Enlai, the Chinese prime minister under Mao Zedong, referred to Long Island several times during his landmark meeting with Henry Kissinger in 1971. 
Mr. Kissinger, then America's national security adviser, was in China to pave the way for Richard Nixon's historic visit a year later.
Among recently declassified documents made public on Feb. 
28 by the National Security Archive, an independent research group, is a transcript of a conversation in which Zhou underscored his belief that Taiwan is a historic province of China by saying his government views that island the way Washington would view Long Island -- part of the sovereign whole. 
Zhou told Mr. Kissinger that history "proves that Taiwan has belonged to China for more than 1,000 years -- a longer period than Long Island has been a part of the U.S."
This was not a casual observation by Zhou. 
The record suggests that he returned time and again to the Long Island-Taiwan comparison. 
The BBC reported in 1981 that Zhou once told a gathering that China respects the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of the United States and demanded that the United States give China the same consideration. 
"If people invaded Long Island in the U.S.A. and sent warships to the channel north of Long Island, how would the Americans feel?" he asked.
Well, if truth be told, local entrepreneurs would probably sell tickets to the event as part of a community oyster festival. 
In addition, the invaders would encounter some pretty tough zoning rules along the North Shore, so they had better come ashore with lawyers.
But Zhou's repeated reference to Long Island's relationship with the United States begs the question: What prompted this analogy and how did Long Island get on Zhou's radar in the first place?
Did he steal out there during breaks at the United Nations to summer with Einstein?
Did he break the line at trendy Hamptons restaurants?
Did his limo overheat while heading out to Jones Beach?
Regretfully, Zhou took the origins of his Long Island focus to his grave in 1976. 
There is nothing in the record to link this enormously powerful Communist leader to one of the world's great centers of commerce and tract homes.
But Zhou was not the last to use Long Island as an example for Western political influence on China. 
Describing Britain's imperialist role in seizing Hong Kong in the 1840's after the Opium War, the China scholar William Overholt wrote that the injustice was on the same scale as having a foreign power grab Long Island. 
He wrote, "It was as if General Noriega of Panama, infuriated at George Bush's efforts to stop Panamanian drug sales to the United States, had seized Long Island in perpetuity and decades later had used this seizure to impose an alien political ideology on part of New York State."
Long Island has gone from being Manhattan's farmers' market to a suburban pioneer to a dynamic and diverse region powering a 21st-century economy. 
Our role on the world stage may be akin to that of the fourth extra hidden on the risers of a Verdi opera, but who knew that world leaders and intellectuals seem to think we are also a perfect example of sovereignty at risk?
Zhou did not escape our attention either. 
One of the Island's favorite sons, Billy Joel, has famously captured much of the sweet and sour that is his home. 
But in seeking to define the events of a chaotic generation, his song "We Didn't Start the Fire" offers this flashback to 1957:
Little Rock, Pasternak, Mickey Mantle, Kerouac
Sputnik, Zhou Enlai, "Bridge on the River Kwai"
If only we could have convinced Zhou to doff his frumpy Mao jacket for something more "Long Island sophisticated" over at Marsh's in Huntington village. 
Now that would have been a chapter in the history books.
