
In their trading debut in New York, shares of the China Life Insurance Company rose about 26 percent, while Orbitz rose initially but fell into negative territory later.
"They were both oversubscribed to a huge degree, so it shows you there was a lot of cash on the sidelines," John O'Donoghue, co-head of listed trading at Credit Suisse First Boston, said of the initial public offerings.
China Life closed its first day of trading on the New York Stock Exchange at $23.72, its initial price of $18.68 for American depository shares, which equal 40 Hong Kong-listed shares.
Orbitz, after rising 18 percent over its initial price of $26 in the morning session, closed at $24.98 on the Nasdaq, or off about 4 percent on the day. 
Orbitz operates a Web site selling flights, lodging, rental cars and vacation packages.
"Anytime you get a big I.P.O., it says the market has strengthened," said Frederic H. Dickson, market strategist at D.A. 
Davidson & Company. 
"The underwriters are confident, the issuing companies are confident and given that China Life is an international company, it signifies a global comfort level with the market."
A third company, Universal Technical Institute, which provides technical education training, rose 30 percent on the New York Stock Exchange. 
Its shares closed at $26.35, up from the initial price of $20.50.
Although initial offerings were more for institutions like Wall Street, the spillover will reach retail investors as more public offerings come through next year, Mr. Dickson said.
"It certainly is a good sign for the market, a reflection that the market environment has improved," a floor trader, Ted Weisberg, of Seaport Securities, said.
David Menlow, president of IPOfinancial.com, a research firm, said the activity yesterday "points clearly to the fact that I.P.O.'s never really went away, they were lurking in the background during the uncertainty over the economy."
Companies are again going public, he said, and Wall Street has noticed, "but not with the same disregard for sober thinking."
Sal Morreale, who tracks initial offerings for Cantor Fitzgerald in Los Angeles, said: "This bodes well for '04. 
China Life is a tremendous I.P.O. and anything to do with China has been on fire. 
Remember, too, that Orbitz is not the leader in its industry, so for them to make a deal like this is very positive."
