
BESIDES the precautions that governments around the world are taking to fight the spread of severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS, travel companies, from airlines to cruise lines, have carried out their own procedures. 
Such precautions are most prevalent in Asian countries and in Canada, where outbreaks have been concentrated.
As of May 1, the World Health Organization cited four areas -- Canada, China (including Hong Kong and Taiwan), Singapore and Mongolia -- as places where SARS is actively being spread. 
The United States and Britain, which had been on the W.H.O.'s list of affected countries in April, were subsequently removed from it because no SARS cases had been detected for 20 days; Vietnam had been removed earlier. 
Twenty days is twice the incubation time for the virus, whose flulike symptoms include a high fever and debilitating fatigue.
Government officials in the nations most affected have had wide-ranging responses. 
At the extreme, entire regions are now off limits to foreign travelers; at a minimum, travelers must have their temperatures checked when they arrive and depart and get used to the sight of masks being worn routinely on Asian city streets.
Travelers heading to involved countries should stay in touch with tour companies, airlines, cruise lines and tourist agencies right up until departure; otherwise, they risk arriving and being sent back home.
The Chinese government has been most aggressive in blocking foreign tourists. 
On April 29, it banned foreign travelers from visiting Tibet, even though Tibet has not had a single case of SARS so far. 
Checkpoints have been set up on three main roads into Tibet to turn tourists back, according to the official National Tourism Administration.
The ban on individual travelers followed one that was already in place to keep tour groups out of Tibet. 
China also will not allow travelers to visit the central part of the country, and does not want them to go to rural areas.
China is one of a dozen Asian nations that have collectively vowed to take aggressive action, at seaports and airports, to fight the spread of SARS. 
In Hong Kong, arriving passengers can expect to have their temperature taken by health department officials at the city's main airport, at border crossings with China and at its principal ferry ports. 
By the middle of this month, Hong Kong expects to have 200 infrared scanning devices in place to monitor travelers' temperatures, in addition to testing them individually with thermometers.
Temperature checks are also in place at airports in Singapore, where tourism has been devastated. 
And screenings are now standard in India, where a handful of SARS cases had been reported through May 1. 
The government has begun checking the temperatures of all inbound air travelers.
The response to SARS is not confined to Asia. 
In the Mideast, the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain have barred travelers from Asian countries where SARS outbreaks have taken place. 
Last month, the World Health Organization lifted an advisory warning against travel to Toronto after Canadian officials convinced the organization that the ban was not justified, despite hospital closings and quarantines there. 
Canada is the only country outside Asia where deaths from SARS have occurred.
The travel industry is taking action as well. 
Last month, the International Council of Cruise Lines, which represents 16 member lines around the world, adopted a set of guidelines on SARS. 
All passengers on any of the lines must fill out a questionnaire on their recent travel history. 
The cruise lines designated Hong Kong, China, Vietnam and Singapore "areas of concern."
Passengers found to have visited those areas within 10 days of the departure of their cruise, or who have had close contact with someone suspected to have had SARS, would be denied boarding.
The organization also recommended that a ship's doctor screen passengers who had passed through Toronto, which the group considers to be an "area of increased screening," before they are allowed to board. 
Some member cruise lines are going further than the guidelines recommend. 
Crystal Cruises announced in late April that it would not board passengers who had passed through Toronto on the way to a cruise, at least until the end of May. 
And Norwegian Cruise Lines last month refused to let four passengers from Hong Kong board one of its ships in Honolulu, though none showed symptoms of SARS; Hawaiian state health officials said such measures were not warranted.
The cruise line association recommended that ships of participating lines keep an adequate supply of masks, gowns and sanitary gloves on board, in case a potential SARS case is discovered, and the ships also are expected to have sanitation equipment and disinfectants on board.
The issue of masks, gloves and disinfectants has been actively debated within the airline industry, since the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention issued its first bulletin to the airlines on March 15, alerting them to the existence of SARS. 
Airlines contend that there is no evidence that SARS is transmitted on airplanes, although an Asian flight attendant who contracted the disease is said to have spread it to family members and neighbors.
The outbreak has devastated Asian airlines. 
Cathay Pacific, based in Hong Kong, has cut its schedules by 45 percent from last year's levels amid speculation it might shut down completely because of low demand. 
Singapore Airlines has cut schedules by 25 percent and has told some staff members to take unpaid leaves, while Qantas, the Australian carrier, has reduced flights within Asia by 10 percent. 
American Airlines, which had hoped to base its recovery on expanding its international service, is postponing inauguration of service between Los Angeles and Tokyo.
The two major United States airlines that serve Asia, Northwest and United, are focusing their efforts primarily on flights within Asia. 
Both permit their flight crews to wear masks on flights within Asia. 
Masks are available at United ticket counters in China, Hong Kong, Taiwan and Singapore for passengers who request them, while flight attendants on Northwest will distribute them to passengers who ask.
That doesn't satisfy the Teamsters union or the Association of Flight Attendants, which represent cabin attendants at Northwest and United, respectively. 
They have asked the Department of Transportation to order the airlines to make masks and gloves available on flights between the United States and Asian countries, as well as those within Asia, but as of May 1 the government had said there was no need to do so.
That is not the case for Asian airlines, which have been handing out masks to boarding passengers for weeks now. 
The practice began on Thai Airlines in early March, and it was joined by a number of carriers including Singapore Airlines and Cathay Pacific.
The SARS situation is also prompting a number of American corporations to prohibit or severely limit business travel to Asia. 
Despite assurances from governments in Vietnam, Canada and elsewhere that it is now safe to visit, companies are slow to send their employees back, said Kevin P. Mitchell, chairman of the Business Travel Coalition, which represents corporate travel departments and business travelers.
A survey by Mr. Mitchell's group, conducted May 2, found that more than half would wait for a declaration from the World Health Organization that it is safe to return to Asia before they would dispatch business travelers there again.
