
Sometimes, bronze feels just like gold.
''It's kind of heavy, actually,'' said the American gymnast Joey Hagerty, just off the victory stand, as he lifted the medal from his chest after the men's team final.
This strange Olympian alchemy is based on low expectations, on the mediocrity predicted for a team whose two stalwarts had dropped out because of injuries.
For a powerful nation, the United States has a love affair with underdogs. 
America celebrates the little guys, the Hoosiers from the little town in Indiana who win the state championship, the miracle hockey team that beat the Soviets. 
Loves them more than Dream Teams.
And this bronze-medal team -- take it from the bouncy little guys, displaying their bronze medals and their hyperactive smiles -- was no Dream Team. 
This was a bunch of recruits slapped together, the starting lineup from Class AAA baseball that somehow qualified for the playoffs, the outsider that reaches the Final Four in college basketball.
Not only that, but this was a team right out of the old movies, the platoon with the youngster from Brooklyn and the youngster from the plains and the kid from the South, one from Column A, one from Column B. An all-American team. 
And it won a bronze medal in the team finals of gymnastics on Tuesday, behind China and Japan, and celebrated as if some magician had waved a wand and turned their bronze into gold.
They live in the shadow of the munchkins, the young women who draw the ratings back home, who win more medals, who get young girls into the gymnasiums with their parents and a checkbook. 
These smallish young men, muscles and all, are the warm-up act. 
And yesterday, they could have lighted all of Beijing with their energy.
''I just get hyped up,'' said Jonathan Horton, a mainstay of this patchwork team, the most emotional, bouncing around on the sideline. 
His enthusiasm was infectious, as he exhorted his teammates after he had hit his own routines.
They were not expected to win a medal here, not without Paul Hamm, who won the gold in the all-around in Athens in 2004; and not without Morgan Hamm, his twin, who had deep Olympic experience. 
Paul had to withdraw at the end of July because the broken bone in his right hand did not heal, and Morgan had to pull out two days before the Games because of an injured left ankle.
''Those guys contributed the most of anybody in history,'' Horton said. 
''The Hamms are irreplaceable athletes, but we had to say, 'Get off it.'
''
They could not put Paul's gold medal out there to compete, and they could not put Morgan's dossier in a uniform. 
They had to regroup, like in the old movies that America used to make before it became an ironic nation. 
You, you and you, front and center.
The last men standing included Kevin Tan, whose family is originally from China; and Raj Bhavsar, whose parents emigrated from the Gujarat region of India in the '60s; and Sasha Artemev, who was born in Russia. 
And by some bizarre coincidence, these were the three best Americans on the pommel horse, the last of the six disciplines on Tuesday. 
Only in America.
Chinese people listen politely when Americans talk about ourselves as a nation built on immigrants, some of them Chinese, of course. 
We can talk about our tangled family histories, the races and colors and ethnic groups all blending in a lot of family trees these days, united under something we call America. 
But here it was, the American dream, flipping around atop a pommel horse. 
Tan got hung up and received low grades. 
Bhavsar did not score well, either. 
But Artemev scored 15.350, just enough to hold off Germany.
''I'm just thinking about his routine, and let the math take care of itself,'' Kevin Mazeika, the head coach, said.
And as the figures flickered on the scoreboard, before they allowed themselves to celebrate, the Americans went over and hugged their friends and colleagues on the German team, who did not win a medal. 
They won their bronze with grace. 
They made their country proud.
''It's been a roller-coaster ride,'' said Tan, who stopped to include the Hamm brothers and David Durante, the last alternate, who did not get to compete.
''Morgan, Paul and Dave were out there today,'' he added.
Tan was listed as Kai Wen Tan on the scoreboard -- ''that's my name,'' he said, meaning he adopted Kevin the way so many young people in China are now Wendy or Steve. 
Tan understood how good the Chinese men are. 
He also understood what it meant for his team to be on the victory stand, and for him to be in China with a medal.
''I never thought, in my wildest dreams, I would be here,'' he said. 
''This is my heritage. 
To be able to do it in China is fantastic.''
He said it with the unaccented English of a Penn State grad, the all-American boy, albeit with a medal hanging around his neck. 
The medal had a bronze hue to it, but it glowed like a more precious metal.
