
Treasury Secretary Henry M. Paulson Jr. said Thursday that the economy was slowing toward moderate and sustained growth, but warned that it could be derailed if trade barriers were raised.
''Some politicians from both parties, reflecting what they are hearing from their constituents, are moving toward embracing further protectionism,'' Mr. Paulson said in remarks to the Economic Club of Washington.
''This is a worrisome trend,'' he added, and he pledged a renewed effort to make the case that ''economic isolationism'' potentially means fewer American jobs and lower living standards.
Mr. Paulson said government data issued on Wednesday that revised economic growth downward to an annual rate of 2.2 percent for the final three months of 2006, from an initial estimate of 3.5 percent, should be seen as a positive move toward slower and sustained expansion.
''I am watching developments carefully, and I believe that the U.S. economy is healthy,'' said Mr. Paulson, who is the Bush administration's chief economic spokesman.
But he cautioned that free trade was ''one of the cornerstones'' of American prosperity and acknowledged rising anger on Capitol Hill, particularly toward China.
''We are dissatisfied with the speed with which China is appreciating its currency, the value of which is not market-determined, and with China's intellectual property protections,'' Mr. Paulson said.
Mr. Paulson is to travel to Japan, South Korea and China next week, and his speech previewed some of the themes he might address there.
He said trade partners like Japan and Europe were showing signs of economic revival but needed to push harder on changes to their labor markets and to bolster growth to help shrink the United States trade gap.
Mr. Paulson said the United States had a strong comparative advantage in services trade, including banking and other financial services, and must push other countries to let more American companies in -- a pitch he probably will renew in China.
He urged Americans to spurn calls for trade protectionism, however, and noted that imports were pushing American companies to become more competitive and making more consumer goods available at cheaper prices.
