
Politicians here expressed satisfaction today at the menu of weapons being offered to Taiwan by the United States. 
But on the streets of the capital there was little response to a decision that had been anticipated with hope and worry.
In part, that is because there were few surprises: people expected President Bush to defer the sale of the Aegis combat radar system, while offering Taiwan many other items on its shopping list.
But beyond that, the military hardware issue is less momentous today than it would have been a few years ago. 
With capital flowing from this island's sputtering economy to a booming China at an accelerating rate, Taiwan's giant neighbor suddenly seems more of a threat commercially than militarily.
"Five years ago political tensions animated the relationship between Taiwan and China," said Yang Chao, editor of The Journalist, a magazine about politics. 
"But now Taiwanese people feel the existence of mainland China, almost physically, by the weight of the trade relationship."
This has left people feeling vulnerable, not to an assault by Chinese ships or troops, but to the pressure of doing business with an emerging economic powerhouse. 
American-made destroyers cannot prevent companies in Taiwan from building chip factories outside Shanghai.
"As long as China is not shooting missiles at us, there is a tendency to view it as an economic opportunity," said Wu Yu-shan, a political science professor at National Taiwan University. 
"The problem is that companies now believe that you have to invest outside Taiwan to survive."
The flow of investment to China coincides with a painful economic slowdown here. 
Exports are falling, output is slowing and the unemployment rate of nearly 4 percent is at its highest level since 1985. 
That has made Taiwan's many small-time stock traders extremely nervous.
"We don't really care which weapons the U.S. sells Taiwan," said Wei Chi-jiang, who was trading shares at a retail brokerage here. 
"What we care about is China's reaction. 
Almost all of Taiwan's investment has shifted to the mainland, so we really care about how they react."
Mr. Wei's comments were echoed by his fellow stock traders. 
Noting that Taiwan's leading companies have huge investments in China, they said it was more important to preserve the status quo than beef up Taiwan's security. 
Several expressed relief that Mr. Bush had not offered to sell their military the Aegis system because it would have provoked China.
"The U.S. shouldn't sell overly advanced weapons to Taiwan," said Joe Chao, a theater owner. 
"That could be terribly dangerous."
Mr. Chao said the issue was especially sensitive because of the election last year of Chen Shui-bian as Taiwan's president. 
The Chinese government is deeply suspicious of Mr. Chen, a longtime opposition leader, because his party formally espouses independence for Taiwan, which Beijing views as rightfully a part of China.
"It might be O.K. to sell weapons to a K.M.T. government," Mr. Chao said, using the initials for the Kuomintang, the Chinese name of the Nationalist Party, which ruled Taiwan before Mr. Chen took office. 
"But China doesn't think this government is stable."
Such views are common among business people. 
But the ties between Taiwan and the mainland extend beyond commerce. 
Tourists from Taiwan are streaming into the mainland, as are graduate students eager to study literature, economics and Chinese medicine at universities there.
"Many of my former students are now at Beida," said Professor Wu, using the nickname for Beijing University. 
"These are the kinds of societal links that are being forged, even as the political tension remains."
Professor Wu noted, though, that the muted reaction to the American decision was somewhat misleading. 
If the White House had suspended or radically scaled back the weapons program, he said, it would have been a rude shock to an island that depends on Washington to protect it.
Indeed, several people said they believed that Mr. Bush was likely to be more supportive of Taiwan than the Clinton administration simply because he had offered a more formidable array of weapons.
"It's good news," said Ling Shiang-shing, 36, an insurance saleswoman. 
"I'm glad that someone is willing to sell weapons to us."
President Chen has so far declined to comment on the decision. 
But members of his Democratic Progressive Party said it would raise the sagging confidence of investors -- perhaps even persuading them keep their money here.
"The local business community can feel that the U.S. stands behind us," said Parris Chang, a former adviser to Mr. Chen on security issues. 
"That kind of confidence may stem the flow of capital to China."
