
A China Eastern Airlines commuter plane crashed into a frozen lake in northern China on Sunday morning, killing all 53 people on board and 2 on the ground, state news media and the airline said.
The Bombardier CRJ-200 aircraft plunged into the lake in Nanhai Park just seconds after taking off from the city of Baotou in the Chinese region of Inner Mongolia. 
The Canadian-made commuter jet was filled to near capacity, with 47 passengers and 6 crew members, the airline said.
The official New China News Agency quoted witnesses as saying they saw the plane explode in a huge fireball just after takeoff. 
China's civil aviation authority said it had no preliminary information about the cause of the crash.
Since a streak of major accidents in the early 1990's, Chinese airlines have significantly improved their safety records even as air travel in the fast-growing economy has surged.
State news media recently reported that Chinese aircraft had flown five million consecutive hours without a fatal accident, a domestic record. 
The last aviation disaster occurred in May 2002, when a China Northern Airlines plane plunged into the ocean near Dalian, killing 112 people.
The Bombardier aircraft, which is operated by two pilots and is generally outfitted to carry 50 passengers, took off from Baotou at 8:20 a.m. in clear weather with temperatures of about 45 degrees Fahrenheit, state news media said.
The initial reports suggested that the plane burst into flames and began falling apart in midair after it had climbed only about 330 feet. 
There was no immediate indication as to whether the event that caused the crash was a major malfunction, a terrorist attack or some other problem onboard.
''Witnesses said that the plane broke into flaming fragments,'' the New China News Agency reported. 
''A house beside the park was damaged by the falling aircraft and several boats nearby were scorched.''
Baotou is a rust-belt industrial city about 370 miles northwest of Beijing. 
The plane was en route to the eastern city of Shanghai, where it had been due to land at 11 a.m.
State news media quoted firefighters as saying that the wreckage was still ablaze 30 minutes after smashing into the ice-filled lake. 
By afternoon, the authorities said they had recovered the remains of 43 people on the plane.
The airline reported that there was one foreigner, an Indonesian, among the passengers. 
The news agency said one of the Chinese onboard was the chairman of a local company listed on the Shanghai Stock Exchange, but provided no other details.
China Eastern said it had at least temporarily grounded its other Bombardier aircraft.
