
The images of Secretary of State Colin L. Powell and Chinese leaders beaming at each other in their meetings this weekend, and a rare interview with the secretary broadcast today by Chinese state television, illustrate just how quickly the roller coaster relationship between the United States and China can turn.
Only three months ago, the two countries were snarling at each other over a downed American spy plane. 
But the message conveyed by all the bonhomie on Saturday was that, for the moment at least, those in the Bush administration who want to work with China are in the ascendancy.
After completion of his first official trip to China, Secretary Powell underscored that longer-term interests made steadier relations between China and the United States likely, even beyond the planned visit by President Bush to China in October.
"Washington is not in a confrontational mode," the secretary told Chinese Central Television in an interview broadcast before he arrived in Australia, where he is to hold talks on the state of the alliance with the United States.
And repeatedly, as he moved through Asia, Secretary Powell said that China "is a nation that need not be seen as an enemy."
For Washington, the reasons for wanting a good relationship with China are many. 
The secretary said he told Chinese leaders that the United States wanted to strengthen economic and trade ties and work with them to reduce the potential for conflicts in the region.
"I was particularly impressed that they reinforced their view that America does belong in the Pacific -- in the Asia-Pacific region -- and they welcome American presence as a stabilizing factor," he said.
The secretary said that the Chinese had begun to reduce their aggressive tailing of American reconnaissance flights along the Chinese coastline.
At the same time, the secretary, who is a former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, made clear that he was not oblivious to China's defense buildup, or to the possibility of a confrontation over Taiwan. 
"I would expect the Chinese military to modernize and transform itself and to use some of its newfound wealth to do that," he said before leaving for China. 
"This is not shocking or surprising to me."
But Secretary Powell's relatively sanguine view toward China is not held uniformly in the Bush administration, particularly at the Pentagon, where the predominant view is of the need to contain China.
China's buildup of missiles opposite Taiwan and its purchase of new fighter jets and Kilo-class submarines from Russia are seen by the Pentagon as an effort to achieve military superiority in the strait facing Taiwan, which the United States is committed to defending.
One goal of the military buildup, according to military analysts, is to stop the United States intervening if Beijing decides to use force to prevent Taiwan from declaring independence.
While Secretary Powell was heading to China last week, Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld, in an interview with The Washington Times, a newspaper with a strong anti-China editorial policy, spoke of moving United States naval and air forces closer to Asia, in case of conflicts over Taiwan or North Korea.
"I've always felt that weakness is provocative," he was quoted as saying, "that it kind of invites people to do things that they otherwise wouldn't think about doing."
But the two broadly defined China camps in the administration -- the "engagers" and the "containers" -- are not neatly divided between the State Department and the Pentagon.
At the State Department, the under secretary of state for arms control, John R. Bolton, who has strong ties to Taiwan, is viewed as believing in the necessity of containing China.
In Vice President Dick Cheney's office, the chief of staff, I. Lewis Libby, signed a 1999 letter that called for an unambiguous defense of Taiwan in the event of an attack or blockade.
Despite Secretary Powell's optimism, David Shambaugh, a China expert at George Washington University and the Brookings Institution, said he saw the containment camp eventually prevailing. 
Those who want to engage are in the minority in the administration, he noted. 
Just as important, he said, as the administration presses ahead with its plans for a missile defense, China is likely to move forward with a rapid buildup of long-range missiles.
Then there are China's human rights practices, a theme in Secretary Powell's talk Saturday, when he got a firsthand taste of China's censorship. 
The television broadcast was cut to eliminate some references he made to the need for China to improve its human rights.
But the censors did let stand the secretary's description of the United States' human rights shortcomings and the progress in his lifetime. 
"America is a country that has had its problems over the years with respect to human rights," he said. 
"I'm a perfect example of it. 
As a black man 40 years ago it would have been unthinkable for me to dream about becoming secretary of state, but here I am."
The secretary's handling of recent human rights cases in China and his announcement that a formal human rights dialogue would resume with the Chinese quickly drew heated criticism from some Republicans.
The recent release of two Chinese-born scholars with American residency who had been convicted of espionage was an easy gift by the Chinese, they said.
"Can it be that the Bush administration's only response to the arrest, jailing, phony conviction, and then deportation of American citizens and American residents is: Thank you for cleaning up the mess?"
Robert Kagan and William Kristol, editors of The Weekly Standard, wrote in the current issue. 
"Is there no cost to the Chinese for such behavior?"
