
As Secretary of State, Colin L. Powell probably enjoyed his most triumphant moment in November 2002 with the unanimous approval of a resolution by the United Nations Security Council demanding that Iraq comply with weapons inspections or face the prospect of war.
Within months, however, his reputation started eroding. 
Anger over the war, over the failure to find the weapons he had spoken of and over the shattered credibility of the weapons intelligence all took their toll. 
Then came indignation within the State Department that its own elaborate plans to secure and reconstruct Iraq had been spurned by the Pentagon -- just one of many instances when Mr. Powell was outmaneuvered by Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld.
On Monday, Mr. Powell made it clear that although he had voluntarily resigned from his job, there had been no effort by President Bush to ask him to change his mind.
At his news conference on Monday, speaking of his conversations about his future with the president, Mr. Powell said: ''We had pretty much come to our mutual agreement without anybody having to make any offer, counteroffers, anything like that. 
We knew where we were heading.''
Supporters of Mr. Powell say that he has not received the credit he deserves for navigating the administration's diplomacy in the Middle East and improving relations with Russia, China, India and Pakistan. 
Nor, they say, has it been recognized that he has pressed successfully for diplomacy in dealing with the nuclear threats posed by Iran and North Korea.
''Whenever Bush got into a ditch, they turned to Colin Powell to help them out,'' said a friend of Mr. Powell. ''It's not just Iraq, or North Korea, or China, but you name it. 
It's satisfying and fulfilling to do that kind of job. 
But the day-in and day-out pounding that comes with it is not something you do forever.''
Few cabinet officers have entered any administration with so much fanfare and so many soaring expectations.
During the Persian Gulf war of 1991 under the first President Bush, Mr. Powell was the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, giving pungent and tough-minded briefings on the progress on the battlefield that brought him into every American household.
After serving briefly under President Bill Clinton, he retired and wrote a riveting book, ''My American Journey,'' telling of his upbringing as the son of immigrant parents from the Caribbean who grew up in New York City, went to City College and had a career serving in Vietnam and Europe in the Army.
The book sold two million copies, and Mr. Powell was such a success on the lecture circuit that he was mentioned as a candidate for president or vice president -- and excited speculation about whether he would run as a Republican or a Democrat. 
After he passed up a chance to run, he was at the top of the list for Secretary of State for the president who was elected in 2000.
When Mr. Powell took office, the expectation was that he would set the course for American foreign policy. 
The first sign of problems came when he announced that the new administration would build on the diplomacy with North Korea set in the Clinton administration, only to be undercut by the White House.
He also argued in favor of continuing sanctions on Iraq, saying that they were doing the job in keeping Saddam Hussein under control.
But then came Sept. 
11, 2001, which occurred as Mr. Powell was traveling to South America. 
He returned to a country changed and an administration newly determined to set as its highest priority making war first in Afghanistan and then in Iraq.
A friend said recently that it was not as if Mr. Powell opposed those wars. 
''The problem is that they were not his priorities,'' the friend said. 
''They were somebody else's priorities.''
Mr. Powell, who preferred diplomacy by telephone rather than traveling overseas to meet with foreign leaders, succeeded in putting together an international coalition for the Afghan war, a high-water mark, and then in getting international backing for the United Nations Security Council resolution authorizing war with Iraq.
He has also worked with European and Arab allies to get Mr. Bush to endorse a Middle East peace plan, known as the road map, aimed at establishing a Palestinian state next to Israel, and to begin an effort earlier this year to spread democracy through the Arab world.
Though the Middle East peace efforts have faltered, Arab leaders say Mr. Powell is the only member of the Bush administration who understands the priority they attach to the issue as essential to improving American standing in the Muslim world.
But it has been the war in Iraq that has given his term its distinctive character.
Mr. Powell let it be known through the journalist Bob Woodward, for example, that he had harbored private misgivings about the war, a tactic that angered loyalists to Mr. Bush at the White House and Pentagon who saw the disclosures as a self-serving attempt to distance himself from the administration's troubles.
Even Mr. Powell's popularity in the United States and around the world has worked against him, setting off what some officials said was a certain resentment from Mr. Bush.
One lingering mystery was whether Mr. Powell's eagerness to leave was mirrored by a White House just as eager for him to go.
He said Monday that he had always indicated to the president that he wanted to serve only one term and that in private meetings they had been discussing that prospect for a year or so.
''As we got closer to the election and the immediate aftermath of the election, it seemed the appropriate time, and we were in mutual agreement that it was the appropriate time for me to move on,'' he said.
An aide added, ''He never asked to stay, nor was he asked to stay.''
Mr. Powell has said many times that his favorite secretary of state was George C. Marshall, in part because he was a former general who declined to resign even when his advice not to recognize Israel in 1948 was not taken at the White House.
But Mr. Powell and his aides also say it is simply untrue that he opposed war in Iraq and then decided against resigning because he believed that it would have been presumptuous for him to do so. 
Even Mr. Woodward's book says that he never flatly told Mr. Bush that he was against going to war.
On Monday morning, after months of speculation about his plans, Mr. Powell opened his staff meeting by saying, ''Here's the news.''
He told aides that he had given Mr. Bush his resignation on Friday, that the two had discussed it for months and that ''it shouldn't be a surprise to any of you.''
He abruptly left after turning the meeting over to his deputy, Richard L. Armitage, who observed the stunned silence and commented, ''He sure knows how to take the air out of a room.''
A colleague said any sadness in Mr. Powell's announcement arose from the might-have-beens that are inevitable in government service.
''If the president had asked him to leave sooner or asked him to stay later, it might have been different, but that didn't happen,'' he said. 
''Let's face it, there is always unfinished business in foreign policy. 
You always leave with a lot of things undone.''
