
Tyler Cowen, now:
Foreign governments, of course, drew the obvious lesson from our debacle — and from our choice of target. 
The United States invaded hapless Iraq, not nuclear-armed North Korea. 
To the real rogues, the fall of Baghdad was proof positive that it’s more important than ever to acquire nuclear weapons — and if the last superpower is bogged down in Iraq while its foes slink toward getting the bomb, so much the better. 
Iran, among others, has taken this lesson to heart. 
The ironic legacy of the war to end all proliferation will be more proliferation.
Me, almost five years ago:
So put yourself in Kim Jong Il’s shoes. 
The Bush administration has denounced you. 
It broke off negotiations as soon as it came into office. 
Last year, though you were no nastier than you had been the year before, George W. Bush declared you part of the ”axis of evil.”
…
On the other hand, Mr. Bush hasn’t gone after you yet, though you are much closer to developing weapons of mass destruction than Iraq. 
(You probably already have a couple.) And you ask yourself, why is Saddam Hussein first in line?
He’s no more a supporter of terrorism than you are: the Bush administration hasn’t produced any evidence of a Saddam-Al Qaeda connection. 
Maybe the administration covets Iraq’s oil reserves; but it’s also notable that of the three members of the axis of evil, Iraq has by far the weakest military.
So you might be tempted to conclude that the Bush administration is big on denouncing evildoers, but that it can be deterred from actually attacking countries it denounces if it expects them to put up a serious fight. 
What was it Teddy Roosevelt said?
Talk trash but carry a small stick?
Your own experience seems to confirm that conclusion. 
Last summer you were caught enriching uranium, which violates the spirit of your 1994 agreement with the Clinton administration. 
But the Bush administration, though ready to invade Iraq at the slightest hint of a nuclear weapons program, tried to play down the story, and its response — cutting off shipments of fuel oil — was no more than a rap on the knuckles. 
In fact, even now the Bush administration hasn’t done what its predecessor did in 1994: send troops to the region and prepare for a military confrontation.
So here’s how it probably looks from Pyongyang:
The Bush administration says you’re evil. 
It won’t offer you aid, even if you cancel your nuclear program, because that would be rewarding evil. 
It won’t even promise not to attack you, because it believes it has a mission to destroy evil regimes, whether or not they actually pose any threat to the U.S. 
But for all its belligerence, the Bush administration seems willing to confront only regimes that are militarily weak.
The incentives for North Korea are clear. 
There’s no point in playing nice — it will bring neither aid nor security. 
It needn’t worry about American efforts to isolate it economically — North Korea hardly has any trade except with China, and China isn’t cooperating. 
The best self-preservation strategy for Mr. Kim is to be dangerous. 
So while America is busy with Iraq, the North Koreans should cook up some plutonium and build themselves some bombs.
But of course, realizing all this when it might have made a difference was being shrill. 
To be considered a man of sound judgment, you have to have waited until after the Bush disasters to realize what a bad leader he was.
