
Prime Minister Zhu Rongji, entering the final year of his term, touted his record of economic achievement today but called the low incomes of 800 million rural citizens a "big headache."
Mr. Zhu, who is 73, was named prime minister in 1998 for a five-year term after serving as a deputy prime minister since 1991. 
He is almost certain to step down next March along with several other high officials.
Today at his yearly news conference, which followed the 10-day meeting of China's toothless legislature, Mr. Zhu appeared ready to stake out his legacy, at times glossing over setbacks. 
He described his government's economic record as remarkable and said he felt pride in his role in helping China sail through the Asian financial crisis of 1997-98.
Mr. Zhu was eager to counter the increasingly voiced worry that large-scale deficit spending, which the government has used to prop up growth through recent tough years, might endanger stabilityI. 
Answering a Chinese reporter's obviously prearranged question, Mr. Zhu said he had been stung by a Hong Kong newspaper headline that pronounced him the "deficit prime minister."
"I never accept honorary titles or degrees," Mr. Zhu said, in one of several flashes of wry humor. 
He said that government debt remained well within safe levels and that the extra spending would leave his successor with valuable assets as well as debts, in the form of new highways, railroads and power plants.
"If we had not adopted a pro-active fiscal policy and prudent monetary policy," he said, "the Chinese economy would have collapsed."
Continued growth without inflation, he said, proves that "our fiscal policies have been just right."
The government has set a target of 7 percent growth for 2002, close to the rate of recent years, although critics say China's growth figures are inflated by false reporting.
Mr. Zhu acknowledged a widening gap between rich and poor, which has become a source of popular unrest, but he said it was unavoidable during China's transition from a planned economy. 
He said that with proper social and taxation policies, the problem would ease.
Asked what his biggest headaches as prime minister had been, Mr. Zhu said, "To be honest, I have headaches all day."
But the biggest single challenge, he said, was bolstering the incomes of farmers, many of whose incomes have stagnated or declined in recent years, even as an urban minority becomes wealthy.
The problem, not easily solved in the overcrowded countryside, will intensify as China opens its markets under World Trade Organization rules. 
American agricultural goods will enter "on a large scale," Mr. Zhu said, so Chinese farmers will find prices falling further. 
"This is giving me a big headache," he said.
When he took office in 1998, Mr. Zhu made ambitious pledges to bolster growth while radically restructuring state enterprises and banks.
He vowed to slash government payrolls, phase out government-owned housing and replace the shredded Communist safety net.
By most accounts, progress in several of those areas has been halting. 
But today Mr. Zhu said that "all the tasks have basically been completed in four years."
"I think the government has made good on its promises," he said.
The prime minister, who is known for his severe manner with incompetent officials, took issue with another Hong Kong newspaper article that said he was best at "banging on the table and staring at people."
"It's true that I bang on the table," Mr. Zhu said. 
"I don't scare the ordinary people. 
I only scare corrupt officials."
