
After vocal objections by some of its alumni, the Nieman Foundation at Harvard has dropped a plan to train Chinese government officials on how to deal with the news media when the Olympic Games are held in Beijing in 2008.
Bob Giles, curator of the foundation, said yesterday he had a change of heart because of concerns from a constituency that had originally supported him -- the current class of Nieman fellows. 
They worried that a controversy over the training session could damage the Nieman name, he said.
The Nieman Foundation had been asked to participate by the Fairbank Center for East Asian Research at Harvard, which was planning a weeklong session at the end of June for 40 Chinese officials. 
Ezra F. Vogel, a research professor at Harvard and former director of the Fairbank Center, who spearheaded the idea of the training session, said yesterday that he was postponing the session, because of the foundation's withdrawal and because the Chinese officials had not paid for their hotel rooms and the financing from the Chinese government was uncertain.
Mr. Giles had told alumni meeting in Cambridge on Sunday that he saw the Nieman's participation in the session as a chance to convey the values of a free press to the Chinese. 
Several alumni protested, saying the Nieman program should not be helping a repressive government learn techniques that could thwart Western journalists from doing their jobs.
Their discontent grew. 
Two prominent alumni from the class of 1961 -- Eugene Roberts, a former managing editor of The New York Times and former executive editor of The Philadelphia Inquirer, and Jack Nelson, a former Washington bureau chief of The Los Angeles Times -- sent out a petition urging the foundation to cancel its participation.
Mr. Roberts said the petition initially went to about 250 people, about one-third of all living Nieman alumni, and 120 responded immediately, with none supporting the foundation's involvement.
''It was such a sharp departure from the traditions of the Nieman program, to be engaging with a government,'' Mr. Roberts said.
At the same time, Mr. Giles met with the current class of fellows, who had supported his decision to join the training session. 
They had also backed him in the face of previous criticism by some alumni that he had diverted the program from its core mission of helping midcareer journalists recharge their batteries.
But on Tuesday, Mr. Giles said, the current fellows expressed concern about the Chinese sessions.
''This is a group I worked with for a year, and they respect me,'' Mr. Giles said. 
''They could see this emerging and continuing controversy that had the possibility of damaging the reputation of our program. 
Nothing is more important to me than that. 
So I decided last night to withdraw.''
Professor Vogel said the Chinese already know how to muzzle the press. 
His goal was to help them understand what Western journalists would expect at the Olympics and how to work with them. 
''The sad paradox is that our goals are the same,'' he said of those who objected.
