
49
The number of passengers traveling by bus between the two capitals of the disputed province of Kashmir -- Muzaffarabad in the sector held by Pakistan and Srinagar in the Indian-held sector -- the first to make the 110-mile trip in 58 years.
Kashmir has been a flashpoint in two wars and innumerable skirmishes between India and Pakistan, and the Indian sector has been engulfed in an insurgency for 15 years. 
Now that both countries are believed to have nuclear weapons, neither wants tensions to flare up into combat again -- but neither has been willing to offer many concessions for peace, either. 
The resumption of the bus run is about all the countries have to show from more than a year of peace talks.
Thirty people made the trip from Muzaffarabad to Srinagar, but only 19 traveled the other way; 10 more scheduled passengers dropped out after a terrorist attack on the government tourist center in Srinagar.
23
The number of amphibious assault ships built by the Chinese navy in the last two years, capable of landing tanks and heavy equipment on a beach in Taiwan.
China has insisted since 1949 that Taiwan is a breakaway province, not a separate country, and it has threatened military action if Taiwan ever declared independence, a step many Taiwanese now favor. 
But in the judgment of many Pentagon planners, China has not been able to mount a large-scale invasion of Taiwan -- until now.
Military analysts say there are no signs that an attack is imminent. 
But China has been rapidly building up its military, with new jets, submarines and other weapons as well as the ships, and raising the rhetorical temperature as well -- developments the Bush administration cites in lobbying against plans to loosen restrictions on arms sales to China.
1
The number of teeth that the earliest known senior citizen had left at the end of his life, according to a report in Nature.
Scientists studying the fossilized skull of a man who lived in the Caucasus 1.7 million years ago said he had lived for at least two years with nothing but his left canine to chew with -- a sign, they said, that primitive humans were compassionate and took care of their elders. 
The man could not have survived that long, the researchers said, without help from younger, healthier fellow Homo erectus hunters, in an era when raw meat was the staple food and few lived to be his age (about 40).
Other scientists said the compassion hypothesis was a bit of a stretch and that more evidence would be needed.
54
Number of nations sending teams to Saudi Arabia to compete in the first Islamic Solidarity Games, which opened last Friday in Mecca and run until April 20.
The games, also called the Muslim Olympics, feature 18 individual and team sports and some 6,500 athletes, all of them male. 
Saudi Arabia is footing the entire cost of the games, estimated at $21 million, in the hope of broadening the world's image of the kingdom beyond oil, religious fundamentalism and regional conflict.
Admission to all events is free, but strict Saudi visa requirements mean that only a handful of foreign spectators will attend.
48
The percentage of United States imports made up of the products and services of American companies' foreign operations, as of January.
In a sense, the United States gets nearly half its imports from itself.
The country has defied expectations by continuing to post record trade deficits despite the weak dollar, which ought to narrow the deficits by making American exports more attractive to foreign buyers while raising the prices of foreign goods here.
Oil, which trades globally in dollars, is a big reason why the deficits have not narrowed. 
But so is a growing tendency to assemble American finished products out of parts and components made overseas, often by American companies.
This trend, which involves the interests of importers, exporters and domestic manufacturers, complicates any effort by Washington to shape a policy to reduce the trade deficit without doing American companies more harm than good.
