
Scott Layden smiled and spoke as if he had just secured a genius for the Knicks' bench next season. 
Without a hint of doubt or regret, he talked of his decision to extend Don Chaney's contract as if no defense was necessary.
"Having the opportunity to work with Coach Chaney since December -- we work together every day -- and seeing what a great communicator he is, seeing how he prepares his team, I felt it was the right decision," Layden said. 
"I believe that Don Chaney is the right person to coach this team. 
I believe in Coach Chaney and I'm very excited that this day is here."
Knicks fans can only hope that Layden, the Knicks president and general manager, has seen something in Chaney that has not been evident to most of them during his three-month tenure as coach. 
Since replacing Jeff Van Gundy, who stunningly resigned on Dec. 
8, Chaney has guided the Knicks to a 12-27 record chock full of humiliating, exasperating and almost unbelievable losses.
Still, the Knicks gave Chaney a one-year contract extension yesterday with a team option for a second year. 
Including the unguaranteed second year, the package is worth about $3 million.
James L. Dolan, the chairman of Madison Square Garden, joined Layden and Chaney at the news conference, and Dolan made it clear that it was Layden's decision to extend Chaney's contract. 
He said Layden made the decision before embarking on a scouting trip to China last Wednesday.
"We have great confidence in Don's ability to lead the Knicks," Dolan said. 
"We appreciate Don's willingness to step into a challenging position in December and believe that he deserves the chance to return as head coach for a full season."
The Knicks' decision seems an admission that the club is ready to rebuild. 
Why bring in a high-priced head coach to oversee what will be a season or two of struggle?
Layden did not go that far yesterday, but he said the timing of the announcement had a lot to do with the draft. 
With the Knicks likely to have a high lottery pick, Layden felt it was necessary to have a head coach in place to help make what could be one of the franchise's most important decisions of the past decade.
Despite speculation that the Knicks had talked to other coaches, including Doc Rivers, a team official said that the team had not considered anyone else.
Layden also said -- without using the word rebuilding -- that the Knicks were committed to doing whatever it took to improve the team over the off-season. 
Both he and Dolan said it was important to have a man of character and integrity -- which, by all accounts, Chaney is -- out front during such a period of transition.
"While everyone would like us to reveal the plan and put a plan out on the table, I don't think it's wise to discuss those strategies publicly," Layden said.
Layden and Chaney, who has a 277-409 career record that includes coaching positions with four teams, believe the Knicks will improve by simply going through a training camp with Chaney. 
They believe it was difficult for the players to adjust from the demanding ways of Van Gundy to the calm and reserved Chaney in midseason.
"Training camp makes a season because that's the biggest juncture of the N.B.A. where you have your players in an isolated situation and you get their mind-set together so they know exactly where we're headed and how we're going to play. 
It's very difficult to do that midway through the season."
The players, all of whom are relieved to be on the team after the trading deadline, realize that some of them may not be around for Chaney's first training camp.
"I don't know if I'm going to be back here," Latrell Sprewell said, referring to the possibility of a trade. 
"I don't know what the situation's going to be. 
I think that's just where you're at when you're going through a tough season. 
I don't know anything about what the roster is going to be like. 
Not saying that I don't want to be here. 
I just don't know what management's going to do. 
Who knows?"
And in regard to Chaney's future: Who knew?
REBOUNDS
During his 72 hours in China, SCOTT LAYDEN was one of many N.B.A. executives who watched YAO MING, the 7-foot-6 center, dominate a game. 
"Yao Ming is a very talented guy who has a lot of potential," Layden said. 
"It was a very positive scouting trip. 
He's got a lot of skills, a lot of talent, and I was impressed with him."
Yao is expected to be the first or second pick in the draft.
