
Days after seeking an arrest warrant for the Sudanese president, the prosecutor at the International Criminal Court said on Thursday that his next case on the conflict in Darfur would focus on the rebels thought to be responsible for a deadly attack on international peacekeepers in September.
The prosecutor, Luis Moreno-Ocampo, already has two cases against figures within or aligned with the Sudanese government. 
His latest, the pursuit of President Omar Hassan al-Bashir on charges of genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity, has prompted criticism from African countries, as well as China and Russia.
At a closed session of the United Nations Security Council on Wednesday, diplomats said, Russia and China expressed concerns that the prosecutor's move against Mr. Bashir would hinder efforts to bring peace to the region, potentially opening the door to intervention by the Security Council.
''There were two camps,'' one diplomat said of Wednesday's talks, ''those who were implying but not saying that the Council should defer the investigation or the warrants, and those who were saying the independence of the court had to be protected.''
By speaking about his investigation into wrongdoing by rebels, Mr. Moreno-Ocampo may be able to soften the criticism of his action against Mr. Bashir, some analysts said. 
Richard Dicker, director of the international justice program at Human Rights Watch, said that Mr. Moreno-Ocampo's remarks were ''important in demonstrating the impartiality of his efforts to look at alleged crimes committed by all parties to the conflict.''
''He's not just going after the government; he's going after the rebel contingents,'' he said.
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo seemed to hint at this himself, telling reporters: ''When you go to the Arab world or the African world, as you know, they are tired of double standards. 
They are tired of justice for my enemies and protection for my friends.''
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, who spoke at a news conference on Thursday to mark the 10th anniversary of the treaty establishing the international court, said he had the names of two commanders suspected of being responsible for the attack, in which 10 African Union peacekeepers were killed. 
He urged the rebels to cooperate in the investigation.
He suggested that he would also look into a recent attack in which seven members of the joint United Nations-African Union peacekeeping force were killed.
