
Russia's president, Vladimir V. Putin, proposed a new way to help resolve the standoff over Iran's nuclear program during an extraordinary meeting with Iran's supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, said the country's chief nuclear negotiator on Wednesday.
The negotiator, Ali Larijani, told reporters that Mr. Putin, who was granted an audience with Ayatollah Khamenei on Tuesday evening, ''offered a special proposal.''
Neither the Iranians nor the Russians would disclose any details, but Mr. Larijani said the Iranian side was studying it.
''One of the issues he brought up was his view on the nuclear issue,'' Mr. Larijani said, according to the ISNA news agency. 
''We are reviewing it now.''
State-run television and news agencies quoted Ayatollah Khamenei as telling Mr. Putin, ''We will think about what you said and about your proposal,'' even as he added that Iran was ''determined to provide our country's need for nuclear energy.''
Mr. Putin's visit highlighted the fact that Russia seems to be increasingly distancing itself from the United States and the Europeans on a strategy to curb Iran's nuclear program. 
While those nations have sought to impose new Security Council sanctions on Iran, the governments of Russia and China have resisted, arguing that more time is needed.
Earlier, Moscow proposed to enrich uranium in Russia for use in Iranian reactors, assuring that Iran would not produce the highly enriched uranium needed for nuclear weapons. 
Tehran rejected the idea as an impingement on its sovereignty.
During his visit, which included a meeting with President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, Mr. Putin also warned the West against a military attack on Iran, stressing that Tehran had a right to peaceful nuclear energy. 
He also said that the Russian-built nuclear power plant at Bushehr, in southern Iran, where construction has been slowed by a dispute over payments, would be finished as scheduled.
Underscoring the friendly nature of the visit, a joint statement spoke of ''the closeness of Russian and Iranian positions over the key world questions and the development of cooperation to establish a world order that is more just.''
It also stressed the need to solve the nuclear issue as quickly as possible ''through politics and diplomacy''; committed Russia to speed up discussions for the construction and sale of Tupolev 214 and Tupolev 334 airliners; and spoke of increased cooperation in energy and aerospace.
Russia is eager to deepen its diplomatic and economic relations with Iran. 
Iran's Fars news service reported that Mr. Putin said during his meeting with Ayatollah Khamenei that Russia was ready to ''expand ties without limitations.''
As Iran's most senior official, the ayatollah has final word on state matters, and his decision to see Mr. Putin was regarded as significant in itself. 
Even Mohamed ElBaradei, the director of the International Atomic Energy Agency, the United Nations nuclear watchdog, did not see Ayatollah Khamenei when he visited here last year.
Mr. Putin has recently met with Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany, President Nicolas Sarkozy of France and Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice.
Russia and China hold veto power on the Security Council, and Iran is relying on both countries, which have important trade ties with Iran, to oppose another round of sanctions. 
Moscow has already voted for two sets of milder sanctions. 
The United States and European countries have said that they will impose tougher sanctions on Iran if it refuses to suspend its sensitive uranium enrichment activities.
Mr. Larijani is scheduled to discuss Iran's nuclear case with Javier Solana, the European Union's foreign policy chief, in Rome next Tuesday.
An American official who was part of a delegation that visited the Kremlin last week suggested that Mr. Putin intimated in private that he had concerns about Iran's nuclear program as well.
''I will tell you that what we heard last week once the cameras left was not bad,'' said the official, who asked not to be identified because he was not authorized to speak on the record. 
''I cannot rule out that he delivered a message that we would like.''
He also said that the construction delays at Bushehr were not coincidental and were part of Russia's strategy of proceeding slowly with aid to Iran.
In Jerusalem, Ms. Rice answered questions about Mr. Putin's visit to Iran by saying that Russia continued to back the diplomatic process to review the possibility of new sanctions following reports next month by Dr. ElBaradei and Mr. Solana. Russia, along with China, opposed a new round of sanctions at a meeting in New York last month.
Neither Mr. Solana nor Dr. ElBaradei was informed by the Russians about Mr. Putin's proposal, officials in both their offices said. 
Ms. Rice discussed Iran extensively during meetings in Moscow last week, including one with Mr. Putin, who she said supported the goal of preventing Iran from developing nuclear weapons. 
''I saw no evidence that Russia intends to do anything but stay on that path we laid out,'' she said, appearing with Israel's foreign minister, Tzipi Livni.
But clearly Russia has emerged as at least a semi-independent broker in the nuclear crisis. 
Just hours after Mr. Putin left Iran, Israel announced that Prime Minister Ehud Olmert would visit Russia on Thursday for what one official described as a ''last-minute, urgent meeting.''
U.S. Ties Missile Shield to Iran
BRUSSELS, Oct. 
17 (Agence France-Presse) -- The United States could change its approach to developing a missile shield if Iran were to suspend uranium enrichment in its nuclear program, a senior State Department official said on Wednesday.
The official, Assistant Secretary of State Daniel Fried, said that United States officials had explained Washington's stance to Russia in talks at NATO headquarters to help allay fears that the missile shield posed a threat to Russia. 
''Our real concern is not Russia,'' Mr. Fried told reporters in Brussels.
