
Declaring himself "1,000 percent happy" with his Russian rail trip, North Korea's leader, Kim Jong Il, bouncily converted a handshake with President Vladimir V. Putin into a three-peck Russian kiss as the two leaders met here today.
President Putin, dressed in a sober blue business suit, smiled evenly while Mr. Kim, in a khaki leisure suit, grinned for television cameras.
In Washington, Mr. Putin's meeting here today was seen by some conservatives as capping a monthlong series of contacts with the countries of President Bush's "axis of evil."
First, Moscow announced a plan to build five nuclear reactors in Iran. 
Then Russian officials disclosed plans to sign a five-year, $40 billion economic pact with Iraq.
The meeting here seemed to be driven partly by Russia's desire for economic development, partly by a desire to chart a foreign policy independent of Washington, and partly to humor an eccentric neighbor.
The North Korean invited himself to Russia last spring. 
Eventually, Mr. Putin responded, scheduling this six-day family vacation and work trip to Russia's Pacific Coast, setting aside this evening for a meeting and dinner with the North Korean leader.
Mr. Putin also met with 10 regional governors and lectured them on the need to use North Korean railroads to connect the Trans-Siberian Railway with South Korea's industrial heartland. 
"If we do not link the railways here, it will be done anyway, in a different place," he said, "through the territory of our esteemed and dearly beloved neighbor, the People's Republic of China."
Russian-North Korean bilateral trade has plummeted by 80 percent in the decade since the Soviet collapse, hitting $115 million in 2001 last year, according to the Russian Ministry for Economic Development. 
About two-thirds of North Korea's trade has been with this chronically depressed region.
But Moscow stands to reap billions of dollars in transit fees once North Korea opens its part of the railway and South Korean goods start pouring into Europe across Russia. 
Today, Mr. Kim came with a well-known energy-dominated wish list for foreign aid: shipments of coal, a nuclear power plant and the rebuilding of a Soviet-era oil refinery. 
But with Russia's economy now smaller than that of the Netherlands, Mr. Putin has moved Russia's foreign policy from aiding old allies to making money in deals with all comers.
With an economy 27 times the size of North Korea's, South Korea is the real prize on the peninsula. 
Next month, Russia is to sign a deal to sell South Korea about half a billion dollars' worth of tanks, helicopters, armored personnel carriers and ships. 
Separately, Russia is selling China about $2 billion worth of submarines, destroyers and aircraft.
Mr. Kim, in contrast, visited a jet fighter factory and a submarine factory this week. 
With his country essentially bankrupt, he left only admiring notes in the factory guest books but placed no orders. 
The only purchase announced during the trip was of 260 tractors made in Omsk.
In this port city, only a handful of North Korean flags were visible as pedestrians stood sullenly in the rain today, waiting for Mr. Kim to pass in his bulletproof stretch Mercedes. 
Thousands turned out last month when a United States Navy jazz band gave free Fourth of July concerts as part of visits by two ships.
Of Russia's goals in the Far East, Andrew M. Fox, the British chairman of an investment firm here who is trying to start an investment company in North Korea, said: "It would make sense for Putin to be reasonably friendly with the countries of so-called axis of evil. 
It keeps him a player on the world scene, it is a neighboring country where everybody speaks Russian."
This summer North Korea embarked on radical economic changes, devaluing its currency by 98 percent, largely abolishing a 50-year-old ration-card system and raising wages and prices as much as 500-fold.
This week, Russian officials justified Mr. Kim's visit by saying it would give him a chance to study Russia's shift from a Communist economy toward a market economy. 
But during his jaunt, which started Tuesday and is to end Saturday, there were no economists or major private business leaders on his agenda. 
Instead, it was largely standard fare, visiting a mix of factories and defense industries.
In Vladivostok, his exposure to the free market was limited to visiting a new shopping center and a bakery. 
After he left the bakery, a truck from his motorcade backed up to the front door and Russian workers loaded several dozen cakes for transport back to the North Korean's train.
