
President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia will seek to advance energy projects by Russia and China during a visit to China this week, officials said in Moscow over the weekend.
On a three-day visit to China, Mr. Putin will "emphasize the realization of large joint projects in the sphere of oil and gas," among other sectors, a close aide to Mr. Putin, Sergei Prikhodko, was quoted as saying by the Russian government's news agency, Ria-Novosti.
In particular, an oil pipeline project that would carry Russian oil from the Siberian city of Angarsk to Daqing in northeast China, is expected to move forward, said the Russian deputy foreign minister, Aleksandr Losyukov, in an interview with Russian news agency Itar-Tass. 
Mr. Losyukov said all the paperwork would be "officially approved" by the end of the year.
A spokesman for Viktor B. Khristenko, the deputy prime minister responsible for energy issues, was more cautious, saying only that the government was still considering signing off on the project. 
An executive at Transneft, Russia's pipeline monopoly, said his company had not prepared any information about the pipeline for Mr. Putin's visit, an indication that a larger agreement may not be signed this week.
Russia and China signed an agreement to study the pipeline project in September 2001. 
Since then, a Russian company, Yukos, has completed an investment study and is drawing up a detailed plan of the route.
Construction could begin as early as summer 2003, a Yukos spokesman, Roman Artemyev, said. 
The 1,400-mile pipeline will eventually carry 600,000 barrels of oil a day to northeast China, a region with waning oil reserves.
The project is one of several that Russia hopes to promote. 
A consortium led by BP that owns a large gas field called Kovykta in the Siberian region of Irkutsk has sought to secure contracts with China for the purchase of its gas. 
The project has been slow to proceed, mainly because, analysts said, China considers the import of Russian oil as a priority over gas.
"The bottom line is that now China obviously wants oil," said Philip Vorobyov, an analyst in the Moscow office of Cambridge Energy Research Associates. 
"Gas probably won't happen for a few years."
Still, China is undertaking a flagship project in the gas industry -- a gas pipeline that will stretch from western China to the country's more developed east. 
Russia's natural gas monopoly, Gazprom, is part of a consortium to build the pipeline. 
If the project succeeds, it will serve as a positive signal and could lead to China becoming a customer for Russian gas, Mr. Vorobyov said.
Russian oil and gas companies are looking for new markets as production rises. 
Growing markets in Asia are attractive, but large exports have been impossible because of transport difficulties. 
Most Russian oil is produced in West Siberia, far from Russia's eastern coast and Asian countries. 
Russia and China are not now linked by a pipeline.
Russia's minister of economics and trade, German O. Gref, said in comments carried by Russian agencies this weekend that "the realization of joint projects in the sphere of oil and gas, including the Russia-China oil pipeline, will increase trade flows by several billions of dollars."
While Mr. Khristenko said on Saturday that total trade flows between Russia and China could be $20 billion to $30 billion a year over the next several years, total trade between the two countries stood at just $10.7 billion in 2001.
