
The United States hit a record deficit of $195.1 billion in the first quarter in trade and capital flows with the rest of the world, the Commerce Department reported Friday. 
The news reignited worries that the economy cannot sustain the growing level of global debt.
If this pace continues, the United States' current account deficit could reach $780 billion this year, a sharp increase from last year's record of $617 billion.
The United States continued to attract foreign investments at relatively low interest rates, and the rate of growth in the trade imbalance has slowed. 
But the direction remains the same, and the overall current account deficit now stands at a 6.4 percent of gross domestic product, also a record.
''Clearly the current account deficit can't go on like this forever,'' said Daniel T. Griswold, director of the Cato Institute's center for trade policy studies, a conservative research group that has generally not worried about the United States' trade gap.
Economists agree that the drop in the value of the dollar is only beginning to help redress the trade imbalance, in part because China and Japan are enjoying what they see as significantly undervalued currencies. 
The Bush administration has been pressing China and other Asian nations to revalue their currencies.
The White House, in general, sees the widening current-account deficit as a sign of strength in the United States and weakness elsewhere.
''It shows overwhelmingly that the United States economy is showing remarkable strength compared to our European trading partners and generating a lot more income for Americans to buy a lot more foreign goods,'' said Tony Fratto, a Treasury Department spokesman.
According to this analysis, the responsibility for altering the trade imbalance lies with Europe and Japan, not the United States. 
Those foreign economies, officials argue, have to restructure their economies and start buying more American goods and consume more of what they produce domestically.
Rob Portman, the United States trade representative, met with Peter Mandelson, his European counterpart, on Friday ahead of the United States-European summit meeting on Monday. 
Both men tried to shift the emphasis away from recent trade disputes, like the lawsuits over subsidies paid to Boeing and Airbus, and instead promote the effectiveness of the overall trade relationship.
''We have so much in common,'' Mr. Portman said.
He was followed by Mr. Mandelson who said that the two men ''had not only a very constructive meeting but a very enjoyable meeting.''
Both men said they were still open to a negotiated settlement in the long-simmering dispute over government subsidies to Boeing and Airbus. 
Formal discussions on an agreement broke down last month, and both sides filed cases with the World Trade Organization. 
While the two officials did not rule out a deal, they offered few specifics about any talks.
''The channels of communication between us are open,'' Mr. Mandelson said.
In the meantime, however, the United States borrows, in essence, $2.1 billion every day to keep the economy afloat, according to the calculations of Stuart Hoffman, chief economist at PNC.
Senator Byron L. Dorgan, Democrat of North Dakota, said the deficit figure was reaching ''dangerous levels that are hurting this country's future.''
''This deficit manifests itself in the lives of American families every day with the loss of jobs overseas, lower wages and a feeling of less security,'' Mr. Dorgan contended.
Several economists said that while the figures remain disappointing, one of the reasons for the unexpectedly wide gap was a $3.3 billion increase in aid to other countries, in part a reflection of the relief sent to Southeast Asia after the tsunami hit last December.
''It's nothing to be cheerful about, but the magnitude of the relief payments and donations holds the potential to distort these figures,'' said Mark Vitner, a senior economist at Wachovia in Charlotte, N.C.
Many economists say the United States should save more and spend less, especially the federal government. 
Mr. Griswold of Cato said nothing in the budget should be immune from serious cuts, including the military budget and entitlements.
But Robert E. Scott, senior analyst at the Economic Policy Institute, a liberal research group, said that it was ''ludicrous to think the deficit is caused by a shortfall in savings.''
The deficit, he said, is caused by the nation's voracious appetite for foreign goods and its inability to sell enough overseas to balance those purchases. 
''Just to keep the gap from growing, exports would have to increase 78 percent faster than they actually did,'' Mr. Scott said. 
''That's the bad news; the wider the gap, the more difficult it is to turn this economy around.''
The argument about the cause of these deficits is spilling over into the debate over the Central American Free Trade Agreement, the centerpiece of the administration's trade agenda this year. 
Representative Benjamin L. Cardin, the Maryland Democrat and ranking member of the trade subcommittee of the Ways and Means Committee, said on Friday that the soaring deficit showed the administration's trade strategy was failing.
''It says we are still hemorrhaging,'' Mr. Cardin said. 
''We are still moving in the wrong direction and the size of the deficit raises serious questions about our ability to control our own destiny.''
