
EUROPE
EUROPEAN UNION -- European foreign ministers scheduled a rare emergency meeting for today to discuss a joint response, as officials expressed solidarity with the United States. 
The external relations commissioner, Chris Patten, called the attacks "the work of a madman."
BRITAIN -- British security forces across the world were placed on maximum alert. 
Prime Minister Tony Blair pledged that Britain would stand "full square alongside the U.S." in the battle against terrorism. 
Queen Elizabeth expressed "growing disbelief and total shock."
RUSSIA -- Russia put troops on alert. 
President Vladimir V. Putin held an emergency meeting of security officials and said he supported a tough response to the "barbaric acts."
GERMANY -- Chancellor Gerhard Schroder described the attacks as "a declaration of war against the civilized world."
Authorities urged Frankfurt, the country's financial capital, to close all its major skyscrapers. 
The new Jewish museum in Berlin canceled its public opening.
ASIA
AFGHANISTAN -- Taliban officials rejected suggestions that Osama bin Laden, the Saudi militant whom they are sheltering, could be behind the attacks. 
Asked if the Taliban condemned them, Foreign Minister Wakil Ahmed Muttawakil said, "We have criticized and we are now again criticizing terrorism in all its forms."
CHINA -- President Jiang Zemin said he was "shocked" and sent his condolences to President Bush, while the Foreign Ministry said China "opposed all manner" of terrorism.
JAPAN -- Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi expressed "great anger" and said "these acts of terrorism should not be forgiven."
Special security precautions were ordered at all United States military installations.
MIDDLE EAST
ISRAEL -- Prime Minister Ariel Sharon declared a national day of mourning for today in solidarity with the United States and urged the world to fight terrorism.
WEST BANK AND GAZA -- Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader, expressed shock at the attacks, and offered condolences and help in hunting the attackers if it was requested. 
Several military Palestinian groups denied involvement, but celebratory gunfire echoed across the West Bank.
IRAN -- President Mohammad Khatami condemned "terrorist" attacks on the United States, which broke diplomatic ties with Iran after the 1979 Islamic revolution and has accused Iran of sponsoring terrorism.
IRAQ -- State television hailed the attacks as the "operation of the century" which the United States deserved because of its "crimes against humanity."
Iraq blames the United States and Britain for prolonging punitive United Nations sanctions imposed after Baghdad's 1990 invasion of Kuwait and retained after a United States-led coalition drove Iraqi troops from Kuwait in the 1991 gulf war.
THE AMERICAS
CANADA -- Hundreds of United States-bound flights were diverted to Canadian airports, including a plane carrying President Glafcos Clerides of Cyprus, who landed in Montreal.
MEXICO -- Increased security caused enormous traffic jams at the United States border and officials said they were considering closing the entire border. 
President Vicente Fox expressed "solidarity and our most profound condolences."
CUBA -- The government expressed its "pain" and "solidarity" with its longtime adversary and offered air and medical facilities to help. 
State television took the unusual step of interrupting normal programming to announce the United States "national tragedy" and show CNN's Spanish-language channel live.
AFRICA
LIBYA -- Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi condemned the "terrible" attacks on the United States and said his country was ready to send aid to the American people, the official JANA news agency reported.
WORLD
NATO -- At an emergency meeting of the alliance's ambassadors in Brussels, the secretary general, Lord Robertson, promised the United States that it could rely on its allies in North America and Europe for assistance and support, and pledged that those responsible would not get away with it.
UNITED NATIONS -- Diplomats called for swift action by the Security Council to impose sanctions on any governments or groups found to be responsible. 
"We are all traumatized by this terrible tragedy," Secretary General Kofi Annan said. 
The headquarters building in New York was evacuated.
