
A heavy-handed Chinese government campaign to monitor the activities of Chinese scholars living abroad is quietly muting criticism of the Communist Party and curbing free speech beyond the country's borders, academics affected by the effort say.
Many people think the Orwellian tactics of China's past are subsiding as the country becomes more open to the outside world. 
But some emigres and expatriate intellectuals, moved to speak by the recent spy trials, say intimidation has increased in recent years and is much broader than previously thought.
Kang Zhengguo, 56, a senior Chinese language teacher at Yale University with permanent residency in the United States, said he was detained and interrogated for three days last year when he returned to visit his mother in the central Chinese city of Xian. 
The experience left him shaken and has strained his relations with friends and family in China.
He estimates that thousands of people have been similarly harassed in what China's Ministry of State Security euphemistically calls "returnee interviews."
Often the interviews are nothing more than debriefing sessions similar to those once conducted by the Central Intelligence Agency with people returning from Eastern Europe, the Soviet Union or even China.
But sometimes the interviews take on a more sinister cast. 
And they invariably end with a warning that talking about the encounters could bring trouble on the next visit home, or even permanent exile from China.
"Few are willing, or dare, to tell what has happened to them once they reach the outside world," said Mr. Kang, who has recounted his ordeal in detail in an essay soon to be published in The New York Review of Books.
A historian who is a Chinese citizen with United States residency said she canceled a trip to China this summer because she feared she too could be arrested.
The chilling effect reaches beyond overseas Chinese. 
Even some American scholars not of Chinese ancestry are wary about speaking to reporters about subjects likely to upset Beijing.
One academic who recently declined an invitation to appear on a television news program for fear of drawing the Chinese government's attention requested that not even a general description of the incident be used in this article for fear she might be identified by her area of expertise.
"The most important part of the arrested scholar story is the self-curbing effects it has on the psychology of both China scholars and overseas Chinese," said Perry Link, a China specialist at Princeton University.
He said such incidents "keep many overseas Chinese mouths sealed and, if we are honest, distort the messages that China scholars give to the broader Western public."
The message emerging from the latest spate of arrests is that China's sense of national security appears to be so fragile that the country's equivalent of the K.G.B. expends vast amounts of time and resources to track the activities of innocuous individuals living far from China's shores.
Mr. Kang, the teacher at Yale, discovered during his detention that mail he had been sending back to China, some of which contained articles and publications critical of Beijing, had been opened, logged, resealed and sent on for years by China's security agents.
The agents are believed to have been watching Mr. Kang since 1989, when he took part in pro-democracy demonstrations in Xian and put up a poster criticizing the military crackdown at Tiananmen Square in which hundreds of people died.
To win his release, he was forced to sign a confession stating that he had violated the provision of the State Security Law prohibiting the "production, distribution or reading of materials that endanger state security," though it is inconceivable that his mail to a retired friend with an interest in international affairs could possibly have threatened China's security.
As a result, his ties to his homeland have been effectively severed. 
Mr. Kang has since applied for American citizenship.
Some of the surveillance is carried out in the United States by students and faculty members from China who collect academic papers and write reports on their fellow scholars for state security agents at Chinese consulates or the Chinese Embassy in Washington, China-born academics in the United States say.
For example, organizers of a rally in June at the University of Chicago recalling the anniversary of the Tiananmen crackdown were warned by a phone call from a China-born professor not to hold the event, according to Hu Ping, chief editor of the New York-based journal Beijing Spring.
Mr. Hu, a speaker at the rally, said the professor had said he was delivering the message on behalf of the local Chinese consulate. 
The organizers went ahead with the event, but talk of the warning dominated conversations there.
Meanwhile, China continues its longstanding practice of monitoring potential critics during high-level visits by United States officials.
During Secretary of State Colin L. Powell's visit last weekend, the police surrounded the home of Zhang Hong, the wife of Jiang Qisheng, who is serving a four-year sentence for trying to organize a public commemoration of the people who died in the suppression of the 1989 democracy movement.
The police evidently wanted to ensure that Ms. Zhang did not try to reach Mr. Powell's delegation. 
In February she had asked through an open letter distributed by a human rights group for a meeting with representatives of the International Olympic Committee who were studying Beijing's suitability to be the host of the 2008 Olympic Games.
Vague regulations governing state security give the ministry wide latitude in pursuing anyone it deems a potential opponent of Beijing.
There are no clear definitions of what constitutes a state secret in China, yet once the ministry's agents invoke state security, Chinese citizens who have been detained no longer have the right to consult a lawyer -- or anyone at all.
"My interrogator told me that even if it's from 50 years ago, 'if we consider it a state secret, it is a state secret,' " Gao Zhan, the scholar released last week on medical parole after being sentenced to 10 years in prison for spying in China, said in an interview last weekend.
When they do become public, the tactics only strengthen the hand of China's Western critics, and the academics affected are often China's best hope for increasing mutual understanding between China and West.
"I could be a bridge between China and the United States, as I have the privilege to know both sides," said Suisheng Zhao, program director of the University of Denver's Center for China-U.S. 
Cooperation.
But Mr. Zhao said he had been cautious about saying anything critical of China, for fear he might draw attention from the state security apparatus.
