
Forged land titles, corruption, high taxes?
No matter.
India's real estate market is getting very, very warm.
It may still be a fragmented industry with high transaction costs and an absence of complete transparency; but it is whetting the appetites of domestic and overseas investors. 
In India, the world's second-fastest-growing economy, after China, changing government policies and a focus on infrastructure are driving up the demand for housing developments, malls and offices.
''For investors seeking the high returns that are no longer possible in the mature European and North American real estate markets, India and China are hot,'' said Prakash Gurbaxani, the chief executive of TSI Ventures in Bangalore, a joint venture of Tishman Speyer Properties of New York and India's largest privately owned bank, ICICI Bank, based in Mumbai.
''Every foreign investor group, including pension funds, high-net-worth individuals and private equity funds, are all looking at this sector,'' said Mr. Gurbaxani, whose company will invest more than $1 billion in the industry in the next few years.
In the past, investors were wary of the opaque business practices in Indian real estate. 
The land laws were archaic, mortgage financing was expensive and the quality of the developments was poor.
But these days, the country's $12 billion real estate market is expanding at a 30 percent annual rate. 
With the economy expected to continue growing rapidly -- the rate is about 8 percent -- and a swelling middle class with an appetite for quality apartments, modern malls and a variety of stores, the forecasts are rosy. 
Analysts at Merrill Lynch predict that the real estate market will grow to $90 billion in 10 years.
Foreign and domestic investors are now eagerly scouring this market, but only recently has real estate begun attracting meaningful amounts of capital, said Rajesh Khanna, managing director in India of the private equity firm Warburg Pincus. 
In the last year, Warburg Pincus has dedicated a third of its resources in the country toward creating and evaluating real estate investment opportunities.
Next month, the real estate developer DLF Universal will have a public offering that is expected to raise over $3 billion in what is billed as India's biggest share sale. 
It tops earlier public offerings such as the $2.3 billion share sale of the government's Oil and Natural Gas Corporation two years ago.
Kushal Pal Singh, 74, the chairman of DLF and one of India's richest billionaires, is credited with transforming a sleepy New Delhi suburb into a bustling town of fancy malls and office complexes. 
DLF has projects in 18 cities but plans to expand to 36.
For foreign investors, the gateway into India opened last year when the government eased restrictions on foreign ownership of real estate, construction and housing companies. 
Foreign developers can have wholly owned subsidiaries in India if they invest $10 million. 
Foreign companies can build commercial and residential buildings if the projects exceed 50,000 square meters (about 538,000 square feet).
The relaxation of rules has brought in a rash of foreign real estate funds and investors. 
Last month, the California Public Employees Retirement System invested $100 million in a real estate fund floated by IL&FS Investment Managers of India. 
In March, Morgan Stanley's real estate investment arm said it would pay $68 million for a minority stake in an Indian property firm, Mantri Developers, its first investment in the country's real estate industry.
Warburg Pincus, too, is negotiating for several real estate investment opportunities, including technology office parks. 
''We see ourselves investing a few hundred million dollars in real estate in India over the next couple of years,'' Mr. Khanna said.
More than a third of India's more than a billion people are under 25 years old. 
Such a young demographic coupled with low mortgage rates is making the housing sector buoyant.
At the same time, the outsourcing industry, which is growing more than 30 percent a year, has helped transform the commercial real estate industry. 
According to Merrill Lynch, outsourcing will create 200,000 jobs a year and demand for more than 15 million square feet of commercial space every year.
Government data suggest there is a shortage of 100 million homes and about 100 million square feet of office space in the country.
Growth in the real estate business is also expected to provide trickle-down employment. 
According to an industry group, the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry, real estate is the second-largest generator of jobs in the country, after farming. 
For every Indian rupee invested in construction, 0.75 rupee is added to the gross domestic product, according to estimates.
