
A Chinese man wielding a knife attacked an American couple related to a United States Olympic volleyball coach on Saturday, killing the man and wounding his wife and their Chinese guide atop an ancient tower in central Beijing.
The attacker then killed himself by leaping from the tower, American and Chinese officials said.
The attack on the tourists occurred on the first day of competition at the Olympic Games in Beijing, after a dazzling opening ceremony the previous night in which China sought to project an image of power and strength while welcoming hundreds of thousands of foreign visitors. 
As news of the killing spread, it darkened the mood somewhat in the city, from the warrens of old alleyways where Chinese are eager to open their homes to foreigners, to the stadiums where visitors waited in line for events like swimming and gymnastics.
The dead American was Todd Bachman of Farmington, Minn., the 62-year-old father-in-law of Hugh McCutcheon, the head indoor men's volleyball coach, American Olympic officials said. 
Bachman's wife, Barbara, 62, was in critical but stable condition after eight hours of surgery.
The Chinese guide is a woman, according to Xinhua, the state news agency. 
She was not identified.
McCutcheon's wife, Elisabeth, a member of the 2004 United States women's Olympics volleyball team, was with her parents when they were attacked.
The attack is an embarrassment for China, where leaders have taken pains to say that, more than anything else, these Olympics would be safe. 
The Chinese government has faced enormous challenges this year, notably during the Tibetan riots in March and the deadly earthquake in May, and is determined to show people here and abroad that it can maintain strict control of the country under any circumstances.
Violence against foreigners is extremely rare in Beijing and across China. 
Chinese generally do not exhibit hostility toward Americans or the United States. 
During the opening ceremony on Friday night, the American delegation drew thunderous applause when it marched into the Bird's Nest, as the Olympic stadium is known, from Chinese watching inside and outside the stadium.
The victims were not wearing anything that would have clearly identified them as Americans or visitors who had a connection to a United States team, said Darryl Seibel, a spokesman for the United States Olympic Committee.
The attack took place at noon on the second floor of the Drum Tower, which was built in the 13th century and lies on the imperial north-south axis that runs from the Temple of Heaven to the Forbidden City to the main Olympic site. 
The tower, a majestic red building, draws tourists who climb it for a sweeping view of one of the best preserved ancient neighborhoods in Beijing.
Xinhua identified the attacker as Tang Yongming, 47, from Hangzhou in Zhejiang Province. 
He was a factory worker who was divorced five years ago, Xinhua reported. 
He quit his job and then sold his house in 2006, and no longer had a permanent home. 
He came to Beijing on Aug. 
1, the report said.
The wounded victims were being treated at the Peking Union Medical College Hospital, one of Beijing's best medical centers, in the Wangfujing shopping district.
The Chinese government, fearful of a terrorist attack from separatists, has tightened security throughout the capital, reinforcing the usual police units with paramilitary officers and soldiers. 
Tens of thousands of surveillance cameras have been installed on lampposts and in bars and Internet cafes, and a legion of residents, most of them elderly, are volunteering as neighborhood sentries. 
They sit on curbsides and in alleys looking for any suspicious act or person.
''This is shocking because I thought the government had done a lot to ensure safety,'' said a patient at a nearby hospital out for a walk by the Drum Tower who would give only her last name, Lu, and age, 62. 
Several other Chinese blamed the guards in the tower for not being more vigilant.
''The timing of this is suspicious,'' said a man who identified himself as Wang, 35, a lifelong neighborhood resident who wondered whether the assailant intended to disrupt the Olympics. 
''I think this might hurt China's image in the world, but I don't think it'll disturb the Olympics per se.''
The men's volleyball team, which is staying in the athletes' village, was notified of the attack soon after it occurred, Seibel said. 
The team still plans to compete in a match on Sunday, with the coach absent. 
No additional security measures would be put in place for American athletes.
President Bush and Laura Bush were still in Beijing on Saturday.
''Laura and I were also saddened by the attack on an American family and their Chinese tour guide today in Beijing,'' Mr. Bush said in his hotel after making a brief statement about the fighting in Georgia. 
''The United States government has offered to provide any assistance the family needs.''
Bachman was the chief executive of Bachman's, a garden center and florist that has locations across Minneapolis-St. 
Paul and employs more than 1,000 people. 
The company, which is led by several members of the Bachman family, issued a statement thanking Olympic officials and people who had offered their condolences. 
''The Bachman family and our entire company family are shocked about the tragic and senseless attack,'' the statement said.
Spectators at Olympic sites began hearing of the attack shortly after it took place.
''To tell you the truth, this is really a shock because there's so much security here,'' said Annette Busateri, 31, a communications manager from Salt Lake City who was watching men's gymnastics qualifications when she heard the news. 
''There are guards everywhere and cameras.''
She and her husband, who were traveling around China with a tour group, paused when asked if they would still wear clothes with ''U.S.A.'' on them.
''I would, I think, because there is still national pride there,'' Ms. Busateri said. 
''You can't let something like this change the way you live or make you shy away from being American.''
Tina Jacobson, 55, of Atlanta, was wearing a shirt with the American flag on it as she waited with her 19-year-old daughter, Jackie, to get into the fencing site. 
They were in Beijing to cheer on Ms. Jacobson's other daughter, Sada, who is competing in the women's saber fencing final on Saturday night.
''I feel safe,'' Tina Jacobson said. 
''We do a lot of traveling. 
This is a very big city and there are people who do bad things.''
Anne Donovan, the coach of the American women's basketball team, said she brought up the attack with her players on their way to a game.
''We said a prayer for them in the locker room and I have goose bumps talking about it,'' she said. 
''It's something that changes the events right now for the Olympic Games.''
