
China and Japan are supposed to be celebrating the 25th anniversary of the normalization of their relations this week, but they are instead entangled in fresh tensions over their ugly past.
At least 36 people in northeastern China have taken ill after unearthing mustard gas that Chinese officials say was left behind by Japanese troops at the end of World War II.
Japan's Foreign Ministry sent a team to Qiqihar, in northeast China, to investigate the accident, overshadowing a separate Japanese delegation sent to commemorate the diplomatic anniversary in Beijing.
Bitter history is also complicating China's choice of Japanese or European technology for a high-speed rail link between Shanghai and Beijing. 
Tens of thousands of Chinese signed Web-based petitions in recent days calling on the government not to award the $12 billion contract to Japan.
China and Japan are Asia's two great powers, and their economies are becoming ever more closely linked. 
But the marred anniversary shows how the wounds of the past remain raw, with some people on each side increasingly willing to express their fears about the other.
"In theory both governments seem committed to improving relations," said Shi Yinyong, a foreign relations expert at People's University in Beijing. 
"But they are struggling to overcome the historical animosity that some ordinary people feel."
Leaders from both countries publicly sought to play down the divisions. 
President Hu Jintao of China and Yasuo Fukuda, Japan's chief cabinet secretary and the leader of the delegation to Beijing, agreed to try to arrange a state visit between Mr. Hu and Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi.
But the formal meetings were undermined by reports that construction workers in Qiqihar had mistakenly uncovered five drums filled with mustard gas on Aug. 
4, causing a stream of people to seek hospital care for symptoms ranging from vomiting to severe burns.
Two affected workers were "close to death," the state press reported today. 
Newspapers carried gory photographs of one man described as having chemical burns over 95 percent of his body.
It is not clear why it took almost a week for China's government-run press to provide news about the accident. 
Some news reports suggested that it had taken several days to discover the damage and the link to wartime weapons that Japan has acknowledged leaving behind in China's northeast.
But Chinese news organizations almost never report boldly on such topics without explicit instructions, and the timing suggests that China may have sought to emphasize Japan's record of atrocities to persuade it to issue a more complete apology for its invasion, a perennial sore point between the two powers.
The Chinese government and a number of citizens' groups have also pressed Japan to devote more money to cleaning up chemical and biological weapons and compensating victims.
Japanese officials said they were investigating and now had a team of experts on the scene. 
They said they would respond appropriately if the facts were confirmed.
"If it turns out that this incident came from the former Japanese Army, then I think it is necessary that we handle the case accordingly," Mr. Fukuda said today at a news conference in Beijing.
The incident is especially sensitive at a time when some Japanese experts are talking openly about developing nuclear weapons to counterbalance possible moves by North Korea to develop atomic bombs.
Japan has had a pacifist Constitution since it was defeated in World War II. 
But China fears that the uncertainties over North Korea's arms program could destabilize the region and prompt Japan and South Korea to become nuclear powers.
Asia's two largest economies have far more in common on the business front. 
Trade has been rising rapidly, as has Japanese investment in China.
Japan has also been viewed by many experts as the front-runner for one of the world's most lucrative infrastructure contracts, building an 800-mile high-speed rail link between Shanghai and Beijing. 
Germany and France are also in the running for the project, which is supposed to cut rail travel time between China's most important cities to 3 hours from 12 and set the standard for fast trains all over China.
But as the decision looms, officials gave a cool reception to Chikage Ogi, Japan's transport minister, who visited China last week but failed to meet with Prime Minister Wen Jiabao or any Railway Ministry officials. 
That was widely reported as a snub in the press in both countries.
