
Ten central government departments, including the powerful Ministry of Finance, ''misused or embezzled'' more than $660 million last year, according to the latest report from China's top auditor.
The report, part of a long-running crackdown on government fraud, said 88 people had been arrested, 14 officials had been referred for prosecution and an additional 104 government employees had been punished for their roles in mismanaging or embezzling government funds, state media reported Thursday.
Liu Jiayi, the nation's top auditor, said in the report that a further $6 billion in government funds had been ''mismanaged'' last year, and that fraud had been detected in dozens of government bureaus, including the Ministry of Education, the National Bureau of Statistics, the Ministry of Health, the Chinese Academy of Sciences and the State Administration of Radio, Film and Television. 
Even the State Administration of Taxation was accused of fraud.
Since 1999, rolling audits of various government departments, agencies and government-owned companies, dubbed the ''audit storm,'' have resulted in the discovery of billions of dollars worth of fraud and mismanagement in everything from state-owned banks to the country's social security fund.
In 2006, the government said $900 million had been misappropriated from the nation's $37 billion social security fund. 
And in 2005, the auditor said that $35 billion in government funds had been misused.
That amounts to a significant problem, even in a country with a national budget of about $600 billion. 
But the temptations are high, given that the average worker in China earns less than $250 a month.
At a news conference in Beijing on Wednesday, rather than expressing shock or anger at the findings, Mr. Liu said that in the course of doing the audits he had found that Beijing's leadership had helped give the economy a boost, that ''the economic structure has been optimized, the government's working efficiency had been raised, and people's living standards have improved,'' according to a report posted on the National Audit Office's Web site.
The scale of the fraud uncovered over the past few years, however, has been huge, with audits indicting nearly every government department and agency that has faced such a check. 
The national auditor rarely publishes the names of government officials involved in the fraud, or ties their actions to the country's highest-ranking officials. 
And few details are disclosed about what happened to money.
Still, nearly every week, in separate investigations, the Chinese authorities announce that a government official has been sacked for corruption, embezzlement or accepting bribes.
Analysts say the crackdowns on corruption are aimed at bringing greater accountability to all levels of government, and at containing a problem that some consider so widespread that it could undermine support for the ruling Communist Party, led by President Hu Jintao.
This ''is one of the highlights of the Hu administration, that government is becoming more and more transparent and open,'' said Zhu Lijia, a professor at the National School of Administration in Beijing. 
''Years ago, you could never imagine such a big amount of embezzled money would be audited and then publicized.''
Other analysts, though, say some of those ensnared in corruption investigations are singled out because of political fighting within the party, often with the losers' crimes exposed and some officials jailed after a closed-door trial.
The punishments can be harsh. 
A food and drug safety official was executed last year after being accused of abuse of power and failing to ensure public safety. 
Other officials have been charged with leading decadent lives, or having friends or relatives accept bribes for them.
In the new report, the auditor said government departments were failing to report their ''profits,'' as was the case with the State Administration of Radio, Film and Television, which regulates the country's film and television market. 
Twenty-eight central government departments were accused of ''budgetary irregularities'' involving $2.6 billion.
''China is now in the process of reform, both economically and politically,'' Professor Zhu said.
''Although it is painful, or even cruel for some government agencies and officials, it must be the way; it is the cost we have to pay for reform and development.''
