
World trade ministers say they fear that they will deliver a shock to the world economy unless they agree to liberalize trade at their meeting here. 
But the only shocking thing may be if they manage to agree on anything at all.
The World Trade Organization, the umbrella trade body, is sometimes described as the ultimate capitalist club, but it is far from exclusive. 
It has 144 members -- with the addition of China and Taiwan this weekend -- including many of the poorest as well as the richest countries. 
The United States, Uruguay and Uganda have exactly the same voting power, which is none.
Voting is forbidden. 
Even the United Nations General Assembly's rule of one country one vote smacks of a tyranny of the majority to ministers here. 
The trade organization operates by consensus, meaning that the smallest holdout can in principle sink the weightiest agreement.
If discussions get that far, that is. 
Two years ago in Seattle, the last time the organization called together its sponsors for what it calls a ministerial, delegates never fully agreed on procedures for deciding if they agreed on the trade issues at stake.
Some poor countries complained bitterly about a so-called green room, where selected delegates haggled over details. 
Though anything they decided there was liable to be rejected by the all-inclusive plenary, talk of conspiratorial cabals felled the entire enterprise.
This time, ministers gathering in this Persian Gulf state decided to make the least hierarchical of multilateral institutions more democratic. 
Any country that wants to participate in any discussion at any time is at least theoretically permitted to do so, with delegate counts and the need for sleep the only limiting factors.
A Twisted Flow Chart
This is how it works. 
The chiefs of the delegations select facilitators to build consensus on various issues. 
The facilitators convene working groups of people intrigued by a particular issue. 
The groups themselves can subdivide to debate proposals. 
Working groups draft text to be reviewed by delegation leaders, any one of whom can start the cycle all over again.
One anti-globalization group attending the meeting passed out leaflets protesting "domination of the heavyweights."
But the United States disguises its power well. 
In one recent session to debate a particularly thorny dispute over patent rules, a lone American delegate was swamped by representatives of Brazil, India, Kenya and Zimbabwe, who did not share the American perspective.
The consensus approach has its origins in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, a cold war-era forum for deciding trade policy that operated like a gentlemen's club. 
At the trade organization, its supposedly more potent successor, officials talk more about the art of gelling and coalescing than about making decisions.
Keith Rockwell, the trade organization's spokesman, was pressed today to reveal something -- anything -- that had been agreed to after three days of talks.
"Reaching agreement ahead of schedule is not something for which we are famous," he deadpanned.
The World Trade Organization may make the United Nations look like a model of corporate efficiency. 
But the trade group has an edge in diplomacy.
Trade-Dollar Diplomacy
Though the ministers have come to Qatar, a conservative Islamic society that borders Saudi Arabia, Israel's delegation is here en masse, with three ministers and a large team of negotiators. 
It is the first meeting in the region to accept an Israeli delegation in two years, said Majallie Whbee, the director of Israel's Ministry of Regional Cooperation.
"Our view is that from the economic side we can build confidence and build peace," he said.
India and Pakistan do not have good relations at home and are often conspicuously cool toward each another abroad. 
But not at the trade meeting.
The two nations are founding members of the Like Minded Group, half a dozen developing countries that press rich countries to open their markets to exports of the poor, like textiles.
When reporters today questioned Munir Akram, Pakistan's permanent representative to the trade organization, on subtle differences in the trade goals of India and Pakistan, he demurred. 
"I do not wish to disagree with the distinguished minister from India," he said with a smile.
Trade does not soften all rivalries, however. 
China and Taiwan spend billions of dollars in two-way trade. 
They both entered the trade organization during this meeting. 
But China used its sway to make sure that Taiwan's accession ceremony came a day after its own.
Moreover, while China's membership documents use the title People's Republic of China, Taiwan had to settle for Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen and Matsu, the latter three being tiny islands under Taiwan's control. 
Chinese Taipei was permitted as shorthand.
The 1999 meeting in Seattle, the trade group's last such meeting, attracted a dozen heads of state, including President Clinton, two dozen members of Congress, hundreds of trade negotiators and tens of thousands of protesters. 
Qatar is another story.
The location is remote. 
The global economy is weak. 
There is a war on. 
And Americans were warned of credible threats of terrorism. 
Many lawmakers and government trade experts and at least one cabinet member, Commerce Secretary Don Evans, stayed home.
The defections took a toll. 
European nations have 508 delegates. 
Japan comes in second with 159. 
Canada has 62. 
The United States barely ranks in the top 10, with 51. 
Indonesia has 60.
Peter Allgeier, the deputy United States trade representative, acknowledged that his contingent would have been larger in normal times, but called the team "pared-down, effective and cooperative."
Is the United States underrepresented?
"We haven't missed a single meeting that we wanted to attend," he said.
