
WHILE an authentic restaurant stove or espresso machine might look impressive in the kitchen, few can pony up the thousands of dollars for the real deal.
But what is bad news for restaurants can be good news for consumers: almost 70 percent of New York's 23,000 food establishments close or change hands within their first five years, according to the New York State Restaurant Association. 
The result is an active auction industry that liquidates restaurant equipment, often at a 10th of list prices. 
These proceedings are open to the public and are advertised in newspapers (including The New York Times on Sunday, usually on the back of the Job Market section, which appears only in the New York region).
For instance, at an auction at China Buffet in Midtown, a walk-in freezer said to retail for $50,000 sold for $2,500 and a wall-size framed photograph of Hong Kong for $60.
The auctions can be a trove of bargains, but they are not for the faint of heart. 
The equipment is sold as is, with no guarantee that it works, and it is cash and carry. 
Most items, especially china, glassware and chairs, come in immense quantities. 
Even brief previous use in a restaurant lends a certain patina of grease, dents or scratches.
Then there are technical issues. 
Some machines require 220 volts, and professional installation is a good idea for those needing access to gas or water lines to ensure that building and safety codes are met. 
Finally, large turnouts can raise prices steeply, so prospective bidders should know their ceilings.
One veteran of these auctions is David Arnold, the founder of the American Museum of Food, which has yet to find a permanent home. 
His finds include a six-burner stove with a salamander for broiling; a deep-fat fryer; pots and pans; a seltzer system; a two-door deli case; and a Rancilio espresso machine. 
All are professional grade and were bought for under $1,000 total.
''My espresso machine came from a small Dominican restaurant that had been padlocked for weeks,'' Mr. Arnold said. 
''When I got there, the stench of rotten food was sickening. 
I think that scared a lot of bidders away, so I got my machine for $165.''
Before an auction last winter at a Papaya World on the Upper East Side, although the grill still had pans of semi-cooked bacon and sausage patties, it was as if the staff and customers had vanished into thin air.
But the owner, Wanas Khalil, was still around and still in business. 
He was selling everything to finance a total renovation. 
''This is my last try to attract customers,'' Mr. Khalil said.
The bidders were typical of the auction circuit: men in jeans and wool caps, with large wads of cash and macho attitudes. 
English, Spanish, Hebrew and Arabic rumblings commingled.
Many bidders were current or aspiring restaurateurs and deli operators. 
Others were dealers who buy, clean and resell equipment at stores on the Bowery and on Atlantic Avenue in Brooklyn. 
Movers handed out business cards.
''It's how I accumulated a whole restaurant,'' Ruben Valdez said. 
''It took two years.''
''I had a shipping container uptown. 
Every time I got a great bargain, I put it in the container.''
Mr. Valdez eventually trucked his container down to San Antonio as a part owner and designer of a nightclub.
Professional equipment, he said, ''lasts forever.''
Unlike their consumer counterparts these pieces ''are designed to be used 500 to 600 times a day,'' he said.
The auction at Papaya World began about 45 minutes late with the arrival of the auctioneer, Michael Amodeo. 
A compact man with impeccably combed gray hair and silver-rimmed glasses, Mr. Amodeo climbed a ladder and addressed the crowd in an unabashed New York accent.
Within minutes his singsong patter and cajoling had sold a five-pot Bunn-O-Matic coffee maker for $15, a five-foot Wolf gas grill for $100 and a Taylor Soft Serve ice cream machine for $175. 
There followed 100 sales, including four huge juicing machines that Mr. Valdez bought for about $200 each.
A selloff at Rio Grand in Midtown attracted Gili Tsabari and Dan Amir, the owners of Rectangles Restaurant, which is to open next month. 
They bought eight brushed aluminum folding tables for $45 each.
Similarly, Rahul Suri, a partner in Tawaa Restaurant, was looking for chairs, pots and pans for his new Indian spot, Rangole.
''This is my first time at an auction,'' Mr. Suri confided. 
''We're trying to understand the scene and take advantage of it.''
He later bought 70 chairs for about $15 each.
The most astonishing purchase was a Wolf six-burner range with salamander, which sold for $50.
''It's worth between $4,000 and $5,000 new,'' said a beaming Bob Potenza, the owner of Gallagher's Bar in Sunnyside, Queens. 
''I was lucky.''
The auction at Jon Vie Pastries and Cafe in Greenwich Village proved how unsentimental the business is. 
Just days after closing on Dec. 
31, Nathan Prusack, the owner, parted with the 42-year-old establishment, piece by bittersweet piece. 
Among the bidders was Jennifer Limotte, who is soon to open a bakery in the Village called Milk & Cookies. 
She spotted a 10-foot marble baker's table.
''I really want that table,'' she said. 
She got it, for $225.
''We're also looking for containers, bins, cooling racks and small goods, like cookie sheets and cake pans,'' her husband, Mark Limotte, said. 
With the half sheets going for about 25 cents each, it certainly beats paying retail.
