
A human rights advocate who was freed from a Chinese prison two years ago after the United States government interceded on her behalf has been found to have illegally sold China some American high-technology items with potential military uses.
The defendant, Gao Zhan, who was born in China but lives in McLean, Va., pleaded guilty in a federal court in nearby Alexandria on Wednesday to one count of unlawful export, for having sold 80 microprocessors several months before her arrest. 
She also pleaded guilty to tax evasion, as did her husband, Xue Donghua.
Ms. Gao, who is to be sentenced on March 5, could be imprisoned for up to 10 years. 
But prosecutors say she might receive a more lenient sentence if she continues to cooperate with investigators trying to identify others involved in exports of tightly controlled products to China. 
Mr. Xue, who could face up to a year in prison, has also agreed to cooperate.
A spokesman for the Chinese Embassy in Washington declined to comment.
Ms. Gao gained international attention when she was arrested in China on Feb. 
11, 2001, on charges of spying for Taiwan. 
She and her husband and their 5-year-old son were about to return to the United States after a visit when they were seized by Chinese government agents.
Ms. Gao was jailed. 
Her husband, who is an American citizen, and son were detained and separated from each other for 26 days before being allowed to return home, without her. 
Her own release, after 166 days, was obtained in part by a phone call from President Bush to the Chinese president, Jiang Zemin.
While court documents lay out the crimes Ms. Gao has now admitted committing, federal officials were unable to explain on Wednesday why China had suspected her of spying against it if she had been helping the Chinese government for years beforehand.
Prosecutors say that from 1998 to 2001, Ms. Gao helped the Chinese obtain high-tech items valued at more than $1.5 million through her use of a false name and a front company.
Court documents say Ms. Gao has admitted using the name Gail Heights to order such items, which were to be illegally shipped to China through a front company -- called Technology Business Services or University Services -- that she falsely claimed was connected to George Mason University in Fairfax, Va.
Customs officials were tipped to the scheme in the fall of 2000 by a company that had found no connection between the university and the Gail Heights who had placed an order for electronic parts under federal export controls.
A search of Ms. Gao's home, the court documents say, uncovered contracts for similar parts with a variety of Chinese entities having ties to China's military. 
The plea agreement involves only one of those sales, under a July 12, 2000, contract for the microprocessors. 
The components operate at low temperatures, making them ideal for aircraft navigation, weapons fire control systems, radar and airborne battle management systems.
