
In a ruling that could lead to new trade barriers on imports from China, a federal judge on Thursday dismissed a bid by China to block the Bush administration from imposing tariffs on Chinese goods produced by heavily subsidized government companies.
The ruling, by Judge Gregory W. Carman of the United States Court of International Trade in New York, clears the way for the Commerce Department to decide whether to impose the tariff barriers on one specific product, high-gloss paper, as early as Friday.
The effect of the ruling could be even more far reaching. 
If the Commerce Department raises tariffs on paper, as many in the industry expect, it could set a precedent for duties to be imposed on steel, machinery, plastics, furniture and other goods from China.
Executives and union employees in these industries say they may seek duties on the ground that their Chinese competitors have devastated American companies and thrown Americans out of work.
Judge Carman dismissed the Chinese claim that the Commerce Department was barred from imposing the duties because it had no basis for such an action in the law or its own regulations. 
He said that the court had no jurisdiction to make such a finding.
The Commerce Department announced last year that it would decide by April 2 whether to revise its longstanding ban on imposing duties to counteract industry subsidies in ''nonmarket economies.''
Such a step would break with a precedent established about 20 years ago.
Duties can at present be imposed on products exported from these countries if ''dumping'' can be proved -- that is, if a United States industry can show that the products are sold below cost. 
But these antidumping duties are small compared with the duties under a separate regulation against subsidies.
In the 1980s, the federal government adopted the rationale that it was impossible to tell what was a subsidy in a nonmarket economy like China's, closing off the possibility of ever imposing antisubsidy duties. 
But last year, the Commerce Department said it would review that ruling and make a new determination on the issue this year.
Congressional leaders have, meanwhile, vowed to pass legislation to force the Commerce Department to impose the duties if it refuses to do so on its own.
