
Standard & Poor's raised one of its leading measures of Thailand's creditworthiness yesterday, saying hefty foreign reserves and dwindling government debt were offsetting the effects of higher global oil prices and concerns about the nation's financial sector.
Standard & Poor's raised its rating for Thailand's long-term foreign-currency sovereign debt to BBB+ from BBB, putting its estimate of Thailand's ability to repay its foreign debts on par with that of Barbados, China and Poland.
But the agency left its rating on Thailand's local-currency debt and short-term foreign-currency debt unchanged, citing the government's slow progress in cleaning up the country's banks and in selling state-owned enterprises.
''It's a balanced action,'' Liew Chih Wai, a sovereign credit analyst at Standard & Poor's in Singapore, said of the rating change. 
''On one hand, improvement is being made on the budgetary side. 
On the other, we're saying you still have some unfinished business.''
Investors saw Standard & Poor's move tilted slightly more in Thailand's favor, and the benchmark stock index in Bangkok rose more than 1.5 percent yesterday.
The upgrading was the first by Standard & Poor's since last October and put Thailand only one notch from the rating it had before the financial crisis of 1997 and 1998.
While concerns remain about the extent to which Thailand has managed to turn away from the kind of poor credit discipline that led to the crisis, its economy is booming and economists expect it to grow 7 percent this year, aided by robust consumer spending and exports.
Other analysts were only slightly less confident of Thailand's overall financial strength.
For example, another ratings agency, Fitch, said it would need more evidence of improvement in the banking sector and less government use of state-controlled financial institutions to expand credit.
''We're a little bit concerned about the degree of pump-priming that's not going through the budget,'' said Brian Coulton, head of sovereign ratings at Fitch in Hong Kong.
Those concerns heightened this month after Thailand's central bank, the Bank of Thailand, criticized the state-controlled Krung Thai Bank for lax lending to real estate projects and ordered it to classify roughly $1 billion in loans as nonperforming even though their borrowers were still servicing the debt. 
The government of Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra has been pressing Krung Thai and other state-controlled institutions to lend to make up for slow credit growth at private banks.
An independent committee formed to investigate Krung Thai's decision to extend the loans in question is due to report its finding to the Bank of Thailand soon. 
Local press reports quoted the central bank governor as saying that Krung Thai's president, Viroj Nualkhair, might be on the way out.
Some analysts have expressed concern that many loans, while being serviced in good times, could sour as rising global interest rates slow economic growth. 
The Bank of Thailand on Wednesday raised its benchmark interest rate for the first time in more than a year to try to curb inflation as oil prices climb and as economic growth feeds a boom in auto loans, home mortgages and credit cards. 
Nonetheless, the rate remains quite low at 1.5 percent.
Mr. Liew at Standard & Poor's said the disclosures at Krung Thai only reinforced his agency's already dim view of Thailand's banks. 
Bank of Thailand data estimating that 13 percent of all loans at commercial banks are nonperforming understate the real extent of the problem, according to Standard & Poor's. 
The agency's own calculations put the ratio at 24 percent of all loans.
Mr. Liew said there were also concerns about further setbacks for Mr. Thaksin as he tries to privatize state-owned companies. 
The government sold stakes in airports and in Krung Thai, but labor unions have blocked efforts to sell part of the state-owned power utility, the Electricity Generating Authority of Thailand.
Still, the government's fiscal position is improving, Standard & Poor's said. 
Government debt, it predicted, would be roughly 28 percent of gross domestic product this year, down from nearly a third in 2003.
And Thailand's economic outlook remains bright, the agency said. 
Rising oil prices are a drag on the economy and on government finances, as the government subsidizes oil prices. 
But rising fuel costs are being more than offset by strong consumer spending and rising exports to China. 
''The export growth is still there,'' Mr. Liew said.
As a result, Thailand has amassed roughly $42 billion in foreign currency reserves, more than enough to cover its import needs and overseas obligations, he said.
