
With Americans growing increasingly concerned about the safety of Chinese products, Washington has begun looking for solutions in Japan.
The Japanese have developed tough approaches for ensuring the quality of Chinese imports, particularly food -- in part by far more rigorous testing of its imported food than in the United States. 
But the innovation getting the most American attention is Japan's system for screening Chinese producers even before they ship their merchandise to Japan.
A report released last week by the House Energy and Commerce Committee cited Japan's system for monitoring spinach and other Chinese food exports as a possible model for importers in the United States. 
Last month, a White House working group issued its own report after visiting Tokyo, and even Chinese officials have urged the United States to adopt the Japanese approach.
Citing the Food and Drug Administration, the House report described Japan's model as the most realistic one for protecting American consumers. 
''The Japanese system of regulating Chinese food imports does appear to offer better control than that currently used by F.D.A.,'' it concluded.
The program is the product of Japan's longer experience with Chinese safety problems, going back to the discovery five years ago of high levels of pesticide in Chinese frozen spinach. 
Americans have become more conscious of such safety issues this year, with the highly publicized recalls of Chinese-made toys contaminated with lead paint and pet food ingredients containing hazardous chemicals.
''Japan is five years ahead of the rest of the world in dealing with quality problems from China,'' said Tatsuya Kakita, the author of several books here on food safety. 
''The world can learn from Japan.''
Japan, which buys far more of its food from China than the United States does, has focused its efforts so far on food safety. 
But some Japanese and American officials and safety experts say that similar methods may also work for many Chinese exports to the United States, not only seafood and processed vegetables but also products like medicine, toys and paint.
It is rare for American officials to praise Japanese import controls. 
Washington more often criticizes Japan's regulations as draconian, especially when applied to American products. 
Indeed, one of the top trade disputes in recent years between the two countries has been over Japanese limits on American beef imports, after the discovery in 2003 of a case of mad cow disease in the United States.
Food safety is a particularly delicate issue in Japan, which imports 60 percent of its food supply. 
After the problems with Chinese-grown spinach created an uproar here in 2002, the government stepped up random testing of all imported food. 
The Japanese health ministry says it and private laboratories now test samples from about 10 percent of all food shipments entering the country.
By contrast, the United States, which imports about a tenth of its food, tests less than 1 percent of shipments, according to the House report.
Many of Japan's stringent tests take place at two national inspection centers. 
On a recent morning at the center in the port of Yokohama, agents in white lab coats examined more than 100 samples -- grinding up lemons, asparagus and even turtle meat in large industrial blenders to test them for banned pesticides, antibiotics and other chemicals. 
The Yokohama center alone tested more than 30,000 samples last year, about three times what the United States tested.
''We are the front line in protecting consumers,'' said Yukihiro Shiomi, an inspector at the center.
The health ministry says Japan tested 203,001 samples of food last year and found 1,515 samples that violated standards. 
The largest number of violations, a third, came from China, which supplies about 15 percent of Japan's food imports.
While there have been calls in Washington for stepped-up testing, there is also notable interest in Japan's new system for screening Chinese producers.
Introduced last year, the system is used only for spinach. 
But the program has been so successful in eliminating quality problems that Tokyo plans to expand it to other types of food imports, said Kazuhiko Tsurumi, deputy director of the health ministry's import food safety office.
''The lesson from our success with improving the safety of spinach is that direct control of producers is the best method for quality control,'' he said.
Under the system, a number of Chinese companies receive licenses from the government there allowing them to export to Japan on the condition that they maintain Japanese standards. 
Currently, 45 Chinese companies are licensed to produce spinach for sale in Japan. 
The Chinese producers must grow all their spinach on their own plots and not buy any from other producers. 
This greatly reduces the chance of dangerous pesticides getting into shipments, Japanese officials say.
While China has licensed exporters before, this system is more stringent, Japanese and American officials say, in part because the health ministry helps to enforce it by allowing in products only from licensed companies. 
By contrast, the United States, with its free-market approach, allows importers to disregard China's licensing system.
Japanese officials acknowledge that their system limits competition, allowing Chinese producers to charge the Japanese consumer higher prices. 
But they say that this profit incentive also keeps the Chinese companies adhering to Japanese standards -- lest they lose their licenses. 
Tokyo also requires Japanese importers to test every shipment of spinach for banned pesticides and other chemicals.
The mandatory testing adds about $160 in costs to each shipment, the health ministry says. 
Spinach now costs about $4 a pound in suburban Tokyo, two to two and a half times what an American might pay, though most of that difference results from other factors, like Japan's archaic distribution system.
But the Japanese say that the controls solve a big challenge in importing from China: weeding out unscrupulous producers, without hurting China's many conscientious ones.
Yet, at a Summit supermarket in the Tokyo suburb of Mitaka, such steps have done little to alleviate fears of Chinese quality problems, which have received intense media coverage here.
Sales of Chinese-grown produce are a tenth of what they were just five years ago, as consumers embrace pricier Japanese products. 
The sense of security in domestic fruit and vegetables is enhanced by the store's practice of posting the names, addresses and even photos of local farmers who grow the produce.
''I prefer the farmers' faces,'' said Yumiko Ishihara, a 38-year-old homemaker. 
''Buying Chinese is like gambling with my family's health.''
