
FORGET ABOUT roller derby on ice. 
This sport is more like "Survivor" on ice. 
Competitors race counterclockwise in a pack, jockey for position at speeds up to 40 miles an hour and inevitably crash, always in danger of being gashed by another skater's blade. 
First one to complete the requisite number of laps wins. 
Unlike long track speedskating, the athletes compete against one another and not the clock.
THE SETUP -- They skate around a 111.12-meter oval on an indoor rink, at the Salt Lake Ice Center (better known as the Delta Center). 
Turns are marked by seven cones, although there are no lane delineations. 
Four skaters race in a heat, with the top two advancing. 
Depending on disqualifications, however, more than four skaters can line up in subsequent rounds. 
There are eight different races. 
Men and women compete in the 500 meters (4 1/2 laps), 1,000 (9 laps), and 1,500 (13 1/2 laps). 
The women also compete in a 3,000-meter relay (27 laps), and the men in a 5,000-meter relay (45 laps).
THE NAMES -- If the on-ice drama is not enough, this sport has already enjoyed pre-Olympic controversy within the United States team. 
Tommy O'Hare went to arbitration charging that Rusty Smith and Apolo Anton Ohno, the sport's superstar, conspired to exclude him from the team during the trials. 
But O'Hare eventually dropped the arbitration and the 19-year-old Ohno emerged relatively unscathed. 
Last season Ohno captured the World Cup title, bringing the Americans into prominence they had never seen. 
Ohno is favored in all four events. 
His four medals in one Olympics would be the most of any speedskater since Eric Heiden won five golds in 1980.
Also watch the teams from China, South Korea and Italy. 
Amy Peterson is the top female skater for the United States. 
Evgenia Radanova of Bulgaria has been rising in the world. 
Kim Dong-Sung of South Korea is the defending Olympic champion and World Cup champion.
China boasts two top competitors in the 500 meters who share the same Anglicized name: Yang Yang. 
The unrelated skaters are designated Yang Yang (A) the older, and Yang Yang (S) the younger. 
LIZ ROBBINS
