
Nobody would ever mistake the Las Vegas Casino "Welcom's You!" cries a crawl of red lights above the door -- for a Las Vegas casino.
There is no faux Great Pyramid, just a nondescript room with seven slot machines, a roulette wheel and three poker tables. 
No luxury hotel soars above the betting parlor. 
The only floor show is a very drunk prostitute trying and failing to find her way out the door.
But most of all on this May evening, the Las Vegas is not Las Vegas because there are no gamblers. 
At 10 p.m. in downtown Blagoveshchensk, barely a half-dozen forlorn figures are feeding the slots or placing bets, compared with 30 on an ordinary night here.
More telling still, only one of them is Chinese. 
"We like to gamble with the Russians," the one Chinese man, 21-year-old Li Yanchou, a student at a Blagoveshchensk teachers' institute, said between bets. 
"Tourists, businessmen who have money -- a lot of them would like to come here. 
But they're not."
That is bad news for the Las Vegas -- and for the Casino Macao on the opposite corner, the Owl a few steps down Lenin Street, the Amursky a few steps up Lenin Street, the Uzbek Restaurant and Kasino just across Lenin Street, and a half-dozen others.
Unlikely as it seems, Blagoveshchensk, a down-at-the-heels city of 170,000 in remote southern Siberia, has carved itself a prosperous niche as the mecca for Chinese gamblers.
Or had, until the ailment a local man was suffering from was tentatively diagnosed in early May as Russia's only known case of SARS, or severe acute respiratory syndrome. 
Faster than you can say "snake eyes," local border posts snapped shut and the casinos' Chinese clientele all but dried up.
Local officials have since said the disease was not SARS, but health officials in Moscow have said they stand by the original diagnosis until tests prove otherwise.
"Who could know that this thing would happen?" said the manager of the Macao, who gave her name only as Svetlana. 
"Usually we rely on tourists. 
Now the only Chinese here are the ones who live in the city."
For Blagoveshchensk residents, it is a piece of uniquely bad luck. 
With a falling population, no dominant industry and no sightseeing outside a handsome but crumbling stock of Siberian log cabins, the city appears to have but one natural advantage: it sits on the Amur River, with a Chinese province of 39 million people just 500 yards away on the opposite bank.
Local entrepreneurs made the most of it. 
The city and outlying areas now have 13 casinos, with 3 more on the drawing board, all catering to Chinese patrons. 
There are far more casinos here than anywhere in Russia, save Moscow (population: 10 million).
The area's gambling joints pump more than $1.1 million a year in taxes into government coffers -- not as much as the booming gold mining industry, but enough to make gambling one of the major businesses in Amur Province.
By most estimates, 7 of every 10 Blagoveshchensk customers come from across the Amur. 
Gambling is illegal in most of China, and while underground betting parlors thrive there, a jaunt to Russia is less furtive and perhaps more fun.
Russia's Far East has larger and more cosmopolitan cities -- Vladivostok and Khabarovsk -- that offer not just casinos but also direct air service from China. 
By contrast, little Blagoveshchensk does not even have a bridge across the Amur; incoming gamblers take boats in the summer, drive across the frozen river in winter and ride hovercrafts in spring and fall, when ice floes rule out other options.
Yet Blagoveshchensk seems to have captured the Chinese heart.
Part of it, apparently, is that Chinese fear the far higher crime rates in bigger Russian cities, and part is that in major towns they must compete for a preferred spot at the tables with sharp-elbowed, high-stakes Russian gamblers.
"In Khabarovsk and Vladivostok you have to pay an entrance fee to gamble," said Marat Makrtchyan, owner of two casinos and president of the Amur Province Association of Gambling Organizations. 
"None of the casinos here charge entrance fees. 
For us the main clients are the Chinese, and Chinese of different levels. 
Low-income Chinese may gamble at one table, and we can set up a V.I.P. table for rich Chinese. 
And they feel this atmosphere."
Many come from Heihe, a Chinese city of about 70,000 directly across the river. 
But increasingly, Mr. Makrtchyan said, they are coming from big cities like Harbin and even Beijing, as well as the great population centers of southern China.
SARS is believed to have originated in southern China, and as the Russian authorities have focused on the Chinese presence in the border area of Siberia as a potential entry route for the virus, casinos have been seen as a potential vector.
Mr. Makrtchyan scoffs at that, although not every casino operator agrees -- the Macao, for example, sprays its gambling hall with disinfectant every three hours. 
After all, Mr. Makrtchyan said, European nations have kept their borders open even as they treat genuine cases of SARS.
"It's a typical Russian attitude -- 'what if?'
" he said. 
"It's very easy to destroy established economic links by illiterate steps."
