
The satellite manufacturer Loral Space and Communications Corporation has agreed to pay $20 million in fines to settle a federal investigation into charges that it passed sensitive materials to China after an abortive satellite launching there in 1996.
State Department officials said today that the penalty appeared to be the largest paid by an American company under the Arms Export Control Act.
The settlement extracts Loral, without an admission of guilt, from a federal inquiry into whether it and two other major American satellite makers compromised trade secrets in their dealings with the Chinese over the last decade.
In a similar arrangement in 2000, the Lockheed Martin Corporation agreed to pay $13 million in fines stemming from its role in a separate case. 
It was alleged to have provided technical aid to a Hong Kong-based company with ties to Beijing.
The third case involves Hughes Space and Communications, which was acquired last year by Boeing, and it is still active.
Under its deal with the State Department, Loral agreed to pay $14 million in civil fines and apply an additional $6 million to improve its compliance procedures over seven years.
The agreement, which was released today, noted that Loral officials "neither admit nor deny" the government's charges.
But, it said, Loral executives "acknowledge the nature and seriousness of the offenses alleged by the department in the draft charging letter, including the risk of harm to the security and foreign policy interests of the United States, and wish to make amends through the payment of restitution."
The government had accused Loral of providing Chinese officials with confidential materials from an American panel that investigated the February 1996 crash of a Loral satellite, which was built for Intelset and launched by a Chinese Long March rocket.
Federal authorities charged the company with 64 counts of violating rules governing the transfer of sensitive technologies and underscored a prohibition on providing "any technical assistance whatsoever" to Chinese authorities seeking to improve their capabilities.
Over the past decade, China became a valued partner of American satellite companies seeking to control costs with inexpensive launchings aboard Chinese rockets. 
But administration officials have insisted on strict rules and oversight for such operations because of concerns that China might appropriate secret technology or pass it to other nations.
Bernard L. Schwartz, Loral's chairman and chief executive, released a statement today accepting "full responsibility for the matter."
"Loral and its employees are patriotic, law-abiding citizens, and we take this matter very seriously," he said. 
"We historically have had an excellent security record and are committed to vigorous compliance with export control laws."
Mr. Schwartz portrayed the incident as an error by a single Loral employee who had provided the Chinese with a report by the American panel, the Independent Review Committee, which was set up to resolve insurance issues. 
The report was edited to protect secrets, he said.
The $20 million penalty is certain to mark a hardship for Loral, which is struggling financially, the officials said, but it removes a hurdle for the company to resume business with Beijing. 
For nearly three years, Loral has sought permission to launch a new satellite in China.
