
Rescuers looking for two missing American mountain climbers in a vast and isolated section of southwestern China are concentrating on two mountain areas after getting a tip from a woman who met the pair shortly before they disappeared.
Ted Callahan, an American climber involved in the rescue effort, said Friday that search teams would begin exploring mountains in Sichuan Province on Saturday, near the cities of Litang and Batang. 
The missing climbers, Christine Boskoff and Charlie Fowler, were last heard from on Nov. 
8.
Mr. Callahan said searchers would initially concentrate on base camp areas below the mountains, adding that the pair's best hope of survival is if they are stranded in a village or in a nomad camp in a valley.
''The hope is that we'll find traces of them in a base camp,'' said Mr. Callahan, who was reached on his cellphone on Friday as he arrived in Litang. 
''That's the great hope right now -- that they are stuck in some nomad camp.''
Mr. Callahan said that clues in e-mail messages from Ms. Boskoff and Mr. Fowler had convinced searchers that the pair intended to climb either Genyen Mountain outside Litang or a string of interconnected peaks near Batang. 
He said that he and other searchers would begin exploring Genyen on Saturday. 
Another team will be organized for the effort in Batang.
Mr. Fowler and Ms. Boskoff are considered elite, world-class climbers, and the search has become an international effort coordinated, in part, out of the United States. 
Friends and fellow mountain climbers are accepting donations to help finance search efforts. 
Mr. Callahan said that four teams of Chinese and American climbers, as well as ethnic Tibetan guides, were being organized.
Asked if the chances of finding the two climbers alive were slim, Mr. Callahan said Mr. Fowler had once survived a mishap in Tibet that forced him to crawl for several days until he reached safety. 
He lost his toes in the episode but survived to climb again.
''He's just known as being exceptionally tough,'' said Mr. Callahan, attributing the same qualities to Ms. Boskoff.
Both climbers are based in Colorado, and Ms. Boskoff is also an owner of Mountain Madness, an adventure mountaineering company in Seattle. 
She had apparently led an expedition and then joined Mr. Fowler in October for a vacation in which they hoped to record a ''first ascent'' on certain unclimbed peaks in southwestern China.
But in e-mail messages to friends, they did not specify which mountains they were trying to climb. 
The lack of specific information has plagued search efforts because the two had been traveling through a mountain region that spreads across Tibet, Sichuan Province and Yunnan Province. 
They also did not apply for a required climbing permit, which might have helped locate them.
In recent days, though, new information has been unearthed, in part because of attention generated by widespread news media coverage in southwestern China and the announcement of a $4,000 reward. 
Gao Min, leader of the Sichuan Mountaineering Association, said that several sightings had been reported, some of which were unfounded, but others were being investigated. 
Mr. Gao said searchers were following up one tip about two trekkers spotted outside Litang.
Meanwhile, Mr. Callahan said an important breakthrough came from a Chinese tourist who met the two climbers on Nov. 
6 and 7 at a hotel in the city of Yading. 
They told her they planned to climb a final peak in Sichuan before returning to the United States. 
That specificity has helped focus the search on Sichuan, though Mr. Callahan said the police were also searching a small region of Tibet along the Sichuan border.
''Our great hope is that this is a rescue,'' Mr. Callahan said. 
''The next best hope is that we'll be able to bring closure to this and bring them home one way or another.''
