
It was a device worthy of Rube Goldberg, or perhaps Wile E. Coyote. A remote-controlled mechanism with a dozen launching tubes was found buried in the turf at Hong Kong's most famous horse racing track last week; it was rigged with compressed air to fire tiny, liquid-filled darts into the bellies of horses at the starting gate.
No horses were injured because the supervisor at the Happy Valley Racecourse, where horses have been racing since 1846, noticed something on the turf before racing started Wednesday. 
He discovered the mechanism concealed by grass-colored tape and called in a police bomb squad to remove it.
The discovery of the device, which was equipped with elaborate electronic controls, has raised concerns about security for the six Olympic equestrian events to be held in Hong Kong next year.
Security experts tend to say that the risk of a terrorist incident during the 2008 Summer Games is lower than at other recent Olympics. 
But Hong Kong is a far more open, less-controlled city than Beijing, where most of the Olympic events will be held.
The equestrian events will not be held at Happy Valley, but at Hong Kong's other racetrack, in Sha Tin, just north of the Kowloon peninsula.
Most of the Sha Tin site has been closed to the public since July for the construction of special facilities. 
It will remain closed until the Olympics begin.
''There will be a full lockdown period of the entire Olympic venue'' and a thorough police inspection before the Games begin, said Lam Woon-kwong, the chief executive of a company set up by the Hong Kong government to organize the Olympics here.
Police officials refused to discuss the device found at Happy Valley, except to say that it was under investigation. 
One popular theory is that gamblers installed it in an attempt to fix the outcome of races.
The liquid in the darts was being analyzed at a laboratory to determine whether it was a tranquilizer, poison or something else entirely. 
A long trench was dug underneath where the starting gate stands during a race, and the footlong launching tubes were placed in the trench and concealed under the locations where each horse would stand at the beginning of a race.
Donald Tsang, who was re-elected Sunday as the chief executive of Hong Kong, said in an interview that he believed gamblers were responsible.
''We'll bring these guys to the book,'' he said, adding that Olympic events like dressage were far less likely to draw the attention or interest of gamblers.
Tsang tends to be well informed about police investigations in Hong Kong. 
He not only heads the territory's government, but his brother was also the police commissioner until retiring in 2003; their father was a police sergeant for many years.
In a sign that the case of the mysterious device at Happy Valley may prove tough to solve, a person close to the investigation said Monday that the police would probably offer a reward as soon as Tuesday for information that would help them find the culprits.
Stephen G. Chandler, the executive director of security and corporate legal services at the Hong Kong Jockey Club, said that the motives and identity of whoever built the device remain a mystery. 
The jockey club manages the city's racetracks and has been working closely with the police.
''We've contacted our counterparts around the world -- it's never been seen before,'' said Chandler, a former Hong Kong police official.
He declined to speculate further on motives. 
Other theories include terrorism, extortion and insurance fraud. 
Chandler said that no one contacted the club before the device was found.
Horse racing experts said it might be hard for gamblers to profit by silently firing darts into one or more horses and betting on others to win. 
They said that any horses that were pierced, and possibly horses near them in the starting gate, might react violently, which would probably lead to the discovery of the darts and the cancellation of the race.
Happy Valley Racecourse is unlike most racetracks because the infield is a public park, equipped with ball fields and operated by the government. 
A public jogging trail lies next to the track's inside rail. 
Three tunnels under the track provide public access.
Soccer balls, badminton birdies and other sports equipment periodically land on the turf on days when there is no racing, and people at the park sometimes stray onto the racetrack. 
As a result, Jockey Club officials inspect the track before races are held.
The track has security cameras, but the trench was dug in a blind spot for the cameras. 
Chandler said that because the Jockey Club had more than 5,000 full-time employees and nearly 20,000 part-time employees, it was possible that someone at the club participated in the scheme.
Video cameras are nearly useless at night because the track is nearly surrounded by apartment towers whose residents object to having floodlights used on the site more often than necessary. 
The club considered installing infrared cameras but decided against it.
But since the discovery of the dart-firing device, guards have begun patrolling the track with dogs at night.
Sha Tin Racecourse has a public park in its infield, but it was closed when the construction project began last summer. 
In 2001, a cleaner found a nail bomb under a seat there. 
A 27-year-old electrician later pleaded guilty to putting the bomb there in an attempt to draw government attention to his personal-financial difficulties; he was sentenced to five years in prison.
A spokeswoman for the International Olympic Committee in Lausanne, Switzerland, said the group was not concerned about the device at the Happy Valley Racecourse because it had not been planted at an Olympic site.
The I.O.C. decided in July 2005, at a meeting in Singapore, to transfer all six equestrian events to Hong Kong from Beijing. 
The Beijing Organizing Committee had new stables built and special fields planted in an unsuccessful attempt to convince international veterinary groups that it could protect horses during the Olympics from 17 equine diseases that are endemic to China.
If the events had been held in mainland China, other countries would have required the Olympic horses to spend months in quarantine before being allowed to return to their home stables. 
Hong Kong, however, meets international veterinary standards.
The I.O.C.'s decision to transfer the events to Hong Kong attracted little attention at the time because it was made at the same meeting in which the 2012 Games were awarded to London, passing over New York, Paris, Madrid and Moscow.
The six equestrian events are individual and team competitions in dressage, jumping and eventing. 
For eventing, a three-day competition, riders seek the best combination score for dressage, jumping and a cross-country race.
Dressage and jumping will be held at Sha Tin Racecourse. 
The cross-country event will be held at a luxury golf course that already has a high fence around it for security and has few trees inside that could be used for cover.
Trying to attack horses at the Olympics would be much harder because the riders have considerable choice about where their horses should stand at the start of each event. 
''Greater variability makes it a harder target,'' said Chandler, of the jockey club.
Stephen G. Vickers, a former Hong Kong police intelligence official who is now the president and chief executive of International Risk, a security consulting company, said that any possible incidents at the Olympic events in Hong Kong would probably be peaceful. 
They may include demonstrations by followers of the Falun Gong spiritual sect, which has been banned and sometimes repressed in mainland China.
Strenuous efforts against triads, which are Chinese organized crime syndicates, have made horse races here less likely to be fixed than anywhere else in Asia, Vickers said.
But the device found at Happy Valley is certain to make security even tighter during the Olympics next year, he said, adding, ''I think they're going to quadruple whatever they were going to do before.''
