
The Senate voted overwhelmingly today to ease restrictions on the export of mass-marketed computers and other high-technology products to countries like China and Pakistan, calling the current law a relic of the cold war.
The legislation revising the 1979 Export Administration Act, approved by a vote of 85 to 14 and backed by the Bush administration, removes controls on items that are "mass-marketed" in the United States or are widely available in foreign countries. 
But it also gives the president the authority, case by case. to block the export of items the Defense Department and intelligence establishent deem a threat to national security. 
And it increases fines and penalties for those companies and people who violate the law.
The regulation of products ranging from tape recorders to computer chips was intended to keep American technology out of the hands of potential enemies, who might use it for military purposes or sell it to hostile countries to make nuclear weapons. 
But critics argued that many of the items on the list were now available in retail stores both here and abroad, and the high-technolgy industry said the licensing process, which took from one to two months on average, undercut its ability to compete internationally.
"We have about 10 times as many items on this control list as we should have," said Senator Phil Gramm of Texas, the ranking Republican on the Banking Committee, who helped write the bill. 
"We need to build a higher fence around a smaller number of things. 
And when people violate the law, we should come down on them like a ton of bricks."
The vote followed a lobbying campaign by computer makers, aerospace companies and electronics manufacturers, among others, who helped tamp down national security concerns that had delayed action on the issue for years.
Two years ago, a House committee headed by Representative Christopher Cox, a California Republican, criticized the Clinton administration's 1996 decision to relax controls over the export of advanced computers to countries like China. 
The Cox committee concluded that some of the American computers sold to China might have been used for military purposes like upgrading nuclear weapons or developing more accurate missiles.
The House is holding hearings on the issue and beginning work on its own bill, which tilts more heavily toward the national security side.
