
In Japan, the American declaration of war on international terrorism has already had one dramatic, if largely unintended, effect: pushing this country's debate over the role of its armed forces further in the last three weeks than in the previous three decades.
Until last month's terrorist attack on the United States, proposals to allow Japan's Self Defense Force to behave like most military forces -- fighting to promote national interests and working closely with allies during crises -- had been perennially stalled.
Two powerful obstacles, the constitutional restraints on the use of military force and strong popular support for the country's official pacifism, have always combined to keep things that way.
But since the country's political leaders were powerfully nudged two weeks ago by a comment from Deputy Secretary of State Richard Armitage, to "show the flag" alongside the United States, politicians here have been virtually outdoing one another in urging new roles for the Self Defense Force.
In this process, Japan appears to be following Germany, its ally during World War II and another country whose armed forces were placed on a tight leash after the horror of Hitler's war. 
Over the past decade, these constraints have been loosened in Germany as the army has taken on missions in the Balkans that were previously unthinkable.
Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi took the lead in this debate, amid fevered discussion here of the need to avoid the embarrassments suffered during the 1991 Persian Gulf war, when Japan declined to join the fight against Iraq. 
On Sept. 
19, the prime minister announced a seven-point plan to dispatch Japanese warships to provide rear-area support for the United States Navy.
But instead of drawing the condemnation expected from many quarters, this first overseas deployment of Japanese armed forces since World War II -- aside from peacekeeping missions -- quickly drew a statement of support from the country's leading opposition formation, the Democratic Party.
Mr. Koizumi might have expected strong resistance from within his ruling coalition as well, especially since one of its members, the powerful Buddhist-affiliated New Komeito Party, is strongly identified with pacifism. 
But in recent days, as the Parliament has debated legislation to enable the naval deployment, senior Komeito members have signaled their willingness to allow broad leeway for the use of weapons by Japanese forces.
Japanese public opinion remains deeply divided over the dispatch of warships, recent polls indicate, although support rises to roughly 70 percent when people are specifically asked if Japan should provide rear-area support only. 
Although their comments have been muted so far, Japan's neighbors, in particular China and the two Koreas, have consistently opposed anything that appears to strengthen this country's military.
"We have been paying attention to responses from China and South Korea and have explained in an appropriate manner," Mr. Koizumi told legislators today.
The new legislation, which will be introduced on Friday, would expand the circumstances under which Self Defense Force troops may use weapons to include protecting people like refugees and disabled soldiers under the care of Self Defense Force personnel. 
There has also been talk of authorizing search-and-rescue operations to support American forces. 
Current rules permit Japanese troops to use weapons only in self-defense.
Japanese political analysts say that what appears to be happening is that the country's leading parties are competing to demonstrate support for an already popular leader, Mr. Koizumi, whose strength has only grown during the crisis.
For the time being, the most notable objections to Mr. Koizumi's offer to support the United States have come from elders within his own party, who appear to be angered over not having been consulted.
"I want a Japan that can't be drawn into a broader war," said Hiromu Nonaka, a former Liberal Democratic Party secretary general who lost much of his clout when Mr. Koizumi won office in April. 
"Right now we don't have a mechanism to put on the brakes."
There is a historical shift here.. 
The old-line power brokers of Mr. Koizumi's Liberal Democratic Party had traditionally been the most ardent advocates of revising Japan's so-called peace constitution.
Akihiko Tanaka, a professor of international politics at Tokyo University, said: "What has happened, obviously, is that now we have a prime minister who is immensely popular, and though he may not be a great expert in security matters, he has a good feel for situations like these. 
He had promised that he would bring about a radical change in thinking, without depending on lots of party gurus, and that is just what he did."
