
In the three weeks since the earthquake ravaged China's Sichuan Province, the Chinese-American community that stretches from Chinatown in Lower Manhattan to the large enclaves on the West Coast has contributed millions of dollars to relief efforts, dwarfing past fund-raising campaigns.
The emergency has temporarily unified the various and sometimes competing strands of the Chinese diaspora, including anti-Communist groups, which have suspended their political animosities toward Beijing for now, to support the victims of the earthquake.
In New York, one of the biggest fund-raisers has been the Chinese Consolidated Benevolent Association, a historically anti-Communist and pro-Taiwanese umbrella group of Chinese social and business groups, and one of the oldest Chinese organizations in the city.
As of Friday, the association had raised more than $800,000, its largest fund-raising drive in its recent history, said Johnson Lee, secretary of the association, which was founded in New York's Chinatown in 1883.
''We're not responding to the government,'' he said. 
''We're responding to the people. 
We're all the same people.''
Justin Yu, the association's president, added: ''I have nothing to do with the Beijing government. 
I didn't connect with them before, I don't have any relations with them now, I don't plan to have any relations with them in the future. 
But the people of Sichuan are my people.''
In recent years, the association has participated in several fund-raising drives to benefit victims of natural disasters on the mainland, including a severe winter storm that struck southern China this year and the devastating floods in 2003.
To circumvent the Chinese government, the association is forwarding its donations to the American Red Cross, which in turn is sending them directly to the Red Cross Society of China, Mr. Yu said.
In addition to groups throughout the Chinese diaspora, Taiwan's government and private sector have provided China with assistance, said Ben Shao, spokesman for the Taipei Economic and Cultural Office in New York, Taiwan's de facto consulate here. 
The Taiwanese government plans to donate a total of $67 million in aid, and private companies have donated about $83 million, he said.
In addition, Taiwan's new president, Ma Ying-jeou, who is viewed as more pro-Chinese than his predecessor, has donated $6,500 of his own money to inspire ''all individuals in Taiwan'' to help, Mr. Shao said.
According to China's mission to the United Nations, as of Friday, a total of more than $5.3 billion in earthquake relief money and services had been donated in China and abroad.
The fund-raising by groups on both sides of the Taiwan-China political divide comes amid an apparent warming in relations between the two. 
Wu Poh-hsiung, chairman of Mr. Ma's Nationalist Party, crossed the 100-mile-wide Taiwan Strait, which separates the island from the mainland, and met with President Hu Jintao. 
The sides agreed to end a nine-year freeze on formal talks about tourism and the start of regular direct charter flights between them.
China has sought to assert sovereignty over Taiwan since the end of the Chinese civil war in 1949, an effort that Taiwan's leaders have rejected. 
But with Mr. Ma's election in March as Taiwan's president, relations between the two governments have warmed.
Russell C. Leong, adjunct professor of Asian-American studies at the University of California, Los Angeles and the editor of Amerasia Journal, said these diplomatic overtures had most likely encouraged more donations for earthquake relief by groups loyal to Taiwan.
''Things have loosened up, providing people with breathing space to do these things,'' he said.
But John C. Liu, a New York City councilman who immigrated from Taiwan when he was a child, said he doubted that a possible reconciliation between the two sides would have an impact on Chinese-American charity.
''No matter how friendly or hostile the governments may be across the Strait, the response from the community would've been overwhelming,'' said Mr. Liu, who represents Flushing, Queens, which has a huge Chinese enclave. 
''This is about the simple reality that many people are dead and many, many more are injured or homeless.''
Chinese-American groups in New York and elsewhere have mobilized for numerous other humanitarian causes, including relief after the terrorist attacks of Sept. 
11, 2001, the Indian Ocean tsunami in 2004 and Hurricane Katrina in 2005.
But the fund-raising efforts since the May 12 earthquake in Sichuan, which killed more than 68,000 people, have surpassed earlier efforts, according to leaders of Chinese-American groups around the country.
The contributions have flowed at benefit concerts and opera performances, in response to postal and e-mail solicitations, and on the sidewalks of Chinatown here, where volunteers have set up donation boxes on folding tables.
Helen Thong, the owner of Taste Good, a popular Malaysian restaurant in Elmhurst, Queens, held a benefit on Wednesday, allocating the day's proceeds -- more than $9,000 -- to earthquake relief. 
At dinnertime, the line of patrons, representing a broad swath of the Chinese diaspora, snaked out the door of the small restaurant and onto the sidewalk.
''You see those pictures on TV, right?'' she said. 
''The children and the people who are helpless under the rubble?
It breaks your heart. 
Basically we are all human. 
We have compassion. 
That's what motivates us.''
Even practitioners of Falun Gong, the spiritual movement outlawed in China, have contributed, said Gail Rachlin, a spokeswoman for the movement in New York. 
''It's on an individual basis,'' she said. 
''When we do get together, people mention that they've donated.''
In recent days, supporters of Falun Gong in New York have held several demonstrations against the Chinese government.
In Los Angeles, where the Chinese Consolidated Benevolent Association raised about $200,000 in a one-day benefit, Peter Ng, the group's president, said the earthquake ''is definitely a tragic thing, but it has kind of opened up everybody's mind.''
''Every facet of the Chinese in the world has done that,'' he added. 
''It's unprecedented.''
