
MACBETH does a back flip from a 10-foot-high city wall; his queen sings a lament as she wipes imaginary blood from her hands; and the courtiers enact their coup in Han dynasty dress. 
It is no typical production of Shakespeare's ''Macbeth'' that Spoleto Festival U.S.A. is presenting on Thursday and Friday in Charleston, S.C.
Renamed ''The Kingdom of Desire,'' it is a creation of the Contemporary Legend Theater of Taiwan, which has fused Shakespeare's plot with the mise-en-scene of Beijing opera. 
The verses are in Mandarin (with English titles), and the words are accentuated by the actors' flowing patterns of movement. 
While plotting the king's murder, Wei Hai-Ming, as Lady Macbeth, elegantly twirls the long sleeves of her dress. 
Wu Hsing-Kuo, meanwhile, as Macbeth, twists his body in snakelike fashion and flutters his hands in circles. 
His movements intensify as his strong tones resonate throughout the auditorium.
In Beijing opera, a 200-year-old dramatic medium and long the most popular form of entertainment in China, actors, clothed in ornate silk costumes, perform stylized movements on a more or less bare stage. 
Traditional string, wind and percussion instruments accompany the performers through sequences of acting, song, dance and acrobatics. 
Like Broadway players, the actors excel in these different skills and often perform them simultaneously.
The Contemporary Legend Theater was established in 1986 by its lead actor and artistic director, Mr. Wu, in an attempt to usher Beijing opera into the 21st century. 
The company made its debut with ''The Kingdom of Desire,'' which it has since performed widely, notably at the Royal National Theater in London in 1990 and at the Avignon Festival in France in 1998.
Over the last two decades, the company has produced a series of plays interpreting canonical Western dramas -- ''Hamlet,'' ''Medea,'' ''Oresteia,'' ''The Tempest'' -- through the Beijing opera lens. 
In 2001, Mr. Wu performed ''King Lear'' as a one-man show, alternately playing Lear, Cordelia and the other principal roles. 
(Cross-dressing is a longstanding tradition in Beijing opera.)
Purists of a certain stripe might see these adaptations as further evidence of the East's capitulation to Western culture, whether popular or classical. 
Mr. Wu, however, sees them as a way to help preserve Beijing opera tradition.
''As I grew up learning Beijing opera, I realized that every day the audiences grew smaller and smaller,'' he said in an interview. 
''The times were changing quickly. 
So I asked myself how I could make Beijing opera flourish again.''
But when he set about to fuse Eastern and Western drama, he and his collaborators found that it was no easy task. 
Ms. Wei, the Lady Macbeth, explains: ''Beijing opera portrays beauty. 
Western drama depicts life.''
Aesthetic qualities of a rarefied sort are paramount in Beijing opera. 
Actors train intensively from childhood to achieve a perfect fluidity of movement. 
Stage scenes are organized to produce the most exquisite impression. 
Sometimes, during a martial sequence, a gong will suddenly sound, and the performers freeze their bodies into a beautiful sculpture adorned in silk.
Onstage, there is no ugliness. 
Actors' faces reveal little emotion, even through death and war; grief is expressed through stylized gestures. 
Nor does anything interrupt the smooth choreography. 
Everything is done to please the eye.
This ideal is very different from Western drama, which, beginning with Greek tragedy, does not hesitate to plunge into the depths of human suffering in a wrenching, realistic manner. 
The goal of involving the audience emotionally often supersedes that of giving visual pleasure.
These differences in representation reflect the differences in subject matter. 
''Beijing opera only portrays virtue, illustrates high ideals,'' Mr. Wu said. 
''Shakespeare's plays and the Greek tragedies talk about human weakness caused by love and hatred.''
Indeed, Chinese opera heroes and heroines, like the charitable Bai Su Zhen in ''Madam White Snake'' or the naive Du Liniang in ''The Peony Pavilion,'' are paradigms of innocence. 
The leads in ''Macbeth'' are murderers tortured by ambition and then by guilt.
But in a few important regards, Shakespeare is well suited to the Chinese stage. 
''Shakespeare wrote most of his plays in verse, like Beijing opera,'' Mr. Wu said. 
''His stage is also relatively sparse. 
The actors are responsible for conjuring up the setting.''
He added, ''We want to use well-known masterpieces because everyone understands them already.''
That is how traditional opera is generally presented in China, where operas may last up to 20 hours but are typically shown in isolated excerpts, requiring the audience to be familiar with the larger context of a given scene.
Mr. Wu began intensive training in Beijing opera at 10, in Taiwan. 
Eight years later, he entered the Chinese Culture University and started studying Shakespeare. 
After graduation he performed leading roles for the Cloud Gate Dance Theater and the Lu Kuang Chinese Opera School. 
In 1983, eager to revive the form, he and a group of friends began discussing the possibility of a Beijing opera interpretation of ''Macbeth.''
This was the genesis of the company. 
The challenges were immense. 
It had no script, no sets, no costumes, no rehearsal space and no financing.
''We had trouble finding someone to adapt the script to Beijing opera, because a lot of people opposed our use of Beijing opera as a means to present a Western drama,'' said Lin Hsiu-Wei, the producer of ''The Kingdom of Desire'' and Mr. Wu's wife. 
''Finally, a college student accepted, and turned the verse into Beijing opera style poetry in one year. 
At the end, it was too long to use, so we had to edit it extensively.''
The text was set to traditional melodies from Beijing opera.
The sets and costumes were produced by volunteers. 
''The people making the sets put up their own money,'' Ms. Lin said, adding that the costume designers did the same.
As for the role of Lady Macbeth, the company looked outside its own ranks. 
''At the time,'' Ms. Lin explained, ''in the Beijing opera world, the two best accomplished artists were Wu Hsing-Kuo and Wei Hai-Ming,'' a star of the Hai Kuang Chinese Opera Company in Taiwan. 
''They were therefore the perfect match onstage.''
Mr. Wu called Ms. Wei and offered her the role of Lady Macbeth -- but without salary. 
(The company is now fully professional.)
Beijing opera is highly codified. 
Movements function as symbols that can represent either the physical situation or the thoughts of a character. 
A thrust of the leg and the character is suddenly swimming in a river. 
A dismissive wave of the hand, the character is angry.
The code is made more complex by traditional opera's character categories. 
Like Western opera, which categorizes its roles according to vocal range (sopranos and tenors as heroes and heroines, mezzos and basses as heavies), Beijing opera divides its characters according to sex, age, rank and function.
The term ''wusheng,'' for example, designates all the male military roles. 
''Qingyi'' describes the virtuous lady, whether a dutiful daughter or a devoted wife and mother. 
Each category has its own repertory of stage movements from which the characters choose to express their particular situations.
Because of the difficulty of the movements, a Beijing opera performer will generally master only one or two role types. 
As Ms. Wei, who began training when she was 10, explains, ''I was raised as qingyi, which means that all my movements had to be very tender, very soft.''
So when Mr. Wu called, she assumed that her role in ''The Kingdom of Desire'' would fall within that category, too. 
''I accepted the offer without having read the script,'' she said. 
She added with a laugh, ''I hadn't suspected his plan.''
But Lady Macbeth does not fall into any of the traditional character categories. 
Ms. Wei had to discard her qingyi movements and create a new body language to depict Lady Macbeth's devious personality -- a process that exemplifies the modernization of Beijing opera in the production.
''I created new movements, like this one, where my palms are facing toward the sky and my hands are at different levels,'' she said. 
''The palms facing upward indicate that Lady Macbeth wishes to elevate her status and the status of her husband. 
But you would never see a movement like this in traditional Beijing opera.''
She demonstrated other movements she had created for her role. 
''When I walk, I move my dress so that it is like the tail of a snake,'' she said. 
''When I plot the king's murder with Macbeth, I emphasize the vicious words with the lashing movements of my dress.''
And unusually, the Beijing opera performers are required to depict suffering realistically, to contort their made-up features into scowls and frowns, to produce tears.
Yet in ''The Kingdom of Desire,'' the performance loses none of its beauty. 
The grimaces, the stabbing and the contracted limbs, all that is normally ugly and cathartic in Western drama, is infused with gracefulness, a constant hallmark of the form. 
And emotions are externalized with a new intensity through the performers' graceful use of their entire bodies to express their feelings. 
(Ms. Wei and Mr. Wu will give a lecture-demonstration on ''The Kingdom of Desire'' on June 8 at the New York Library for the Performing Arts.)
As Mr. Wu had hoped, ''Macbeth'' has given Beijing opera new expressive possibilities and a new opportunity to flourish. 
Maybe Beijing opera will do the same for ''Macbeth.''
(Photo by Chen Hueh-Long)(pg. 
24)
Wei Hai-Ming, far left, and Wu Hsing-Kuo of Contemporary Legend Theater of Taiwan. 
(Photo by Yang Wen-Chin)(pg. 
25)
