
Jean-Michel Dumont, a public relations executive from France, lives here on Jianguo Xi Lu, or West Nation-Building Street. 
Yet every few weeks he finds a piece of ghostly mail in his letter box addressed to 47, 506 Pass, Rue Frelupt.
The street has not been officially called Frelupt since 1943, during the Japanese occupation, when the city's administration changed the foreign street names to reflect the country's presumed bright pan-Asian future instead of its supposedly dark, quasi-colonial past.
But the Frelupt-addressed mail continues to arrive like hesitating clockwork, a small but pleasant event for the Frenchman because it provides a tangible link to the days when his compatriots administered this part of Shanghai, known before the war as the French Concession.
The letters, from Columbia University in New York, have also been a sometimes tenuous thread between two worlds for more than half a century during which time this once cosmopolitan city was largely cut off from the West. 
Their uninterrupted delivery is one of the many small marvels of the mail, a testament to the reliability of the postal services on both sides of the Pacific.
In certain respects, little appears to have changed here since the letters began arriving in 1951.
The Pass in the address on the letters is an abbreviation for Passage, which is what the French called the lanes that lead off Shanghai's busy streets and are today time capsules of traditional Shanghai life, even as skyscrapers and highways slowly close in around them.
About 9 each evening, someone walks through the lanes where Mr. Dumont lives ringing a bell to remind residents that they should "lock the doors, close the gas taps and be careful with fires."
Each morning, itinerant scrap collectors make their rounds, clanging chimes and calling out for paper, bottles or cans. 
The rice man visits once a week, advertising his arrival in a clear singsong voice as recognizable as any bell.
But the neighborhood's peaceful routine and the reassuring constancy of the mail belie a turbulent past.
In the 1940's, a Shanghai gangster turned real estate developer built these three-story row houses on the road that once led to the French garrison's rifle range and was named for Joseph Sylvain Frelupt, a Shanghai resident killed in World War I. The gangster named the development Yi Yuan, or Virtuous Garden. 
In 1945, the house now occupied by Mr. Dumont was bought by a family named Chang. 
They paid in gold because of the hyperinflation in China at the time.
Yi Yuan's residents remember vividly the day in 1968 when they gathered nervously at the corners of the winding lanes, watching and waiting their turn as Mao's Red Guards smashed or carted off the best of each family's belongings. 
Then strangers arrived to take up residence in the homes.
Three generations of the Chang family were corralled into two rooms while six poorer families moved into the rest of the house, sharing its three toilets, two bathtubs and tiny kitchen. 
Some people had it worse. 
Fourteen families occupied the house next door.
The new and old residents settled into an uneasy coexistence, but they still do not mix much. 
The original owners, richer and better educated, consider themselves a world apart from their uninvited neighbors. 
Most of the families who, like the Changs, held onto their deeds, reclaimed their houses during the reforms of the 1980's, but those who panicked and turned over their property to the government in a desperate patriotic gesture are stuck with their unwanted housemates today.
In 1948, one of the Chang sons had sailed from China aboard the steamship President Wilson and enrolled in Columbia University's School of International and Public Affairs just a month before China's Communists came to power. 
He gave the school his home's prewar address because most Shanghai residents continued to use the old street names until the Communist government enforced the address changes after 1949.
The address was later copied from Mr. Chang's registration records to an index card in the school's alumni files. 
Keeping the database of 410,000 names up to date is a full-time job made even more challenging by the world's changing geopolitical map. 
The breakup of the Soviet Union, the reunification of Germany and the shifting states of Yugoslavia have all played havoc with addresses.
Howard Hartig, who helps manage the Columbia database, says that he and his colleagues are constantly weeding the mailing list of people who have died or addresses that are no longer current. 
But it is impossible to keep all of the entries fresh.
"Letters seldom come back with stories if they come back at all," Mr. Hartig said by telephone from New York.
Mail to Frelupt has never been returned, and so the university has not stopped sending alumni news and fund-raising appeals to the house in Shanghai. 
The Columbia mail arrived here throughout the political upheavals of the late 1950's and even the extreme xenophobia of the 1966-76 Cultural Revolution.
Shanghai's main Post Office still employs a handful of elderly mail handlers to redirect letters that arrive periodically from overseas with pre-Communist-era addresses.
Mr. Dumont, who first came to China in 1986, moved into the Changs' house in 1995 as part of a renewed French presence in this part of the city, which, with its walled gardens and leafy lanes, looks like it could be in northern France. 
Last December, he bought the house.
Mr. Dumont collects the letters that arrive from Columbia and periodically passes them on to a member of the Chang family. 
But the family says it has never bothered forwarding the mail from Columbia to Mr. Chang. His niece said Mr. Chang stayed in New York and still lives just a few blocks from the university.
