
For the second time in as many months, Dell rattled its investors by warning that its customers are reluctant about spending on computers and servers.
On Tuesday, the computer maker cautioned that slumping demand for technology equipment across the globe was affecting its business. 
The somber message, issued halfway through Dell's third quarter, caused a drop of more than 11 percent in the price of the company's stock. 
Dell closed Tuesday at $15.98, down $2.01.
Dell has frequently cited lackluster demand for technology for less than stellar financial results. 
In August, Dell warned that weakness in spending in the United States had carried over to Europe and Asia. 
It said that decline in spending contributed to a 17 percent drop in quarterly profit. 
The company said in a Securities and Exchange Commission filing in early September that it planned to shrink its worldwide network of factories.
''We saw a very weak August,'' Dell's chief financial officer, Brian T. Gladden, said Tuesday at a Bank of America investors conference in San Francisco.
Only about 20 percent of Dell's revenue comes from consumers. 
Its reliance on business spending, and on the government, military and education sectors, is causing Dell to feel the impact of the slowing economy ahead of some major rivals.
Small and medium-size businesses and the federal government are reining in technology purchases. 
''Corporate spending has been relatively balanced for us in the U.S. and the consumer market continues to be pretty strong,'' Mr. Gladden said.
Some analysts have questioned whether Dell's problems are of its own making. 
In August, the company blamed ''self-inflicted'' factors, like price cutting, for part of its woes. 
Mr. Gladden deflected these critiques Tuesday and emphasized that there was ''more broad-based slowing'' in the economy.
Dell warned of particular weakness in Britain and southern Europe. 
It also cited difficulty selling in China. 
''We saw weakness in China as part of the Olympic period and expected it to snap back,'' Mr. Gladden said. 
''We have dug a bit of a hole there.''
Hewlett-Packard and I.B.M. have proved more resilient than some of their competitors in recent months, and in recent statements they remain optimistic. 
Both companies have a broad range of products sold globally. 
Hewlett-Packard's customers are balanced between consumer and business customers. 
But a number of analysts expect the two companies to face increasing pressure because of the recent strengthening of the dollar.
H.P.'s chief financial officer, Cathie Lesjak, said at the Bank of America event that the technology company is ''very confident'' in the recent guidance it gave its investors.
With uncertainty rife in the financial markets and more financial services companies facing difficulties, Forrester Research scrambled this week to revise its forecast for technology spending in the United States. 
Forrester is now forecasting that year-over-year growth in sales of computers, software and outsourcing services will slow significantly, while spending growth for communications equipment and technology services should actually increase at a faster rate in 2008.
The research firm said it expects that softness in technology purchases will begin in the latter part of 2008 and early 2009 as companies pull back on capital spending. 
It is now predicting an increase in tech spending in 2009 of 6.1 percent, down from its previous forecast of 9.4 percent.
Softness in the financial sector is of particular concern to the large hardware makers, as Wall Street firms tend to spend heavily on technology.
