
China stepped up its attacks on Taiwan's president, Chen Shui-bian, even as he was sworn into office for a second term on Thursday, warning that it would force Taiwan to remain part of China even if that resulted in international isolation and severe economic pain.
Militant statements in the official media and stark warnings by several of China's leading Taiwan experts appeared designed to discount in advance some mildly conciliatory comments Mr. Chen made Thursday morning in his inaugural address, while emphasizing Beijing's readiness to attack if he pursued a course toward formal independence.
Mr. Chen, delivering his address in a downpour in front of Taiwan's presidential palace, said he would undertake constitutional reform, as he has long promised. 
But he ruled out using the reform process to effect changes to the country's sovereignty and left the door open to reunification down the road, if Taiwan's 23 million people choose to support it.
''This is my responsibility to history that I present to the Taiwan people and government a new constitution before my term ends on 2008,'' Mr. Chen said, following through on a campaign promise.
But at least in part to alleviate Chinese concerns that a new Taiwanese constitution would result in a formal severing of Taiwan's remaining ties to the mainland, Mr. Chen vowed to exclude questions of sovereignty.
''I am fully aware that consensus has yet to be reached on national sovereignty, territory and the subject of unification and independence,'' he said. 
''I clearly state here that such issues will not be included in the scope of constitutional reforms.''
Despite those comments, which were largely anticipated, mainland Chinese leaders appear to have reached a new consensus that there is little prospect of negotiating with Mr. Chen, who narrowly won re-election in a disputed poll in March, and that Beijing must eliminate doubts that it is prepared to attack to enforce its will.
''No one will pay any attention to his words, even if he talks at great length,'' said Xu Shiquan, one of China's most senior advisers on Taiwan affairs, said of Mr. Chen. ''China will pay any price to prevent independence.''
The rising tensions underscore the risks for the United States, which has been cast as an intermediary between China and Taiwan. 
Washington recognizes China's sovereignty but has also vowed to defend the island, a democracy, against any attack from China. 
It is Taiwan's main supplier of weapons.
China took the unusual step of briefing the United States on the text of a new Taiwan policy before its publication on Monday morning. 
Mr. Chen sent emissaries to Washington earlier this month to discuss his inaugural address, American and Taiwanese officials said.
A senior Bush administration official said mediation ''had reduced the chances of miscalculation'' at a difficult time. 
But he also acknowledged that the two sides had become increasingly antagonistic and political tensions had increased even as economic ties flourished.
A former American government official who discussed Taiwan policy with civilian and military leaders in Beijing last week said China had determined that Mr. Chen had already ''crossed the red line'' after campaigning on a platform that China felt amounted to supporting independence. 
The former official said he was repeatedly warned that China had little choice but to attack if Mr. Chen fulfilled past pledges to solidify Taiwan's national identity.
''I don't think they want to use force,'' the former official said. 
''But the pessimism is striking. 
There's a sense they have no choice now.''
On Monday, China released its highest level statement on Taiwan policy in several years, outlining a variety of benefits Taiwan might receive, including closer economic ties, reduced military tensions and more diplomatic ''living space,'' but only if Taiwan fully accepted the ''One China'' principle under which Beijing claims sovereignty.
At the same time, Prime Minister Wen Jiabao said the Communist Party would ''seriously consider'' enacting a law that would require Taiwan and China to reunify by a certain date, either voluntarily or by force.
Mr. Chen has sent conflicting signals in the past about whether he intends to try to formalize Taiwan's de facto independence. 
But he has repeatedly rejected the ''One China'' policy, and his aides made clear this week that he was not prepared to discuss China's sovereignty claims at this time.
The most delicate issue is how Mr. Chen carries out constitutional reform and whether he will adhere to his promise to steer clear of sovereignty questions. 
Mr. Chen said his plan for ''constitutional re-engineering'' will focus mainly on the structure of Taiwan's government and enforcing rule of law and human rights.
American officials have said they expect Mr. Chen to promise not to seek independence through constitutional reform. 
Yet Mr. Chen must respond to broad support among his core constituency for concrete steps to show that Taiwan is realizing its national identity, and to broad opposition to accepting Chinese rule.
