
FEW people would consider an outsize rock to be the ideal pillow. 
But not unlike a medieval knight in a brass rubbing, resting in sweet repose on a stone tablet, Ling Chan, the celebrity facialist, sleeps on a 9-by-15-inch slab of jade. 
"To me, it is cool and comforting, like butter," Ms. Chan said. 
"In the morning, I feel as if my head and neck have been massaged for eight hours. 
It balances the flow of chi, or energy, in my body. 
It gives me serenity."
Serenity is a valuable commodity to Ms. Chan, who is in the business of soothing the complexions and egos of clients like Diana Ross, Barbra Streisand and Madonna. 
She is famous for her luxuriously long facials, which often include spiritual guidance and advice about romance. 
Because she does all this standing up, a good night's sleep is essential.
Like many Asians, Ms. Chan grew up believing that jade has mystical powers to heal and restore the body and spirit. 
Its role in the Chinese bed, bath and beyond dates back 2000 years to the Han dynasty, when jade pillows were carved exclusively for royalty. 
According to lore, the Empress Dowager Cixi was famously fond of hers.
In modern-day Chinese culture, the green stone is still popular. 
At Ms. Chan's three Ling Skin Care salons in Manhattan, jade cylinders are rolled over customers' faces and eyes to revive the skin and absorb bad chi. 
At her home in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, jade Buddhas and talismans make her meditation room and living room almost verdant.
The pillow, however, is Ms. Chan's security blanket. 
"I am so attached to it," she said as she led the way to her bedroom. 
"I almost believe I slept on it in a past life."
(Even in a past life, she apparently slumbered only on her back, since jade is distinctly inhospitable to stomach-sleepers.)
Turning down the red silk bedspread, she uncovered the stone, which was tucked under a down pillow as if it were a 25-pound tooth that only the doughtiest tooth fairy could spirit away.
To be sure, this tooth fairy would have to be not only strapping but also unusually flush. 
A solid jade pillow costs about $2,000. 
That price was initially daunting to Ms. Chan, who first bought a less expensive version -- a dense fabric bolster with a beaded slipcover similar to the mats that cabbies drape over their seats. 
The results were unsatisfying. 
"My hair got caught in it," she said. 
"Every time I moved, a piece got yanked out."
So when Ms. Chan spotted a rare single-slab jade pillow in an antique shop in New York's Chinatown, she splurged, justifying the expense as a gift for her husband. 
"He tried it that night and kept complaining, 'I can't take it, I can't take it,' " she remembered.
The next night, the pillow moved to her side of the bed. 
"It took me three days to get used to it. 
Now I can't do without it."
Does the fact that Ms. Chan was able to stick it out suggest that she has a stronger chi than her husband?
"I think it does!" she said, smiling happily at the prospect.
"Or else it just means I have a harder head."
