
The strangeness of it all was not lost on Robert Rosendahl as he walked through the humming Chinese factory, the place where as a World War II prisoner of war he had been a slave laborer for the Japanese. 
He had hated this factory, just as he hated the Japanese prisoner of war camp that took three years of his life.
This morning, Mr. Rosendahl, 82, was back for the first time. 
He and two other returning Americans walked tentatively through the compound as Chinese television crews crowded in. 
His wife, Bettie, asked him if he wanted to take a picture.
"I don't want to take a picture," he said. 
"Why the hell do I want to take a picture?
I spent 59 years trying to forget this place."
Then he paused, laughing gently at his own bluster, and lifted his camera. 
Click.
He could not resist, just as he could not resist returning after six decades to this city in northeast China where he and roughly 1,500 other Allied prisoners endured forced labor, sub-zero temperatures and, if the allegations are true, a Japanese-administered germ warfare program that used them as guinea pigs.
Mr. Rosendahl, along with two other former American soldiers, Oliver Allen, 82, and Harold Leith, 84, came back today to Shenyang, in part, because they want to make certain that their obscure but brutal chapter of history is not forgotten. 
In particular, discussions are under way with Chinese officials to preserve the remains of the prison camp, known as Mukden, and, if money can be raised, to build a museum.
"One of these days, people like Bob and me will be gone," said Bettie Rosendahl. 
"There won't be anybody left to tell the story."
The question of remembering is a potent one for many Chinese here in the northeastern region, historically known as Manchuria. 
The return of the American P.O.W.'s came, by design, on a symbolic day in Chinese history -- the anniversary of Sept. 
18, 1931, the beginning of Japan's brutal 14-year occupation of Shenyang and of surrounding Manchuria, when untold numbers of Chinese were slain.
For many Chinese, the lingering resentment and anger toward Japan is great. 
Today, an online petition signed by more than 1.1 million Chinese called on Japan to compensate Chinese victims of buried chemical weapons left by the Japanese after World War II. 
Last month, Chinese construction workers unwittingly struck buried mustard gas, killing one person and injuring dozens.
This month, China and Japan held talks on the issue of buried chemical weapons, Reuters reported. 
So far, Japan has rejected the idea of compensation, contending that China relinquished such a claim when it established diplomatic relations with Japan in 1972.
The political subtext, though, was not much on the minds of the former prisoners. 
Mr. Allen, who came with his wife, Mildred, from Tyler, Tex., had been fighting in the Philippines when the Americans were forced to surrender. 
He and Mr. Rosendahl took part in the Bataan Death March before they were brought by boat to Mukden.
During that first winter at Mukden, at least 260 men are believed to have died. 
The ground froze so deep in the intense cold that the men could not be buried, so their bodies were kept in a room until springtime.
Mr. Allen, like Mr. Rosendahl, was forced to work in a nearby factory that was being built to make machine parts for the Japanese war effort. 
Mr. Allen recalled that when the Japanese overseers went to lunch, the prisoners would sabotage the plant, dumping tools into the wet concrete.
"Everything we could get our hands on went into the concrete," Mr. Allen said.
This morning, the plant, now a Chinese and Czechoslovak joint venture that makes machine tools, was buzzing with work as Mr. Allen and Mr. Rosendahl came through with Dr. Kenneth Y. Kai. Dr. Kai, an orthodontist from San Jose, came to represent his elderly father, Yoshio Kai, who was the Japanese translator at the factory credited by many prisoners with secretly helping them survive.
"He gave them blankets and food," Dr. Kai said of his father. 
"He knew about the sabotage but he didn't report it."
The other returning American, Mr. Leith, was not a prisoner at Mukden but the camp's liberator. 
Days after Emperor Hirohito surrendered, Mr. Leith parachuted into Manchuria to make certain that the prisoners were not executed, ultimately winning their safe release.
"I ran down the corridor into the courtyard of the prison and told the P.O.W.'s they were going home," Mr. Leith recalled. 
"I was asked all these questions like: Was Shirley Temple dead?
Who won the World Series last year?"
The most agonizing question -- still not fully resolved -- concerns whether the Japanese used the Mukden prisoners in medical and germ warfare experiments. 
Mr. Rosendahl remembers being forced to take shots, while Mr. Allen said he did not, but knew of other inmates who died after taking them. 
Greg Rodriquez Jr., whose late father was a Mukden prisoner, said guards had held feathers under the noses of sleeping prisoners, a known method of spreading bacteria.
The old prison camp is now a battered apartment building for poor Chinese. 
Yet as Mr. Rosendahl and Mr. Allen went inside this morning, it took them a minute to recognize the place burned in their memories. 
They stood in a tiny room, since converted into an apartment, and seemed stunned at how much and how little had changed.
"You recognize any of this?"
Mr. Rosendahl asked Mr. Allen.
"Not this TV," Mr. Allen replied, and the two men laughed.
