
FOR musicians starting out, winning an international competition means more than earning accolades; cash and concert engagements also come with the prize.
So when Yunjie Chen, a 21-year-old Chinese-born pianist, was one of five 2001 Young Concert Artists International Artists Auditions winners, he received $5,000 and performing dates in three cities. 
In December, Mr. Chen, who has also won prizes in China and Germany, played in Washington and Boston. 
On Wednesday he makes his New York debut at the 92nd Street Y.
But first, he will appear in Oakdale, opening the Islip Arts Council's Free Winter 2002 Chamber Music Series today at 2 p.m., at the Carriage House at Bayard Cutting Arboretum. 
He will play the same program of Bach, Prokofiev and Schumann that he will perform in Manhattan before a paying audience.
He is the first of six current and recent competition prize winners to appear in this season's series of 12 weekly concerts. 
The others, all Concert Artist Guild International Audition winners, are the Avalon String Quartet, on Feb. 
3; Alpin Hong, a pianist, on Feb. 
10; Ayako Yoshuida, a violinist, on Feb. 
17; James Lent, a pianist, on March 10; and a duo, Anthea Kreston, a violinist, and Jason Duckles, a cellist, on March 24.
Now in its 26th year, the Islip series has evolved into a showcase for emerging talent. 
It one of only a few like it in the country, said Susan Wadsworth, founder and director of the Young Concert Artists International Auditions, and, she says, gives "young professionals -- and these are professional musicians, not students -- the opportunity to perform close to New York."
Yet the budget for the series is minimal.
"I'm embarrassed to say that we only pay the performers -- soloists and groups alike -- $300," said Lillian Barbash, executive director of the Islip group. 
"But that's up from the $50 we paid when we started."
Some performers have their fee supplemented by the arts organizations supporting them. 
But others, like Mr. Lent, the pianist who has previously appeared in Oakdale, may be on tour in the area and have a "free date and just squeeze us in," said Dorothy Kalson, the council staff member who books the series. 
"Often, they'll have new material that they want to try out," she added.
Performers who have appeared in the series include the Bachman-Fridman-Klibinoff Trio; Daniel Waitzman, the flutist; Elaine Comparone, the harpist; Edward Arron, the cellist; and Reiko Aizawa, the pianist.
The series also offers performance by local groups, including the Pierrot Consort, the resident chamber ensemble at the C. W. Post Campus of Long Island University.
Information: (631) 224-3420.
