
As the shutdown of West Coast shipping enters a second week, businesses from Japan to Pakistan are growing increasingly worried that a protracted dispute between American longshoremen and port operators could cripple Asia's economic recovery.
Some manufacturers are already feeling the strain. 
Last week, Toyota closed a factory it operates with General Motors in California. 
"We're really short on parts that come from Japan, starting from the engine," said Paul Nolasco, a Toyota spokesman in Tokyo.
Matsushita Electric Industrial, best known for its Panasonic brand, has 120 shipping containers of microwave ovens and televisions awaiting unloading at West Coast harbors.
More cargo is lining up. 
Shipping officials estimate that more than 150 freighters are nearing their destinations or idling off the coast. 
Yesterday, for example, a 68,000-ton ship operated by the Orient Overseas Container Line was to arrive in Long Beach, Calif., from Hong Kong with as many as 5,000 containers.
The Pacific Maritime Association, which represents shipping lines and terminal operators, closed the ports and locked out 10,500 longshoremen last Sunday night after complaining that the workers were engaged in a slowdown. 
The International Longshore and Warehouse Union said its members were working more slowly as a safety precaution after five longshoremen died this year.
Talks with a federal mediator continued yesterday and the White House urged both sides to resolve the dispute to prevent further damage to the economy. 
Both sides agree that the major issues are management's effort to introduce new technology to speed cargo handling and the union's demand to retain high-paying clerical jobs under its jurisdiction.
Apprehension is building about what could happen if the lockout is drawn out. 
But for now, many Asian exporters are trying to operate as close to normal as possible.
At Yue Yuen Industrial in Hong Kong, where shoes for Nike, Adidas, Reebok and Timberland take shape, the factory is buzzing with activity. 
Like many exporters, the company has signed contracts with American companies that ensure payment if goods are shipped on time.
"They must be watching very closely," Philip Wong, Yue Yuen's investor relations manager, said of the shoe companies. 
"We are just standing by."
Many ships bound for America are still leaving foreign ports on time. 
Shipping companies are betting that the contract negotiations will be settled before vessels that are making the 10- to 14-day voyage across the Pacific reach their destinations. 
But nearly all shipping companies are looking for alternative sites.
Some ships have already been diverted to Mexico. 
Others are seeking sanctuary in Vancouver, British Columbia, but port officials there said they would not be able to handle additional traffic. 
Companies are also exploring the option of shipping goods by plane.
Economists said the impact of the slowdown on Asian countries would be relatively mild if the dispute between dock workers and the port operators was settled quickly. 
But the longer it goes on, the worse it will get. 
And as more ships line up outside the harbors, analysts said, the backlog to unload their cargos could stretch into a month or more.
"If the shutdown lasts for more than one month, East Asia would be in a recession," Andy Xie, the chief economist at Morgan Stanley in Hong Kong, said in a report. 
"The consequences for the global economy are horrendous."
Last year, more than $300 billion worth of goods entered the United States through the West Coast ports. 
Most of that cargo came from Asia and represented 10 percent of the gross domestic product of East Asia, economists said.
Experts are divided about the overall cost of the shutdown. 
Some economists have said that losses may have reached $1 billion a day during the first five days, and increased sharply after that. 
But others say those figures are exaggerated. 
In truth, no one knows for sure.
"The global impact depends on how long this goes on," said Richard D. Rippe, chief economist at Prudential Securities. 
"If it's brief, the impact on both the U.S. economy and the global economy is likely to be small."
Many manufacturers accelerated shipments earlier in the year in anticipation of the expiration of the longshoremen's contract in July. 
But much of the merchandise could not be shipped early, because it was destined for just-in-time delivery to store shelves for the beginning of the Christmas shopping season. 
This delivery system, virtually nonexistent 10 years ago, allows companies to save money by cutting down on storage costs.
But this year, if merchandise made abroad is not unloaded in time, retailers could cancel orders, experts said. 
That would set off a downward spiral, causing manufacturers to lose money and lay off factory workers or force them to take time off without pay.
In Pakistan, whose economy is heavily dependent on textile and apparel exports, companies are worried about multilateral trade quotas for certain items. 
The quotas are being filled quickly by other countries through East Coast ports. 
Manufacturers there fear that once ports are reopened, it will be too late and their goods will have to sit in warehouses until next year.
The closing of West Coast ports also prevents American exporters from getting goods like fresh poultry and fruit to foreign countries. 
And in Hawaii and Alaska, consumers are beginning to worry that their lifeline to goods produced in the United States will be cut off soon. 
Neither state has reported shortages, but in Hawaii, customers began to stock up on goods from Wal-Mart and Costco a few weeks ago when labor negotiations with the dock workers grew more contentious.
The governors of Alaska and Hawaii had asked the union and port operators for a special exemption because so much of their goods arrive by container vessels. 
This weekend, both sides agreed to resume shipments to those states.
To prevent a meltdown of commerce, shipping companies are beginning to reroute ships to any port that will take their goods. 
Vancouver is among the most inviting because it has the facilities to handle large container vessels. 
But port officials said they were not "in a position to take ships that do not currently make Vancouver a port of call."
The Mexican authorities, however, are welcoming diverted vessels to their Pacific ports. 
In the last four days, Ensenada, Guaymas and Manzanillo have received thousands of tons of cargo from Hong Kong that had been scheduled to go to Portland, Ore., and Long Beach, officials said. 
But getting the goods by truck to consumers in the United States could take weeks or longer.
Some air carriers have been flooded with inquiries about delivering goods. 
All Nippon Airways, which flies from Japan to the West Coast, has noticed a small increase in orders over the last few days, but "space is already very tight," Yasuo Taki, a company spokesman, said.
On Thursday, the United Parcel Service said it would add more 747 flights to the United States from Asia.
"Any time you get new business, people coming to you wanting space on your plane, of course, that's good," said Travis Spalding, a spokesman at U.P.S. 
"We will try to accommodate customers whenever we can. 
But our first responsibility is going to be to serve our existing customers."
