
THERE are many Web sites devoted to criticizing industries and companies. 
Many are of the ''Wal-Mart Watch'' variety (walmartwatch.com) and are decidedly one-sided.
There are also services like the Dow Jones sustainability indexes (www.sustainability-indexes.com), and the many sites for ''socially conscious'' investors. 
These, according to a recent article in The Harvard Business Review, amount to a ''cacophony of self-appointed scorekeepers'' that make up a ''jumble of largely meaningless rankings, allowing almost any company to boast that it meets some measure of social responsibility.''
Now comes Do The Right Thing (dotherightthing.com), a site introduced this month. 
It works like Digg.com in having users make submissions, which are then voted on by readers. 
''All are welcome,'' the site announces, including ''people who buy the stuff, who make the stuff, who live in communities where the stuff is made, and who have transcendent abilities to speak on behalf of that which cannot speak (like wildlife and the environment).''
Once companies are submitted, they are evaluated for 60 days. 
Users submit evidence for or against the company, votes are tallied, and a ''social performance'' score is given. 
After the initial evaluation, the score can still change with further submissions and voting.
''Its important to create a system that has a balance of accountability and free form,'' Ryan Mickle, the site's founder, told David Cohn of newassignment.net. 
It is based on Digg, he said, because ''it's a balance between a wiki and a forum, and neither [alone] would have worked for Do The Right Thing.''
This may not yield a fully balanced assessment of every company, but only time will tell that. 
While it seems at least possible that most users will be predisposed to take a negative view of a given company, the site is open to people with all points of view.
''Google does EVIL by allowing censorship in China,'' is the headline on one recent submission, which referred to an article on TechCrunch.com. 
But the article was about a Google founder, Sergey Brin, recently expressing regret over Google's earlier decision to allow China to censor its search results. 
When several other users pointed this out to the submitter, he referred to a different article about Chinese censorship that referred to Google only peripherally. 
Most users gave the post a thumbs-down, and it ended up with a below-zero score. 
Still, as of Thursday, 67 users had voted positively on the submission, essentially agreeing that it should count against Google.
One user questions the very nature of the site, asserting that it is based on false premises. 
Many things companies do, this user noted, have both good and bad consequences. 
Should complicated matters really be measured with a simple thumbs-up or down?
''Is outsourcing really not the right thing?'' he asked. 
''Are you sure?''
The user concluded, ''I recommend using and posting to this site with trepidation.''
That, and perhaps not writing off those ''self-appointed scorekeepers'' so quickly.CREDIT SCORE MISTAKES -- People trying to repair their credit often operate from ignorance of how credit scores are determined. 
For them, the Simple Dollar (thesimpledollar.com) offers the ''10 Common Tactical Mistakes When Dealing With The Credit Score Blues.''
For instance, canceling old credit cards is not always a good idea, because the length of a person's credit history is a big factor on a credit score. 
Also, the site advises, ''if you have balances on other cards, canceling an old credit card can also worsen your debt ratio, which makes up 30 percent of your score.''DEDUCTIVE REASONING -- Bankrate.com offers the wild and the wacky from the world of tax deductions. 
More than one person has tried to write off the cost of day care for a dog. 
One Amish man wanted to write off his buggy, on which he had spent about $1,000 to install dashboard lights, kickplates, a tinted windshield and a velvet interior. 
Not all offbeat deductions are illegal, though. 
One man successfully wrote off his comic-book collection because he wrote his doctoral thesis on the societal impact of comics. 
DAN MITCHELLComplete links are at nytimes.com/business.
