
BORSCHT. It's not a dish many people associate with Hong Kong, and probably not what most would order for dinner their first night in this former British colony. 
Roast pork, sure. 
A whole fish steamed with ginger, absolutely. 
But beet soup?
It hardly seems Chinese.
Yet borscht is certainly Hong Kongese, a not uncommon sight on dinner menus and an essential component of a meal at Queen's Cafe, the dim, cozy, wood-paneled restaurant where I spent one Friday evening earlier this year. 
Opened in 1952 by White Russian emigres and immortalized in the 1991 Wong Kar-wai movie ''Days of Being Wild,'' the cafe was filled with a cross-section of Hong Kong: hip kids in black glasses and cowboy boots, office workers embarking on the weekend, and first-daters, all tucking into roast chicken, rib-eye steaks, shrimp cocktail and bowls of that tangy borscht.
I was there alone, and so I brooded over my prix fixe meal of borscht and ''sharshlik'' fillet -- garlicky and a little overcooked, just the way I like it -- which cost 128 Hong Kong dollars, or $16.45 at 7.77 Hong Kong dollars to the U.S. dollar, plus a pair of Carlsberg beers for 35 Hong Kong dollars each. 
Dining with oneself for company can be difficult in any city, more so in one as jam-packed with human beings as Hong Kong: seven million inhabit the 425 square miles of this special administrative region of China, more than two-thirds of which is rural land or protected greenspace. 
Don't think sardines; think transistors on the latest Intel chip.
Adding to the challenge was my two-day budget of $500, including lodging, which in Hong Kong can go a long way -- or nowhere at all. 
Fleabags abound, noodle soups cost next to nothing, and trendy, disposable clothes are worn by everyone under the age of 40. 
At the other end of the spectrum is the Hong Kong of the bankers, the developers, the movie stars: InterContinentals and Mandarin Orientals, glittering Louis Vuitton boutiques, and private clubs whose ''Members Only'' plaques glare at you from semisecret entrances to Art Deco skyscrapers.
I wanted to live that life, but on a rickshaw-puller's salary, and so far, I'd succeeded. 
I had checked into the Cosmopolitan, a new hotel whose clean, modern rooms occupy the former premises of the Xinhua News Agency, China's official news outlet. 
The Cosmopolitan and its infinitesimally cheaper sibling, the Cosmo, lay across the street from the Happy Valley racetrack, about 10 minutes from the Causeway Bay subway station.
Reserving two nights through hotels.com set me back $176.12, and the remainder I'd calculated at approximately 2,600 Hong Kong dollars, about $334, of which I'd spent almost nothing. 
Lunch had been a noodle soup with roast pork and wontons (23 Hong Kong dollars), and the subway trip to Central, Hong Kong's downtown (5 Hong Kong dollars), put me within walking distance of the Peak Tram, the funicular (30 Hong Kong dollars round trip) that for 118 years has heaved sightseers up steep slopes to Victoria Peak. 
Or, rather, to the Peak Galeria, where I bought bags of dried mangoes and spicy dried cuttlefish (10 Hong Kong dollars each; the latter was buy-one-get-one-free!) before marching to the real peak.
The 20-minute hike along winding Mount Austin Road took me past ritzy apartment complexes and the peaceful, deep-green Victoria Peak Garden before topping out in a plaza 1,818 feet above sea level. 
Up there, families strolled paths lined with mountain laurels and azaleas, while I looked down on the city: the 50-story apartment buildings arising from the hills; the misty harbor, stocked with ferries and container ships; the black kites wheeling lazily in the sky, sighting a rodent dinner far below.
Later that day, I received a call from Tim, a childhood friend who had been living in Hong Kong for several years. 
We met for a drink at Opia, a dark bar-restaurant that would not be out of place in New York. 
Its prices, too, struck me as familiar: 132 Hong Kong dollars for my South gin martini meant, alas, that one would be my limit. 
Still, there was always Saturday.
SHOPPING in Hong Kong is more than a pastime; it's an undertaking, a scholarly pursuit. 
There was no way I could hit every shopping district in a mere 24 hours, but I was determined to do my best. 
I began with Hollywood Road, stopping first for an airy scrambled-egg-and-corned-beef sandwich (33 Hong Kong dollars with a cup of coffee) at Tsui Wah, a hectic plastic-boothed diner that serves fish-ball noodle soup alongside baked pork chops with tomato sauce.
One of the oldest streets in Hong Kong, Hollywood Road is famous for its antiques shops, art galleries and the boutique zones of Soho and Noho. 
But the very first store I walked into was of more recent vintage: G.O.D., or Goods of Desire, a minichain that applies Hong Kong street style to Ikea-like home decor, clothing and stationery. 
Here were pajamas printed with classified ads from Chinese newspapers, Lucite frames bearing stock shots of people from the 1960's, and rather comfy-looking sofas that might have been a tad difficult to ship back home. 
(Dear G.O.D., please open a New York branch.)
On I soldiered, glancing at the contemporary Vietnamese paintings at Arch Angel Gallery (53-55 Hollywood Road) and sampling the premium men's denim at Jeanious before happening upon Wattis Fine Art, which was the host of a show of Arthur Hacker's pen-and-ink drawings of 1970's Hong Kong.
Mr. Hacker, a British writer and artist who has lived in the city since 1967, renders street life with a strong, funny, simple line, carefully tracing the flower print on a hippie's shirt or the precarious-looking bamboo scaffolding still used on construction sites today. 
No catalog was available, and the drawings cost 8,500 Hong Kong dollars and up, but a lithograph of his ''Evolution of the Hong Kong Bar Girl'' was a relative bargain at 500 Hong Kong dollars; I snapped one up.
Lunchtime!
I met my friend Fed at Isola, a trendy Italian restaurant with a magnificent harbor view and an equally magnificent set menu (218 Hong Kong dollars): an antipasto buffet (from olives to octopus salad and beyond), a main course (gnochetti al ragu, red mullet) and a dessert bar (panna cotta, fruit salad, creme brulee, chocolate mousse, apple tart ).
Over the gut-busting meal, Fed, a consummate shopper, gave me advice: Skip the glossy shops of Central, and make for Tsim Sha Tsui in Kowloon, Paterson Street in Causeway Bay, and the area around 3 Pacific Place in Wan Chai.
I splurged on a scenic cruise across the harbor on the Star Ferry, dropping 2.20 Hong Kong dollars for an upper-deck seat (the lower deck is 1.70). 
The ferry, in operation since 1888, has the advantage of being fast as well as atmospheric, and landed me in Tsim Sha Tsui in under 10 minutes.
For Tsim Sha Tsui bargains, there is one destination: the third floor of the Silvercord Center, where the I.T. 
Sale Shop has off-season fashions from brands like Paul Smith and Cacharel at up to 90 percent off. 
I found an A.P.C. suit down from 6,199 Hong Kong dollars to 3,100 -- cheap, but not quite frugal.
A few flights down, however, was a warren of stores operated by I.T., a fashion conglomerate with 230 shops across Greater China. 
Some sell international brands; others offer I.T.'s own labels, of which Izzue has become my favorite, seeming to take my best memories of the Gap and Urban Outfitters and give them an amusing Hong Kong twist. 
I walked out with lightweight olive-green pants and a rumpled blue-striped button-down (698 Hong Kong dollars).
After a restorative nap at the Cosmopolitan, I went in search of 3 Pacific Place and Flea n Cents, (34-38 Queen's Road East, Wan Chai) whose world-spanning collection of vintagetoys, furniture and tchotchkes Fed was certain I'd love. 
It was closed. 
A nearby Illy Cafe, however, was open, and sold a wide array of CD's -- classic reggae and soul, the new Neko Case and ''Xiang Gang Electric,'' a compilation of local D.J.'s, which I bought for 128 Hong Kong dollars.
Time for dinner. 
Again, I was alone. 
(My friend Tim works for a large newsweekly based in Hong Kong, and a breaking story kept him in the office.) But Xi Yan Sweets, a Chinese restaurant whose up-and-coming chef, Jacky Yu, takes cues from Southeast Asia, knows how to treat the solo diner. 
My waitress endorsed my selections -- a smoked-duck noodle soup and fried radish cakes with XO sauce -- with a welcome enthusiasm. 
The room was stark red and white, with high ceilings, marble-topped tables and exposed ductwork, and I slurped my noodles (smoked duck tastes surprisingly like really good ham) undisturbed.
After dinner (154 Hong Kong dollars), I heard from Fed. 
He and some friends were meeting in Lan Kwai Fong, Central's hopping night-life district; would I like to join?
Yes, I said, then changed my mind. 
There is something quite wonderful about walking the streets of a megalopolis at night, with lamps glowing in the apartments above and a million dramas taking place as people close up shop, get drunk, argue on cellphones, and neck quietly in the dark corners of empty office plazas.
Sunday morning brought a hunger that reminded me of when, at the age of 18 months (so my parents recount), I stood up in my chair at a slow-to-serve restaurant and cried out, ''I want Chinese food!
Give me Chinese food!''
No more fusion -- I wanted the classics. 
I wanted dim sum. 
Make that Dim Sum, a retro-traditional dumpling parlor 15 minutes' walk from the Cosmopolitan, past a series of cemeteries -- Muslim, Roman Catholic, Protestant, Parsee and Hindu -- whose multilingual tombstones reminded me of Hong Kong's tourism slogan: ''Asia's World City.''
Dim Sum was also directly across the street from Tim's apartment; he woke up just as I arrived and joined me for two kinds of shrimp dumplings, fried pork dumplings, roast pork buns, chive boxes and -- because I'd heard Calvin Trillin loves it -- sweet fried milk. 
The little plates fulfilled that 30-year-old hunger, but, since the bill was just 91 Hong Kong dollars each, left me with one last dilemma: How to spend the last 400 or so in my pocket before my flight?
Dim Sum's neighborhood, Tim informed me, happens to be known for its foot-massage parlors. 
The name Foot Joy intrigued me, and for the next 50 minutes (and for 198 Hong Kong dollars), my feet underwent a process that left them soft, limp and close to joyful.
In fact, they felt so good that before I knew it, I had walked back to Happy Valley, where a series of horse races from Macao were being projected on a video screen. 
(Live races run Wednesdays.) I paid my entry fee of 5 Hong Kong dollars, and split my last 200 between two horses: Sea Treasure, a sure thing at 3.4-1, and Oh Great, the 99-1 long shot. 
One minute 50.3 seconds later, it was time to go home.
Total amount spent: 2,760.80 Hong Kong dollars ($521).
AFLOAT ON A JUNK
WHERE TO STAY
Cosmopolitan Hotel, 387-397 Queen's Road East, Wan Chai, (852) 3552-1111, cosmopolitanhotel.com.hk; from 700 Hong Kong dollars, or $90, at 7.77 Hong Kong dollars to the U.S. dollar, a night.
Cosmo Hotel, 375-377 Queen's Road East, Wan Chai, (852) 3552-8388, cosmohotel.com.hk; from 650 Hong Kong dollars.
WHERE TO EAT AND DRINK
Queen's Cafe, 8 Hysan Avenue, Causeway Bay, (852) 2576-2658.
Tsui Wah, multiple locations; see www.tsuiwahrestaurant.com.
Isola, Levels 3 and 4, IFC Mall, Central, (852) 2383-8765, www.isolabarandgrill.com; reservations recommended.
Illy Cafe, 12-18 Wing Fung Street, Wan Chai, (852) 3525-1570.
Opia, Jia Boutique Hotel, 1-5 Irving Street, (852) 3196-9100.
Xi Yan Sweets, 8 Wing Fung Street, Wan Chai, (852) 2833-6299, xiyan.com.hk.
Dim Sum, 63 Sing Woo Road, Happy Valley, (852) 2834-8893.
WHERE TO SHOP
G.O.D., multiple locations; see god.com.hk for details.
I.T. Sale Shop, Shop 72, Silvercord Center, 30 Canton Road, Tsim Sha Tsui, (852) 2377-9466; ithk.com.
Izzue, multiple locations; see www.izzue.com for details.
Jeanious, 51 Staunton Street, Central, (852) 2189-7148.
WHAT TO SEE
Duk Ling The last of the batwing junks runs cruises (380 Hong Kong dollars a person and up) and can be chartered (from 9,000 for two and a half hours), but on Thursday afternoons and Saturday mornings, the Hong Kong Tourist Board offers free trips to foreign visitors (passport required). 
Details: www.hktb.com.
