
For all her accomplishments as soccer's leading scorer and the biggest superstar in women's team sports, Mia Hamm has never sustained her brilliance consistently throughout a major tournament like the World Cup or the Olympics.
That may soon change. 
At 31, as she nears retirement after the 2004 Summer Games in Athens, Hamm is playing the most complete soccer of her career. 
She delivered a pair of goals and an assist tonight in a 5-0 victory over Nigeria before a crowd of 31,553 at Lincoln Financial Field, matching her goal output for the entire 1999 Women's World Cup and placing the United States on the verge of qualifying for this tournament's quarterfinals.
In the past, Hamm's confidence has been mercurial, rising or falling with her ability to put the ball into the net. 
She has scored only twice in the knockout phase of a World Cup or an Olympics. 
But she has become more assured, versatile and resilient -- no longer consumed by defeat or a failure to score -- during three seasons with the Washington Freedom in the Women's United Soccer Association.
As her teammates on the national team have become more accomplished and better known, Hamm no longer has an urgent obligation to carry the team on the field, or to shoulder the burden of media attention off it. 
Freed of the responsibility to take control, she seems more willing to do it.
In tonight's rugged game, Hamm tackled fiercely, tracked back to retrieve balls, dropped into midfield on occasion and seemed intently driven from the beginning.
"She wants the responsibility on her shoulders," Coach April Heinrichs said. 
"I believe this will be her best World Cup."
A reluctant superstar, Hamm now seems more comfortable with her celebrity and more relaxed in the way she plays. 
She has scored a pair of goals and collected four assists in two matches of this World Cup, her fourth. 
With 8 career goals and 12 assists, she has surpassed Michelle Akers of the United States and Sun Wen of China as the leading all-time scorer in the women's world championship.
"There's not a reluctance to take over games," the captain, Julie Foudy, said of Hamm. 
"Before, she wasn't reluctant, but she was content with others' taking the stage. 
Now, she's saying, 'I can do it.'
She's playing with an intensity that is inspiring all of us."
The United States (2-0) can advance to the quarterfinals with a draw or narrow defeat on Sunday against North Korea in Columbus, Ohio. 
In the first game of tonight's doubleheader, Sweden (1-1) defeated North Korea (1-1) by 1-0 as forward Victoria Svensson scored on a volley in the seventh minute.
The United States had defeated Nigeria by 7-1 in the 1999 World Cup as the match grew edgy and scabrous. 
The Americans expected a similar game tonight, and Nigeria quickly fell into trouble with its fierce tackling.
In the fifth minute, the Nigerian captain, Florence Omagbemi, took down forward Cindy Parlow from behind in the penalty area, and the Argentine referee, Florencia Romano, signaled a penalty kick.
As the game moved into the sixth minute, Hamm called for the kick, which was a departure from the 1999 World Cup final, when she had not wanted to take one -- then did reluctantly -- in the penalty kick shootout against China. 
Tonight, she assuredly placed a low shot inside the right post. 
The Nigerian goalkeeper, Precious Dede, guessed incorrectly, shuffling to her left, and Hamm pumped her fist in celebration at the 1-0 lead.
In the 12th minute, Parlow was fouled a second time, giving the United States a free kick from 32 yards. 
Again, Hamm stepped forward to take the kick. 
Playing in the W.U.S.A., she has refined her playmaking skills and fashioned herself into a dangerous threat on set pieces. 
Hamm intended to make a pass from the left flank as Parlow made a run toward the far post, but the ball kept floating inexorably toward the goal. 
Dede seemed frozen off her line and reached up with both hands but could not control the ball, allowing the United States to take a 2-0 lead.
Two minutes into the second half, Hamm placed a corner kick perfectly onto the head of Parlow, who was left unmarked from six yards out. 
Abby Wambach scored in the 65th minute, and Foudy delivered a penalty kick in the 89th minute, but the game was dominated by Hamm.
"It's more consistent than in the past," Hamm said. 
"I credit the W.U.S.A. for putting you under pressure week in and week out. 
I'm trying to enjoy this. 
I'm definitely a lot looser than in previous World Cups. 
I'm an intense, emotional person. 
Sometimes, stopping to smell the roses isn't a bad thing."
RUSSIA 3, GHANA 0
Marina Saenko got one goal and started another scoring play as Russia beat Ghana in Carson, Calif.
Saenko scored on a free kick in the 36th minute, Natalia Barbachina made the score 2-0 in the 54th minute, and Olga Letyushova capped the scoring with a close-range volley in the 80th minute.
Russia goalkeeper Alla Volkova, sometimes rushing to the top of the box to turn away scoring threats, was particularly effective when Ghana had breakaways.
CHINA 1, AUSTRALIA 1
Bai Jie scored in the 46th minute as heavily favored China settled for a tie with Australia in Carson, Calif.
Heather Garriock scored in the 28th minute to give the upstart Australians (1-0-1) a short-lived lead.
China (1-0-1), ranked fourth in the world to Australia's 15th, kept the pressure on most of the second half, but Australia's defense crowded back into its own zone to turn back repeated threats.
