
One of the indelible images in women's soccer history is Brandi Chastain's left-footed penalty kick past the Chinese goalkeeper Gao Hong to win the 1999 World Cup for the United States.
The goal was followed by a brouhaha about a doffed jersey and an exposed sports bra.
Now, less than two years later, Gao is tending goal for the New York Power, one of eight teams in the new Women's United Soccer Association, which opens next month and features nearly all of Chastain's teammates and four of Gao's from the Chinese national team.
Among Gao's new teammates for the 21-game W.U.S.A. season are Tiffeny Milbrett, Christie Pearce and Sara Whalen, all United States World Cup veterans, plus the elite Norwegian national team players Gro Espeseth and Ann Kristin Aarones.
"She never thought of the U.S. players as enemies, but she always tried her best to play a good game against them," Heike Chan, who translated for Gao, said yesterday at a W.U.S.A. news conference in Manhattan. 
"She likes the U.S. team. 
She's excited to be on the same team as Tiffeny. 
She sees her role is to promote soccer."
Gao has met the United States players on occasion, but her inability to speak English got in the way. 
"They could only smile at each other or pat each other on the shoulder," Chan said. 
"But even that she felt good about."
Milbrett said: "I have incredible respect for her. 
I hope to learn a lot more about her. 
We may not learn a lot soccer-wise, but to get inside her brain, to learn how she grew up and how she views life."
Gao knows a little English, but she will be taking language classes after the W.U.S.A. teams finish training next month in San Diego. 
Chan said that Gao knew of the league's startup plans well before she was signed last fall. 
"Her only surprise in coming here is in how well developed it is," Chan said.
W.U.S.A. officials have enormous confidence that they have produced an attractive, marketable mix by allocating United States team stars like Chastain, Milbrett, Mia Hamm, Brian Scurry and Julie Foudy to the eight teams, then adding elite international players and rising college stars.
They believe the W.U.S.A. is more immediately attractive than Major League Soccer, largely because of the United States team's success.
Power Coach Pat Farmer said that while there are other women's professional leagues, "This is the premier league for women."
The league also plans to inject its players into communities to build upon the large interest in their sport among soccer-playing girls and young women and their families.
"We have to get involved, do what we love to do," Milbrett said, "and show that we're not here just to play awesome soccer, but for the betterment of people around us."
The Power opens in Atlanta on April 21. 
The first home game, against the San Diego Spirit, will be played April 29 at Mitchel Athletic Complex in Uniondale, N.Y.
