
It was only 24 minutes into BRAD DAVIS'S Major League Soccer career, but he quickly had the look of a grizzled, confident veteran.
Davis was inserted into Saturday's game in the 81st minute by MetroStars Coach OCTAVIO ZAMBRANO, replacing ROSS PAULE on the left side of the midfield. 
Davis scored the game-winning goal in overtime as the MetroStars defeated the Columbus Crew, 2-1.
"He obviously wanted me to take care of my role defensively," Davis said, referring to Zambrano. 
But he mostly wanted me to go forward and make things happen. 
I'm an offensive player. 
I had a couple of chances but couldn't put them away until the overtime.
Davis, who is 20 and played at St. Louis University, was picked by the MetroStars No. 3 over all in the recent M.L.S. draft. 
He showed his offensive prowess last year, scoring 10 goals and adding 14 assists as the Billikens advanced to the quarterfinals of the N.C.A.A. tournament.
Against the Crew (he had also been a late sub in a 1-0 loss to Columbus at Giants Stadium on April 3), Davis went immediately forward, forcing Columbus to scramble. 
Early in the second five-minute overtime period, Davis drifted into the left side of the penalty area as the MetroStars attacked on the right side.
"I don't remember who made the original run, but I do know I was calling for the ball because I was open on the opposite side from the get-go," Davis said. 
There were a couple of shots that were deflected. 
I held my position and, as it rolled to me, my eyes felt like they opened up real big. 
I put my head down and struck it well.
The game-winner, however, is no guarantee of more playing time.
"Hopefully, I will get more playing time," Davis said. 
"I feel I can play. 
It's just a matter of time."
WORLD CUP
BORA MILUTINOVIC, the peripatetic Serb who is the coach of China's national team, said that he might stay in China after the World Cup, but that he would definitely retire from coaching. 
"I'll be 60 when the World Cup is over," Milutinovic told a daily newspaper in Sichuan. 
"The places where I prefer to stay most are the United States and China, not Mexico, where my family lives now."
As the start of the tournament nears, Chinese officials have told the nation's clubs that 11 injured national team players will not be allowed to play in remaining league games, even if they are fit. 
Striker HAO HAIDONG (toe) and the captain and veteran midfielder MA MINGYU (knee) top the list of injured players. 
"If all the players are injured, I would go to the World Cup alone," Milutinovic said.
China has scheduled five warm-up matches -- the first is against South Korea on April 27 -- before it begins play on June 4 against Costa Rica in a first-round group that also includes Brazil and Turkey.
The Manchester United and Ireland midfielder ROY KEANE tore a hamstring in last week's Champions League match in Spain and will be out for at least six weeks. 
The Irish defender STEPHEN CARR, who plays in England for Tottenham Hotspur, has been slow to recover from a knee injury.
"The World Cup's gone, and it's now about getting myself fit and playing football again," Carr said on the club's Web site. 
"I found out last week, and it's a massive disappointment."
Portugal, which opens World Cup play against the United States on June 5, will be without the 22-year-old Benfica wing SIMAO SABROSA. 
Sabrosa, who has played 12 times for the Portuguese national team, underwent surgery on his left knee after he was injured in last week's exhibition loss to Finland. 
Arsenal of the English Premier League said it was prepared to allow its Japanese midfielder, JUNICHI INAMOTO, to leave the club and join his national team at the end of April. 
Arsenal signed Inamoto for $5.7 million from Gamba Osaka last summer, but he has been unable to win a spot in the Gunners' starting lineup.
Japan is scheduled to play host to Costa Rica (April 17), Honduras (April 29) and Slovakia (May 4) in warm-up matches.
A poll of 442 college students conducted by the South Korean magazine Vox found that the American short-track speedskater APOLO ANTON OHNO was the most unwelcome at the World Cup. 
Ohno was followed by OSAMA BIN LADEN, JAY LENO and BRIGITTE BARDOT.
Ohno won a gold medal at the Salt Lake Games when a South Korean skater was disqualified; Leno and Bardot have ridiculed South Koreans for their custom of eating dog.
CORNER KICKS
The New York Power of the Women's United Soccer League will play a benefit match at 7 tonight at Baker Field in Upper Manhattan against the Columbia University's women's team. 
The match will be preceded by a clinic at 5 p.m.
On Sunday, the Power defeated the Philadelphia Charge, 2-1, in an exhibition match at Indian Hills High School in Oakland, N.J.
The Power opens its second season on Saturday night in Washington against the Freedom. 
JACK BELL
