
Against all odds, the chewing-gum aisle at the grocery store became a hotbed of creativity in recent years, as companies battled to find new ways to sell an immutable product, often by trying new combinations of coatings, fillings and packaging.
Now that thinking appears to have spread to broader strategy discussions in the boardrooms of candy companies.
On Monday, Mars, the privately held maker of Snickers and M&Ms, said that it would buy Wrigley, the famous chewing-gum company, for $23 billion. 
Analysts expect the companies to become a potent new marketing force as they try to appeal to a rapidly growing consumer market in countries like China, India and Russia.
The $80-a-share buyout will create the world's largest confectionery company. 
It will be owned by the Mars family, known for its devotion to privacy and its phenomenal wealth.
While Bill Wrigley Jr., a major shareholder in the company that bears his family name, was not looking to sell, he said in a Monday news conference, ''The Mars family approached us with a compelling all-cash offer.''
''We must respect the past,'' he later added, ''but at all times do what is right for the future.''
The deal, to be financed with an infusion of $4.4 billion of loans from Berkshire Hathaway, the company controlled by Warren E. Buffett, brings together two companies with many similarities and a complementary portfolio of products, with Mars focusing on chocolate and Wrigley, chewing gum. 
Both companies have strong roots in Chicago (Mars later moved to Virginia) and remain closely aligned with the families that bear their names.
While Wrigley became a public company, it remains closely tied to the Wrigley family, with Bill Wrigley Jr. controlling 37 percent of the voting stock, according to Citigroup.
The merger puts pressure on competitors like Hershey, Cadbury Schweppes and Nestle to make deals of their own to compete with a bigger Mars. 
A possible deal between Hershey and Cadbury fell through.
''I don't think this is going to force rash decision-making,'' said Eric Katzman, an analyst for Deutsche Bank, but he added, ''It certainly has to be viewed as a game changer.''
Mr. Katzman said the deal would make Mars the clear category leader in the candy aisle, giving it more influence with retailers. 
In addition, the merger would increase Mars's distribution and market strength in developing markets.
Under the terms of the deal, which is subject to shareholder and regulatory approval, Wrigley will remain a stand-alone company ''with a high degree of autonomy'' under the umbrella of Mars brands, Mr. Wrigley said.
The Wrigley family will not retain an ownership interest, though Mr. Wrigley will remain executive chairman of the company, and the Wrigley leadership team will remain in place. 
Chicago would remain Wrigley's headquarters.
Mars first contacted Wrigley about a merger on April 11. 
Mr. Wrigley said he met for several hours at the home of Paul S. Michaels, Mars' global president, where they sat at the kitchen table eating sandwiches and discussing a merger.
Mr. Buffett was brought into the deal as a potential financier about 10 days later at a meeting in Omaha, officials said. 
''Those of you who know me, know that I have been a big fan of Wrigley's business model for many years, and I love their products,'' Mr. Buffett said in a statement.
In an interview, Mr. Michaels said he had been a longtime admirer of Wrigley and believed that the company would be a ''good cultural fit'' for Mars.
''The main play here is about growth and investment,'' Mr. Michaels said.
Several Wall Street analysts and investors said the deal made sense because it created a broad portfolio of confectionery products. 
Wrigley has been doing particularly well overseas in recent years, staking out leading positions in China, India and Russia, among other markets.
But some questioned why Wrigley would remain a separate entity given the cost savings that could be achieved by integrating the two companies.
David Driscoll, an analyst for Citigroup, said combining sales and distribution forces was ''probably the No. 1 reason why you do'' a merger. 
He noted that Wrigley's distribution network in China was among the best and that it was logical to use the system to sell Mars chocolates, too. 
''Why drive two trucks when you can drive one?''
Mr. Driscoll said.
Mitchell P. Corwin, an analyst at Morningstar, said both companies might be playing down the potential disruptions because of Wrigley's prominence in Chicago, where the Wrigley Building and Wrigley Field are among the city's landmarks.
Globally, the confectionery market grew 44 percent from 2002 to 2007. 
Wrigley has grown largely on its success overseas, while struggling in the United States, analysts said. 
The company labored to integrate LifeSavers and Altoids into its business after acquiring them from Kraft in 2005, and has lost market share in gum to Cadbury in recent years.
Wrigley and Cadbury have been battling for consumer attention with products like Wrigley's Orbit, a gum packaged in convenient tabs.
The company has global sales of $5.4 billion and distributes its brands, which include Juicy Fruit and Wrigley's Spearmint, in more than 180 countries; 60 percent of the company's sales come from outside the United States.
Mars has annual sales of $22 billion and distributes its products, among them Milky Way, Pedigree pet food and Uncle Ben's Rice, in more than 66 countries.
