
The team events at the World Bridge Championships here are getting to the serious stage. 
Monday will feature the women's McConnell Cup semifinals and the open Rosenblum quarterfinals.
In Saturday's matches there were some very close finishes, none more so than the one between a team from India, Sunit Chokshi, Kiran Nadar, Honey B. Prabhakar, Bachiraju Satyanarayana, Rajesh Tiwari and R. Venkatraman, and a team from the United Stated, Russ Ekeblad, Ronnie Rubin, Fred Gitelman, Brad Moss, Eric Greco and Geoff Hampson.
At halftime the Indians led by 52 international match points. 
The Americans regained 22 imps in the third quarter and slowly drew closer during the final session. 
When the diagramed deal, the 56th and last board, was played, the Indian edge was down to 4.
At the other table, Gitelman (East) passed, Tiwari (South) opened one club, and Prabhakar (North) responded one no-trump, which showed either a balanced 19-20 points or a game-force with club support. 
East made a weak jump overcall of three diamonds, and South rebid three no-trump. 
East, having been warned that declarer had diamonds well held, tried a surprise attack in spades. 
This worked like a charm. 
Moss (West) won with his ace and returned a spade. 
Declarer rose with his king and played three rounds of clubs, East discarding an encouraging diamond and a second diamond. 
West shifted to that suit, East winning with his ace and taking two spades to defeat the contract.
Could Greco and Hampson go plus?
They use a strong-club system, so Hampson (South) had to open one diamond. 
His two-heart rebid showed a balanced 11-13 points.
Nadar (West) was not going to find the start of the ace and another spade. 
He led his fourth-highest diamond. 
Satyanarayana won with his ace and returned a diamond. 
Declarer took the trick and played on clubs, establishing nine tricks: two hearts, two diamonds and five clubs. 
Plus 100 and plus 600 gave Ekeblad 12 imps and victory by 8.
In the McConnell quarterfinals Sunday, both American teams, with Carlyn Steiner and Hansa Narasimhan as captains, won comfortably. 
The other semifinalists will be a team from Sweden and a team from China.
Among the Americans in the Rosenblum round of 16, the Nick Nickell and Roy Welland teams made it through with relative ease. 
There were two all-American matches, between teams led by Rose Meltzer and Ekeblad, and by Jim Mahaffey and Richie Schwartz. 
Both were close early in the fourth quarter, but Mahaffey and Meltzer ended up with the victories.
Christal Henner-Welland's team of Americans and Swedes won a nail-biter against the top Brazilian team, led by Gabriel Chagas. 
And Reese Milner's team lost to a Chinese team. 
In the other matches, a team from Israel defeated an opponent from Denmark in a close contest, and a French team easily beat one from Belgium.
Full details can be found at www.worldbridge.org/tourn/Verona.06/Verona.htm.
