
A day after North Korea claimed to have extracted weapons-grade fuel from a nuclear reactor, South Korea on Thursday strongly urged North Korea to re-engage in disarmament talks but said it was not time to take the issue to the United Nations Security Council.
South Korean officials said they believed that North Korea's declaration was a negotiating ploy in its standoff with the United States and that negotiations could still resolve the nuclear crisis.
Asked about the possibility of going to the Security Council, Foreign Minister Ban Ki Moon told the South Korean news media that there had not yet been ''consultation among the relevant parties.''
Mr. Ban, who was on a tour of Uzbekistan with President Roh Moo Hyun, said his government preferred to focus its efforts on the stalled six-nation negotiations over the North Korean nuclear crisis. 
''There, we should find solution through negotiation,'' he said. 
''Referring it to the United Nations Security Council is not desirable until all diplomatic efforts are completely exhausted.''
At a news conference here, Lee Bong Jo, the deputy minister of unification, described North Korea's declaration as a move to increase pressure, ''thereby simultaneously strengthening its negotiating power.''
Even as North Korea stepped up pressure on the Bush administration, the reluctance of South Korea -- one of the United States' closest allies in this region -- to push North Korea appeared to limit Washington's choice of sticks.
On Tuesday, the day before North Korea's announcement, China also said that it opposed applying economic or political sanctions to pressure the North to abandon its nuclear weapons program.
South Korea and China, in keeping with their long-standing positions that politically and economically engaging North Korea is the best way to avert a collapse and to encourage reform, have long opposed punitive actions, like a quarantine to prevent the smuggling of nuclear materials, economic sanctions and going to the Security Council.
The two countries, along with Russia, another participant in the six-nation talks, are North Korea's biggest trading partners, and sanctions or a quarantine would be ineffective without their cooperation. 
The sixth participant in the talks, Japan, is the only one backing Washington's calls for tougher actions.
Assistant Secretary of State Christopher Hill, Washington's lead negotiator on North Korea, is scheduled to arrive here on Friday for talks.
American officials have said in the last week that North Korea might be preparing for its first test of a nuclear weapon, basing their assessment on satellite photographs of the North -- though, they have said that the activity observed in Kilju, in the northeastern part of the country, could be a ruse by North Korea to strengthen its hand in negotiations.
