
Natalie du Toit of South Africa won her fourth gold medal in swimming at the Beijing Paralympics, taking the 400-meter freestyle on Friday in a world-record time for her disability group. 
Du Toit, who lost a leg in a 2001 motorcycle crash, finished in 4 minutes 43.81 seconds -- 15-hundredths of a second better than the mark she set three years ago in London.
She is one of two Paralympians who also competed at the Beijing Olympics; she finished 16th last month in the 10-kilometer open-water swim. 
Natalia Partyka of Poland, who won her class in table tennis this week, is the other.
Du Toit has set three disability group records in winning four golds. 
She also set records in the 100 butterfly and the 200 individual medley. 
Her other gold came in the 100 freestyle, in which she holds the record.
She will wrap up her Paralympic program on Sunday in the 50 freestyle, where she also holds the disability group record.
Du Toit won five golds and a silver at the Athens Paralympics in 2004, but chose to compete in only five events here. 
She said she could have done even better.
''I had a really bad turn, and had to stop and start again, which wasted a lot of energy,'' she said. 
''I didn't think I would do a best time.''
A promising Olympian until her injury, she is hoping to qualify for the 2012 London Games.
Melissa Stockwell, a United States Army veteran whose left leg was blown off by a roadside bomb in Baghdad, did not qualify for the final in her swimming class on Friday, the China Internet Information Center said.
This week she finished sixth in the 100-meter butterfly and fifth in the 100-meter freestyle; on Friday she finished fourth in a 400-meter freestyle heat, the information center said.
Fifty-four medals were up for grabs on Friday. 
In the major disciplines, there were 16 in swimming, 15 in cycling and 18 in track and field. 
Spain won three gold medals in swimming to lead all countries.
Britain dominated cycling with four gold medals and six over all. 
The United States won seven medals in cycling, including three gold. 
Spain also managed three gold medals in cycling and six over all.
In track, the sprinter Oscar Pistorius is expected to win the 200 on Saturday, adding to the gold he won this week in the 100.
In the medal standings, China leads with 37 gold medals (eight in table tennis) and 109 over all. 
Britain has 33 gold and 69 over all, followed by the United States with 23 and 56 over all.
More than 4,000 competitors from nearly 150 countries and regions are battling for 472 gold medals in 20 sports at the Paralympics.
