
South Korea's central bank on Thursday announced the deepest cut in interest in its history in an attempt to cushion its economy from the global downturn.
The announcement followed China's disclosure that its economic indicators for November showed the country's economy slowing much more rapidly than expected, increasing expectations that Beijing will accelerate efforts to bolster growth.
The Bank of Korea's cut on Thursday was its fourth in two months, and took its key interest rate down a full percentage point to 3 percent, a much bigger cut than economists had predicted. 
The bank's governor, Lee Seong-tae, said South Korea was ''on the verge of an emergency situation that may need more drastic policy,'' Reuters reported.
Central banks around the world have delivered a cascade of cuts as the speed of the economic slowdown -- and outright recession in the United States, Canada, Japan and much of Europe -- becomes apparent.
In Taiwan, the central bank cut its main rate by 0.75 points, to 2 percent, on Thursday, the fifth such move in two months. 
The rate cut, which was announced after the close of the market, was the biggest in 26 years.
In China, data for November showed a sharp fall in consumer price inflation -- to 2.4 percent, from 4 percent the previous month -- as demand fell in line with slowing growth. 
On Wednesday, trade data showed import growth dropping sharply and exports shrinking for the first time in years as domestic and overseas demand shrank.
The Chinese data added to the sense of worry about the extent to which Asia's economies are being affected by the economic downturn that was set off last year by the subprime mortgage crisis in the United States. 
It also dashed hopes that China's economy could act as a buffer by taking up the slack from the slumping United States, Europe and Japan.
China's double-digit growth is expected to slow to around 8 percent next year, and growth across the region is also forecast to decline as demand in Europe and the United States and within the region shrinks.
The Asian Development Bank on Thursday said it expected growth in Asia's developing nations to slow to 5.8 percent next year, from 9 percent in 2007 and a projected 6.9 percent this year. 
The estimates echoed those issued by the World Bank earlier this week.
Jong-Wha Lee, head of the Asian Development Bank's s office of regional economic integration, said that ''2009 is likely to be a very difficult year for developing Asia.''
The bank called on governments to step up efforts to bolster their economies. 
''While the region's economies and financial systems are fundamentally sound and appear better cushioned to withstand the immediate effects of the crisis than in other parts of the world,'' the bank said it was concerned ''that the global credit crunch is now spilling over into domestic banking systems, squeezing funding resources for corporate investment.''
