
Caught between a politically potent farm lobby and an insistent trading partner, South Korean officials have hit on a recipe they hope will ease tensions all around, and the unlikely main ingredient is 10,300 tons of garlic.
South Korea finds itself having to buy the garlic from China to fulfill a commitment it made last year to settle a previous trade dispute. 
China complained in recent weeks that South Korea's garlic purchases were running far below promised levels, and it revived a threat to cut off South Korean sales of mobile phones and polyethylene to China, a trade flow dozens of times as valuable.
But garlic is South Korea's No. 2 cash crop after rice, and much of it is grown in the politically pivotal southwest. 
Letting in more Chinese garlic would infuriate the farm lobby and damage the ruling coalition's chances in elections next year.
So the government needed a destination for the garlic where it would do more good than harm. 
Official eyes turned northward: maybe the garlic could be used to bolster President Kim Dae Jung's efforts to improve relations between the Koreas.
"If possible, we would like to give garlic to North Korea as aid," Park Je Hun, director in the trade division of the ministry of foreign affairs and trade, said last week, confirming news reports hinting at the plan.
Though the idea has not yet been broached with North Korean officials, Mr. Park said the garlic might accompany a shipment of 200,000 tons of fertilizer that Seoul agreed in late April to provide to the North.
The fertilizer is meant to signal "that we want to continue reconciliation," said Kim Hong Jae, a spokesman for the South Korean ministry that handles relations with the North. 
And diplomats said adding the garlic might be the gesture that prods the North to return to talks that have been stalled for a month. 
"The North grows almost no garlic," one diplomat said. 
"The donation of garlic would be a good-will gesture that would help to ease the tensions."
If the North declines, government officials said, the garlic will be warehoused in Inchon until another recipient can be lined up, perhaps in Southeast Asia.
Who will pay the $5.7 million tab for the garlic remains to be settled. 
The polyethylene and cell phone exporters have balked at government suggestions that they underwrite it, but they may be given little choice.
