
Chang Ki Tak, an assistant manager in a finance company, hardly knows what to make of the free time coming to him as society here slowly adjusts to a luxury viewed almost as a right in other industrial countries: a five-day workweek.
"It's true I can spend more time with family and friends," Mr. Chang said, hesitantly, when asked what he thought of a bill proposed by the government to guarantee a five-day week, "but it means spending more money on them, too."
And, he said, "it will be very inconvenient for me if the banks are closed on Saturdays."
Although some companies, under union pressure or simply in deference to changing times, have already adopted the five-day week, Mr. Chang and many other workers still toil until lunchtime on Saturdays.
Beginning next year, however, he and several million other Koreans will have to work only 40 hours a week, spread over five days, rather than the present 44 hours, including Saturday mornings, if the National Assembly passes legislation drafted by the labor ministry.
To soften the blow to owners and managers, the change would be phased in. 
The bill stipulates that the five-day week will go into effect next July at public corporations, workplaces with at least 1,000 workers and all banks and insurance companies.
Then, by July 2004, the bill will apply to companies with at least 300 workers; by July 2005, to those with 50 or more workers; and by July 2006, to those with at least 30 workers.
According to the Labor Ministry, a presidential decree will say if and when companies with fewer than 30 workers get a five-day week. 
That qualification, the ministry said, will allow the government "to flexibly respond, given the conditions of small and medium-sized firms," the ones most fearful of such a change.
Lee Dae Jung, a manager in the labor ministry's international cooperation division, says such fears reflect minority views. 
"Everyone, both workers and employers, agree it is time to introduce the five-day workweek," he said. 
"Polls show 60 to 80 percent of the people support reducing working hours. 
This is the trend."
Still, objections to the terms of the government proposal by both management and labor groups, and the usual political jockeying, could kill the current plan. 
While South Korea as a nation and Koreans individually have proudly focused for two generations on catching up with the major industrial powers, notably Japan, the former colonial ruler, they have generally accepted without question the need to work longer hours than people elsewhere.
Last year, the average South Korean worked 2,477 hours, according to a survey released in July by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. 
Though comparisons are difficult -- the O.E.C.D. warns that what is tallied can vary greatly from country to country -- the South Korea number is higher than that of the other countries reporting, including the United States (1,821 hours), France (1,532) and the Netherlands (1,346).
What spurred on the movement to reduce hours here is the realization that people in the countries that do the most business with Korea, namely the United States, Japan and China, all put in fewer hours. 
A 40-hour workweek has long been the norm in the United States. 
Japan phased in a 40-hour week over 11 years beginning in 1988, and China adopted it 10 years ago. 
Most other countries have also adopted the 40-hour, five-day workweek, with some requiring less. 
Four years ago, for instance, France cut the number of hours a week before overtime to 35 from 39.
The pressure for more leisure time has mounted among Koreans just about every time some government official or research institute makes yet another prediction of economic growth this year of at least 6 percent.
But both management and labor organizations are so displeased with the compromises proposed by the government that officials fear that the National Assembly, dominated by the opposition Grand National Party and eager to embarrass the government in the run-up to a presidential election in December, may vote it down.
"All sides object to the law," said Hyun Jung Taik, senior economic adviser to President Kim Dae Jung. 
"By showing strong objections, they try to get more. 
Previously, the attitude of the Assembly toward this very contentious issue was to let it pass away."
Representatives of big business denounce the bill in unequivocal terms. 
"We think the five-day workweek is premature for the Korean economy," said Choi Song Suu, a research analyst for the Federation of Korean Industries, which is made up of the chairmen and presidents of the country's largest chaebol, or conglomerates. 
"We are still not rich. 
We should work more."
Mr. Choi was scathing in his criticism of the work habits of white-collar workers.
"White-collar productivity is far too low, compared with Western countries," he said. 
"It's true we work longer hours than in any other country, but our labor intensity is not good enough to introduce a five-day workweek. 
A lot of workers are spending their time on private affairs, going to the clinic, talking to friends at home, sending e-mail messages."
That kind of talk infuriates representatives of Korea's two major labor organizations, who say the proposed legislation is weighted toward business.
"The average person here puts in 600 or 700 more hours a year than do people in the United States or Japan," said Yoon Young Mo, the international secretary of the Korean Confederation of Trade Unions, an umbrella organization that says it has 600,000 members. 
"I don't know how the economy has survived if all workers don't work too hard."
But to Mr. Yoon, the phased introduction of the five-day week, and the failure to guarantee it for companies with fewer than 30 workers "is not a compromise."
Companies with fewer than 30 workers hire 58.6 percent of the work force, he said, and are typically regarded as "places where exploitation is the most severe."
The Korean Confederation of Trade Unions has promised an unremitting campaign for a stronger bill. 
"We are using our muscle for a campaign for a bill that will not negatively affect workers for small companies," Mr. Yoon said.
The issue is by no means simple.
"The manufacturers are not totally unreasonable," said Jang Ha Sung, a finance professor at Korea University and the country's leading shareholder rights activist. 
"For the large organizations, the five-day week is not a problem, but it may be a problem for small factories."
Mr. Jang cited several issues that are not resolved, including disagreement over the number of holidays and adjustments in salaries as a result of reduced hours.
Nonetheless, he said, the five-day week is inevitable. 
Most banks, in response to union pressure, adopted the five-day week in May, and other companies have followed.
What about the complaint that many office workers are not working very hard?
Mr. Jang predicted that most of them "will change their work habits when they see they have a shorter week to do their jobs."
