
Anne-Marie Slaughter, an international lawyer and the dean of the Woodrow Wilson School at Princeton University. 
She is the author “The Idea that is America,” and she is spending this academic year in Shanghai.
There is a poster all over Shangai of a Downs Syndrome kid with a medal hanging around his neck covered in lipstick kisses — an ad for the Special Olympics that were held in Shanghai last month. 
Professor William Alford, my friend and former colleague from the Harvard Law School, was deeply involved in making the Special Olympics happen. 
I asked him to write up a post about it. 
He describes a sea-change in China’s attitude toward disabled kids — kids who have long been hidden away were in the spotlight, applauded by a proud nation.
When I first began to study China almost 45 years ago, Chairman Mao had yet to launch the Cultural Revolution. 
There was no United States foreign investment in the People’s Republic of China nor any PRC students in the United States. 
China was so inwardly focused that few, if any, in or outside the country could have imagined it becoming a global economic and military powerhouse.
Over these decades, I’ve had a front-row seat to epic changes, both hopeful and tragic. 
But nothing compares with the extraordinary events I witnessed this autumn through my pro bono work with the Special Olympics, an NGO headquartered in the United States that provides free sports, health, educational and family support services worldwide to persons with intellectual disabilities.
Special Olympics held its Summer World Games in Shanghai during the first half of October. 
It was the largest sporting event of any type held in the world this year, with some 7,500 athletes with intellectual disabilities from 165 nations having taken part. 
But far more noteworthy is the change it expresses and what that tells us about China.
The disabled have never been treated especially well in China, but that hardly distinguishes it from the history, at least until fairly recently, of every other nation. 
In the United States, for instance, it was Oliver Wendell Holmes, among the most revered of Supreme Court justices, who in upholding involuntary sterilization wrote that “three generations of idiots is enough.”
The change that I’m referring to was most dramatically manifest at the moment on October 2 when the Chinese team, composed of hundreds of
persons with intellectual disabilities, entered Shanghai Stadium. 
The crowd of more than 90,000 – including China’s President and many of the Chinese world’s most prominent public figures including the actor Jackie Chan, the cellist Yo-Yo Ma and the hoopster Yao Ming — exploded in prolonged exuberant standing applause. 
A population that had long been shunted aside or worse, now stood center stage, celebrated as the country’s representatives before a national television audience running into the hundreds of millions. 
At least for that evening, they were the focal point of the intense pride that Chinese feel in their nation’s domestic resurgence and ascendance on the world stage. 
Having devoted a lifetime to scrutinizing the Middle Kingdom, I found it a profoundly moving experience.
Skepticism comes naturally among professional observers of China and one may be tempted to wonder whether there is anything more to the magic of the opening ceremony than a good show for officials intent on creating an image of humanitarian concern, or doing a dry run for the 2008 Beijing Olympics. 
Clearly, only time will tell whether the authorities are willing to do what it takes to ensure full inclusion for their tens of millions of disabled citizens and, as importantly, whether age-old attitudes among the populace have changed throughout this continent-sized land of 1.32 billion people. 
That said, there are reasons for optimism.
At the official level, busy as they were with final preparations for the 17th Party Congress, President Hu Jintao and other senior leaders, including Shanghai Party Secretary Xi Jinping, who was designated at that conclave as Hu’s likely successor, devoted considerable time, personal prestige and resources to the World Games. 
The example of the usually earnest president happily embracing individuals with intellectual disabilities has more force in China than would its counterpart here, whatever the motivation.
But however one reads official actions, there was far more at play during the Games. 
Qin Yi, the Katharine Hepburn of China, and other eminent Chinese actors appeared on national television talk shows to discuss the challenges they faced in raising children with serious intellectual disabilities. 
Leaders from academe, business, sports and other sectors of Chinese life joined foreign counterparts in a day-long symposium designed to share best practices in their respective fields. 
Representatives of families of the intellectually disabled from across the nation convened to express powerfully their desire for better treatment. 
And, most importantly, individuals with intellectual disabilities spoke for themselves – on national television, at the aforementioned symposium and, it seemed, everywhere.
The circle of people touched was not limited to those directly affected by or professionally concerned with intellectual disability. 
More than 40,000 individuals – most, but not all, from China – served as volunteers, including thousands who housed total strangers from abroad and a valiant team from Shanghai’s Fudan University and the University of North Carolina who pulled numerous all-nighters to ensure that every athlete’s accomplishments was available online for family and friends unable to attend. 
And hundreds of thousands of other Chinese took in the competitions, cheering on the athletes, whether they were from China or playing against the home team.
China, I dare say from the perspective of 40 years’ viewing, will never be the same.
William Alford is the Henry L. Stimson Professor, Vice Dean, and Director of East Asian Legal Studies, Harvard Law School and a member of the board of directors of Special Olympics.
