
Kmart has received thousands of calls and e-mail messages from customers urging the discount retailer to stop buying so many of its shoes, fishing rods, T-shirts and stereos from China, prompting the company to warn Chinese diplomats that it will seek new suppliers unless the crew of an American surveillance aircraft is released promptly, company executives said today.
The complaints that have streamed into Kmart's customer service line in Troy, Mich., in recent days were an unprecedented and apparently spontaneous response to the overseas crisis, the executives said. 
Store managers have also telephoned headquarters to relay concerns that customers were annoyed that the stores stocked so many "made in China" goods when American military personnel were being held in that country against their will, they said.
"Our customers are telling us to quit doing business in China -- that they're not going to buy things made there anymore," said Dale Apley, vice president for public policy. 
"These are just the people taking time out of their schedule to contact us. 
How many other people out there are thinking the same thing?"
The outpouring of anger may indicate that the continuing standoff may have started to shake one of the foundations of the United States-China relationship: the partnership of trade and investment that has grown rapidly despite regular disruptions in bilateral ties during the last decade and a half.
Unlike China's bloody crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators in Beijing in 1989 or its efforts to intimidate Taiwan by lobbing missiles off that island's coast five years ago, the current impasse directly affects United States military personnel. 
Business leaders said that made this crisis uniquely sensitive because the public put the safety of the crew above abstract notions of geopolitical stability or human rights for Chinese citizens.
Like Wal-Mart, Target and other discount leaders, Kmart sells billions of dollars of Chinese-manufactured consumer goods each year. 
Total trade volumes have soared, and often, from month to month, the United States trade deficit with China tops the one with Japan. 
The most recent Commerce Department statistics showed that the United States trade deficit with China increased 19.3 percent in January, rising to $7.2 billion, while the deficit with Japan narrowed slightly, to $5.9 billion, the lowest in 13 months.
Mr. Apley said Kmart had no plans to pull Chinese goods off its shelves and would like to continue to do business with factories there. 
But he said the customer response had prompted executives to put Chinese business contacts on notice that Kmart would have no choice but to "diversify its suppliers" unless the matter was resolved quickly.
At Target Stores, based in Minneapolis, Patty Morris, a spokeswoman, said the company had decided not to answer media questions about customer complaints or product sourcing policies. 
She said that the company might have received a few calls related to the China standoff, but that the volume "was not alarming to us and does not warrant getting involved in the dialogue."
Most corporate executives who have worked for years to cultivate cordial ties with Chinese officials are reluctant to say anything about the crisis in public, hoping that a low-key approach will encourage a speedy resolution that leaves few scars. 
United States companies accounted for almost half of the $40 billion in foreign investment in China last year, and many of the largest -- Boeing, Motorola and General Motors -- have declined comment or said talks should be left to diplomats.
But some business leaders in Washington share Kmart's alarm. 
Lobbyists here say they worry that the detention of the crew will make it hard to hold back a tide of anti-China sentiment. 
"We have been the most vocal advocates of open and expanded trade with China," said Thomas Donohue, president of the United States Chamber of Commerce. 
"But we are going to support these young men and women being held over there. 
If this goes on much longer, the economic advances are going to be hard to sustain."
The crisis is so sensitive that some Chinese-American business leaders have expressed rare public opposition to China's diplomatic behavior.
Susan Au Allen, head of the United States Pan-Asian Chamber of Commerce, a group of Asian-American business executives, said she wrote a letter to the Chinese Embassy today saying her group had decided to cancel a May meeting on investment opportunities with Chinese trade officials in Washington.
"There is a glaring difference between this crisis and all the other issues with China because they are holding Americans against their will," said Ms. Allen, who was born in Guangzhou. 
"China does not need any more excuses. 
They have to grow up and act like big boys."
Unlike the fight in Congress last year over whether to grant China permanent normal trade relations, when the battle resonated only lightly outside the capital, the current standoff appears to have set off a grass-roots response that could affect the way Washington reacts.
Recent polls have found that a majority of people consider the military detainees to be hostages, though the Bush administration has not used that term. 
The polls also show that a majority do not want the administration to apologize for the incident.
Mr. Apley of Kmart said the company at first suspected that the volume of complaints indicated that an anti-China group had begun an organized campaign, but company officials found no evidence of that.
Still, some unions that have opposed expanding trade ties with China are using this as an opportunity to drive home their message.
The United Association of Union Plumbers, Pipefitters and Sprinkler Fitters has devoted $500,000 to buy radio advertisements during baseball games around the country urging a boycott. 
"The crew of an American plane, forced to make an emergency landing in China, is held hostage by the Chinese government," the commercial says. 
"Think about that. 
And vow to buy no Chinese products until the servicemen and women are released."
