
When factories close, the workers who are laid off often feel like dinosaurs in a fast-disappearing industrial age. 
But when the Carrier Corporation shut down its huge air-conditioning factory here last year, Joseph Huppman saw it as a golden opportunity.
Mr. Huppman, who worked at Carrier for five years after spending 17 years in the Air Force, took advantage of his layoff to pursue a career that had long beckoned to him.
''I always wanted to be a nurse, and the opportunity never came up before,'' he said. 
''Carrier, by sending my job to China, made the opportunity come up.''
Now, after nearly a year back at school, Mr. Huppman, 50, is a licensed practical nurse, working at the local veterans hospital.
After Carrier, long this city's largest employer, moved the last of its Syracuse manufacturing operations to China and Singapore, many of the 1,200 laid-off workers felt as if they had been plunged into a real-life version of ''Survivor,'' although not on a Pacific Island. 
But now hundreds of these workers are pursuing a survival strategy that seems to be working: concluding that they had to reinvent themselves for post-industrial America, they are training for new careers.
Helped by federal and state aid and generous tuition assistance from Carrier, nearly 500 laid-off workers have enrolled in a variety of college or vocational courses: respiratory therapy, education, trucking, human resources, hotel management, even geographic informational systems.
''We were pleased to see that a lot more of these workers went back to school than we usually see after layoffs,'' said Kelli Owens, the central New York regional administrator for the state's employment services office. 
''Our goal has been to train these workers for a job they can move into.''
With manufacturing withering in Syracuse and many other cities that were once blue-collar meccas, state, city and union officials urged the Carrier workers to train for new fields, and a large number heeded that advice.
Two programs eased the way. 
First, Carrier promised to pay tuition for workers for up to four years, sweetening the pot by offering a $10,000 bonus to those who received bachelor's degrees and $5,000 to those who received community college degrees. 
Second, federal retraining money for factory workers who lose their jobs when their companies move operations overseas provided many Carrier workers unemployment benefits for as long as they remained in school, for a maximum of two years. 
Usually workers receive only six months of such benefits.
But education has not been a cure-all. 
It does not ensure that the workers will find jobs or, if they do, that the jobs will pay as well as Carrier did. 
Happy as he is to be a nurse, Mr. Huppman is earning $30,000 a year, half what he earned at Carrier, where he earned $17 an hour and worked hundreds of hours of overtime.
''They all got to accept they're not going to earn the same money they earned while at Carrier, even if they go back to school,'' said Rick Simone, business manager for the Sheet Metal Workers local at Carrier. 
He estimated that those who found new jobs took pay cuts of 30 to 40 percent, on average.
Betty Haley, a career adviser with CNY Works, a government-financed training and employment agency in Syracuse, said the workers did not have it easy.
''Looking for a job is very overwhelming when you haven't done that for 25, 35 years,'' she said. 
''We've helped them with interviewing skills, resumes and networking, all these skills they haven't used in forever.''
Stephanie Liddle, another Carrier castoff, took a six-month course to become a medical assistant in a doctor's office, but her job search has come up dry.
Now 59 and having problems paying her rent, she is at a point that she thought she would never reach: She has decided to move in with her 85-year-old mother.
''I've sent out resumes to at least five places a week, but without any luck,'' she said, having just hauled two dressers out of her apartment to the curb for anyone to take.
Still, Irwin Davis, the president of the Metropolitan Development Association of Syracuse, said that as a whole, the former Carrier workers were doing better than expected.
''If this were 10-plus years ago, a majority of these people would have simply hit the interstate and headed south and gotten a job there,'' Mr. Davis said. 
''The interesting thing is some 500 of these workers have returned to school, and that shows they think there is opportunity here.''
Roger A. Evans, an economist with the state Labor Department, was bearish about this city's prospects. 
''This area is doing very well outside the manufacturing sector,'' he said, noting that the number of nonmanufacturing jobs in the area had risen by 8,700 to 287,400 in the last three years, while factory jobs fell by 5,200 to 33,000.
Some workers have scoured the Internet to find industries that are hiring. 
A Web search convinced Chris Fiacchi, 34, that he should study respiratory therapy.
''A lot of us chose medical fields,'' he said. 
''With all the aging baby boomers, there's going to be a large increase in medical staffing. 
You don't have to worry about layoffs there.''
Thirty years ago, Barbara Ann Goss left Syracuse University after her freshman year and went to work at Carrier. 
Now she has returned to college to study health information technology.
''Manufacturing, which I love, hardly exists any more in Upstate New York, and I'm not about to move to China,'' said Ms. Goss, who worked at Carrier for 26 years. 
''I'm not about to leave the region, and about the only field I see growing here is health care. 
But I'm not cut out to be a nurse. 
I can't do blood and guts.''
There are indisputable success stories. 
After studying to become a surgical technologist, Dale Carpenter, 37, landed a job in an operating room at St. Joseph's Hospital Health Center here.
''The layoff was the best thing that ever happened to me,'' he said. 
''Now I don't have to worry week to week about being laid off. 
Now I won't ever have to worry about looking for work again.''
Patrick Sullivan, 52, sounds as if he has discovered the fountain of youth, so enthusiastic is he about studying for a degree in geographic informational systems, which involves interpreting satellite photos.
''Like most other parents, I told my kids, 'If you get a chance to go to college, you should,''' said Mr. Sullivan, who worked at Carrier for 27 years. 
''Well, I finally had the chance to go to college, and I took it.''
Even with their new skills, some former Carrier workers have been frustrated by the job hunt. 
Gary Galipeau, 57, who is married to Ms. Goss, will soon have a bachelor's degree in human resources from Empire State College. 
But he has repeatedly been rejected for jobs in the field, despite his expertise from having been the top employee benefits official for the union at Carrier.
''I feel a need to continue working, financially and emotionally,'' said Mr. Galipeau, who worked at Carrier for 37 years. 
''I was interviewed by a headhunter, but the subtle feedback was, I'm too old for what they're looking for.
''A lot of Carrier people worked 50, 60 hours a week for many, many years, and now, suddenly, they're considered too old to work.''
Mr. Galipeau contrasted today's job market with the one in 1967, when General Electric laid him off from its now-closed television factory here.
''At that point in time, you could roll out of bed into a manufacturing job,'' he said, voicing concern that the region's high-paying factory jobs were giving way to lower-paying service jobs.
''I'm scared about the future for central New York,'' he said. 
''You can't base an economy on selling hamburgers and insurance policies to each other.''
