
It has been a long time since Japan has experienced shortages of any kind. 
So it came as something of a surprise last month when Nissan Motor was forced to briefly suspend much of its production because it could not get hold of enough steel.
Since then, Suzuki Motor has said a lack of steel would force it, too, to shut down assembly lines for a few days this month, and to reduce production from January to March. 
Even the giant Toyota Motor said Thursday that it has had to make adjustments in the kind of steel it buys to ensure steady supplies.
The shortfall in steel is unusual in a country that for most of the last decade has been dealing with problems of excess -- too many workers, unused plants and more banks than needed -- but analysts and executives say it is a problem that could become increasingly common.
Although widespread shortages are not expected, analysts say the supply of steel is likely to remain tight for at least the next six months, a situation that could drive steel prices higher, and in turn, raise costs for carmakers, construction companies and other industries that depend heavily on steel.
So far, shortages have been limited to the high-grade steel used as automotive sheet metal, but strong demand, particularly from China, for everything from ships and office towers to home appliances, is driving steel prices broadly higher. 
With China now the world's biggest user of steel, prices in some markets have risen 60 percent over the past year and analysts expect further hikes in the year ahead.
''This is not a problem that can be solved in the short term,'' Takeo Fukui, Honda's chief executive, said. 
Strong demand in China, India and elsewhere combined with limits on how fast steel production can be ramped up means supplies will remain tight for ''one, two or maybe several more years,'' he said.
After years of consolidation in the global steel industry, many producers are now operating near peak capacity. 
In Japan, where the number of large steel manufacturers has dwindled because of mergers, the industrywide capacity utilization rate is now 15 percent higher than the average rate of the last 26 years, according to the ministry of economy, trade and industry.
For Japan's automakers, the steel shortages are at least partly a result of their own success. 
Both Toyota and Honda Motor announced earlier this week that they expected to sell record numbers of cars this year and forecast healthy gains for 2005. 
Nissan was forced to close plants in Japan for five days in late November because its steel sheet suppliers could not keep up with demand generated by strong sales of some of its newest models.
But like so many recent wrinkles in global markets, much of the reason for the shortages can be attributed to the blurred pace of growth in China.
''People have been really caught by surprise by demand from China,'' said Peter G. Harris, senior materials analyst at Commonwealth Securities in Melbourne.
China's demand for steel, after rising 20 percent a year for the past three years, is now slowing as a result of the government's efforts to cool the economy, according to Piboonsak Arthabowornpisan, chairman of the Iron and Steel Industry Club of Thailand. 
But Mr. Piboonsak said he expected China's appetite for steel to remain relatively strong, predicting growth in demand of about 10 percent next year.
While robust demand is pulling steel prices higher, they are also getting a push from below by rising raw material costs as prices march higher for both iron ore and the coking coal used to fire steel furnaces.
Again, demand from China is behind the increases. 
The country recently began importing coking coal after domestic supplies fell short of what was needed to fuel Chinese steel mills.
And competition is driving up prices. 
Two of Japan's largest makers, Nippon Steel and Kobe Steel, earlier this month agreed to more than double the price they pay Australian suppliers for coking coal.
In the market for iron ore, analysts say that in the past Japanese steel makers pretty much set the price and could even get mining companies to commit to providing, at a set price, additional supplies if needed.
But the tables have turned now that China has replaced Japan as the world's largest iron ore importer, putting ore producers in their strongest position in years.
Australia's two dominant producers, BHP Billiton and Rio Tinto, are in annual price negotiations with Japanese steel makers, and ore prices are likely to rise as much as 30 percent next March, they say.
The pressure to secure iron ore has become so intense that Japanese and Chinese steel mills are increasingly locking in long-term purchase contracts, even taking equity stakes in mine expansion. 
The Chinese are now financing infrastructure projects in Australia to encourage new players to enter the iron ore market. 
In November, Chinese government-owned companies agreed to bankroll a 1.85 billion Australian dollar ($1.42 billion) project to help the Fortescue Metals Group, an industry upstart, build a mine in western Australia to rival BHP Billiton, as well as port facilities and a 248-mile railway to connect the two.
But until a lot more ore is made available, pressure to raise finished steel prices is likely to continue.
In a report to clients this month, Andrew Gibson, a Goldman Sachs JB Were analyst based in Melbourne, said that steel prices in Australia had risen between 40 percent and 60 percent in the last year and predicted more increases in global prices next year.
In Japan, prices of iron and steel have risen more than 18 percent in each of the last two months compared with levels a year earlier, according to Bank of Japan figures.
To be sure, auto analysts do not expect the increase in steel prices by itself to have a significant impact on Japanese automakers, which buy about one-fifth of Japan's steel output. 
The bigger issue for carmakers is availability.
Carlos Ghosn, chief of Nissan, said recently that the company might have to curb vehicle production again in March because of a shortage of steel. 
If that happens, Nissan would be forced to reduce production by a total of 40,000 vehicles, including the shutdown earlier this month, because of tight steel supplies. 
That reduction would reduce the company's profit by as much as 16 billion yen ($154 million), Mr. Ghosn said.
And even if it crimps profits for carmakers, the prospect of rising steel prices is not necessarily an unwelcome development for the economy a whole. 
For most of the last decade, one of Japan's most persistent economic problems has been widespread deflation, which has kept incomes from rising and curtailed consumer spending. 
Rising steel prices are one sign that the price declines are coming to an end, economists say.
''It's quite positive in terms of beating deflation,'' said Richard Jerram, an economist for Maquarie Securities in Tokyo.
