
The Beijing tournament was a modest dress rehearsal for the Summer Olympic Games. 
Late last month, a women's basketball team from the United States found itself in the final against the host Chinese.
The Americans' coach, Anne Donovan, didn't have quite the loaded roster she will take back in August, but it did include the veteran W.N.B.A. stalwarts Lisa Leslie, Swin Cash, Kara Lawson and Katie Smith, and the graduating college stars Candice Wiggins and Sylvia Fowles.
China won, 84-81.
''After Athens, they put a lot of money into their women's team,'' Donovan said when we spoke after her return home. 
''They hired Tom Maher, who coached the Australian Olympic team, and is really respected internationally. 
They've been getting better and better, but the most surprising thing was that they beat us after we'd blown them out earlier in the week. 
In the past, the Chinese would never have stood up to us after that.''
If China is capable of vanquishing American basketball professionals, how bad will it beat up on the world in table tennis and taekwondo?
How much will it hijack the medal standings after pouring what American Olympic officials describe as staggering resources into its long-planned coming-out party?
Speaking of a comprehensive Chinese medal harvest program called Project 119 last month, Steve Roush, the United States Olympic Committee's chief of sports performance, said, ''You start doing the math, and that's what keeps me up at night.''
That to me sounded a bit too much like Cold War rhetoric, but only weeks ago, it was pretty much in line with what promised to be the Beijing Bully Olympics. 
The world was on its way to chafe at Chinese sporting dominance, choke on air quality that Donovan said ''can be so bad it's impossible to describe'' and campaign against the government's suspected complicity to genocide in Sudan and its oppressive policies in Tibet.
Now what?
A front-page article in The New York Times on Thursday reported on how the Tibetan cause, which threatened to further inflame the Olympic theater after deadly riots in March, has been muted by the earthquake that devastated China's Sichuan Province, killing tens of thousands and instantly evoking an outpouring of global sympathy.
By extension, has the Beijing Olympics been similarly and permanently recast?
Quite possibly, understandably, and at the same time regretfully, according to Eric Reeves, a professor of literature at Smith College and a leading critic of the Chinese government for failing to use its economic and regional influence to stop the slaughter in the western Sudanese province of Darfur.
''I think there is going to be a natural inclination to show a human solidarity with the people who have endured this horrific tragedy,'' Reeves said Thursday in a telephone interview. 
''The Chinese leaders, these are very, very tough men, very hardened, who see an opportunity and will seize it. 
They will say: 'We are a suffering nation. 
Are you really going to hit us on top of our loss?'
''And I expect there will be athletes now more likely to say, 'At this moment, I have to be quiet.'
There will be journalists who before the earthquake would have taken on the subject and now who will say, 'I have to pull my punches.'
''
In Chicago last month, when dozens of American athletes sat for interviews at a three-day Olympic news media summit, it seemed that every dialogue began with the Darfur pop quiz. 
There was, as I saw it, no wrong answer; athletes have as much right to view the Games apolitically, to unapologetically compete, as they do to speak out.
But Reeves is right: the horror in Sichuan Province could well foster a lasting belief that the Chinese people have been through enough. 
Activists will have a daunting call to make: lose the long-awaited-for stage of what Reeves and others have been calling the Genocide Olympics, or pour salt in China's wound?
How would Americans have felt if foreign journalists and athletes came to the Salt Lake Winter Games of 2002 and railed about American foreign policy months after 9/11?
We know how, but in Reeves's opinion, after he has devoted years to calculating the cost of human life in Darfur while waging a more personal battle with leukemia, the only relevant context here is the corresponding numbers of dead.
''It doesn't mean I care any less about tens of thousands of earthquake victims, but in Darfur, there have been 450,000 who have died genocidal deaths, deliberate deaths,'' he said.
A year ago, Reeves acquainted himself with sports as a medium for activism when Ira Newble, a former Cleveland Cavaliers bench player now with the Los Angeles Lakers, sought him out for mentorship before writing a letter to the Chinese government, signed by most of his Cleveland teammates, calling for action on Sudan.
Reeves continues to hope that at least some athletes will have the mettle to be heard between the playing of the anthems this summer.
