
Government and business leaders here welcomed today the orderly transfer of power in Beijing and a series of Chinese overtures to Taiwan, but a deep split is evident on how to respond.
Tsai Ing-wen, Taiwan's minister for relations with China, said conciliatory statements by President Jiang Zemin and Deputy Prime Minister Qian Qichen during and just before the Communist Party Congress in Beijing showed a new willingness on the mainland to negotiate closer links with Taiwan. 
At the congress, Hu Jintao replaced Mr. Jiang as head of the party.
"The position of both sides, after consideration of what has been said by both sides, is closer than before," Ms. Tsai said in an interview today.
But Ms. Tsai was wary about moving quickly to conclude any new deals with Beijing, even after recent comments by Mr. Qian, who has called for closer transportation links across the Taiwan Strait and has softened some of China's demands before that can happen.
"We still have reservations in the sense that we have to wait for some time to see if what he said is going to be a stable and consistent policy of China," she said.
Taiwan business leaders were much less cautious today, calling for a quick opening of direct flights and shipping routes to the mainland.
"I just hope they can negotiate a deal as quickly as possible," said Y. C. Wang, chairman of the Formosa Plastics Group and Taiwan's richest and best-known industrialist.
Focused on Iraq and the campaign against terrorism, the United States has urged China and Taiwan to avoid confrontations in the coming months like the dispute that erupted in August when President Chen Shui-bian of Taiwan briefly hinted at a more pro-independence stance. 
Beijing regards Taiwan as rightfully a province of China.
Some warming of relations is already apparent. 
Taipei announced on Tuesday that it would allow chartered flights between Taiwan and Shanghai for Chinese New Year early next year. 
That would address the annual problem of tens of thousands of Taiwan business executives trying to return home for the holidays on a limited number of flights.
But Taipei said the chartered planes would have to fly via Hong Kong or Macao, taking six or seven hours instead of the 80 minutes a nonstop flight would require, because the Taiwan Strait is less than 100 miles wide. 
If direct flights were allowed they would approach Taipei so quickly that air defense systems might have trouble distinguishing them from a military attack.
Taiwan businesses have been the biggest "foreign" investors in China in the last decade, and they contend that the lack of direct transportation links and closer governmental relations have hurt their competitiveness. 
Beijing has welcomed the investment and has increasingly tried to draw Taiwan into a close economic embrace, a policy especially apparent in speeches at the Communist Party Congress.
Taiwan's government has been more wary, especially since the election two years ago of Mr. Chen, of the Democratic Progressive Party, which leans toward greater independence. 
The party tends to represent less-affluent voters who are wary of competition from low-wage businesses in China.
The opposition Nationalist Party, which ran Taiwan from 1949 to 2000, is closer to the island's business community and favors eventual reunification with the mainland.
In an interview on Thursday, Lien Chan, the party's chairman, said the Democratic Progressive Party was trying to placate those voters who strongly favor independence from the mainland. 
"If you do something to please them, you are sure to have 30 percent of them packed up for you," he said. 
"This is Chen Shui-bian's grand strategy."
Ms. Tsai declined to respond publicly to the criticism.
