
Cleveland Clinic surgeons have performed the nation's first near total face transplant, officials said on Tuesday. 
The patient is a woman who was not identified.
Three partial face transplants have been performed since 2005, two in France and one in China. 
All have involved using facial tissue from a dead donor with permission from their families.
The Cleveland surgical team, led by Dr. Maria Siemionow, said it had replaced about 80 percent of the patient's face with that of a dead woman in the last two weeks. 
The doctors offered no details on the patient, but said they would discuss her surgery at a news conference on Wednesday.
Recent improvements in managing the care of transplant surgical patients, including the use of better anti-rejection drugs, have allowed doctors to forge into new areas of tissue transplants, including the hands and face.
Such transplants are experimental and highly controversial.
A main area of concern, critics contend, is that the recipients must take anti-rejection drugs for the rest of their lives. 
An adverse reaction can come at any time, but can often be managed by adjusting the dose of the drugs. 
But such fine-tuning involves a balancing act -- giving sufficient amounts of the drugs to prevent rejection of the tissue but not enough to lead to infection. 
What can make a face transplant particularly risky is that, if the drugs fail, surgeons may have little to offer the recipient.
Critics have also raised ethical concerns, including protecting the donor's identity. 
Plans for face transplants at a number of medical centers in this country and Europe have been slowed by difficulty in finding donors.
But transplant pioneers say that the psychological effects of facial damage from injuries, birth defects, burns and a number of diseases can be psychologically devastating. 
Though reconstructive surgery is possible in many cases, proponents say that in other cases, an experimental face transplant could be worth the risks if patients and donors and their families understand them.
Transplant surgery pioneers also point to the apparent success of the three earlier face transplants and a number of hand transplants. 
Some of these operations -- so-called composite transplants -- have involved transplanting not only the skin, but also underlying soft tissues.
In November 2005, a team in Amiens, France, performed the first partial face transplant. 
The recipient, Isabelle Dinoire, then 38, was seriously disfigured when her Labrador retriever mauled her. 
The surgeons grafted a nose, lips and chin from a donor who had been declared brain dead.
In a published report in December 2007, Ms. Dinoire's doctors said she was satisfied with the aesthetic result. 
She has spoken in a news conference.
In 2006, Chinese doctors did a partial face transplant on a farmer who lost much of the right side of his face in a bear attack.
In 2007, a French team performed the third partial facial transplant, on a 29-year-old man. 
His face had been disfigured by neurofibromatosis, a genetic disorder of the nervous system that causes tumors to grow in tissues around nerves.
