
Shortly after Liu Zige touched the edge of the pool at the Water Cube on Thursday and grabbed China's first gold medal for swimming in the Beijing Olympics, the questions began.
Who was this 19-year-old who had never competed in an international meet before?
How had she shaved more than a second off the world record in the 200-meter butterfly?
And how had her teammate Jiao Liuyang also surpassed the old record in claiming the silver medal?
''Until Beijing, I'd never heard of either of them -- just who are they?'' asked Jenny Schipper, whose daughter, the Australian swimmer Jessicah Schipper, had held the world record until Thursday, when she finished third.
Pawel Slominski, the trainer of the Polish swimmer Otylia Jedrzejczak, called the results ''not rational.''
Jedrzejczak, the 2004 Olympic champion in the event, finished fourth Thursday. 
Susie O'Neill, a former Australian swimming star who took home gold in Atlanta in 1996, called the victory ''just weird.''
There were no easy explanations after the race. 
Liu's coach angrily denied the suggestion by Western reporters that Liu might have slipped through China's antidoping dragnet. 
Neither Liu nor Jiao has ever been caught doping. 
Or perhaps they, too, were the beneficiaries of the high-tech seamless bodysuits in which so many swimmers have broken records here. 
And the howling Chinese fans who dominated the stands Thursday undoubtedly provided a kinetic lift.
A more likely explanation for Liu's success, however, is that she is a successful product of Project 119, the government training program that uses limitless resources and relentless training to increase the country's precious medal intake.
Started in 2002, the program's name alludes to the additional number of gold medals China hoped to win if it were to focus on sports in which it had traditionally lagged. 
Swimming was one of those sports.
Until Thursday, almost nothing was publicly known about Liu, except her age, weight and height. 
Since her victory, however, the Chinese news media have helped fill the void, calling her story a ''fairy tale of the ugly duckling.''
In 2004, she was plucked from the northeastern province of Liaoning and taken to Shanghai to enter China's sports mill. 
Within a year, she was a promising member of the Shanghai swim team.
''You never need to worry about her not practicing hard enough,'' her coach, Jun Wei, told China Daily, the country's official English-language paper.
By 2007, Liu had climbed to No. 22 in the 200 butterfly, an event that rewards brute strength and stamina.
Like many of her athletic peers, whose lives have room for sports and sports alone, Liu has been largely cut off from her friends and family. 
She told the Chinese news media that she had not been home for Spring Festival in six or seven years and that she had not seen her parents since October 2007.
Her teammates described her as a ''lion'' in the water, but they also called her introverted and prone to sadness. 
One teammate, Zhao Zihan, said she often broke into tears after being scolded by her coach.
''She will not complain, no matter how heavy the pressure is,'' Zhao said. 
''She will just cry out silently, or unburden herself to her parents by phone.''
Other teammates said she did not own a cellphone or computer and seldom went shopping. 
One teammate said the most relaxing thing Liu had done was to go out Sunday afternoon for fish filets in hot chili oil. 
Liu otherwise is known to talk almost exclusively about swimming.
Jiao Liuyang, 18, the second-place finisher, was a known quantity whose strong showing was not unexpected. 
But Liu had been largely overlooked by everyone, including her coach, who advised her just to do well Thursday. 
She said she never expected to win a medal, let alone break the world record.
''I didn't feel pressure before the competition, I just tried to relax,'' she said afterward.
In the end, she won in 2 minutes 4.18 seconds, shaving 1.22 seconds off Schipper's record.
Those who still doubt whether Liu's victory came naturally might recall China's previous bout with doping. 
At the 1994 Asian Games, the Chinese team took home 12 gold medals. 
Then seven of the swimmers tested positive for banned substances, forcing them to relinquish their prizes. 
Four years later, the ignominy repeated itself, with four more swimmers disqualified.
The government has since been unforgiving to those caught doping. 
Earlier this year, China's top backstroker was given a lifetime ban after tests found steroids in his system. 
But so far at these Games, none of China's swimmers have tested positive for banned substances.
Over the past decade, Chinese swimmers have struggled to regain their former prowess and the world's trust. 
During the Games in Athens, China won a single gold medal in swimming. 
At last year's world championships, the team won only one silver and one bronze.
In the past year, Zhang Yadong, the Chinese swimming team's head coach, said his charges had been training harder than ever and analyzing the performances of their rivals. 
They saw so much potential in Liu that they flew her to Australia last year to train.
He said that if the West had never heard of Liu, it was only because she was not ready for her moment.
''Foreigners always keep a very close eye on the Chinese swimming team for doping problems,'' he said. 
''Why do they always feel it's abnormal when we do well in the pool?''
