
Politically, Taiwan's relationship to Beijing could be characterized primarily as a rift borne of defiance on one side and menacing rebuke on the other. 
But geologically, the small island of Taiwan appears to be on a collision course with mainland China. 
Over millions of years, that is.
Millimeter by millimeter, the same colossal forces that molded Taiwan's steep mountains -- and that unleash its earthquakes -- are narrowing parts of the Taiwan Strait, bringing the island ever closer to the mainland.
Now an international coalition of scientists from the United States, Taiwan and Japan are planning to delve into those mountain-building processes. 
And despite friction between Taipei and Beijing, the project's leaders have quietly requested assistance from mainland Chinese geologists. 
If officially approved, the researchers say, the collaboration would be one of the biggest formal cross-strait scientific partnerships. 
Such joint endeavors remain rare.
Known as Taiger, the $5 million study will use seismic monitoring on land and sea to create a three-dimensional snapshot of Taiwan --the geological equivalent of an M.R.I. scan, said Francis Wu, a geophysicist at the State University of New York, Binghamton.
Scientists have previously used the same techniques to make 3-D images of many mountain ranges. 
But because the Taiger survey will be of much higher resolution, it will provide the most detailed map yet of a mountain belt -- from its 12,900-foot peaks to its roots about 18 to 30 miles underground and deeper, to earth's upper mantle, 370 miles underground, Dr. Wu said.
This month Dr. Wu and his colleagues will deploy a first set of seismometers along three transects spanning the island' s width. 
For two years the instruments will record vibrations from nearby and distant earthquakes.
Because the shock waves travel at different speeds through different materials, they reveal much about the rock structures within the earth's crust. 
In November, the researchers will bury another 1,000 seismometers placed at 100-meter intervals, to detect controlled explosions.
The mapping will continue in spring 2008 in the waters around Taiwan. 
The American research ship Marcus Langseth will shoot gigantic air bubbles underwater, creating seismic waves that travel into the sea floor and bounce back. 
Strings of sensors towed by the ship and a grid of seismometers on the ocean bottom will monitor the experiment.
The survey builds upon a rich history of research exploring Taiwan's topography. 
Since the 1970's, the island has been a natural laboratory for probing how collisions between tectonic plates, the vast interlocking slabs that make up the earth's crust, gave birth to mountain belts.
''Taiwan is one of the fastest rising mountains in the world,'' Dr. Wu said.
The island's peaks are rising roughly two or three centimeters a year. 
That may sound about as thrilling as watching your toenails grow, but for Dr. Wu and others who ponder geodynamic events that unfold over hundreds of millions of years, it is more like the Indianapolis 500.
Taiwan popped up in the Pacific Ocean four million to five million years ago when the Eurasian plate --where mainland China is -- slid under an ancient chain of volcanic islands sitting on the neighboring Philippine Sea plate. 
Sometime later, the two plates somehow reversed roles at the north end of Taiwan: there, the Philippine slab slides under the Eurasian slab.
The Himalayas, an estimated 50 million years old, are also growing rapidly and are of interest to scientists. 
But Taiwan's smaller scale (roughly the size of Vermont) and greater accessibility make it easier to study, Dr. Wu said.
The island is not only seismically active; it also undergoes substantial erosion from monsoons, in a process believed to influence how quickly mountains rise, said Kip Hodges, a geologist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 
Taiwan is ''a very good place to study this kind of collisional behavior,'' Dr. Hodges said.
In fact, the classic theory of how mountains evolve came from research on Taiwan, said Timothy Byrne, a geoscientist at the University of Connecticut and a consultant for the Taiger study. 
In the early 1980's, John Suppe, a Princeton geologist, and his colleagues calculated that mountains form in subduction zones just as a bulldozer pushes into a pile of sand, creating a wedge-shaped mound in front of its shovel blade.
For Taiwan, the bulldozer blade is the Philippine plate, scraping the top of the Eurasian plate. 
''That's a pretty good analogy for the top 10 or 15 kilometers of Taiwan,'' Dr. Byrne said. 
''It's not grains of sand but small blocks of the earth's crust that are breaking apart.''
But questions remain over how much the bulldozer model applies at greater depths, Dr. Byrne said, particularly under the midsection of Taiwan. 
Dr. Wu, for one, speculates that the Eurasian slab does not actually subduct there but instead has crumpled up against the Philippine plate, edge to edge, like two cars in a head-on collision.
By answering some major questions about the deep structure, the new study could improve the understanding of mountain building, Jacques Angelier, a veteran French investigator of Taiwan geology, said in an e-mail message. 
Dr. Angelier, who is not involved in the mapping study, works at the Villefranche Oceanological Observatory of the Pierre & Marie Curie University.
A clearer picture of Taiwan's plate dynamics could also help define its potential seismic hazards, said Chao-Shing Lee, a geoscientist at the National Taiwan Ocean University in Keelung, another study collaborator. 
Mountain making causes earthquakes, like the 7.6-magnitude temblor that struck Taiwan in 1999, killing 2,400 people.
Historical accounts show that huge quakes in the Taiwan Strait have set off deadly tsunamis, including one that swamped Keelung, at the island's north tip, in 1867. 
And scientists believe that a tidal wave set off by a quake destroyed the Quanzhou seaport in South China in 1604. 
A tsunami generated in the strait could reach Taiwan and the mainland in 20 minutes to a couple of hours, Dr. Lee said.
Since geology's perils pay no heed to politics, Dr. Wu and Dr. Lee visited the China Geological Survey in Beijing in November to discuss its potential participation in the Taiger study. 
Mainland geologists said they could use their ships to help with the air bubble experiments in the strait, said Dr. Lee, who is a member of the science and technology council that advises the president of Taiwan. 
''We can split the task but cooperate, and then we share the data,'' he said.
Rui Gao, a geophysicist at the Chinese Academy of Geological Sciences, said in an e-mail message that the collaboration would ''benefit people on both sides of the strait.''
Political differences should not prevent scientific partnerships, he said.
Although Taiwanese and Chinese researchers routinely work together individually, large-scale official partnerships are still rare. 
In an act of geodiplomacy, the geoscientists are now delicately moving to persuade their respective governments to approve the Taiger study collaboration.
But success seems uncertain with continuing political tension. 
Taiwan's president persists in pushing for independence; Beijing, which last year passed legislation outlawing Taiwan's secession, has in the past vowed to reunify it with China by force if needed.
Meanwhile, as the Philippine and Eurasian plates converge at eight centimeters a year, the island's mountain zone keeps gradually growing on its west side. 
Some parts of the strait are becoming shallower and narrower, said Dr. Byrne of Connecticut. 
It's impossible to predict how the plate interactions will change, but if current patterns hold, he said, in a few million years ''Taiwan Strait will be gone, will be dry land.''
Will the island and the mainland ultimately reunify?
Asked the question at a recent scientific meeting in San Francisco, Dr. Lee smiled enigmatically and chuckled. 
''If the Chinese can be that patient,'' he said.
(Photo by Evangelos Dousmanis)
(Illustration by Erin Aigner/The New York Times)Chart/Diagram: ''An Island on the Move''Taiwan was created by the collision of two tectonic plates, the Philippine Sea and the Eurasian. 
Contintued tectonic activity causes earthquakes in the region as Taiwan slowly moves closer to mainland China.Diagram of Taiwan, China, the Taiwan Strait, and the Eurasian and Philippine Sea plates highlight the movement of tectonic plates in the region.(Source by J. Angelier, 1986)
