
Sheaffer Lee, president of the BenQ Corporation, loves to show off his company's mobile handsets. 
His favorite is the EF81, a slim, rectangular folding phone with a black metallic back and a gold-plated front embellished with calligraphy from a well-known Tang dynasty poem.
The phone is one of Mr. Lee's favorites, not just because of its styling but also because it symbolizes the relationship between his company, one of Taiwan's largest electronics makers, and Siemens of Germany, which paid BenQ to take over its ailing handset division last year. 
Designed in Germany and Taiwan and built in Europe, the limited-edition phone, he says, aims to blend the passion of the East with the rationality of the West.
''There's a lot of synergy between the European and Asian way of thinking,'' Mr. Lee said. 
''How to make those synergies is the big question. 
It will take time.''
The question is whether consumers and investors will also have patience. 
BenQ, whose cellphone division primarily made handsets for big companies like Motorola, formed the intercontinental venture with Siemens so it could sell its own branded phones beyond Taiwan and China. 
But by trying to reach consumers in the West, BenQ now competes more directly with the companies it used to sell to, and some are taking their business elsewhere.
BenQ, which like many companies in Taiwan is known for its cost-cutting, must also turn around Siemens's operations in Germany, where labor laws are stricter.
Perhaps most important, BenQ must do battle with the Big Five -- Nokia, Motorola, Samsung, LG and Sony Ericsson -- which control about 80 percent of the global handset business and are increasing their share of the market at the expense of smaller players like Siemens.
BenQ is undeterred. 
Handset sales worldwide are growing enough that everyone can get a piece of the pie, Mr. Lee said. 
The company also hopes to marry the expertise it gained mass-producing phones for others with the distribution system and brand recognition that Siemens has built in Europe.
In effect, BenQ wants to duplicate Sony and Ericsson's cross-border success, or become the next Samsung, which has transformed itself into a chic global brand.
The first step toward reaching that goal will be cutting losses at Siemens. 
While BenQ is obligated to meet Siemens's commitments to its German workers through June, the company has said little about what it will do after that. 
Some manufacturing, for instance, could be shut down or moved to Asia, analysts say.
Over all, BenQ expects that as soon as this quarter it will start winning back some of the market lost by Siemens, whose share has fallen to 4.7 percent worldwide from 8.4 percent in 2003.
Thanks to its deal with Siemens, BenQ now generates more than one-third of its sales from its mobile phones and the company expects to unveil about 30 new handsets this year.
Progress, though, has been uneven. 
BenQ reported a loss of $185 million in the fourth quarter, about four times what analysts expected, on sales of $2 billion. 
That shortfall prompted a sell-off of BenQ's shares, which lost nearly 20 percent of their value over the following week.
[On April 24, BenQ posted another quarterly loss -- $156 million -- which it attributed to revamping costs at the Siemens cellphone unit. 
On Friday, the stock closed in Taipei trading at 26.65 Taiwan dollars, or about 82 cents, up from a low of 25.95 Taiwan dollars in mid-March; the Taiwan market was closed Monday.]
BenQ is not the first electronics maker in Taiwan to introduce a brand against stiff odds. 
Acer, which spun off BenQ in 2001, took the same gamble in the 1990's when it started selling its own computers in the United States after years of producing them for others. 
But Acer was unable to build its brand fast enough to offset competition from low-cost makers like Dell and rivals like Hewlett-Packard, which used their growing heft to grab more shelf space in Best Buy and other retailers.
BenQ decided that cellphones were a riper opportunity because of their healthier growth prospects. 
Worldwide handset sales, for instance, jumped 21 percent in 2005 and are expected to grow an additional 28 percent, to 1.04 billion phones, by 2009, according to forecasts by Gartner, a market research firm.
While computers have increasingly become commodities, cellphones are still relatively profitable because they are being packed with more and more sophisticated software, chips and screens.
''Cellphones are about the same as PC's in the 1990's because they are both transitioning in technology,'' said Kirk Yang, who covers Asian electronics manufacturers for Citigroup in Hong Kong.
No matter how good its phones are, BenQ still must persuade carriers to sell them. 
The company works with carriers in Taiwan and China, and Siemens's customers in Europe and elsewhere. 
(BenQ can use the Siemens name for five years.)
But in the United States, one of the world's largest and most competitive markets, Siemens and BenQ face an uphill battle. 
The mergers of Cingular and AT&T Wireless and of Sprint and Nextel have given carriers more power to negotiate deals with handset makers. 
To meet their demands, manufacturers try to make up the difference by selling more phones.
That tilts the balance to Motorola, Nokia, Samsung and LG, which already control about 85 percent of the American market.
''With the consolidation in the U.S. market, these carriers can really use their buying power to get the best prices out of handset producers,'' said Hugues De La Vergne, a Gartner analyst. 
''With the economies of scale in the industry, Siemens has had difficulties competing with the Nokias and Motorolas of the world.''
While carriers are always looking at new handsets as a way to distinguish their brands, they are comfortable with their current arrangements. 
Asked about BenQ's prospects in the United States, Gary D. Forsee, the chief executive of Sprint Nextel, said BenQ would most likely remain on the fringes.
''Around any business model, you end up with three, four or five companies with significant share and others coming up with niche products,'' he said.
But BenQ is less interested in being a niche player or a mass producer of cheap phones. 
Instead, it wants to invest in the research and development of high-end handsets, for consumers in Europe, Asia and North America, that rival the Motorola Razr and the video phones from Samsung and LG that Verizon Wireless and Sprint sell.
''We have strength in R.& D., manufacturing and fashion in Asia, and we're located in Taiwan, where the PC infrastructure is strong,'' Mr. Lee said. 
''And if you look at Germany, there's a long heritage, like Mercedes and BMW, in manufacturing and design.''
BenQ is now doing more to attract attention. 
The company plastered its name on hundreds of taxis in Las Vegas during the Consumer Electronics Show in January. 
Its name, which stands for Bringing Enjoyment 'n' Quality to Life, is also meant to evoke Sony and its ability to marry technology with style.
Investors will want to know whether BenQ can put those words into action.
''The question is whether Siemens and BenQ can come up with something that the average person thinks is cool,'' said Ittai Kidron, an industry analyst at CIBC World Markets in New York. 
''To introduce phones with a wow factor will be difficult.''
