
Acer, the Taiwanese personal computer maker, received a cold dose of reality the last time it tried to conquer the world. 
But it says it has learned its lesson, and it is going after the United States and Chinese markets again.
Last week, Acer named as its president Gianfranco Lanci, an Italian who led its operations in Europe and the United States. 
The current president, J.T. 
Wang, will become the chairman and chief executive. 
The management shuffle was caused by the retirement of Stan Shih, the company's founder.
The promotion of a Westerner to the No.2 post is an unusual move for a Taiwanese company. 
But Acer may need Mr. Lanci's understanding of cross-cultural issues.
Acer, a longtime name in the personal computer industry, is the fifth-largest PC vendor worldwide. 
But in the second quarter, it surpassed Hewlett-Packard as the top brand of notebook computer in Europe, with a market share of 16.7 percent, according to the research group IDC.
Last year Acer shipped 2.5 million notebooks and 2.3 million desktop computers. 
Europe accounted for 70 percent of notebook sales and 32 percent of desktop sales.
It hopes to repeat that performance in the United States and China, as part of its aim to become the No.3 PC seller worldwide within three years. 
Acer has already said it expects to sell about four million notebooks and three million desktops in 2004.
''If Acer wants to be a serious brand business player, it must have a significant presence in these two markets,'' said T.Y. 
Lay, Acer's president for international operations. 
The company was humbled in its previous United States foray and exited the American retail market in 1999.
Mr. Lanci, at a news conference in Taipei last week, said that Acer's United States sales doubled in the first half of this year. 
He added that he expected to double United States revenue again next year, though he did not provide numbers.
Several analysts said the goals were reasonable, largely because Acer starts from a low base.
''With minimum operation overheads, and quite limited revenue, we are already breaking even in the U.S.,'' Mr. Lay said. 
''We foresee in the third quarter a profit coming from the U.S. operation.''
Analysts said that competition would be tougher for Acer in the United States than in Europe or the Asia-Pacific region. 
''A good deal of their success in Europe depends on the fact that they are a foreign company among foreign competitors,'' said Roger Kay, vice president for client computing at IDC in Framingham, Mass.
In this environment, Acer is on an equal footing with American computer firms Dell, Hewlett-Packard and I.B.M. 
But in the United States, Mr. Kay said, ''they are fighting on the turf of domestic competitors who are well entrenched.''
In China, Acer's goal is to become the fifth-largest notebook vendor, though it would not give a timetable. 
In this year's second quarter, it was 12th in China with a market share of 2.5 percent, according to IDC. 
I.B.M. was first with 21.1 percent.
Acer's interest in China is prompted by its position as the second-largest PC market in the world, behind the United States. 
But international brands are seriously challenged there by local vendors like Lenovo, Haier and Beijing Founder Electronics.
The company has signed deals with Carrefour, Europe's largest retailer, and Best Buy, the largest electronics chain in the United States, as well as with prominent distributors like Ingram Micro and Tech Data. 
Acer has no direct sales, unlike other PC vendors who sell through a mix of direct and retail channels to customers.
''What Acer has done has been very consistent,'' Mr. Kay said. 
''With its 'channel only' strategy, it has made the retailers feel comfortable. 
So the retailers are happy to give them shelf space.''
