
Hsu Wang recalls the days when children tried to recreate his puppet shows by wrapping scrap paper around their fingers or handkerchiefs around chopsticks.
Now, the 65-year-old puppet master fears children's hands are too busy playing video games or pressing the buttons of television remote controls scanning for cartoons.
But the revered puppeteer still believes that in some ways, these may be the best days for Taiwanese folk artists because for the first time in a century, they no longer must bow to political pressures.
Puppetry is serious business in Taiwan, and Mr. Hsu has watched his hand-size princes, kings and clowns serve different propaganda masters: the Japanese who colonized Taiwan until the end of World War II and the Nationalist Chinese government whose anti-Communist campaigns tolerated no dissent until martial law ended in 1987.
Although the audiences at his performances are smaller now that the island has become democratic, Mr. Hsu feels puppetry is being appreciated in a genuine way.
"Democracy is a nice thing," Mr. Hsu said in his studio, crowded with glove puppets in finely embroidered costumes and wood-carved faces. 
He began his career when he was 5. 
Ten years later, he became the chief puppeteer in his family's troupe. 
"There were no written scripts," he said. 
"My dad taught me the lines orally, and I still remember them clearly to this date."
At the height of puppetry's popularity in the 1950's and 1960's, Mr. Hsu performed and also choreographed many of the shows that were presented daily to packed theaters and parks all year round.
With its large repertory, Mr. Hsu's troupe, called Hsiao Hsi Yuan, remains Taiwan's most active puppet group, but has had to reduce the number of its performances. 
Mr. Hsu also trains young puppeteers.
On a small, glittering stage set up in a suburban Taipei marketplace, Mr. Hsu recently performed a 90-minute show about the legendary Sun Pin protecting his small kingdom from the wicked fairy Hai Chao.
Assisted by a few aides, he used about 20 puppets, making the small figures walk, roll and somersault. 
He also sang and narrated monologues in a crisp voice accompanied by the gongs and strings of his troupe. 
His feet stamped on the wooden back of the stage to create the sound of striking weapons or figures hitting each other head-on.
His audience, many in T-shirts and shorts, laughed and oohed and aahed. 
An afternoon downpour failed to disrupt the show, only compelling some to seek shelter and watch from the corridor of food stalls selling squid soup and fermented tofu.
Glove puppets have a long tradition in China, and immigrants brought the art to Taiwan in the 19th century. 
When Mr. Hsu was in primary school, Taiwan was Japan's colony, and his father's puppets had to perform Japanese history plays designed to teach the Taiwanese to be good Japanese citizens.
After the end of World War II, China's Nationalist government took over the island, and politics continued to interfere with the arts.
Then came Gen. Chiang Kai-shek's retreat to Taiwan in 1949 after the Nationalists lost a civil war to Mao's Communists. 
As General Chiang built the island into an anti-Communist base intended to recapture the mainland, puppets were pressed into propaganda duty, with scripts cleared through censors.
Worried about declining interest in puppetry, Mr. Hsu sent five of his six children to college so they could find other careers. 
A few years ago, however, his eldest son, Kuo-liang, quit his job as a legal consultant to manage the family troupe, feeling obligated to continue the tradition.
