
The stock market dropped nearly 7 percent here on Monday following confusion over a disputed election on Saturday and the slight wounding of the president in a shooting on Friday afternoon. 
The sharp decline helped drag down markets across Asia and around the world.
Stock market rules here limit price drops for each stock to a little less than 7 percent a day. 
So many stocks fell the limit on Monday that the Weighted Price Index of the Taiwan Stock Exchange tumbled 455.17 points, or 6.7 percent, to 6,359.92.
To make matters worse, there were few buyers even after most stocks had fallen the limit. 
The volume of stocks traded was only a third of the usual volume.
The dearth of buyers even at sharply lower prices prompted equity strategists to predict that the market would continue falling on Tuesday, and possibly on Wednesday and Thursday.
Political turmoil here and falling share prices helped pull down the Nikkei Stock Average of 225 issues in Japan by nine-tenths of a percent and the Hang Seng Index in Hong Kong by 1.9 percent. 
Some financial analysts even mentioned the troubles here as contributing to losses in European markets and in early trading in New York.
Among the losers before the close in New York trading were Taiwanese companies like Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing, the world's largest made-to-order computer chip producer, down almost 8 percent, and Chunghwa Telecom, the biggest phone service provider here, down nearly 7 percent.
The business community here had mostly favored Lien Chan, the opposition Nationalist Party candidate in the presidential election. 
Mr. Lien favored closer relations with mainland China, where most large and medium-sized Taiwanese companies have significant operations, and had been ahead in most polls.
But President Chen Shui-bian, who has taken a confrontational approach to relations with the mainland, was injured in a mysterious shooting on Friday afternoon, 15 minutes after the close of trading here. 
Public sympathy appears to have helped Mr. Chen as he defeated Mr. Lien on Saturday, 50.1 percent to 49.9 percent.
Mr. Lien has refused to accept the loss, asking a court to order a recount as his supporters blocked a downtown thoroughfare in Taipei on Sunday and Monday.
Peter Sutton, the head of Taiwan research at the CLSA investment bank, predicted that airline stocks in particular might fall the limit on Tuesday and Wednesday, before reaching by Thursday a level at which buyers might step in.
Investors had bid up airline stocks in recent weeks based partly on polls showing that Mr. Lien had a slim lead. 
Mr. Lien had been expected to authorize direct flights between Taiwan and the mainland, which would have been a bonanza for air carriers.
Travelers must now fly to other jurisdictions, usually Hong Kong, before catching flights to mainland destinations, a time-consuming and cumbersome routing that discourages nonessential travel.
''People thought they'd be able to set up businesses flying directly into China,'' Mr. Sutton said of the hopes for a Lien victory.
James Carroll, the head of Taiwan equity research at ING, said that if many stocks fall the limit again on Tuesday, there would be many buying opportunities for investors. 
''The Taiwanese tend to over-discount political developments,'' he said.
Taiwanese officials said on Sunday that they have $3 billion available to steady the market if necessary. 
The government intervened in the stock market four years ago to reverse a sharp sell-off that followed the election of President Chen to his first term.
But there was no sign that the government was intervening on Monday. 
Just as governments prefer to intervene in currency markets when the momentum of a currency's movement slows, officials in Asian markets like Taiwan and Hong Kong have preferred to wait for a time when their stock interventions might have the greatest effect.
The New Taiwan dollar fell only a tenth of a percent on Monday, to 33.29 New Taiwan dollars for each American dollar. 
Later in New York trading, the New Taiwan dollar recovered some to trade at 3 United States cents. 
Economists said there was practically no chance of the Taiwanese currency coming under serious attack.
Like China and Japan, Taiwan has been intervening actively in financial markets in recent months to slow the rise of its currency. 
As a result, it has accumulated enormous foreign exchange reserves that reached $224.8 billion last month.
Taiwan also retains fairly strict capital controls on the transfer of money overseas. 
Because there is a limited supply of New Taiwan dollars outside of Taiwan, most of the trading takes place here, where Taiwan's central bank controls it very tightly.
Because few countries have diplomatic relations with Taiwan, recognizing Beijing instead, and because Taiwan has few natural resources, Taipei has long pursued one of the world's most cautious currency policies, for fear of running out of money to buy oil and other needed commodities.
Last autumn, the International Monetary Fund strongly criticized as wasteful the tendency of many governments, especially in Asia, to accumulate very large foreign exchange reserves. 
In an interview late last week, Fadah Hsieh, the vice chairman of the Taiwanese government's policy-coordinating Council for Economic Planning and Development, acknowledged that the size of the government's foreign exchange reserves meant that other opportunities to invest large sums were being passed over.
''We know that we have huge foreign exchange reserves,'' Mr. Hsieh said. 
''We also realize that if we have too much foreign reserves, we don't use our resources efficiently, we are lending our resources to other countries.''
The reserves here are believed to be invested mostly in United States Treasury securities.
The cabinet has asked the central bank and other government institutions to study ways that the foreign exchange reserves might be used more efficiently, Mr. Hsieh said.
But he contended that since Taiwan is not a member of the I.M.F. and cannot borrow from it, Taiwan needs especially large reserves as a financial cushion. 
Despite the government's intervention, the New Taiwan dollar had appreciated by close to 5 percent against the American dollar in the months leading up to the election.
This has eroded Taiwan's competitiveness somewhat with mainland China, which has closely pegged its yuan to the American dollar.
