
Chinese stock markets plummeted Wednesday and continued their decline in early trading Thursday after the authorities in Beijing moved to impose higher taxes on trading activity.
The tax increase, which was announced early Wednesday, was the government's latest attempt to rein in the world's hottest stock market as a growing number of economists and analysts warn about the danger of a market bubble.
Investors reacted by selling shares and pushing the benchmark indexes on the two main stock exchanges sharply lower. 
The Shanghai composite index plunged 6.5 percent, to 4,053.09. 
The Shenzhen composite index dropped nearly 7.2 percent, to 1,199.45. 
At midday Thursday, the Shanghai exchange was down nearly 3 percent from Wednesday's close and the Shenzhen 5 percent.
When Chinese shares fell sharply at the end of February, markets around the world tumbled in tandem on worries of broader trouble ahead for the nation's economy. 
But on Wednesday, other Asian markets were down only modestly.
The benchmark Hang Seng index in Hong Kong declined 0.86 percent Wednesday, and in Tokyo the Nikkei index of 225 issues slid a little less than 0.5 percent.
In its move Wednesday, the Chinese finance ministry tripled the tax on stock transactions to 0.3 percent, which analysts said was probably not enough to destroy the bull market, though it could dampen the mood of speculators.
''The psychological impact on investors could be larger than the actual effect of the duty adjustment,'' Shen Minggao, an economist at Citigroup, wrote in a research note.
Most analysts said they did not think that a sharp drop in stock prices would harm the Chinese economy, which continues to grow robustly. 
Some said they expected the markets to resume their climb quickly unless the government announced further measures.
''If the market expectation is that share prices are going to rise 50 percent in the next six months, then the transaction tax is affordable,'' said Dong Tao, chief Asia economist at Credit Suisse.
The tax was increased at a time many Chinese seem to have gone mad for stocks. 
Professionals, retirees, shop owners, students -- even watermelon hawkers -- are said to be lining up to buy stocks in hopes of getting in on the rally. 
More than 300,000 accounts are being opened every day, regulators say. 
Brokerage houses are overrun with day traders and people who pack lunches to spend the day staring at stock price monitors.
One indication of the mood is a popular cellphone greeting that is being sent around Shanghai. 
The greeting replaces the national anthem with a call for all investors to rise up and buy, buy, buy stocks.
''Arise, ye who refuse to be slaves'' from the national anthem has been replaced by: ''Arise, ye who haven't opened an account!
Pour your gold and silver into the hot market.''
Chinese seem eager to buy stocks not only because they have watched prices soar in the last two years, but also because there are few other opportunities to get a good return on investments.
Until the past year, much of the speculative money in China was going into real estate, particularly in Shanghai and Beijing. 
Policy makers chilled real estate speculation with a series of tax and administrative measures, only to see the speculation move into stocks.
Many investors are betting almost everything on stocks. 
Some said that even the sell-off on Wednesday was unlikely to restrain optimism. 
''There are too many small investors in the market,'' said Fan Ligen, a retired Shanghai clerk who has been investing in stocks since 1992. 
''They are like hundreds of ants swarming on pieces of meat on the ground.''
In the February sell-off, prices plummeted 8.8 percent after the Shanghai composite index surpassed the 3,000-point level for the first time. 
It was the biggest one-day drop in a decade. 
But with prices down, new investors rushed in, sensing an opportunity to buy on the cheap.
They were right. 
In mid-March, the Shanghai index retraced its losses, again exceeding 3,000. 
Early this month, it passed 4,000. 
This week, it was pushing toward 4,400 on record volume.
''Our market is different from the ones in the U.S. or Japan,'' said Li Wenwei, a banker who was at a brokerage house in Shanghai. 
''Those markets obey the rules of the market, while ours doesn't. 
There are bubbles in the market. 
The index is already too high, and there is a lot of risk in the market.''
In many ways, the stock market has come into line with China's phenomenal economic growth, a bullish market to match a bullish economy that is growing close to 11 percent a year, creating worries about the possibility of hypergrowth and inflation, a stock market crash and, potentially, civil unrest.
The rise is extraordinary. 
Since July 2005, when a bearish market turned bullish, share prices have soared in Shanghai by more than 300 percent and 400 percent in Shenzhen, even with Wednesday's drop.
That decline, though, was especially sharp -- given regulations that no single stock rise or fall more than 10 percent in a trading day. 
Some stocks fell the limit Wednesday, and questions arose whether they might continue dropping Thursday.
''I think the market will still go down a bit tomorrow,'' Mr. Li, the banker in Shanghai, said. 
''My two stocks fell today. 
But I won't sell them yet. 
I'm not nervous about the fall since my investment is from my savings.''
