
AS tempers rose over the spy plane standoff last week, Pentagon officials made a tactical decision. 
They put off an announcement that they were going ahead with plans to buy from China more than half a million new black berets for the Army.
It was a telling if minor moment in the unfamiliar world of 21st-century international relations. 
The new century's most important and confusing big-power dance will, arguably, be between the United States and China. 
And as events have proved time and again, it is unlikely to be dominated either by friendship or enmity, making it unlike the foreign relationships that Americans were accustomed to for virtually all the 20th century. 
Can anyone imagine the Pentagon of 1970 buying army supplies from the Soviet Union?
"Americans only know one international pattern, cold war or friendship," said Robert S. Ross, a foreign policy specialist at Boston College who happened to be in Beijing last week during the standoff. 
But neither path, many experts argue, is inevitable or perhaps even likely with China -- or, indeed, with other nations, as complex and ambivalent ties become the norm in a world with a globalized economy and one true superpower.
"Everyone needs to start realizing that this is IT," said Mr. Ross, referring to the mix of tensions, small breakthroughs and crises that has characterized Chinese-American relations since the Soviet empire fell.
Nasty encounters like the one on the Chinese island of Hainan have fed talk about the possibility of a new cold war, this time pitting the United States, guarding its global position, against an increasingly wealthy and well-armed China, seeking respect and influence. 
Indeed, the mid-air mishap and its aftermath brought to mind the Soviet Union's downing of a U-2 spy plane in 1960 and the jailing of its pilot, Francis Gary Powers.
But the differences between then and now are vastly greater than the similarities. 
They have been apparent in the calibrated postures of the American and Chinese governments as each sought to resolve the Hainan incident without losing face, but also without jeopardizing their huge and growing economic ties -- precisely the kind of glue that did not bind the United States and the Soviet Union.
Their legal theories and early public statements aside, chagrined American officials resigned themselves to the loss of the aircraft and any technological secrets that remained on board: China's military was not about to pass up the unexpected manna from above, nor did anyone really expect it to.
Yet, even as American leaders hinted early in the week at dark consequences if the crew were not quickly released -- trade relations, weapons sales to Taiwan and China's heartfelt bid to host the Olympics are all still up in the air -- and even as the Chinese made angry demands for a national apology, both sides also stressed a desire for friendly relations and a negotiated outcome.
For more than a decade, American-Chinese relations have normally been characterized as in transition toward some ultimate state of good or bad. 
For a brief time, around President Clinton's back-slapping China visit in 1998, the wishful thinking was of a "strategic partnership."
When the Taiwan issue heats up, or an unforeseen event like the bombing of China's embassy in Belgrade occurs, latent hostilities and fears pop up on both sides and the talk turns to inevitable military and economic competition, of "containment" and cold war.
But cases like the spy plane incident may be less an indication of relations going awry than a characteristic event of the era, containing all the contradictions of a relationship fraught with good reasons for partnership and good reasons for rivalry. 
Those opposing forces can never be fully reconciled, but must be lived with.
Wrong assumptions about U.S.-China relations are costly. 
Expecting warm ties yields disappointment and betrayal; expecting inevitable conflict courts a self-fulfilling enmity.
Many experts think that the vision to be nurtured these days is of a more ambiguous, less satisfying but still fruitful relationship. 
It is one that may come more easily to Europeans, who have long survived with uncertain neighbors and contradictory goals, than to either Americans or Chinese. 
American perceptions of global involvement were framed in the friend-or-foe context of two world wars and the cold war; the Chinese remain obsessed with a history of colonial humiliation that still shapes all encounters with the West.
"The United States and China have the defining great-power relationship of the first half of the 21st century," Mr. Ross said. 
"We'll never really be friends. 
But we can work to optimize exchanges and trade, and to avoid big crises and war."
Taiwan is the great exception and the great danger. 
Human rights, trade practices, even downed aircraft can be argued over and endured. 
But the Taiwan issue has real potential to embroil Washington and Beijing in years of destructive tensions or even a hot war.
With deft policies on all sides, the Taiwan issue too can limp along indefinitely, never resolved but never exploding, many Western and Chinese experts say. 
The Chinese government's periodic outbursts of belligerence have never laid down an absolute reunification deadline. 
Instead, from Beijing's viewpoint, they have deterred the worst outcome -- a declaration of independence followed by war.
Chu Shulong, a specialist in Chinese-United States relations at the government-run Chinese Institute of Contemporary International Relations, says: "I don't believe there will e a cold war because the United States and China do not have any major, fundamental conflicts of national interest, except for Taiwan. 
And even in that case, there appears to be enough common ground to avoid hostilities."
"The Soviet Union tried to compete with the United States strategically, geographically, and ideologically over the whole world," Mr. Chu said. 
"China has no intention of competing with the U.S. globally."
Even in Asia, he said, diplomatic cooperation has recently been common in places like the Koreas and East Timor.
"We can't deny the possibility of more conflict if hard-liners in the United States or China -- those who see the other mainly as a threat -- become the mainstream," Mr. Chu said. 
"But that doesn't appear likely."
Mr. Chu, like many Chinese experts, may be underestimating the extent to which China's own rising power will automatically widen Beijing's notions of its rights and interests, frighten its Asian neighbors and stoke fears in Washington. 
Certainly in the case of Taiwan, China's increase in threatening missiles and other offensive weapons will trigger more American transfers of advanced weapons.
Mr. Chu, though, notes that China cannot possibly catch up with the United States economically, technologically or militarily for many decades. 
This contrasts with American perceptions, at the height of the cold war, of great Soviet strength, and it insures a different dynamic in relations. 
Moreover, Mr. Chu believes, the coming generation of Chinese intellectuals and political leaders is firmly wedded to globalization, interdependence and the primacy of China's economic advancement.
As for the bumpy road of United States-China relations, well, there is no reason to think it will be easy. 
The two powers, one riding high around the globe and proud of its muscle, the other seeking a new status in Asia and the world but aware of its relative weakness, would have frictions in any case. 
Clashes like that over the spy plane are intensified by what the Chinese see as American arrogance, and by what Americans see as China's hyper-sensitivity.
The Chinese have already heard Mr. Bush, in his campaign, bash them as a "strategic competitor," threaten to sell the most advanced defensive systems to Taiwan and pledge to build national missile defenses that could negate China's small nuclear forces, noted Andrew Nathan, a political scientist at Columbia University. 
"So in the current crisis, for Chinese leaders to act like a doormat would be to send the wrong message," he said. 
"They don't want a major crisis, but they do want to use the occasion presented by this accident to remind the Bush administration that 'We're here, we're a major power, we are not to be treated like a second-rate country.'
"
Potentially dangerous confrontations are, of course, best avoided, but they do provide a kind of practice for the frustrations ahead.
The Chinese, emerging from a self-imposed shell, are still learning the game and the United States seems to learn diplomatic lessons over and over again. 
Mr. Bush was elected with the strong support of conservatives and neo-cold warriors who are suspicious of China inclined to "get tough."
So, Mr. Ross, says, "Bush is repeating the pattern of new administrations with China -- you go to the extremes and get knocked back to the center.
"It would be nice," he said, "if we could overcome that."
