
AFTER three huge pro-democracy demonstrations by residents here, Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain visited last week to learn what Beijing has done with this former British colony, six years after he oversaw its handover to Chinese rule.
People were too polite to tell him that the British legacy remains part of the problem.
Throughout most of 156 years of British rule, colonial administrators imposed repressive and often racist regulations. 
Not only did they block the development of democratic institutions, but they censored Chinese-language publications and movies for many years. 
Mail was opened and wiretapping was widespread. 
Only in the 1980's was the dreaded Public Order Ordinance revised, after many years of allowing the police to break up gatherings of as few as three people, especially public protests.
"There is a kind of myth that everything was free and wonderful under the British, but they had a very tough colonial administration," said William Overholt, who was an investment banker here in the 1980's and now holds the Asia policy chair at the RAND Corporation research institute. 
"It didn't start loosening up until it was clear it was going back to China."
Beijing's efforts to force Hong Kong to pass new security laws set off the protests this summer. 
But many colonial laws still on the books for offenses like sedition themselves fall far below the current international standards for civil liberties.
Trying to enforce the existing laws would be difficult for Beijing, however, not least because many of the laws were written to help the government root out Communists.
The British also discriminated heavily against the 98 percent of the population that was Chinese, creating a lasting resentment that still finds expression in a fiercely anti-European, pro-Beijing segment of the population here.
The government here is now trying to pass new security laws to replace some of the mustiest ordinances, which restrict even the handling of documents the government deems seditious. 
Some of these disused laws are so old that the courts here might rule that they are unenforceable.
As a result, democracy advocates favor retaining these laws even in cases where they appear more draconian on paper than the laws with which the government wishes to replace them.
By contrast, the government has retained the still usable Public Order Ordinance, and even toughened it immediately after China took possession of Hong Kong in 1997. 
For the last six years, anyone organizing a demonstration has had to obtain first a "letter of no objection" from the police.
If more people show up for a rally than the organizers forecast to the police in obtaining the letter, then the organizers and participants in theory can face criminal prosecution and jail terms of up to five years.
Organizers of the rally that drew 500,000 people here on July 1 had predicted that only 100,000 would come. 
"We dare the government to sue 500,000 people for unlawful assembly," said Margaret Ng, the member of the Legislative Council who represents the legal profession.
But she also suggested that at least the march's organizers could actually face legal difficulties if the government opts for a harsh crackdown.
