
It takes a rock-solid stomach to open a restaurant. 
According to Brian Buckley, a New York restaurant analyst, for every two restaurants that open in Manhattan, only one will still be operating in two years' time. 
One man who seems to be undeterred by those odds is Rick Camac, the managing director for several eateries in progress: Adiletto's, an upscale pizzeria with branches in the West Village and Midtown, and Fatty Crab, a Southeast Asian bistro that's set to open this Monday on Hudson Street.
Camac already has one success to his culinary credit, the popular 5 Ninth, whose precocious chef, Zakary Pelaccio, swooped into the meatpacking district from Brooklyn and quickly gained a cult following among foodies and critics alike for his sophisticated fare that marries seasonal American and Asian flavors.
One recent morning, the neighborhood buzz had a different sound. 
Camac, 49, was standing on Hudson Street, looking up at the new custom African-mahogany facade for Fatty Crab. 
A workman on a ladder above drilled into a plywood panel so newly painted that it looked wet. 
On the sidewalk next to him, a plumber sawed loudly on an iron pipe for a new gas line. 
A couple of blocks away in the 5 Ninth kitchen, Pelaccio and his chef de cuisine were ironing out recipes for chili crab and char kway teow, a stir-fry noodle dish.
A year ago, with the lease signed for Fatty Crab, Camac worked the phones and managed to cajole nine investors to pony up $20,000 to $75,000 each (in addition to his own $75,000 contribution). 
The initial plan was a cafe version of 5 Ninth, with simpler, less expensive fare. 
In July, Pelaccio had a change of heart and lobbied for a different concept: he wanted to pay homage to the crab joint he frequented during a seven-month stint cooking in Kuala Lumpur in 1996. 
Camac didn't panic over the last-minute change; it was O.K. with him as long as Pelaccio could create another winning restaurant formula.
Every detail of Fatty Crab that bears directly upon its profitability -- from mushroom expenditures to glassware attrition -- is within Camac's purview; meddling with the recipes, polishing brass and hiring bartenders remain in Pelaccio and his floor staff's jurisdiction.
''The reason why the marriage works is, I don't do what they do, and they don't do what I do,'' Camac said. 
''We could never fill in for one another.''
On this day, there were plenty of details that came under Camac's bailiwick. 
Thirty-six antique wood chairs from China had yet to arrive in port. 
Behind the bar sat a $4,000 espresso machine the size of a wedding cake that had been dented in transit and awaited the shipper's insurance settlement. 
The kitchen was fully installed (save the gas), but the Alto-Shaam AR-7E rotisserie oven had to be returned so the door could be rehung to swing open from the opposite direction. 
Camac expects two-thirds of the initial money to be eaten up by construction costs, equipment and ''small wares'' like forks and salt shakers.
Camac got into the hospitality business in 2001. 
He owned and managed software companies based in New York but was itching to act on a longtime interest in food and wine. 
That year, he gave a friend the last $25,000 he needed to open Maker's, a Murray Hill bar, in return for an equity stake. 
Energized by that bar's success, and looking to do something more ambitious, Camac joined forces with a former Pastis general manager and a former bar manager at Rhone and wrote a business plan for a $300,000 cocktail lounge.
The team soon found a space, a sagging but stately 1848 town house on Ninth Avenue between Gansevoort and Little West 12th Street. 
Within a few hours, Camac had miraculously raised $250,000 from half a dozen friends. 
''I was lucky there were a lot of people who had faith in me,'' he said. 
''They knew I had a passion for this, and they wrote checks blindly.''
Camac signed a lease on the space, and when the last tenant decided to vacate his home in the building's basement, he realized he could install a kitchen. 
The lounge morphed into a full-fledged restaurant. 
It wasn't an easy task, as the building needed a gut renovation: the stairwells as well as all the wiring and plumbing had to be brought up to code, and there was no central heat; there were only fireplaces. 
The $300,000 project became a $1.6 million extreme makeover. 
Camac made another salvo of phone calls and ultimately ended up with nearly 20 investors.
At the root of Camac's fund-raising talent is a hard-boiled assessment of the investment he's peddling. 
''Restaurants are impulse investments, and they're emotional,'' Camac said. 
''People want to bring their friends into a great restaurant and say, 'I'm a part of this place.''' (Camac's investors have no say in how the restaurant is run.)
''Don't get me wrong -- we want a return on our money,'' he added. 
''But if anyone looked at restaurants from a purely business standpoint -- X's and O's -- they wouldn't do it.''
Wendy Maitland, a Manhattan real-estate broker and an early investor in both 5 Ninth and Fatty Crab, seems to agree with Camac's view. 
''I could've flipped three condos that would've brought a faster, easier, clearer return than 5 Ninth,'' she said. 
''But this is more creative.''
A longtime West Village resident, Maitland dines at 5 Ninth, often with clients, an average of once a week. 
''If we had a chef who was making food I didn't love, it wouldn't be any fun, but this makes me much happier than my stock portfolio.''
Investors in Camac's restaurants are given priority for reservations and receive a complimentary round of drinks or dessert, but they pay for their meals like any other customer. 
Camac limits his own dining at 5 Ninth to one dinner, one brunch and one evening of drinks a week. 
And even then, he said, ''if I'm sitting at the bar, and it starts to fill up, I'd rather make room for a paying customer.''
Camac descended to Fatty Crab's basement to check on the progress of the natural-gas pipe. 
Con Edison had mandated installation of a larger gas line between the street and the restaurant -- work that Camac undertook at great expense. 
But Con Ed reversed its decision, and now the plumber was hooking up small-gauge pipe. 
''Frustrations like that don't even bother me anymore,'' Camac said. 
''I expect them. 
You learn to be patient in this business because the alternative is a nervous breakdown.''
Besides, there was real progress to focus on back upstairs. 
A workman had finished installing the awning. 
''Look at that,'' Camac said, gazing up at the cartoon-crab logo on the sign. 
''Fatty Crab.''
He basked in that satisfaction for a second before setting off to the construction site of one of his pizzerias. 
Along the way, he passed his golden egg, 5 Ninth. 
He pointed to a boarded-up restaurant space -- not his own -- vacant for more than a year and noted that its owners hadn't been able to raise enough money to begin construction.
''The most expensive part of this game is not opening,'' he said.
Number of restaurants that opened in New York City in 2004: 300.
Average profit an independent New York City restaurant will make for each dollar spent:
10 cents.
Cost of one Matthews fan company ''Vent-Bettina'' ceiling fan at Fatty Crab: $1,100.
Chili Crab
2 tablespoons chili sauce, like sriracha
3 tablespoons soy sauce
1 tablespoons sugar
3 tablespoons rice-wine vinegar
3 tablespoons tomato paste
1 teaspoons sesame oil
1 * cups chopped shallots (about 8 ounces)
4 cloves garlic, sliced
1 tablespoon freshly grated ginger
teaspoon kosher salt
2 tablespoons cornstarch
1 tablespoon peanut oil
8 blue crabs, cleaned and split, large claws slightly cracked
1 egg yolk, beaten
cup chopped scallions for garnishing.
1. In a large bowl, whisk the chili sauce, soy sauce, sugar, rice-wine vinegar, tomato paste and sesame oil with 1* cups water and reserve.
2. Place the shallots, garlic, ginger and salt in the bowl of a food processor. 
Pulse until the mixture becomes a smooth paste. 
In a small bowl, whisk together the cornstarch with 2 tablespoons water.
3. Heat the peanut oil in a wok over high heat, and when it shimmers, add the shallot paste and fry for 30 seconds until very fragrant. 
Add the crabs and $7 of the chili sauce, and when the liquid simmers, continue to cook for 2 minutes, shaking the pan to cover the crabs with the sauce.
4. Add the remaining chili sauce to the pan, and when it reaches a simmer, turn the heat to medium-low, cover the pan and continue to simmer vigorously about 8 minutes. 
Stir in the cornstarch paste, and when the liquid in the pan thickens, turn off the heat. 
Add the egg yolk and stir again to combine. 
Divide the crabs and sauce among 4 plates, sprinkle with the chopped scallions and serve immediately, with crab picks and many napkins. 
Serves 4.
Char Kway Teow
3 tablespoons vegetable oil
* cup chopped garlic
3 cups bean sprouts
1 pound fresh kway teow (broad rice) noodles
1 teaspoon salt
* cup dark soy sauce
2 tablespoons seedless tamarind paste dissolved in Cv cup water
6 large eggs, lightly beaten
1 tablespoon Thai chili sauce
3 Chinese sausages, thinly sliced
8 ounces medium shrimp, peeled and deveined
3 ounces chives, sliced into 2-inch pieces.
1. Place a large wok or saute pan over medium heat. 
When the pan is hot, add 1 tablespoon of the vegetable oil and all of the garlic. 
Saute until the garlic is translucent, about 1 minute.
2. Add the bean sprouts and noodles to the saute pan and stir to coat with garlic and oil. 
Add the salt, soy sauce, tamarind mixture and cup water. 
Saute for 1 minute. 
Transfer to a platter and set aside.
3. Return the wok to medium heat. 
Add the remaining 2 tablespoons vegetable oil. 
When the oil is hot, add the eggs to the pan and stir until lightly scrambled. 
Add the noodle mixture, chili sauce and Chinese sausages. 
Add the shrimp and saute until they start to turn pink, about 1 minute. 
Add the chives and toss until the shrimp are fully cooked, about 1 minute more. 
Serves 4. 
All recipes adapted from Fatty Crab.
