
Talk about excuses for a party.
Forced out of its West 53rd Street Manhattan location by an earth-churning, ear-splitting reconstruction project, the Museum of Modern Art has now officially, if temporarily, moved to Queens. 
And that, apparently, is good enough reason to go wild.
In retrospect, moving the artworks from one of the world's great museums across the East River might have been the easy part. 
Now the hard task is making sure that people in Manhattan, Queens and beyond take note of the Modern's new address (33rd Street, at Queens Boulevard, Long Island City), where a reconfigured staple factory, painted bright blue, will open this weekend as MoMA QNS.
That partly explains this week's whole series of attention-getting ploys, which began on Sunday morning with a procession across the Queensborough Bridge. 
In this performance, reproductions of some of the Modern's most famous works -- including Picasso's "Desmoiselles d'Avignon," Giacometti's "Standing Woman" and Marcel Duchamp's "Bicycle Wheel," as well as the artist Kiki Smith, offered as "a living icon" -- were carried on palanquins or litters from 53rd Street in Manhattan to 33rd Street in Queens.
The three-hour procession, with rose petals, bubbles and music by a Peruvian band, Banda de Santa Cecilia, was designed, right down to the colored shirts, by Francis Alys, a Belgian-born artist living in Mexico City. 
A video of the performance will be shown at MoMA QNS, starting this weekend, along with drawings and photographs of it.
Other gatherings, galas and neighborhood parties are scheduled for the opening, but the biggest bang will come on Saturday night at 9:30. 
That is when 1,000 fireworks shells, fired sequentially into the night sky, will create a full rainbow over the southern tip of Roosevelt Island.
"Transient Rainbow," created by the Chinese-born artist Cai Guo-Qiang and produced by Phil Grucci, will unfold -- naturally -- from the Manhattan side of the East River to the Queens side. 
As experiences go, it will be brief. 
The rainbow will last 20 seconds, with the entire event spread out over a minute. 
"It is awfully short," Lilian Tone, the Modern's curator for the display, said ruefully.
Like the Sunday ceremonial procession, the fireworks are by a well-known artist, chosen to put the museum's move in a cultural context. 
"We were waiting for an opportunity to invite him to do a project for us, and this was it," Ms. Tone said.
Mr. Cai, who lives in New York and is perhaps best known for his paintings in gunpowder, recently staged another fireworks display in China as part of "Projects for Extraterrestrials," a continuing series. 
"He conceives art that is not only for the museumgoer, but for a wider, more inclusive audience," Ms. Tone said.
In Mr. Alys's case, the concept was border regions, which has special meaning for someone living in Mexico. 
"He is fascinated by ideas of borders, or peripheries," said Harper Montgomery, an assistant curator at the Modern. 
"He was obsessed with the idea of moving from Midtown Manhattan to Queens, with the really dramatic transition that takes place as the landscape, physical and economic, changes as you go across the bridge."
It has been several years since officials at the Modern began planning the move, to a site that had already been acquired as storehouse space for the museum's ever-expanding collection.
"Once we knew we were coming out here," said Diana Simpson, director of visitor services, "we needed to figure out the most effective way of communicating with regular MoMA visitors, and new visitors, how they get to our new location."
What followed was a series of visitor-friendly measures: free admission this weekend; a regular weekend shuttle bus service from the 53rd street location to Queens; a new visitor center inside the museum's Design Store, which remains on West 53rd street; and the addition of Chinese and Korean to the Modern's roster of languages in which information is available. 
(These are spoken in the museum's new neighborhood.)
After studying census data and visitor surveys, the Modern has also adjusted its hours for the new site. 
The museum will now be closed on Tuesdays and Wednesdays and will open one half-hour earlier -- at 10 a.m. -- for those out-of-town visitors who, say, want to make a morning excursion outside of Manhattan before a Broadway matinee.
After what they expect will be an outstanding opening weekend, museum officials are hoping to see attendance at the new site reach 1,000 to 2,000 a day. 
That is a far cry from the peak of 3,000 to 4,000 at 53rd Street earlier this year, but a number that they have anticipated as they plan for the three-year Queens sojourn.
