
HUDOYKUL HAFIZOV, a soft-spoken, slightly built immigrant from Uzbekistan, works as inventory manager at Silver Rod Pharmacy in Bensonhurst, Brooklyn, and he has a favorite joke:
''A person who knows three languages is trilingual.
''Someone who knows two languages is bilingual.
''But do you know what they call a person who speaks only one language?''
Pausing for a beat, Mr. Hafizov replied triumphantly to his own question, ''American!''
Smiling broadly, he adjusted his reading glasses and returned to his typing.
Mr. Hafizov, who is 36 years old and emigrated in 2000 from the ancient city of Samarkand, himself speaks five languages: English, Uzbek, Russian, Tajik and Turkish. 
Despite his official title at the pharmacy, he, like most of the 40 employees, is frequently summoned to play interpreter, to explain medication instructions or shipping options to immigrant customers who use the store's Western Union services to send remittance checks back home.
In microcosm, the little drugstore and its customers tell a striking and in some respects unfamiliar story of ethnic change. 
Bensonhurst, which sits snugly south of Borough Park and east of Bay Ridge, is in nearly every respect not what it used to be.
As recently as the 1980s, nearly everyone who worked at the pharmacy had been born in Italy, or at least in Brooklyn. 
Over the last decade or so, this has changed. 
The pharmacy's work force now includes people from around the globe -- from Bulgaria, Ukraine, Georgia and Russia, from Mexico and Panama, China and Korea, Pakistan and Bangladesh. 
A total of 16 languages are spoken in this single storefront on 18th Avenue near 65th Street.
The diversity of the pharmacy's staff has both mirrored and been a response to the growing diversity of the neighborhood. 
People often talk about the melting pot that is 21st-century Queens. 
Yet over the past decade, and with little fanfare, Bensonhurst has evolved into one of the city's largest and most diverse immigrant communities.
Its two primary ZIP codes are home to more immigrants than any other neighborhood of Brooklyn -- about 76,000 of the neighborhood's 158,000 residents are foreign-born -- more, even, than better-known immigrant destinations like Jackson Heights or Elmhurst.
Census data show that Bensonhurst has as many Russians as Brighton Beach, and as many Chinese as Sunset Park. 
About 10,000 Ukrainians call it home, along with 2,500 Latin Americans and almost as many Pakistanis. 
Two-thirds of Bensonhurst households speak a language other than English at home.
All of this might be surprising to many people, given that in 1989, less than two decades ago, Bensonhurst's reputation as an insular and sometimes bigoted neighborhood was cemented with the murder of Yusuf Hawkins. 
A 16-year-old African-American from East New York, Brooklyn, Yusuf had been visiting the area to inquire about a used car when he was surrounded by a gang of white youths wielding baseball bats and shot to death.
Barely a generation later, the neighborhood that came to personify racial hostility has emerged to become the new face of the city's diversity. 
(The one exception remains African-Americans and African immigrants, excluding Egyptians, who continue to make up fewer than 1 percent of the residents, although whether this is due to the lingering effect of the Yusuf Hawkins shooting is difficult to determine.)
''You have all types of people here,'' Mr. Hafizov said as he sat in the pharmacy's basement, surrounded by boxes of medication, and entered price codes into a computer database. 
''It makes you feel like a small fish in a big ocean.''
'Unlike Anywhere Else'
It is a testament to the insular nature of neighborhoods that when New Yorkers think of Bensonhurst, many still think only of Italians or perhaps Jews. 
Its very name suggests a place where the faces are wrinkled and white, where women trade recipes from the old country and men with names like Mancini and Scotto wax nostalgic about life on the docks.
But as the 2005 hit documentary ''Mad Hot Ballroom'' showed, the fifth-grade dancers from Bensonhurst's Public School 112 represented a rainbow of ethnicities. 
Today, more than half of the school's 465 students are Asian and nearly a fifth are Latino. 
One in five speaks limited English.
Not that Italians have disappeared. 
When Italy won the World Cup last year, it seemed as if ''the entire country of Italy had come out to celebrate,'' one local merchant commented. 
Elderly men still sit outside social clubs sipping espresso and chattering in Italian.
But the neighborhood that was the setting for the 1970s television series ''Welcome Back, Kotter,'' giving a young John Travolta his star-making role as the high school ringleader Vinnie Barbarino, has since hemorrhaged Italians. 
From 1980 to 2000, half the residents of Italian descent left, and the number now is just under 60,000.
''Italians are moving to Long Island, New Jersey and Staten Island,'' lamented Salvatore Fronterre, vice president of the Federation of Italian-American Organizations of Brooklyn. 
''Young people move away, and then their parents follow.''
Though the neighborhood still has what Mr. Fronterre calls ''good Italian flavor,'' he is not sure how much longer that will last. 
''It depends,'' he said, ''on how long we're going to live.''
Isabel Moccia, who has worked at Silver Rod for 15 years, is one of the pharmacy's few remaining employees from Italy. 
She immigrated to Brooklyn in 1970, when she was 9, and she still lives in the three-family brick house on 71st Street that her parents purchased for $60,000 in 1975.
''The small group of Italians that are still here, they're not happy,'' Ms. Moccia said. 
It is not that the neighborhood's indigenous Italians object to the newer arrivals, she said. 
''They're angry at all the Italians who have left. 
They say that they're greedy, that they just took the money and ran.''
The economics driving the departing Italians are easy to understand. 
A recent estimate put the price of Ms. Moccia's house at nearly $1 million; with that kind of money, Italians can retire comfortably to the suburbs.
By flocking to Bensonhurst in the early 1900s, Italians transformed the neighborhood. 
Their departure is having an equally profound effect.
''It's unlike anywhere else in the city,'' said Joseph Salvo, director of the population division at the Department of City Planning. 
''The key is that the Italian community was just so large and tight, and now that they're leaving, it's created the largest vacuum of housing availability in the city. 
And immigrants are the ones quickly filling the vacuum.''
A wide array of immigrants rushed to replace the departing Italians, beginning in the late 1980s with the Chinese, who were eager to live in a neighborhood convenient to Chinatown by subway. 
As Sunset Park filled up, a logical next step was Bensonhurst, where the N train runs directly to Sunset Park and the D train to Grand Street.
According to the 2000 Census, about 20,000 Chinese lived in Bensonhurst, and that number has risen; Steve Chung, president of the United Chinese Association of Brooklyn, estimates that the community has since doubled in size. 
According to the city planning agency, the census tracts with the fastest-growing Chinese population in the city are in Bensonhurst.
As the Chinese and, to a lesser extent, Mexicans move east fromSunset Park, Russians and immigrants from the former Soviet Union are moving north from Brighton Beach, sometimes not even stopping in what for decades was the city's most Russian neighborhood.
''They're increasingly heading straight from Russia to Bensonhurst,'' Mr. Salvo said. 
''These families are younger and don't necessarily see the housing at Brighton Beach as desirable. 
They want something with more space and a bit more upscale.''
Another stream of immigrants, largely South Asian, is heading into Bensonhurst from Ditmas Park and Midwood, or directly from their home countries. 
That is the path taken by Muhammad Alam, a slender 39-year-old who made the journey from Pakistan to Bensonhurst in 2001 and runs the 24/Seven News Cafe next door to Silver Rod. 
Last year, Mr. Alam was joined by his wife and young son and daughter.
Flocks With Fresh Faces
Milestone Park, a concrete recreation area with concrete chessboard tables, sits at the southern end of Bensonhurst, on 18th Avenue and 81st Street. 
One late summer afternoon, Russian and Chinese men could be seen waging fierce battles over the chessboards, at times observed by crowds three people deep.
Muslim women in headscarves pushed children in strollers, heading to a playground across the street. 
A group of Pakistani teenagers relaxed on a bench, their backpacks at their feet, talking in Urdu about their efforts to form a cricket team at nearby New Utrecht High School. 
A Guatemalan woman watched as Mexicans loaded bread into a delivery truck and shouted instructions to one another in Spanish.
Across the street from the park sits the oldest institution in Bensonhurst, the New Utrecht Reformed Church, which has witnessed wave after wave of immigrants pass through its doors. 
Founded in 1677 by Dutch immigrants, the church was once visited by George Washington, and it was designated a city landmark in 1966.
Louise Fabiszak, a 73-year-old retired secretary of Italian, Armenian and Syrian descent, has been a loyal member of the church nearly her entire life. 
She fondly remembers the Easter Sundays of her childhood, when she used to scramble to find an empty pew. 
But attendance at the English-speaking services has dwindled; today, as few as a dozen people might show up.
Not that the church isn't well used.
In 1989, six Chinese immigrants, led by the Rev. Peter Loew, approached New Utrecht about using the 1892 parish house next to the sanctuary for Sunday morning services. 
A Russian contingent was next, taking the Sunday evening slot. 
Then the church was approached by a group of Koreans, who now worship there on Sunday afternoons.
Before long, the church swirled with activity. 
The Chinese congregation grew quickly to about 100; the Russians had nearly as many, the Koreans about 50. 
All the while, the original congregation continued to shrink.
In the mid-1990s, Pastor Loew raised the possibility of purchasing the parish house. 
Two hours a week wasn't enough time to minister to his growing congregation's needs; they needed a place they could use daily.
In part to stave off such a move, a retired Bensonhurst carpenter named Robert Buonvino helped form an organization called Friends of Historic New Utrecht, with the goal of getting the parish house designated as an official city landmark.
Pastor Loew eventually gave up on the idea of buying the parish house, and though he remained on good terms with most of the church's original members, he sometimes felt an undercurrent of discrimination. 
''People didn't have to say it outright,'' he said. 
''But we would sometimes hear comments like 'Maybe you should go, since you're getting too big.'''
In 1998, the parish house was designated a landmark, and soon afterward the Chinese congregation purchased a building farther south on 18th Avenue.
Now it's the Russians who may outgrow the parish hall. 
And though Ms. Fabiszak hopes the church can attract the neighborhood's new immigrants to its services, that hasn't yet happened.
''Our minister tells us that immigrants will be our salvation,'' she said. 
''The writing is on the wall -- Bensonhurst is changing. 
But they all want to do things in their own language, which I can understand.''
Little Crossroads of the World
On a recent September afternoon, a visitor to Silver Rod would have had a front-row seat from which to observe the neighborhood's increasingly heterogeneous character.
In Aisle 2, a Mexican mother and her young son were searching for back-to-school supplies; Januario Perez, the pharmacy's head stocker, who came from Mexico in 1988 and has worked at the store for 10 years, chatted briefly with the mother in Spanish, after which the elusive binder was located.
In Aisle 5, Ana Pui helped an older Italian woman find an anti-wrinkle cream. 
Ms. Pui spent the first 13 years of her life in Panama, where her parents had relocated from China to open a restaurant, and she speaks Spanish in addition to Mandarin and Cantonese.
After a few moments of digging, Ms. Pui found the item the customer was looking for. 
But that was not the end of the transaction.
''Twelve dollars!'' the woman said, gasping. 
''Why so expensive?''
''I don't know what to tell you,'' Ms. Pui replied. 
''I don't make the prices here.''
Next door, Mike Petratos and Brian Flynn, the owners of Silver Rod since 1990, monitored the final touches being applied to the newly renovated 24/Seven cafe. 
Last fall they took over management of what was then a sleepy newsstand, and they hope to transform it into a neighborhood destination by adding a deli, foreign-language newspapers and magazines, and eventually outdoor seating.
A key part of their business strategy has been to keep abreast of their customers' evolving tastes. 
They know, for example, which Polish papers to stock (Nowy Dziennik and Super Express) and which brand of frozen desserts their Asian customers prefer (Yolato).
And of course the cafe sells one product that appeals to everyone.
''No matter what nationality you are,'' Mr. Petratos said, ''you drink coffee.''
