
FOR Americans, the "bad guys" in China seem easily identifiable: they are the aging, grim-faced Communist hard-liners in Mao jackets, wagging their trembling fingers at the world. 
They squelch democratic opinion, detain American airplane crews and ferociously repress Tibet.
But that conclusion is thoroughly misleading. 
Increasingly, the real hard-liners toward the West are simply ordinary people.
They wear blue jeans and T-shirts with risque English phrases. 
They trade gossip about how to get American visas. 
They read Danielle Steele novels and revere a man they call Qiao Dan, also known as Michael Jordan. 
But many also believe that the United States is a bully, that Beijing should stand up more firmly to Tokyo and Washington alike, that Tibetan monks should be tossed in jail if necessary and that any move by Taiwan toward independence should result in a Chinese military attack.
"A more democratic China is not necessarily a less nationalistic China," said Xiao Qiang, the executive director of Human Rights in China, a New York-based group. 
"It could take a very hard line, too."
Indeed, if China had been a more democratic country, the recent stalemate over the American spy plane might have been much more difficult to resolve. 
As China has become more open in recent years, allowing citizens to tap out their thoughts in Internet chat rooms or even call them in to talk radio shows, public opinion has come to matter more. 
Ultimately, this may make China more complex, nationalistic and obdurate. 
Think of France, cubed.
The accompanying comments by university students give a taste of the feelings many young Chinese have toward the United States. 
There is fascination, respect and envy, but also perplexity about and resentment of those high-handed and inscrutable Americans.
This growing Chinese nationalism did not arise by accident. 
In the aftermath of the 1989 Tiananmen crackdown on the student democracy movement, Chinese leaders consciously cultivated nationalism as a new glue to unite the country. 
Communism was discredited, so President Jiang Zemin and others used the education system and the propaganda apparatus to nurture a prickly national pride and suspicion of the outside world. 
As He Xin, a commentator with close ties to hard-liners, said at the time: "The new unifying force in China is patriotism."
Wu Jiaxiang, a former senior official who was imprisoned after Tiananmen and now lives in Boston, puts it differently. 
"Chinese nationalism is something that the Communist Party started after Tiananmen," he said. 
"They use nationalism to replace Communism. 
They invented it. 
There was some in the 1980's, but it has become much stronger since the 1990's."
The upshot was that the government toned down its propaganda about the virtues of socialism -- which nobody believed anyway, since the children of the leaders were busy raking in money as capitalists -- and focused on warnings about the duplicitous and predatory West. 
Those warnings fell on fertile ground, partly because China has been pushed around, plundered and carved up by one country after another, ever since Britain went to war with China in 1839, in part to force it to buy opium.
SUCH predations created ferocious waves of nationalism. 
In 1899-1900 an ultra-nationalist group known as the Boxers rampaged against foreigners, declaring in one statement: "Foreign devils are not produced by mankind. 
If you do not believe it, look at them carefully. 
The eyes of all the foreign devils are bluish."
Shouting, "Protect the country, destroy the foreigner," the Boxers slaughtered foreign missionaries, hacked off the breasts of their wives, and, of less concern in the West, killed a far greater number of Chinese Christians.
The ruling Qing dynasty, which was at the time disintegrating in a way that some find comparable to the travails of today's Communist dynasty, seized upon that nationalism to try to bolster its own legitimacy, without much success. 
The Communist Party has been rather more clever so far in nurturing nationalism since the 1990's, and in staying on top of the nationalist tiger.
Yu Renqiu, an expert on United States-China relations at the State University of New York in Purchase, recalls that when he came to the United States in 1980 he and his fellow Chinese students were not terribly nationalistic. 
But in the last half-dozen years, he said, Chinese students have become much more inclined to stand up for their country and vent outrage at the United States.
"I worry about it," Professor Yu said. 
"I worry that this popular nationalism may get out of control."
While misinformation in China's state-controlled media is often blamed for the nationalist response during incidents like the spy plane standoff, the reality is more complex. 
In 1999, for example, when the American bombing of the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade provoked outrage in China, many Chinese students in America were also furious, even though they were relying for their information on American television and newspapers. 
Likewise, the Hong Kong public has periodically been whipped into a nationalistic fervor over Japan's occupation of the disputed Senkaku islands.
Part of the reason seems to be that, where Americans see individual incidents, the Chinese see one more in a 200-year string of "guochi" -- a term familiar to all Chinese, meaning national humiliation. 
Americans see an air collision, or the jockeying among competing cities to get the Olympics; the Chinese see another insidious attempt by foreign powers to weaken China and hold it back.
This perspective has been encouraged not just by the Chinese government but also, paradoxically, by the advent of quasi-capitalism in the news media. 
Often the most jingoistic publications in China are not the official ones but those unsubsidized magazines and tabloids that must fight for readers any way they can, including peddling nationalism much as William Randolph Hearst did in America in the run-up to the Spanish-American War.
While some observers worry that the American and Chinese peoples -- and not just their governments -- may come to regard themselves as antagonists, they also note that China's growing market economy could, over time, have the opposite effect.
"Many Chinese are very practical," notes Xu Pei, a Chinese-language journalist in Washington. 
"They understand that they have to trade with the U.S. and that if relations with the U.S. were damaged, then their living standard would be damaged. 
They know that very clearly."
The Chinese leadership also has an incentive to keep the nationalism in check. 
President Jiang, who as much as anybody helped nurture today's mood, has lately been hurt by it, since his decision to return the American air crew is seen by many Chinese as evidence of weakness and a willingness to toady to America.
All in all, the government in China today often seems more afraid of the people than the other way around. 
The leaders know that protests by students, workers or even peasants could paralyze the country, and that either unrest or high levels of popular discontent could provoke a coup d'etat.
SO the authorities go to tremendous lengths -- through propaganda and through cash payments -- to appease unemployed workers and the army. 
All this makes nationalism a particularly interesting force in China, given its potential not just for conferring legitimacy on the government but also for taking it away.
"Nationalism is very dangerous for the Communist Party," said Mr. Wu, the former senior official. 
"Because after you've created it, it grows stronger and stronger on its own until it is difficult to control."
