
THE legendary medicine man of the Oglala Sioux, Black Elk, believed that power in the world "always works in circles."
And so, apparently, does President Bush.
The president's foreign policy advisers said last week that he would engage the world in a series of "concentric circles," first meeting with America's neighbors Mexico and Canada, then allies in Europe and Japan. 
Only then would he be ready to powwow with the leaders of Russia and China on the tough issues of global security that lie ahead.
That agenda is not going to be easy. 
Ten years after the end of the cold war, not only are some of the most fundamental issues of global security unresolved, especially where nuclear weapons and the defenses against them are concerned, there is also no global forum in which these most profound security questions are being debated by all the nations who have a stake in the outcome.
Of course the United States talks one-on-one with dozens of nations about nuclear weapons. 
It carries on arms control negotiations with Russia and takes part in the Geneva Disarmament Conference and other discussions aimed at controlling nuclear proliferation, ballistic missiles and nuclear testing.
But the most searing security question for the coming decade is how to manage profound reductions in the number of terror weapons on the planet while parrying the question of missile defenses -- especially the question of who gets left outside the umbrella. 
And where is the hall for this debate?
Former Secretary of Defense James R. Schlesinger points out that while America and its NATO allies have a forum in Brussels to talk to Russia about the big issues of NATO expansion and America's plans to erect a national antimissile shield, neither Japan nor China is included in these discussions.
JAPAN is interested in missile defenses against North Korea. 
Taiwan wants to protect itself from rockets that might come from the mainland. 
Beijing fears that any American missile defense will render China's small intercontinental deterrent force ineffective, and has threatened to build up its nuclear arsenal in response. 
If it does, the Central Intelligence Agency predicts that India, fearing China, will not be far behind. 
And Pakistan, fearing India, will join the race, too. 
And so on.
For all its promise, Mr. Schlesinger notes, the United Nations Security Council has never proved to be "a satisfactory forum" for debate or negotiation of the complex issues of global security and nuclear weapons. 
For one thing, a number of aspiring nuclear powers (Iran and Iraq, for example) are simply not represented there, though each has specific security concerns -- or ambitions -- that have caused them to reach for nuclear weapons, as Israel did at an earlier time.
And in the end, "if there is disagreement among the major powers, the Security Council can't do a damned thing," Mr. Schlesinger points out. 
That is, perhaps, as it should be. 
Yet it is still surprising that the international system has failed to stumble upon a forum that could be the unambiguous site for airing the issues of post-cold war security and global arms control.
Since nuclear weapons were invented more than a half-century ago, the history of arms control has been the story of Moscow and Washington, and 30 years of acronyms: SALT, Start and the like. 
But as the former Russian national security adviser Andrei A. Kokoshin notes, the "second nuclear age" -- with its proliferation of aspiring nuclear powers and new technologies -- is rapidly ungluing the conventions of arms control.
The American response has been to try to set the agenda by its own orchestration of diplomacy and power politics, and Mr. Bush's concentric rings are the latest manifestation. 
Russia has responded with its own counterorchestration. 
And as China rails from the sidelines, each player maneuvers for advantage in a competition reminiscent of the cold war, which hardly seems adequate -- or safe -- in this age.
A new forum -- or a reinvigorated old one -- could allow modern leaders to sit in regular summit to discuss security in the new nuclear age. 
Bring heads of state together and they will talk about what is on their minds. 
Consider the Group of 8 meetings of large industrial nations, where security questions occasionally intervene. 
The same has been true at summits of Asian Pacific leaders. 
A forum that regularly brings heads of state together becomes a decision-forcing mechanism that mobilizes bureaucracies for problem solving, innovation and compromise. 
In the view of many analysts, this is what the nuclear age needs too.
The Russian foreign minister, Igor Ivanov, speaking in Geneva on Thursday, lamented the fact that the Disarmament Conference, a United Nations forum of 66 countries, was still a diplomatic backwater for sterile posturing at the ambassador level and that heads of state pursued national strategies elsewhere. 
Arms control, he said, "cannot and must not be the privilege of a narrow group of nuclear powers or states with the largest military potentials."
Truth be told, Mr. Ivanov's government has done little to broaden the web of included countries. 
But the Bush administration also seems mistrustful of multilateralism in discussing global security. 
In committing his administration to deploy, at the earliest date, a national missile defense system -- banned by the 1972 Antiballistic Missile Treaty -- Mr. Bush appears headed for pre-emption, not consultation or negotiation. 
Russia has replied that if one treaty falls, so will others, like dominoes, because their interconnecting principle of deterrence -- that the best defense is a stable, balanced offense -- will be undermined.
IN going it alone to sell his idea, Mr. Bush's diplomacy of concentric circles is in danger of becoming an exercise of gauging the opposition of neighbors, allies and potential adversaries before unilaterally junking the 1972 treaty and deploying an anti-missile system. 
But without the trust that comes from a stable edifice of arms control consultation and agreement, the American shield risks becoming just a target for adversaries to penetrate, inciting further escalation.
And trust is rapidly dissipating.
An early test of Mr. Bush's approach will be his meeting tomorrow with the Canadian prime minister, Jean Chretien. 
In a December meeting with Russia's president, Vladimir V. Putin, Mr. Chretien publicly identified with the Russian position that the 1972 treaty "is a cornerstone of strategic stability."
Mr. Bush and Mr. Putin spoke Wednesday on the telephone, but no one could say whether they had narrowed the arc of their differences.
