
FEW public officials here talk as Mike Rowse does a rat-a-tat-tat of jokes, stories and epithets delivered in a workaday accent worlds away from the pukka tones of a classic British colonial.
When Britain returned Hong Kong to China in 1997, about 100 British civil servants stayed behind, blending into this increasingly Chinese society with varying success. 
Mr. Rowse's populist style played well, and he has become one of the most senior British officials.
But he has gone a giant step further in cozying up to the locals: four months ago, he renounced his British citizenship to become a Chinese national. 
The decision, he said, was driven in part by his new post as director general of Hong Kong's investment promotion agency, Invest HK. 
"I'm a salesman for Hong Kong," said Mr. Rowse, 52, who came here in 1972 as a backpacker. 
"I thought: 'I want to travel on a Hong Kong passport. 
I want to show that I bought the product myself.'
"
Mr. Rowse cannot speak, read or write Chinese. 
He cheers for the Manchester United soccer team. 
And he parries a question about his loyalty toward the Communist government, saying, "That's a private matter."
But on the subject of his adopted city, he preaches with the zeal of a true believer. 
Not only does he think that Hong Kong is the best destination in Asia for foreign companies and investors, he believes its role will grow after China joins the World Trade Organization this month.
Mr. Rowse notes that the number of foreign companies that have established regional offices in Hong Kong has risen 30 percent the last two years, to 3,237. 
Of those, almost one-third, or 944, use Hong Kong as their Asian headquarters, putting it comfortably ahead of rivals like Shanghai and Singapore.
"The increase is not because I'm tall, slim and incredibly good-looking," said Mr. Rowse, who is none of the above. 
"It's because they are saying, 'China is going to be in the W.T.O., we want to be in China, where are we going to do it from?'
Overwhelmingly, the answer is Hong Kong."
To skeptics, the statistics merely indicate that the city is in its last cycle as a middleman for China and the world. 
After Deng Xiaoping opened China's economy in 1978, Hong Kong became an entrepot for goods moving in and out of the country. 
In recent years, it supplied bankers, lawyers and accountants to help foreigners make sense of the Chinese market.
As China pulls down its walls, many analysts say the foreign firms will no longer need this help. 
With Beijing subscribing to standard rules for trade and investment, they say these companies will be able to bypass Hong Kong and deal directly with cities throughout China.
Some see a remark made in 1999 by the prime minister of China, Zhu Rongji, as prophetic. 
In the future, Mr. Zhu said, Shanghai would be the New York of China while Hong Kong would be the Toronto.
"I think China's entry into the W.T.O. will be more negative than positive for Hong Kong," said Marc Faber, a money manager who runs his own investment advisory firm. 
"As China becomes more of an open society, the whole of China will become more like Hong Kong. 
So the advantages of having an office there will diminish."
MR. FABER also said the city would be handicapped by its costs, which are among the highest in Asia. 
After 28 years here, Mr. Faber moved last year to Chiang Mai, in Thailand, because it is so much cheaper.
Hong Kong's costs have aggravated the effects of the global downturn. 
On Friday, Hong Kong said its economy contracted in the third quarter, putting the city on the verge of its second recession since the Asian financial crisis in 1997. 
As China booms, the contrast between a sickly Hong Kong and its robust motherland is hard to avoid.
While some marquee companies, like Boeing, have come to town recently, others are leaving. 
Wal-Mart Stores, which used to do its procurement here, recently moved to Shenzhen, a Chinese boom town on the Hong Kong border. 
HSBC, known locally as Hong Kong bank, moved its China headquarters to Shanghai last year.
In the battle for Hong Kong's franchise, Shanghai has replaced Singapore as the rival that people here fear most. 
It has thrusting skyscrapers, stylish restaurants and powerful patrons in Prime Minister Zhu and President Jiang Zemin.
But Mr. Rowse is unmoved by Shanghai's charms. 
Saying "I have to couch this point carefully," he noted that the towers in the city's vaunted Pudong business district were still half-empty. 
And he said Shanghai could not compete with Hong Kong's rule of law or free flow of information.
Subtlety is not Mr. Rowse's strong suit. 
Through a career that has included stints as a caption writer at a local newspaper and as an investigator for Hong Kong's anticorruption agency, Mr. Rowse has developed a reputation as a blunt, hard-driving operator, unafraid to make enemies.
"He is a take-no-prisoners kind of guy," said Kerry McGlynn, a former spokesman for the last British governor, Chris Patten. 
"His direct manner doesn't endear him to our more cautious colleagues. 
But he gets things done."
Perhaps his signal achievement was negotiating the 1999 deal with the Walt Disney Company to build a theme park here. 
He had to contend with Disney's famously tough negotiators and with other Chinese cities, notably Shanghai, which were lobbying ardently for the project.
"I believe quite honestly, without him in that role, the project never would have been realized," said Steve Tight, the managing director of Hong Kong Disneyland. 
"I can't think of the number of times we reached a bottleneck, and he was the person to break through with a creative solution."
Critics here say those creative solutions mainly helped Disney. 
With Hong Kong bearing nine-tenths of the park's $3.6 billion in costs, commentators sniped that Mickey Mouse had taken Mr. Rowse to the cleaners.
Nonsense, he responded. 
(Actually, he used a common British expletive that means the same thing.) "Disney bragged about the deal to their shareholders, and I think some people accepted that at face value," he said, adding that Disneyland would pay huge long-term dividends.
THE theme park is not scheduled to open until late 2005 or early 2006, but Mr. Rowse said he would be here for it. 
He said his decision to take Chinese citizenship was prompted by his realization that he never planned to return to Britain. 
He has been married twice, both times to Hong Kong Chinese. 
Friends say his current wife, and four children, carry British passports; he would not discuss their status.
Mr. Rowse is the only British civil servant known to have switched his citizenship to China. 
The move won praise from his bosses, though some people suggest that he is merely setting himself for future promotions.
"It wasn't a single decision," Mr. Rowse said, objecting mildly. 
"It was a series of lifetime choices. 
Suddenly, you find that at every fork of the road, you've chosen to be Chinese."
