
In declaring Vietnam the first country to stop its outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS, the World Health Organization relied on a time-tested rule of thumb used by epidemiologists.
The rule says that an epidemic is over if no new cases occur in a time span that is double the longest known incubation period of the disease. 
Because SARS has a 10-day incubation period, and no new cases have been detected in Vietnam since April 8, health officials said yesterday that the disease had been brought under control.
Vietnam had a total of 63 cases and 5 deaths.
Dick Thompson, a spokesman for the health organization, said it believed reports that the outbreak had ended because Vietnam had been scrupulous about reporting cases and working with experts to contain the disease. 
In addition, he said, W.H.O. workers still in Vietnam confirmed that there were no new cases.
"Frankly, it's something the country wants," Mr. Thompson said. 
"They want to know about cases. 
If they don't know they're right back to Square 1, and that can meantravel restrictions and all sorts of hardships. 
The lesson from China is that you can't hide cases, and if you try to, it's going to take a long time to rebuild your credibility."
The health organization said Vietnam had conquered the disease by identifying and isolating cases promptly, tracing their contacts, protecting medical workers, isolating suspected cases, screening travelers and quickly sharing information with other governments.
Mr. Thompson gave credit for Vietnam's success to old-fashioned infection-control measures.
"You don't need a lot of high-tech equipment or space suits," Mr. Thompson said. 
"What you do need is a very high level of political commitment, and that was there from the beginning."
Mr. Thompson said that Vietnam and other countries in the region were in a state of high alert for new respiratory diseases even before SARS emerged, because in February two cases of a dangerous form of bird flu were detected in people in Hong Kong. 
When a visitor to Hanoi fell ill with a strange respiratory disease in February, Mr. Thompson said, doctors suspected bird flu and called in the W.H.O. 
The health organization sent masks, gloves, goggles and experts to train hospital workers in infection control.
"With infection control and contact tracing, you can get a handle on this disease," Mr. Thompson said. 
"This is a very poor country, a developing country, and they did it. 
But they know the next case could arrive on the next plane."
In addition to declaring Vietnam's outbreak over, the W.H.O. said cases had peaked in Canada, Singapore and Hong Kong. 
Mr. Thompson said that conclusion was based on records showing that daily numbers of new cases in those places have begun declining steadily.
"One way to look at it is to say that maybe the outbreak hot spots are cooling off, maybe they're getting a grip on the disease," Mr. Thompson said. 
"Another possibility is that this is a seasonal disease. 
But we don't know. 
You can't let your surveillance down anywhere."
Cases in China have not peaked, he said.
"The future of this epidemic will be determined in China," Mr. Thompson said. 
"Whether we deal with this epidemic for the next 20 years will be determined in China."
In New York City, where the number of suspected cases of SARS increased by 2, to 18, the city health commissioner took pains yesterday to calm fears and assure the public that the disease was not spreading in the city.
The commissioner, Dr. Thomas R. Frieden, said that in addition to the 18 suspected cases, there were 2 probable cases. 
Of the 20 suspected and probable cases, 18 people have recovered and the others are recovering, he said.
Dr. Frieden said all the cases involved people who had recently traveled abroad. 
"We don't have local transmission in New York City," he said. 
The two new suspected cases, discovered Friday evening, involve people who had recently traveled to Toronto.
Dr. Frieden said there was no reason for people in New York to wear protective masks or avoid travel to Asian neighborhoods. 
"I'm concerned about people deciding not to travel to Chinatown," he said. 
"I had dim sum there yesterday and it was delicious."
Westchester County also reported a new possible case of SARS yesterday, bringing the total there to two suspected cases. 
A New Rochelle High School student who had traveled to Toronto was hospitalized after developing symptoms Saturday. 
She is recovering, said Dr. Joshua Lipsman, the county health commissioner.
Westchester's other suspected case of SARS -- a 71-year-old woman who had traveled to China -- was announced April 4. 
She recovered without incident.
