
TODAY's sexiest fruit, the darling of chefs, is the yuzu, a rare, expensive Japanese citrus of mysterious provenance. 
Few diners have seen this rough-skinned oddity the size of a golf ball or know what it is, but many have encountered its distinctive flavor and aroma, a complex blend of lime, lemon and grapefruit.
"It has an amazing floral citrus fragrance -- you can smell it from across the room," said Gregory Brainin, chef de cuisine at Jean Georges in New York, who has served 30 recipes with it in the last year. 
For one dish, the captain carries an atomizer to the table and suffuses bay scallops with a mist of yuzu juice.
A hybrid of a primitive citrus called Ichang papeda and a sour mandarin orange, the yuzu originated in China but is most widely cultivated in Japan, where shreds or slivers of its rind are used to accent cooked vegetables, fish and noodles. 
Its zest and juice enhance soy sauces, miso toppings, ponzu sauces and vinegars.
The yuzu ideally complements matsutake mushrooms, and is harvested in the same season, autumn and early winter. 
Over this time, the fruit ripens from green to bright yellow, when it is sweetest and most aromatic.
To protect American growers from diseases prevalent in Asian groves, fresh yuzu cannot legally be imported into the United States. 
But yuzu is grown and sold domestically.
Yuzu trees were unofficially introduced into California before 1888, grown in home gardens by Japanese-American aficionados. 
About 10 years ago, enterprising farmers started raising yuzu, some perhaps illicitly, to fulfill a demand from chefs.
Because of its scarcity, the yuzu fetches high prices, $8 to $20 a pound wholesale, and up to twice that at retail. 
Wholesalers tend to be secretive about sources.
One longstanding grower is Richard Ota, 77, a semiretired bonsai gardener who has 90 yuzu trees in his backyard in Norco, 40 miles east of downtown Los Angeles. 
He also grows eight trees of sudachi, a kindred citrus usually harvested green and used for juice. 
On a visit to his planting at this time last year, I saw that the gangly semideciduous trees had lost most of their leaves, and the yuzus glowed like yellow light bulbs. 
His neighbors' chickens, goats and a miniature white horse added incongruous barnyard whiffs to the exquisite citrus aroma.
"So many years I spent looking, I wanted to grow yuzu," said Mr. Ota. "I could make money. 
So in 1986 I went to Japan and got the budwood for grafting."
In their eagerness to produce yuzu and sudachi, many backyard growers apparently propagated trees from imported and untested budwood, in violation of state and federal regulations.
In 1998, aware of the demand for yuzu trees and fruit, the director of the state's Citrus Clonal Protection Program, which maintains clean sources of budwood for growers, released certified budwood to nurseries. 
Legal sudachi budwood should follow next September, said John Bash, a program employee.
In the last five years, specialty citrus growers in the San Joaquin Valley have planted several hundred yuzu trees, and some are starting to bear; one group plans to put in 20 acres next spring. 
As such regular commercial sources develop, sky-high yuzu prices may well decline.
Growers and purveyors are debating which strains of yuzu in California have the most authentic appearance and aroma. 
The variety maintained by the protection program did not come from Japan: it was found in China in 1914 by Frank Meyer, a legendary agricultural explorer who also brought back his namesake lemon.
Today, fresh and processed yuzu are the rage at high-end restaurants, for cocktails, savory dishes and sweets. 
Yuzu is less sharp and more subtle than lemon, allowing its fruitiness to come through, said Wylie Dufresne, the chef and an owner of WD-50.
At Union Pacific, in New York, yuzu is ubiquitous. 
David Coleman, chef de cuisine, uses the juice to cure foie gras; the acidity complements its fattiness, he said. 
He also features yuzu in a sauce for hangar steak.
Typically restaurants use yuzu to accompany fish. 
The famous miso marinade for black cod at Nobu, also in New York, is spiked with yuzu juice. 
At Geisha, set to open soon, the menu will feature one of Eric Ripert's dishes from Le Bernardin, tuna and hamachi sliced very thin in a checkerboard pattern, covered with a yuzu-ginger vinaigrette.
Thomas Keller, Charlie Trotter and Masa Takayama, who will each open new restaurants in the new Time Warner Center, are all yuzu enthusiasts. 
Yuzu also stars as dessert. 
At Spago in Beverly Hills, Calif., Sherry Yard makes yuzu meringue tarts as well as pineapple-yuzu sorbet.
Several chefs complain about indiscriminate use of yuzu. 
"People are just dumping it in everything, and it's got to be used very gingerly, because it is so intense," commented Mr. Brainin of Jean Georges.
Fresh yuzu is available intermittently in season at Japanese markets, which year round may offer products such as yuzu juice, salted and unsalted; frozen fruit; dried peel; and kosho, a paste of yuzu rind macerated with hot peppers and salt.
Ripe golden yuzu are emblematic of winter in Japan, where it is traditional on the winter solstice to take a yuzu bath in which several whole fruits, wrapped in cheesecloth, are floated.
Yuzu trees, though not the fruit, are quite hardy, surviving temperatures down to about 10 degrees. 
It may even be possible, therefore, to grow yuzu in the warmest parts of the New York City area, on Long Island and against south-facing walls.
Fresh Fruit and Juice And Even Trees
FRESH yuzu is available in season, from September into January, and yuzu products can be found year round.
KATAGIRI -- Fresh yuzu, two for $4.99; juice, 100 milliliters, $7.19. 
At 224 East 59th Street, New York; (212) 755-3566.
McKENZIE FARMS NURSERY -- Grafted yuzu trees in one-gallon containers, available next spring; $15 plus shipping. 
At Scranton, S.C.; (843) 389-4831.
MINAMOTO KITCHOAN -- Candied rind, $10 for 130 grams; white bean jelly with yuzu flavor, $1.60 apiece. 
At 608 Fifth Avenue (49th Street); (212) 489-3747.
MITSUWA MARKETPLACE -- Fresh yuzu, $2.99 each; dried rind, 3.5 grams, $2.59; juice, 100 milliliters, $7.99. 
At 595 River Road, Edgewater, N.J.; (201) 941-9113.
RISING C RANCHES -- Fresh yuzu, $15 a pound (1 pound minimum), plus shipping. 
At Reedley, Calif.; (559) 637-9546.
SUNRISE MART -- Fresh yuzu, two for $3.99; juice, 100 milliliters, $8.29. 
At 4 Stuyvesant Street (Third Avenue), second floor, New York; (212) 598-3040.
