
In 1990, N.B.A. 
Commissioner David Stern assigned the league's first employee to be based in Asia. 
He tapped Rob Levine, then a vice president for international development, who worked out of an apartment in Hong Kong and often participated in conference calls in his pajamas because of the time difference with New York.
Since those days, the N.B.A. has built such a sweeping presence -- and following -- in China that Stern said there was potential for his champion to one day meet the Chinese league champion in a playoff series.
When China and the United States men's basketball team play here Sunday, the contest will probably deliver one of the signature moments of these Games. 
Hundreds of millions of people are expected to watch on television, President Bush will attend, and the ticket is considered among the more difficult to secure of any Olympic event.
Team USA is filled with N.B.A. stars and may dominate the game, but it is the competition off the court that offers a compelling subplot of these Olympics: the international race to tap the lucrative basketball-crazed Chinese market. 
The N.B.A. is using the Games as a way to further its reach in a country in which it already has a presence on things like Mongolian Milk containers and on the Internet to even the most remote villages.
That fledgling effort begun by Levine less than 20 years ago has blossomed into a 100-employee enterprise called N.B.A. 
China. It has grown with roughly $250 million from major investors like ESPN and China Merchant Bank. 
Timothy Chen, the former chief executive of Microsoft's China operations, was hired last year to run the basketball organization.
The N.B.A. is so enamored with China and its estimated 450 million fans that Stern said in an interview earlier this summer that officials were in talks with the Chinese Basketball Association about a partnership in an N.B.A.-branded league in China.
''A decade from now, the champion of the N.B.A. of China could be playing the champion of the N.B.A.,'' Stern said.
The biggest challenge the N.B.A. faces is navigating the tricky political road from being a marketing giant in China to becoming a financial partner in the Chinese Basketball Association.
Xu Jicheng, a former Chinese national team player, said that with sports reform in China just a decade old, it was unclear how much of a financial interest the government would allow the N.B.A. to have in the Chinese league, in which many of the teams are state-owned.
''Nobody knows,'' said Xu, the most prominent basketball news media voice in China. 
''Just like 30 years ago, no one knew that McDonald's would be so prevalent in China.''
There is no questioning the N.B.A.'s presence. 
About 1,000 people lined up outside for a recent opening of an N.B.A. store in Beijing, and N.B.A. merchandise sales are expected to increase by 60 percent in China this year. 
As many people play basketball in China -- an estimated 300 million -- as live in the United States.
Asked about the future here, Chen said, ''Whatever forecast we would do is too small.''
Because prime-time games in the United States usually tip off in the morning in China, bosses are often forced to look the other way as employees watch N.B.A. 
Webcasts. Just last week, someone was spotted on the Great Wall wearing a Kobe Bryant jersey and a straw hat. 
And although Houston Rockets center Yao Ming is perhaps China's biggest celebrity, his jersey recently ranked No. 10 in sales in China behind those of stars from the United States like Bryant, Allen Iverson and LeBron James.
On a recent visit to China, James was not allowed to leave the DoubleTree Hotel in Beijing without government security because of the crush of crowds. 
Bryant received one of the biggest cheers of any athlete at the opening ceremony on Friday. 
Dwyane Wade, who has played in the Final Four and the N.B.A. finals, said the crowd outside the team hotel in China two years ago was the biggest scene he had experienced in his career.
''When they start chasing the bus eight blocks -- that was crazy,'' Wade said with a chuckle. 
''I've never experienced anything like that. 
I expect it now to be crazier this time around, with this being the Olympics and everything.''
China's love of basketball stretches back more than a century. 
The Chinese started playing the sport in the late 1800s and fielded an Olympic team in 1936.
''During the Cultural Revolution, they got rid of Western classical music and anything else Western was frowned upon with only a handful of exceptions; one was basketball,'' said Alexander Wolff, who wrote the international basketball book ''Big Game, Small World.''
Early during his tenure in China, Levine toured the countryside and many of the most populated cities. 
He was struck by seeing basketball courts in the center of rural villages and in the middle of urban settings.
''We're not introducing the game to them,'' Levine recalled thinking. 
''We're introducing our game.''
The N.B.A. initially gave countries like China television rights for little or no money to help build interest and loyalty. 
The league now reaches 215 counties in 41 languages, and 51 broadcasters in China show its games.
Levine said the most important factor building the following was allowing Chinese fans to get to know the players. 
He helped start a program similar to ''NBA Inside Stuff,'' the show featuring players off the court. 
It was locally produced and hosted by David Wu, who was well known from his role on MTV Asia.
''People started knowing the players' stories, and they started becoming like rock stars,'' Levine said.
Heidi Ueberroth, the N.B.A.'s president for global marketing partnerships and international business operations, recalled visiting the city of Guilin in the mid-1990s on a weekend trip while in China on business. 
Nobody knew she was affiliated with the N.B.A., but she remembered a young and energetic tour guide's introduction of the city as, ''The sister city of Orlando, Fla., the home of Shaquille O'Neal.''
The N.B.A.'s presence can also be felt in the smallest villages, and the league is financially supporting China's goal of building 800,000 courts.
''In many places around China, having an hour of physical fitness a day means playing basketball,'' said Ueberroth, who is the daughter of Peter Ueberroth, the chairman of the United States Olympic Committee and a former commissioner of Major League Baseball.
The Rockets' selection of Yao with the No. 1 pick in the 2002 N.B.A. draft took the league's presence to another level. 
Stern and the deputy commissioner Adam Silver have traveled with Yao to China, an experience Stern compared to ''traveling with the Beatles.''
Stern has been in China numerous times and has noticed an evolution.
''I was struck by how the kids looked the same as American kids,'' Stern said. 
''It's the global teenager. 
Their hair was streaked blond, and their shorts were around their ankles. 
They wore headphones.''
One factor in determining the N.B.A.'s financial future in China revolves around its knowledge of building, operating and maintaining arenas. 
The N.B.A. played a large role in the building of the arena that will be used for the Beijing Games, and the league's production department is involved here this month.
The N.B.A. is in talks with AEG, a leading sports and entertainment presentation company, and the Chinese Sports Ministry about an arena in Shanghai. 
Stern described what he called a ''grand plan,'' an N.B.A. partnership with AEG to build as many as 12 arenas in China.
How receptive the Chinese will be remains to be seen. 
''The world needs China rather than China needs the world in the basketball market,'' Xu said.
As the N.B.A. tries to navigate China's fertile ground, it also prepares for the next frontier.
''Heidi just got back from a trip to India,'' Stern said. 
''We see India as China 20 years ago.''
