
OF the 10 Academy Award nominations received by Ang Lee's "Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon," two went to the composer Tan Dun, for original song (in a collaborative effort) and original score; his score took the Oscar. 
Mr. Tan is now busy with prestigious commissions from, among others, the New York Philharmonic and the Metropolitan Opera.
Bright Sheng's little opera "The Silver River," a collaboration with the playwright David Henry Hwang, which charmed listeners at the Spoleto Festival U.S.A. last spring, opens on Saturday at the Prince Music Theater in Philadelphia, on its way to Singapore next month and the Lincoln Center Festival next year. 
Mr. Sheng is working on commissions for the New York Philharmonic and the Santa Fe Opera.
Chen Yi and Zhou Long, both juggling commissions as well, contributed to a "Songbook for a New Century," unveiled late last month by the New York Festival of Song. 
Ge Gan-ru, despite a second career as co-president of Ge & Ge, a metal trading company, keeps an active hand in composition, and his Fourth String Quartet is to be given its premiere by the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center on Thursday evening. 
And Bun-Ching Lam is a composer in residence at the New Jersey Symphony, which offers the premiere performances of her "Song of the Pipa," beginning on Thursday in Englewood.
All this is merely the latest evidence that a generation of Chinese-born composers have established a major and diversified presence on the American musical scene. 
They are by no means the first wave of immigrants to have done so. 
But perhaps not since the various infusions of African influences has a sizable contingent steeped in an idiom so far removed from Euro-American norms achieved such prominence.
These composers have much in common. 
All are in their mid-40's. 
Most entered conservatories in Beijing or Shanghai newly reopened after the Cultural Revolution in the late 1970's. 
Most studied in the doctoral program at Columbia University with an older Chinese immigrant, Chou Wen-chung, and some were in fact recruited through the United States-China Arts Exchange, which Mr. Chou founded. 
Most became American citizens and evolved styles mingling elements of their old and new musical cultures.
But, they insist, they are all individuals. 
And Mr. Chou concurs. 
"As a group, they demonstrate the kind of talent available in Asia," he said. 
"But they are each different."
Indeed, they have pursued divergent careers.
Tan Dun, 45, was born in Changsha in Hunan Province. 
Forced to work in rice fields during the Cultural Revolution, he was called back to musical service in Changsha near the end, when a boat carrying the local Beijing opera troupe sank, carrying the musicians to their deaths. 
He played a fiddle in Madame Mao's model operas and produced musical arrangements. 
The revolution ended with Mao's death in 1976, and Mr. Tan was accepted into the 1977 class at the Central Conservatory in Beijing. 
He entered Columbia in 1985.
He has in recent years become the most visible member of the group with his involvement in wildly disparate high-profile projects: the opera "Marco Polo" at the New York City Opera and elsewhere; "Heaven, Earth, Mankind (Symphony 1997)," written for the British handover of Hong Kong to China; Peter Sellars's version of the classic Chinese opera "The Peony Pavilion"; the "Concerto for Water Percussion and Orchestra in Memory of Toru Takemitsu" at the New York Philharmonic; the "Water Passion After St. Matthew" in Stuttgart, Germany; "2000 Today: A World Symphony for the Millennium," for BBC and other television broadcasters; and, of course, "Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon."
Mr. Tan has been accused of gimmickry, opportunism and commercialism in connection with some of these projects and others, and in his relationship with his record label, Sony Classical, where crossover mania reigns. 
And he shows an undeniable gift for self-promotion. 
Yet he comes by his taste for the circus rightly in his connection to Chinese opera, a catchall that ranges from the subtlest expression to the broadest comedy, martial arts and acrobatics. 
What's more, Mr. Tan has produced some finely tuned creations, like "Out of Beijing Opera," a miniconcerto for violin.
He says he does not yet know the precise nature of the opera he will write for the Met. 
"Several subjects are being discussed," he added. 
"I spend so much time with every piece, forming a concept."
For the Philharmonic next season, he is planning a piece using the metaphor of 12 births, based on the cycle of animals representing years in the Chinese calendar. 
The work is to be a tribute to Kurt Masur, in his final season as the orchestra's music director, the notion being that after the maestro closes the circle there, he will have a 13th birth: a new journey.
Mr. Tan seems more interested in high theatrical concept than in musical consistency. 
"I don't care about isms," he said. 
"Basically, I practice Tan Dun-ism."
And his highly theatrical bent is shared in some degree by each of his Chinese-American colleagues. 
If not all their works are actually theatrical, they tend to be programmatic or at least descriptively titled.
"Almost all classical Chinese works have titles," Bright Sheng said. 
"The title was sort of a guide to keep the character of the music, because there was no notation."
Mr. Sheng, also 45, was born in Shanghai. 
He spent the Cultural Revolution on the Tibetan border, playing piano with a folk ensemble. 
He entered the Shanghai Conservatory in 1978, Queens College in 1982 and Columbia University in 1985.
He made his name in 1988 with "H'un (Lacerations): In Memoriam 1966-76," a mournful, dissonant orchestral creation evoking the sufferings of the Chinese people during the Cultural Revolution. 
Much of his work since has followed a more lyrical bent, but he recently returned to a harsh orchestral depiction of history with "Nanking!
Nanking!" commemorating the Japanese slaughter of some 300,000 Chinese civilians in 1937, as recounted in the book "The Rape of Nanking" by Iris Chang.
Mr. Sheng is writing a quadruple concerto for the New York Philharmonic in the 2002-3 season, featuring the cellist Yo-Yo Ma, the pianist Emanuel Ax and players of the lutelike pipa and the sheng, an elaborate bamboo mouth organ. 
The opera he is writing for Santa Fe in 2003 is to be about Mao's wife, Jiang Qing. 
"Her life was miserable," he said, "except for the 10 years of the Cultural Revolution, when she was the second-most powerful person in China."
Like Mr. Tan, Mr. Sheng is also a conductor, mainly of his own works and other contemporary music. 
"I'll feel that I've arrived when someone asks me to conduct Mozart," he said. 
Unlike Mr. Tan, Mr. Sheng maintains an academic base, teaching composition at the University of Michigan.
So does Chen Yi, teaching composition at the University of Missouri at Kansas City. 
But she will soon have to step aside as a stipulation of the $225,000 Charles Ives Living, awarded to her recently by the American Academy of Arts and Letters. 
It requires that she devote herself to composition for three years without other occupation. 
Zhou Long, her husband, will take over some of her teaching in the meantime.
Ms. Chen, born in Guangzhou, and Mr. Zhou, born in Beijing, are both 47. 
Ms. Chen did hard labor in the countryside for two years during the Cultural Revolution and was then whisked off to play in a Beijing opera company, performing model operas and making musical arrangements. 
Mr. Zhou spent that time driving a tractor in another area. 
They met as part of the illustrious class that entered the Central Conservatory in 1977 and married after graduation. 
They both went to Columbia, Mr. Zhou in 1985 and Ms. Chen in 1986, receiving doctorates along with Mr. Tan and Mr. Sheng in 1993.
Ge Gan-ru, 46, was born in Shanghai. 
He labored on a farm during the Cultural Revolution, then attended the Shanghai Conservatory, where he stayed on to teach composition for two years. 
He entered Columbia in 1983 and received his doctorate in 1992.
Bun-Ching Lam, also 46, was born in Macau, a Portuguese colony until 1999. 
She was spared countryside labor during the Cultural Revolution but spent two years in one of Mao's indoctrination programs. 
She entered the Chinese University of Hong Kong in 1976. 
She received her doctorate from the University of California at San Diego in 1981.
For all the accomplishments of these composers over some decade and a half in this country, success, acceptance and recognition have not always come easily. 
Mr. Zhou, whom some consider among the most gifted, a judgment borne out by works like "The Ineffable," a chamber piece that softens modernist angularity with Asian bends and twangs, admits to perhaps the worst case of culture shock. 
The English language was particularly problematic for him, and the musical idiom was difficult. 
"For Chinese composers, the basic problem is a weakness in rhythm," he said, "because Chinese music is so free."
Mr. Zhou found the sudden exposure to all manner of pop music, rock 'n' roll, jazz and show tunes as well as 20th-century Western classical styles dizzying. 
"From 1985 to 1987, I wrote nothing," he said, "not a single note."
He has since made his way well, but he still expresses frustration at the commercial system and at a certain inability to separate himself from the pack.
FOR that matter, all of these composers tend to be marginalized at times, their cross-cultural works treated as novelties rather than a part of the contemporary-music mainstream (if mainstream there be anymore). 
For example, in all the criticism of a paucity of contemporary music at the New York Philharmonic in recent years, Mr. Masur seldom receives points for his advocacy of some of these composers and others of Asian heritage.
"In Europe and even Japan, everyone thinks I'm an American composer," Mr. Tan said. 
"But in America, I'm a Chinese composer."
Mr. Sheng echoed those words in a separate conversation.
Still, success has come for all in varying degrees: in some cases, perhaps, too much too soon, in the view of Mr. Chou, the composers' mentor. 
Mr. Chou sees no virtue in combining cultural artifacts in a superficial way, without a deep understanding of the cultural legacies involved. 
And he finds slim improvement in some of the work of his former students over the musical chinoiserie of a century ago.
"They reflect the intellectual ambience in China today," he said. 
"They are not in the habit of going to libraries, doing real research or debating issues. 
I'm disappointed. 
It's not the kind of situation I wanted. 
What I'm looking for is a spiritual digestion of one's legacies."
Yet Mr. Chou in no way demeans the native abilities of these composers. 
"They are talented and well trained," he said. 
"Most happened to be in the first class after the Cultural Revolution, when only the best could get in."
Nor does their success or even their popularity particularly surprise him. 
"Since 1949, everybody in China has been conscious of what it takes to interact with the masses," he said. 
"Everyone seems instinctively to know how to reach out to the community. 
It's not surprising that Tan Dun would get an Oscar."
And it would certainly not surprise Mr. Tan that Mr. Chou disapproves. 
"Basically, I've never been a good student," Mr. Tan said. 
"I think Chou Wen-chung probably hates me. 
He thinks we haven't concentrated enough on basic studies. 
He doesn't understand why we write so much. 
But I will always be a wild child."
Indeed, for Mr. Tan, that wildness may be part of what it means to be an American. 
"My life moved from east to west, from a closed room to an open room," he said. 
"American music is so charming because it is so free and open, so driven by the new blood of all cultures."
