
AFTER a 20-year transition, the world's last major left-wing dictatorship, the Communist Party of China, has transformed itself. 
It is now, arguably, the world's last major right-wing dictatorship.
With the convening of the 16th Congress in its 81-year history, the party is rewriting its constitution to declare that it represents "advanced forces" -- capitalists -- as much as workers and peasants. 
Rich people have begun joining the party. 
A few may be invited to join its policy-making Central Committee.
This is China's baldest acknowledgment since veering from orthodox socialism in the late 1970's that it will make workers and peasants fend for themselves. 
Dictatorship of the proletariat has failed. 
So the party is giving plutocracy a chance.
Jiang Zemin, the Communist Party chief who plans to retire after the Congress adjourns, has buried the last real pretenses of socialism. 
"All legitimate income, from work or not, should be protected," he told the party Congress on Friday.
The old China defended the working class against the capital class. 
In the new China, Mr. Jiang said, "the fundamental interests of the people of the whole country are identical."
This new strategy marks a calculated gamble to "keep up with the times," as Mr. Jiang said repeatedly, by mimicking capitalist-oriented authoritarian regimes, like the old South Korea, Taiwan and Chile. 
The fact that those countries have long since become democracies does not disturb party officials. 
They argue that the transition took 30 years in South Korea and Taiwan. 
China has just begun.
IT could work -- at least for a time. 
China's output is on track to grow 8 percent this year, faster than any other big economy, and private business has become the leading force for growth. 
In fact, the state-run companies that once dominated here now make up, by many calculations, only a third of economic output.
Foreigners have invested more money in China so far this year than anywhere else, including the United States. 
All that money is flowing because the party has used its near-absolute power to create favorable conditions for capitalists.
Companies setting up factories in Guangdong or Shanghai can employ workers from the hinterlands, often paying them less than $100 a month for 12-hour days. 
Migrant laborers can stay in cities only so long as their employers need them; without urban residence permits, they have no local rights. 
The government does not allow independent unions. 
There is no collective bargaining.
Corporate tax rates are low. 
Rich people have only begun to pay income tax. 
Much of what the government does collect in taxes it uses to build roads, high-speed trains, telecommunications networks and air and shipping ports -- tens of billions of dollars spent each year to support the infrastructure of commerce. 
It has also indulged in vanity projects, like a new $600 million headquarters for China Central Television and the grandiose Shanghai and Beijing opera houses, all designed by well-known Western architects.
Among wealthy nations, the United States is considered stingy when it comes to social benefits and health care spending. 
But by percentage of its economy, China makes the United States look profligate. 
In other words, it does not make rich people share their wealth. 
The gap between rich and poor has grown almost as fast as overall income, meaning that inequality is increasing nearly in lock step with the country's development.
Such statistics alarm some old-school party members and outspoken intellectuals. 
Bao Tong, a former top-level government official who lost his post after the Tiananmen Square crackdown in 1989, wrote a scathing letter criticizing Mr. Jiang's plans to embrace capitalists. 
"It implies that it is now time for the party to admit the unspoken truth and formally declare that it has become China's party for the rich and the powerful," he wrote.
Other critics say that opening the party to businessmen will delay a needed political reckoning. 
"The economic elite love money, not democracy," wrote Kang Xiaoguang of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences. 
Such views could be widespread, but it is hard to tell, since Mr. Jiang has closed the main leftist academic journals where criticism of his policies was being expressed, including the one that published Mr. Kang's essay.
Mr. Jiang would not agree that his party has abandoned the poor. 
China, he argues, is still in the "primary stage of socialism."
Later on, contradictions between the working and capitalist classes may become acute and the poor will vanquish the rich. 
But not in the primary stage, which could last 100 years. 
Capitalism has to blossom before it can be uprooted. 
It might be called trickle-down Marxism.
The risk of such thinking, some critics say, is that China may aim to recreate the dictatorships of South Korea and Taiwan and miss, becoming Marcos's Philippines or Suharto's Indonesia instead. 
Those two countries also tried to combine capitalist economies with strongman rule, but were felled by economic stagnation and corruption.
To avoid such a calamity, China should do less for the elite and more to create a populous middle class, said Cui Zhiyuan, an associate professor of political science at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, who is currently a visiting scholar at the National University of Singapore.
Professer Cui said the test will be whether China's new leadership, led by the largely unknown Hu Jintao, a longtime party apparatchik, spreads the country's emerging wealth. 
It needs to spend more on rural health care, to subsidize the poor western regions, to retrain workers fired by failing state companies and to improve education.
He cites one statistic to support his case: to encourage exports of manufactured goods, China now gives up more money each year in export tax credits than it spends on all social welfare programs combined.
"You over-privilege one sector like that at the expense of all the others," Professor Cui said. 
"Unless China can create a real middle class, it will be just another capitalist dictatorship."
He may be right, but China's Communist Party seems unable to escape the paradox of its continued existence. 
It has entered the 53rd year of uninterrupted rule, and has 66 million members. 
But in the party's careerist tradition, many new members are successful capitalists who joined -- became Communists -- to help themselves make more money.
Communism, then, has become crony capitalism. 
The party is betting that this shift will help it create enough jobs to employ the millions of urban unemployed, as well as millions more among China's vast, impoverished rural population, many of whom are seeking better lives by moving to the cities and industrial zones.
If this plan works, power will remain entirely with the Communist Party. 
It's a vision of China's future than appears to include everything but democracy.
