
All parties involved in the triangular Taiwan-PRC-U.S. triangle will face a challenge to seize the opportunity presented by the Taiwan election. 
On the one hand, President-elect Ma will need to follow through on his commitment to work for more constructive cross-Strait relations, albeit in a framework of consolidating Taiwan’s economic, political and military position. 
On the other hand, to be successful in these efforts, he will have to follow through on his pledge to reach across party lines to engage the opposition DPP and others in the society in creating a broad consensus to move ahead in this way.
The opposition DPP will have to eschew its likely tendency to view these developments only through the prism of partisan politics, and to be willing to cooperate in forging such a broad-based consensus. 
The two parties’ positions are not identical by any means, and no one should expect the DPP to give up its principles. 
But there is much in common between the visions that Ma and his DPP opponent, Frank Hsieh, which should be available to be drawn on. 
The suggestions heard in the aftermath of this enormous defeat of the DPP is that more radical forces will seize control of the party and purge the moderates. 
One has to hope for the sake of the health of Taiwan’s democracy and of the ability to seize the moment to create new cross-Strait and domestic political frameworks that this is not the case.
At the same time, as Richard Bush observes, the PRC will need to reach out to Taiwan to demonstrate its readiness to put past tensions to the side as it forges a new network of relationships across the Strait. 
The defeat of two referenda on UN membership combined with Ma’s election should relieve Beijing of its extreme concerns about movement toward formal independence and should open the door to Mainland initiatives toward Taiwan. 
It will have an early opportunity to demonstrate that it is prepared to do this when the World Health Assembly meets in April and Taiwan once again applies for observer status, which can be granted (if Beijing agrees) without raising sensitive sovereignty issues.
Finally, the United States must be willing to cooperate with better cross-Strait relations. 
This seems likely to be the government’s position, but concerns will be expressed from some quarters that, even though unification is not on the table, any substantial improvement of Taiwan-Mainland ties could be detrimental to U.S. strategic interests. 
Should such a view prevail, it would hamper, and perhaps scuttle, the opportunity that now exists for the first time in a decade or more to stabilize the situation across the Taiwan Strait and give a boost to Taiwan’s own well-being and security and to U.S.-Taiwan relations as well as to U.S.-PRC relations.
Alan D. Romberg, a distinguished fellow at the Henry L. Stimson Center and the director of its East Asia Program, is in Taiwan.
