
British monarchs are supposed to be inscrutable to the point of banality. 
If they have interesting opinions about things like politics and foreign policy -- and it is not always clear that they do -- they are expected to keep them quiet.
Queen Elizabeth, who has reigned serenely above the fray for half a century, through social and political upheaval, outlasting government after government on the left and the right, is the master of the no-opinion remark. 
Her approach is so disciplined that the satirist Craig Brown once imagined her greeting one of her own children at a reception by saying, ''Have you traveled far?''
But Prince Charles, the heir to the throne, is cut from different cloth. 
That is becoming increasingly clear as an unusual battle rages this week in the High Court. 
The case concerns The Mail on Sunday's publication in November of a peppery travelogue the prince wrote after his return from the ceremony in 1997 transferring ownership of Hong Kong to China from Britain.
The airing of the intemperate and intermittently amusingly document, titled ''The Great Chinese Takeaway'' and meant to be distributed to only a select group of Charles's friends and acquaintances, proved highly embarrassing.
Among other things, Charles complained about being forced to fly business class while members of the government flew first class. 
He accused Prime Minister Tony Blair of making ''decisions based on market research and focus groups,'' criticized the Chinese Army and called the Chinese leaders ''appalling old waxworks'' who engaged in ''an awful Soviet-style display'' of goose-stepping at the ceremony.
Charles sued The Mail, claiming it had violated his privacy and was guilty of copyright infringement. 
He also hopes to prevent the paper from publishing seven similar reports he wrote after other trips, which were apparently leaked to it by a disgruntled former palace employee.
But the case is becoming less about copyright law and more about Charles's role in British politics. 
According to testimony by Mark Bolland, the prince's deputy private secretary from 1996 to 2002, the prince sees himself not as an aristocratic man of privilege, but rather as a ''dissident working against the prevailing political consensus.''
Charles, he wrote in a statement that is part of the newspaper's defense, had a habit of plying people -- members of Parliament, cabinet ministers, influential acquaintances -- with letters outlining his unsolicited ''views of political matters and individual politicians at home and abroad and on international issues.''
Mr. Bolland continued: ''The prince's very definite aim in all this activity, as he expressed it, was to influence opinion. 
He saw that as part of the job of the heir apparent.''
Mr. Bolland also wrote that the prince deliberately boycotted the state banquet given in 1999 for Jiang Zemin, then the Chinese president, choosing instead to have dinner with his girlfriend, Camilla Parker Bowles. 
So that it would be clear that he was making a political statement, Charles instructed his office to leak his evening plans to the news media, Mr. Bolland claimed.
Mr. Bolland's statement was not read in open court but was released by The Mail and seized upon with glee by the British newspapers.
''If the prince truly considers himself to be a 'dissident,' then he is one who occupies a most unusual labor camp,'' The Times of London wrote in an editorial. 
''Prisoners of conscience are normally dressed in chains and not a crown.''
Prince Charles has a well-documented history of exasperation with many aspects of the modern world. 
An antagonist of much of contemporary architecture, he called a proposed extension to the National Gallery ''a monstrous carbuncle'' some years ago and said of the new British Library, then under construction, ''How can you tell it is a library?''
He also harbors negative views -- expressed in speeches and letters or leaked by both supporters and detractors -- about nonorganic farming, genetically modified food, American environmental policy, supermarket chains, the rise in personal injury claims and the so-called compensation culture, the government ban on fox hunting, the news media, the state of British education, the treatment of the Dalai Lama by the Chinese and what he sees as the trend toward political correctness.
''What is wrong with everyone nowadays?'' he scribbled several years ago in a note to an aide, complaining about an employee who wanted a promotion. 
''Why do they all seem to think they are qualified to do things far beyond their actual capabilities?''
The note, later leaked by the disgruntled (and unpromoted) employee, went on to disparage ''child-centered learning'' in schools that ''tells people that they can all be pop stars or High Court judges or brilliant TV personalities or even infinitely more competent heads of state without ever putting in the necessary work or effort or having natural ability.''
In a statement rebutting Mr. Bolland's testimony, Sir Michael Peat, Charles's private secretary, disputed the notion that the prince was forever meddling in politics.
Charles ''avoids making public statements on matters that are the subject of disagreement between political parties,'' Sir Michael said. 
Nor, he said, has the prince ''bombarded'' government officials with unsolicited letters, ''but has written to them from time to time on issues that he believes to be important.''
Vernon Bogdanor, professor of government at Oxford University, said that Charles ''has a right -- some would say a duty -- to interest himself in public matters and to speak on what he likes.''
In fact, Professor Bogdanor said, the fault lies with Mr. Bolland.
''Mark Bolland has broken the duty of confidentiality, as well as undermining the constitutional underpinning of the monarchy,'' he said.
But public opinion does not seem universally behind the prince on this one.
''If he is going to find it irresistible to interfere in politics -- sometimes on the side of sense, sometimes on the side of nonsense -- then the monarchy would be in grave peril with him as head of state,'' Paul Flynn, a Labor member of Parliament, told the Press Association.
He added that if Charles was so interested in politics, ''then he should do what everyone else does who has that urge, and stand for Parliament.''
