
AT the opening of the United Nations last week, President Bush said the United States could get much more done building coalitions than acting as the world's Lone Ranger.
Behind the scenes, though, his aides were scrambling to put out a fire: countries that President Bush considers partners -- China, Russia and India -- were banding together to stymie an American and European effort to bring sanctions against Iran for its suspected nuclear weapons program.
Washington backed down, at least for now. 
But what may be more important is the unusual configuration of countries that broke with President Bush and that may prove troublesome in the future.
What Mr. Bush faced from the well of the United Nations on Wednesday morning was a strange new geopolitical world, in which your allies on one issue are ganging up on you in the next room.
When Mr. Bush started coalition-building after the Sept. 
11 attacks, he expected the United States to be the linchpin. 
But now, post-Iraq, the president is increasingly facing what might be called coalitions of the unwilling, pursuing their own interests or pushing back American goals around the world, issue by issue, in search of oil or regional influence.
Without question, this push-back was beginning well before George Bush was president. 
Europe sought a common military strategy independent of Washington's (an experiment with mixed results), and Asian and Latin American nations gathered together, mostly to negotiate trade accords.
But the years after Sept. 
11, 2001, masked a lot of these tensions. 
Countries cast their lot with a president who said that nations had to choose to be ''with us or against us.''
Four years later, Mr. Bush no longer seems as unassailable; the temptations for nations to form ad-hoc partnerships seem irresistible. 
Here's a look at a few of the most unusual.
China, Russia and India
The effort to adopt sanctions against Iran has failed so far, mostly because of this troika. 
China and India are growing at rates that have made them voracious consumers of oil -- and thus friends of the Iranians. 
Russia has been a key supplier to Iran's multibillion-dollar effort to build a large nuclear reactor.
None wants to jeopardize its relations with Iran over a nuclear weapons program that Tehran denies exists.
These countries have leverage because Russia and China could veto any sanctions in the Security Council. 
So Mr. Bush is reluctant to force a vote he could lose, perhaps emboldening Iran to speed ahead with its nuclear development.
The Iranian case has created another unlikely partnership-of-the-moment: India and Pakistan. 
Both spent decades building secret nuclear arsenals, which they aimed at each other. 
Three years ago the United States was trying to stop the two countries from blowing each other up in their dispute over Kashmir.
But now Pakistan and India both oppose any effort to penalize Iran.
No one seems to think that this sudden agreement between Pakistan and India reduces their rivalry.
But to many in the Bush administration, it is stunning that Pakistan, which Mr. Bush declared a ''major non-NATO ally,'' and India, which just struck a deal with Washington on cooperation in civilian nuclear technology, are working together to oppose one of Mr. Bush's most urgent counterproliferation goals.
And no one understands where, if anywhere, this new detente may be going.
China and South Korea Vs. the United States and Japan
The cold war kept alliances simple. 
In the Pacific, the United States stood with Japan and South Korea. 
North Korea's lifeline was China. 
Then came the 1990's boom, when the Chinese decided that capitalism wasn't all bad and opened diplomatic relations with South Korea.
Now, in the negotiations over disarming North Korea, the relationship between Seoul and Beijing goes far beyond sharing the secrets of making microprocessors.
To Washington and Tokyo, disarming North Korea -- believed to have upward of six or eight weapons -- is job one. 
If that means sanctions and pressure that topples Kim Jong Il's government, well, that's life.
But the South Koreans and Chinese desperately want stabilityII first.
''Our biggest fear is that if the central government collapses, we will have millions of angry, hungry Koreans coming over our border,'' a senior Chinese official said in a recent interview in Washington.
The South Koreans have a similar fear. 
So they are happy to have talks, talks and more talks, so long as they head off any risk that the United States will take unilateral action.
Could this mark the beginning of the end of the American-South Korean alliance?
In two recent speeches, President Roh Moo Hyun talked openly about a new role for South Korea, one far less dependent on the United States. 
South Korea, he said, would play a ''balancing role'' in the region.
That set off alarm bells in Washington. 
''We told the South Koreans that the Chinese were not going to stick their necks out for them if things get ugly,'' a senior American official said.
But when South Korea was caught a year ago secretly toying with some nuclear experiments, American intelligence officials questioned whether the country is once again thinking about building the bomb. 
The South Koreans deny that this was their goal.
Russia and Europe
Standing in the East Room with Vladimir Putin on Friday afternoon, President Bush said he's stopped counting how many times he's met the Russian leader ''because I've run out of fingers on my hands.''
And he never fails to praise Mr. Putin as a partner in the war on terror.
But the reality is that many in the White House are deeply suspicious of his motives and his centralization of power.
So at key moments Mr. Putin has sought succor in Europe, particularly on issues that the Europeans and the Bush administration see very differently: the war in Iraq, the Middle East and global warming, to name three.
And, like many Europeans, Mr. Putin has not exactly embraced Mr. Bush's call for spreading democracy around the world. 
He has chafed at periodic American condemnations of his own moves to re-empower the Kremlin.
Earlier this year he gave Mr. Bush a 40-minute lecture in Slovakia about the imperfections in American democracy.
''It was a brush-back pitch,'' a White House aide said. 
''And you can imagine, the boss didn't enjoy it.''
