
SARS has certainly changed the face of street life here, where masks are now worn as often as caps, and bicycles, once a disappearing mode of transportation, have increased as Beijingers shy away from buses and subways.
But there is one sight that has almost completely vanished, giving the city a particularly forlorn feel: Beijing's millions of children are missing.
With schools closed for nearly a month, the majority of Beijing's precious only children are virtual prisoners at home, kept in iron-clad parental lock down to protect them from SARS. 
The children spend their days moving from TV to computers and back again, most forbidden even to play with their friends. 
Their only diversion is an occasional walk outside, according to conversations with some of them on their brief forays into a city where parents see germs lurking everywhere.
This week the Beijing city government announced that it would begin to reopen schools starting with high schools on Thursday. 
But elementary students will have to wait nearly another month, until June 14, to get back to class. 
They are miserable and antsy.
"I'm lonely," said Zhang Hanxiong, a skinny, tousled 9-year-old. 
"I want to go back to school. 
There is nobody to play with me."
His big sad eyes peered over the elaborate plastic and gauze mask that his mother had fitted on him. 
After his pleading, she agreed to take him for a walk to a pharmacy to buy vitamins E and C to protect against SARS. 
"I know he's bored, but it's safer staying at home," said his mother, Xia Sixin, who works for a construction company and was not wearing a mask. 
"It's just too risky to let him play with his friends."
Family planning policies have relaxed significantly in the Chinese countryside, but not here, where one child to a family is still the rule. 
These so-called little emperors often become an extended family's reason for being. 
So when SARS came to town, small armies of mothers and fathers, grandmas and aunts began draconian campaigns to protect their genetic investment.
In normal times, Beijing's parks and street-side playgrounds resemble busy anthills. 
Now they look like ghost towns. 
"He mostly stays in the house, but sometimes we take him for walks like this or allow him to play with a neighbor in the hallway," said He Yulong, scrubbing her 7-year-old's hands with a disinfectant towel as she pushed him past the temptations of an empty jungle gym in August 1 Park.
The Beijing government closed all schools in late April in an attempt to stem the spread of the SARS virus. 
It was a desperate move in a country where education is every family's paramount obsession and children rarely miss school for illness. 
To keep children busy and allow them to continue with their studies, some classes have been offered on radio and TV, and exercises were provided on the Internet. 
Many parents improvised lessons and homework. 
Teachers were required to report to schools each day so they could field called-in questions.
Chinese students are often ambivalent about their schools, which tend to put a heavy emphasis on discipline and memorization. 
But the prolonged absence has polished classroom memories to a new sheen, leaving all of them nostalgic.
"Normally I don't care much for school, but now I'm dying, I miss it so much," said Chen Yuan, a fourth grader in a blue track suit. 
Her mother had taken the afternoon off to let her go for a stroll in the park. 
"I watch classes on TV in the morning and try to keep busy in the afternoon. 
But even TV's getting boring!"
Indeed, even if children were allowed outside more often, there would be little to do: the government has closed most places where children congregate, including movie theaters, video arcades and indoor playgrounds. 
At the same time, most parents have continued to work, leaving the children home alone or with grandparents, cooped up in tiny apartments.
They end up not just with cabin fever but also SARS obsessed.
"At home, I mostly watch TV and help with the housework to prevent SARS," said Jiao Jingyang, a fourth grader with pigtails, adding proudly, "It is my job to wash the floor and windows with disinfectants."
Her mother said she took Jingyang to get fresh air when she could but "not on buses or to shopping centers -- that's too risky."
The group most chafing under lock and key, however, are probably Beijing's teenagers. 
Too old and cool to be caught dead strolling with parents, they report missing their life of video arcades and Internet bars.
Qiu Lan and her husband continued their tradition of afternoon walks in August 1 Park last week. 
But their 17-year-old Lili refuses, preferring chat rooms on the Net.
"Of course she complains, but that's it: the only thing she's allowed to do is to go out to the park with us," Ms. Qiu said.
