
HOW many battles can the United States take on at one time?
Even before North Korea's stunning admission last week that it had been cheating for years on its commitment to freeze its nuclear weapons program, that question was heard all over Washington.
For 12 days this month, as administration officials kept the wraps on North Korea's defiant declaration to American diplomats, one subtext of the meetings inside the White House situation room was "whether we are overloading the circuit boards," a participant said.
As they met, American diplomats were trying to cut deals with Russia and France on Iraq, Al Qaeda was emerging from the mist and unknown to the world, the Korean Peninsula had slipped into nuclear relapse.
Some are tempted to say that the unexpected challenge from Korea demonstrates that the administration's current course -- confronting Iraq while Americans still face the daunting tasks of securing Afghanistan, pursuing terrorists across the globe and stopping them at home -- creates pressures that can lead to deadly mistakes.
"I am concerned about the overload on the intelligence side, human and the technological," Stephen W. Bosworth, a former ambassador to South Korea who is dean of the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy at Tufts University, said last week. 
"And the problem of a doctrine of pre-emptive defense is that it places a hell of burden on exact intelligence on where the next attack is coming from."
He may prove correct. 
But to the Bush inner circle, battling on many fronts may not be entirely unwelcome.
Mr. Bush's team sees this moment in history as a rip in time, a chance to re-order the world on American terms. 
It said as much in the national security strategy published last month, which talked not only of pre-emptive strikes to prevent future attacks, but of a global campaign to "defend the peace by fighting terrorists and tyrants."
This strategy finds opportunity even in simultaneous crises.
Even a political opponent like Samuel R. Berger, the national security adviser to President Bill Clinton, agrees with at least part of the Bush logic. 
"The lesson you always learn in these jobs is that the world doesn't deal cards one at a time," he said. 
But the cards make up a hand that can be played.
Speaking of the twin crises in Iraq and North Korea, he said: "These could play off one another. 
If you get a strong Security Council resolution on Iraq, it conveys to North Korea that the international community will find a nuclear program unacceptable."
The administration argued last week that nothing in its strategy requires it to use the same tactics in different countries. 
Saddam Hussein is a unique threat, argued Condoleezza Rice, the national security adviser, requiring a uniquely aggressive response. 
Kim Jong Il, North Korea's leader, she suggested, runs a wounded, isolated nation that can be enveloped by troops and unhappy neighbors, and squeezed until its bleeding economy shatters.
History does suggest that moments of maximum stress like this can allow the most creative diplomacy. 
Remember the missile crisis that unfolded 40 years ago this week, when John F. Kennedy feared simultaneous wars in Cuba and Berlin, but emerged with a horse-trade and eventually with a nuclear test ban treaty. 
And remember 1945.
Speaking of the Bush strategy, John Lewis Gaddis, a Yale historian, argues in a forthcoming article in Foreign Policy that "there's been nothing like this in boldness, sweep and vision since Americans took it upon themselves, more than half a century ago, to democratize Germany and Japan, thus setting in motion processes that stopped short of only a few places on earth, one of which was the Muslim Middle East."
Still, even some of Mr. Bush's own aides acknowledge that they have rarely seen the system so stressed.
One of them argued last week that a $365 billion annual Pentagon budget should be sufficient to take on Saddam Hussein's depleted forces and deal with periodic confrontations with Al Qaeda and other military priorties.
The problem, he said, lies in the worlds of intelligence and policy-making -- here he said the government is currently stretched to the limit.
"We only have satellites in so many places at a time," said one senior official who took part in the recent discussions. 
"We only have a handful of senior policy makers who can reach out around the globe. 
And they know that, when you need help from friends and allies, they can't belly up to the bar too often. 
They tell us, 'If we stick our neck out on this one, we can't on that one.'
"
In the North Korean crisis, White House officials said that the 12 days in which they were publicly silent was a period intended to give the national security team time to study its new hand and consult allies.
But in Congress and at the United Nations, critics of Mr. Bush's Iraq policy had other explanations.
How could Mr. Bush convince the United Nations that Iraq must be confronted with military force immediately while North Korea, a confessed nuclear power, should be treated with patient diplomacy?
And how do you continue working with the Pakistanis, the Russians and the Chinese, all of whom you believe helped North Korea in its nuclear ambitions in the 1990's?
Some argue that the White House should have seen trouble brewing. 
"The surprise is that anyone in the Bush administration should be surprised," said Representative Edward J. Markey, a Massachusetts Democrat who has argued for a tougher stance on North Korea. 
He said a letter he wrote the president asking about covert nuclear projects there got a brush-off.
The administration goal at this point is not to confront North Korea with a threat of force, as it is doing in Iraq, but to work with Russia, China, Japan and South Korea to send a parallel if less bellicose message to North Korea that it faces a stark choice: Disarmament or a total economic embargo, even by its old friends. 
"This is the model we should have applied to Iraq," said Representative Ellen Tauscher, a Democrat from California, who voted to support Mr. Bush on Iraq.
But it is unclear whether the allies will sign up, and that means this will inevitably test another part of Mr. Bush's grand strategy.
The president has said that the Sept. 
11 attacks opened the way for new, far more constructive relationships with Russia and China. 
He is about to find out how constructive those relationships are, because Russia seems poised to prove the most critical player on the Iraq front, even as China plays that role on the North Korea front.
If they help -- and the help will come for a price -- it could build a critical wartime alliance of convenience. 
Or Russia and China could decide to let the United States stew in its own new strategy of pre-emption and predominance, and deal with its multifront battles on its own. 
That would truly stress the system.
