
THE audience of Communist Party cadres sits rapt in this city's cold and cavernous Great Hall of the People. 
Even those high up in the third tier seem to hang on the speaker's every word. 
This government hall is normally the domain of politics, but not tonight.
Instead a small man in a gray suit, seated at a simple table decked with flowers, sits nearly motionless as he delivers homilies about health and little nuggets of New Age wisdom.
"Comrades!
Take care of yourself, teach yourself, liberate yourself, love yourself," he intones. 
"Health is gold and the key is in your hands!"
Or this: "Take care of your babies, caress them, hold them, kiss them. 
It's not just about having good milk -- there is emotional nutrition, too."
He exhorts his audience to walk more ("the best exercise"), to eat more tomatoes ("ward off cancer") and to drink a carton of milk every day ("taller, better skin, smarter, too").
When, after two hours, he finishes his eclectic message of self-healing and self-love, a phalanx of middle-aged fans crowd around him seeking autographs.
With his conservative suits, soft voice and neatly combed hair, Dr. Hong Zhaoguang certainly does not possess the aura of a New Age guru. 
No one could accuse him of being overly charismatic. 
Still, he has become for many Chinese a kind of Deepak Chopra with Chinese characteristics and he is taking the country by storm.
His self-help health books have sold millions of copies, a favorite gift of children to aging parents. 
He crisscrosses China giving inspirational talks three to four nights a week and has more than 400 groups on a waiting list to book engagements.
In some ways, his popularity is easy to dissect: As hospital costs have skyrocketed, middle-aged Chinese are avidly looking for alternative paths to better health. 
Also, with Communist idealism having long since evaporated, China has become a nation of spiritual seekers looking for meaning to fill that void.
The Falun Gong spiritual movement once gathered its fuel from these same dual quests. 
But since it was banned by the government in 1999 as an "evil cult," Chinese have had to channel those energies into more politically acceptable alternatives. 
Dr. Hong's program is even cloaked with a veneer of science.
So while the government persecuted Falun Gong, with its mystical bent of exercise and meditation, it has enthusiastically adopted the avuncular cardiologist as its own. 
One day he is in Chongqing talking to cadres. 
The day before it was the Central Party School in Beijing. 
The next he is in coastal Guangdong.
His wisdom is so valued that he was recently named joint chief lecturer for 11 ministries, including the notoriously unenlightened Propaganda Department.
"My program is like a point-and-shoot camera," said Dr. Hong, who considers his work preventive medicine. 
"Other experts give people health advice but they talk about grams and calories and it's too complicated for them to follow. 
People don't need a great camera with lots of lenses. 
They need something that's simple, they can use."
LIKE many Western health gurus, Dr. Hong's second career evolved as a reaction to the system he was working in, which he came to see as cold and unresponsive to patients' needs. 
Raised in Shanghai, Dr. Hong worked for many years as a conventional cardiologist at big hospitals in Beijing, before spending two years at Northwestern University, from 1981 to 1983, just as preventive medicine was becoming the rage in the United States. 
He returned to China with some new ideas.
In a country obsessed with high-tech treatment, Dr. Hong did what most Chinese doctors were loath to do: he sat on patients' beds, looked into their eyes and talked.
"We think of treating disease with medicine and scalpels, but words are very important, too; the patients come alive with smiles and hope," he said, holding court at his small cluttered office at Anzhen Hospital in Beijing, a mix of reporters, nurses and businesspeople hanging on his words.
"When I saw patients on the ward, I found that many had spent a few hundred thousand yuan on treatment, but if they had knowledge of how they could prevent and had taken charge, then maybe they wouldn't have the disease," he recalled. 
He empowered them with his can-do message of personal responsibility.
The patients, apparently, liked what they had heard.
"I found that when I was talking to one patient, the one in the next bed would stop watching TV and turn to listen," he said. 
"Pretty soon, two or four or eight others were coming in -- then their wives. 
Before I knew it, I was speaking in the lounge, and people were recording me and taking notes and exchanging them later in order not to miss anything."
And so the industry of Dr. Hong was born, although the intensely private doctor, who is married, declined to say how much money it generated these days. 
In his lectures, he encourages patients to pay more attention to food and exercise, but not to the point that it ruins their lives.
One standard homily involves an elderly patient whose favorite foods were fatty meat, boiled pork, eggs, bananas and melons, and how Dr. Hong had learned from the man. 
"One doctor had told him that he shouldn't eat the meat or the eggs, his cholesterol was too high. 
Nor the banana -- too much potassium there. 
Watermelons and pears?
Banned because he has diabetes.
"But then he said, 'What's the meaning of life then?'
My message now is that these are general principles you should try to follow, but there's no need to be too strict about them."
TO make his program simple and catchy, Dr. Hong has infused it with numbers and slogans, mimicking the style of Communist Party propaganda so familiar to people here. 
To Western ears it may sound both old hat and New Age, but in China it is breaking ground.
There are the "four bests": best doctor is yourself, best medicine is time, best state of mind is peace, best exercise is walking. 
Also, the "three morning half-minutes": lie in bed for half a minute after waking, sit up for half a minute after rising, then sit for a another half minute with legs hanging over bed.
Most popular among his followers, though, is his strong emphasis on mental and emotional health. 
His recipe for what he calls Eight Treasures Soup is Dr. Hong's answer to "Chicken Soup for the Soul": one piece of loving heart, two inches of kindness, three portions of justice, four qian of tolerance, plus fealty, honesty, sacrifice and no regrets. 
Put the eight elements into the pot of open-mindedness, add fairness, thoughtfulness, quietness, and you are done.
