
THOUGH there seems to be a great deal that remains unknown about Hu Jintao, China's vice president and the odds-on favorite to become the country's next ultimate leader, his background as a ballroom dancer should gladden the hearts of traditionalists.
Think of the Congress of Vienna of 1814. 
Think of the British diplomat Castlereagh and his Austrian counterpart Metternich. 
Consider how they choreographed an intricate balance of European powers after the years of Napoleonic turmoil while twirling in diplomatic gavottes that were not just metaphors but actually took place on dance floors.
Does the ascendancy of Mr. Hu, who just met with President Bush in Washington, augur a restoration of the terpsichorean element long missing from the politics of great powers?
It is too early to tell, but at least there is now reason to hope that the values of ballroom dancing may again influence the conduct of grand politics, since these two fields of human endeavor have so much in common.
Indeed, is there a better preparation than dancing to help determine who leads and who is to be led, or how to look as if you are leading when, in fact, you are following?
And what about learning how to apply only the pressure necessary to steer a clumsy partner through a crowded field without violating anyone's territoriality or appearing overbearing or dominating?
Then there are flirtation, seduction and conquest, objectives so often shared by both activities.
Finally, ballroom dancing, at least in its classical variant, presumably favored by Mr. Hu, emphasizes grace, an awareness of appropriate tempo and a quest for harmony of the sort that characterized the durable peace that the dancing delegates forged at Vienna in 1814-15.
CASTLEREAGH (Robert Stewart) was a viscount and Klemens von Metternich a prince, and just about everybody else attending the Congress of Vienna was an aristocrat, which meant that they had been taught from an early age how to dance waltzes, pavanes, mazurkas, polkas and reels, just as they had learned to fence and hunt. 
At that time the major reason for balls and large dinners was not fund-raising but as an essential venue for the gathering and dissemination of information and gossip -- the twin staples of statecraft. 
This importance, of course, subsided after the invention of the telephone and the growth of media.
Democratic leveling also played a role, and by the time Castlereagh's and Metternich's successors met at the formerly royal palace at Versailles to negotiate a peace treaty after World War I, there was little if any dancing. 
By then, few knew how to gavotte. 
Periodic efforts by Washington hostesses to supplant the old steps with conga lines, line dancing and the hokeypokey have been unsuccessful.
There are some ironies in the realization that the most visible link to a time when statesmanship and stately dancing were compatible undertakings may be the 59-year-old Mr. Hu, a child of the Chinese revolution.
Like so many other things, the history of ballroom dancing in China has been tempestuous. 
First introduced by Protestant missionaries, it gained popularity through the early 20th century, particularly among the middle class. 
For some time the Chinese Communist Party favored such dancing, and there are reports that during the civil war against Chiang Kai-shek's nationalists, Mao Zedong and his close associate Zhou Enlai would attend dancing parties.
Once the Communists took power, they even required certain elite technical schools to give courses in ballroom dancing, following the example of the Soviet Union, where such courses, instituted under Peter the Great, Russia's westernizing czar, survived into the Stalinist era.
When Mr. Hu attended one such university in the early 1960's he was a member of the school dance team, performing in tableaux vivants portraying the movements of manual workers. 
Off campus he reportedly perfected his fox trot. 
The year he graduated marked the beginning of the Cultural Revolution, and ballroom dancing was banned.
But there is more to the story. 
Chairman Mao reportedly kept dancing. 
In his book, "The Private Life of Chairman Mao," Li Zhisui, Mao's physician, wrote that well into old age, Mao would invite attractive young women to dance with him at small parties, presumably auditioning them for further rendezvous.
Currently ballroom dancing in China is widely said to be booming.
