
President Bush stepped onto French soil today to meet the European leaders who vociferously opposed the war in Iraq, but rather than rehash their differences he spent the day trying to increase pressure on two other nations he regards as major threats -- Iran and North Korea -- to give up their nuclear weapons programs.
Mr. Bush arrived here from St. Petersburg, Russia, after a meeting with President Vladimir V. Putin that both men used to put differences over Iraq behind them, and to sign the recently ratified treaty that requires both sides to reduce their nuclear arsenals.
There was no such warmth during Mr. Bush's pro forma handshake and chitchat with President Jacques Chirac of France this afternoon, just as there was none with the German chancellor, Gerhard Schroder, when the two men met in Russia on Saturday night. 
Mr. Bush believed that those two European leaders undercut his effort against Saddam Hussein, and White House officials have made clear that there would be little effort to mend fences here at the meeting of the Group of 8, the major industrialized nations plus Russia.
Mr. Chirac described his encounter with Mr. Bush as "positive," but then curtly ended questions on the issue by declaring that he had no "discomfort" in dealing with the American president.
Rather than dwell on their differences, Mr. Bush pressed the main issue on his agenda -- nonproliferation. 
By the end of the day, the president appeared to have won at least a new hearing from Mr. Putin on Russia's technological aid to Iran's nuclear programs. 
There were also signs from China that North Korea, its close ally, might be willing to meet for a second negotiating session, this time with Japan and South Korea present, as Mr. Bush has demanded.
The president's aides worked behind the scenes to sign countries up for a new White House initiative to create an international legal basis for seizing missiles, chemical and biological agents, and nuclear components on the high seas or in the air. 
The proposal is clearly intended to give countries broader authority to quarantine North Korea, and perhaps Iran as well.
It was unclear how many of the traditionally American allies here would agree, at a moment when many Europeans view Mr. Bush and the United States as far too powerful and too willing to use military force to shape the world to America's liking.
Mr. Chirac made clear that American dominance was still one of his chief concerns. 
"I have no doubt whatsoever that the multipolar vision of the world that I have defended for some time is certainly supported by alarge majority of countries throughout the world," he said to reporters this evening on his way to a dinner with the other leaders.
The concerns about American empire were also echoed in the huge protests -- involving tens of thousands of Europeans -- that moved through the streets of Geneva and villages in both Switzerland and France today. 
The police tried to contain the threat of violence with tear gas, and the Swiss had to send German antiriot police officers into their streets.
But while there was a good deal of window-breaking and stone-throwing, the mix of antiglobalization protesters, anti-Bush protesters and others did not appear as serious as the kind of rioting that marred the Group of 8 meeting in Genoa, Italy, two years ago.
This year the protesters were kept miles from Hotel Royal, where the leaders of the United States, France, Britain, Italy, Canada, Germany, Japan and Russia were meeting on the edge of the lake, and heard none of their chants.
Mr. Bush, in whose White House the word "globalization" is rarely uttered, has said nothing so far about the protesters' concerns, insisting that the main economic challenge he must confront is getting the major economies of the world growing again. 
On Monday the leaders are expected to discuss for the first time the threat of deflation in Japan and Germany -- and to a lesser degree the United States -- and the fast-declining value of the dollar.
One of Mr. Bush's aides said today that the United States was "virtually alone now as an engine of growth in the global economy," though in the period before the opening session today Mr. Bush's aides talked about no new global initiatives to synchronize get the three largest world economies in sync. 
That was the traditional purpose of this annual meeting, though one that has often gotten lost with the other competing agendas.
"If they deal with trade, exchange rates, and Iraqi reconstruction in an acrimonious fashion, that is likely to be very unsettling for the dollar and thus for the financial markets," said Robert D. Hormats, a veteran of many of these economic summit meetings and now the vice chairman of Goldman Sachs International.
But those are also the issues that least invigorate Mr. Bush, who sees these meetings largely as a forum to press his case for the fight against terrorism, and to argue, as he did at the beginning of his trip this weekend, that the world must unify behind an American vision of confronting tyrants and unconventional weapons.
Mr. Bush began his day in St. Petersburg, where he briefly took part in the celebration of the city's 300th anniversary. 
There he pressed Mr. Putin, once again, to end the multimillion-dollar contracts that Russia is fulfilling with Iran for the construction of its nuclear reactors part of a program that the White House alleged again today was a "cover for their larger nuclear weapons program."
Mr. Putin, speaking at a joint news conference with Mr. Bush, said that he, too, was concerned about Iran's intentions and said that reports of differences with Washington on the issue were exaggerated. 
But then, in a direct challenge to Mr. Bush, he said, "We are against using the pretext of nuclear weapons program of Iran as a leverage in -- as an instrument of unfair competition against us."
A senior administration official said later that he was apparently referring to the help that British firms had given Iran years ago. 
Ari Fleischer, the president's press secretary, told reporters here tonight that "it would not be the first time President Putin said something for a domestic constituency."
Within hours of his arrival at this small town on the southern bank of Lake Geneva, Mr. Bush turned from Iran's nuclear threats to North Korea's. 
He met with Hu Jintao, the new Chinese president. 
Mr. Hu is one of the 12 leaders of developing nations who were invited here by Mr. Chirac in an effort to, in his favorite phrase, "enlarge the dialogue" beyond the world's wealthiest nations.
Mr. Bush has met Mr. Hu twice before, but not since the Chinese leader formally succeeded Jiang Zemin as president. 
In the interim, China has taken an active role in the North Korean nuclear crisis, acting partly as an intermediary, and partly as a neighbor who wants neither a nuclear North nor a collapsing government next door, with the inevitable flow of desperately poor refugees over the Chinese border.
Mr. Hu, a senior administration official said tonight, told Mr. Bush that he believed that the North Koreans would drop their demand to negotiate only with the United States, leaving Japan and South Korea on the sidelines. 
Now, Mr. Hu suggested, the North would probably agree to multiparty talks as long as it was guaranteed that negotiators could talk directly to the Americans, ignoring others in the room.
"The president said, 'Look, in a multilateral format, sure, the North Koreans can look us in the eyes and say something,' " the senior American official said. 
That was essentially the approach that Deputy Secretary of State Richard L. Armitage described to Congress several months ago, angering many at the White House who saw it as a way around Mr. Bush's strictures about how talks with North Korea's Communist government must be pursued. 
Now, Mr. Bush appears to have come around to Mr. Armitage's viewpoint.
Mr. Bush was clearly trying to cultivate a relationship with Mr. Hu today, one that would contrast sharply with the formal, sometimes icy relations he had with Mr. Jiang.
"It's a generational thing," one senior aide to Mr. Bush said recently. 
"He and Jiang were just from different planets. 
He has a chance now to have a relationship with the Chinese president akin to the one with Putin."
Mr. Bush is clearly trying to gain authority for a broader set of interdictions of unconventional weapons, and he has begun to discuss informally his new initiative to organize countries to seize such weapons. 
The initiative was driven, one administration official said, by the bitter experience of last year, when Mr. Bush had to let a North Korean missile shipment to Yemen resume its journey after it had been stopped by Spanish forces.
The president is using the summit meeting here today to demonstrate that he can work with the traditional allies, even while bitterness over Iraq remains.
"The most important thing, particularly after all the differences there have been over Iraq, is that the international community comes together and gives a very strong statement," Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain, Mr. Bush's greatest ally in the group here, said today, referring to an expected statement on the need to halt proliferation. 
"It will be the quality of intent that is as important as anything else."
Prime Minister Jean Chretien of Canada, who also opposed the Iraq war, said, "Everybody was concentrating on creating a mood of solidarity."
But mostly what Evian creates, of course, is water -- lots of it. 
It is unclear whether solidarity can also be created, and by the time the answer comes, on Tuesday, Mr. Bush will be long gone -- having cut his stay here short to move on to talks in the Middle East.
