
The State Department announced today that it would resume shipments of food aid to North Korea, ending a two-month hiatus, but that it intended to cut donations this year by 35 to 75 percent from last year's totals.
Despite the cut, the announcement was clearly intended as a conciliatory gesture toward the new South Korean president, Roh Moo Hyun, who was inaugurated this morning in a ceremony attended by Secretary of State Colin L. Powell.
Mr. Roh, elected on a wave of anti-American sentiment, has advocated engagement with Pyongyang and sharply criticized the Bush administration's efforts to isolate the North.
"We are also concerned about the people of North Korea, people who are in very great need," Mr. Powell told a news conference after meeting with Mr. Roh this afternoon. 
"We will be working with the international donor community to ensure that needy people receive the food that is intended for them."
Richard A. Boucher, the State Department spokesman, said the United States would deliver at least 40,000 metric tons of food to North Korea this year and was prepared to increase that amount by a further 60,000 tons.
Last year the United States contribution to North Korea food aid administered by the United Nations was 157,000 metric tons, more than half of the program's total.
State Department officials said the reduction in aid this year was largely a result of two factors: North Korea, despite a continuing famine, needs less aid this year, while demands for American assistance, particularly in Africa, have risen sharply.
But the department has also complained that the North Koreans might be diverting food aid from starving civilians to Communist Party officials and soldiers. 
Mr. Powell and other American officials suggested today that the size of this year's food aid package would depend on whether North Korea allowed better monitoring of aid distribution.
"We will watch carefully" how the first shipment of 40,000 tons is distributed, Mr. Powell told reporters traveling on his plane today.
There had been widespread speculation among Asian diplomats, Democrats and aid groups that the Bush administration intended to suspend food aid to North Korea indefinitely to pressure the North to abandon its nuclear weapons programs. 
American food shipments to the North ended in December.
But Mr. Powell said the shipments had stopped only because Congress had not enacted spending bills for 2003, asserting that the United States does not use food as a political weapon.
The administration did halt shipments of heating oil to North Korea last year after Pyongyang's admission that it was pursuing a covert nuclear weapons program.
The United States has been among the largest suppliers of food aid to North Korea for several years, having provided 1.9 million metric tons, worth more than $620 million, since 1995. 
American food aid consists largely of corn-soy flour used for making bread, cooking oil and baby formula.
The administration's assertions that North Korea may be diverting food aid to soldiers and the party elite are based mainly on anecdotal information and have not been clearly documented, aid groups say.
But American officials say it is difficult to document such diversions because Pyongyang places restrictions on the World Food Program's monitoring activities, including a requirement of five days' notice for inspections.
"We should not be using the food to prop up the elite or the regime," Mr. Powell said last week.
Despite the administration's insistence that the United States does not use food for political purposes, some administration officials have suggested that they would like to see China use its aid programs to put pressure on North Korea to dismantle its nuclear programs. 
China is the largest supplier of food and fuel aid to North Korea.
Washington particularly wants Beijing to play a more assertive role in pushing Pyongyang to attend a "multilateral forum" to discuss the permanent dismantling of North Korea's weapons programs.
Mr. Powell suggested today that American officials could meet privately with the North Koreans during or after such a forum. 
But North Korea has said it will only meet directly with the United States.
South Korean officials have urged the Bush administration to accept the North Koreans' demands and meet them in direct talks. 
But today Mr. Powell said Mr. Roh understood that direct talks had to begin in a "multilateral setting," suggesting that differences between the two governments might have narrowed.
"I think that I can say that he supports that approach," Mr. Powell said in Seoul. 
"Of course he is anxious to see dialogue take place quickly between the two sides."
During their meeting, Mr. Powell said, he reassured Mr. Roh that the United States had no plans to invade North Korea. 
But to reporters later, he warned that if North Korea began reprocessing spent nuclear fuel rods, making them usable for weapons, "it changes the entire political landscape."
Mr. Roh and Mr. Powell seemed to go out of their way to minimize the tension between the two allies, which has grown serious since the fall. 
Washington made no secret of its preference for the conservative candidate here, Lee Hoi Chang, whofor months appeared all but certain to win an easy election.
Several hours before Mr. Roh's inauguration, North Korea test-launched a short-range missile into the eastern seas, its first such test in three years, apparently meant as a reminder of the tense security situation on the Korean Peninsula.
Mr. Roh made no mention of the missile launching in his inauguration speech. 
Mr. Powell played down the launching, calling it "not particularly shocking."
