
South Korea's National Security Council worked today on a compromise proposal to ease the standoff over North Korea's nuclear weapons program, spurred on by warnings from North Korea's state-run news media that "the present situation is very serious and unpredictable."
The compromise, which is to be submitted to American and Japanese officials in Washington on Monday, is part of a wider effort by South Korea to mediate between its ally, the United States, and its onetime nemesis, North Korea.
In a measure of South Korea's move from North Korea's adversary to North Korea's advocate, the main headline of The Korea Times, an English-language newspaper, said today, "Seoul will ask U.S. to guarantee survival of N. Korea."
Seoul is going to propose that President Bush write a letter promising not to attack North Korea, in return for which North Korea would put its plutonium-based nuclear program back under international controls. 
A formal nonaggression treaty would face opposition in the United States Senate, which is critical of North Korean human rights violations.
"We are preparing for a compromise that will call for both U.S. 
President George W. Bush and North Korean leader Kim Jong Il to make concessions," said Lim Chae Jung, head of the transition committee for President-elect Roh Moo Hyun of South Korea. 
Mr. Roh has said that he would like to see the crisis resolved by his inauguration on Feb. 
25.
South Korea's general attitude is that an expensive peace on the peninsula is far cheaper than war, and that aid to impoverished North Korea is a small insurance premium to pay to preserve the prosperity that has grown steadily in South Korea.
The United States is trying to enlist not only South Korea, Japan and Europe but also North Korea's traditional backers, Russia and China, in an effort to get North Korea to renounce its nuclear program. 
But neither the Chinese nor the Russians gave any indication today that they would go along.
"The rigid U.S. policy towards the D.P.R.K. will only exacerbate tensions between the two sides," China Daily, a state-owned, English-language newspaper said, referring to North Korea's official name, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. 
"The United States should first give up its superpower mentality and sanction policy, and then treat the D.P.R.K. as an equal sovereign state."
In Russia, where a South Korean envoy arrived today, Deputy Foreign Minister Aleksander Losyukov said the United States and North Korea should search for a solution in a "calm and constructive way."
"Threats and sanctions are counterproductive," the Itar-Tass news agency reported.
North Korea's behavior will also be under scrutiny at the International Atomic Energy Agency, the United Nations body that kept watch on North Korea's nuclear program with cameras, seals and inspectors until the government in Pyongyang ordered the controls turned off last month. 
This week, the agency's inspectors were expelled.
The agency's directors meet on Monday in Vienna to weigh a resolution that could lead to the imposition of sanctions against North Korea by the United Nations Security Council.
Today, North Korea again defended its behavior as a way to counter American threats.
"Removing seals and monitoring cameras from the frozen nuclear facilities," the newspaper Rodong Sinmun said in an editorial today, "is part of the D.P.R.K.'s mode of revolutionary and independent counter-responding to the U.S. imperialists' tough policy with the toughest one."
"If the U.S. imperialists misjudge the might and will of the D.P.R.K. and make a pre-emptive attack, the D.P.R.K. will deal a mortal blow to the war provokers with its powerful counterstrike," the newspaper continued in an English translation provided by the Korean Central News Agency. 
"The U.S. imperialist warhawks should contemplate."
North Korea has tried increasingly to play on the anti-American sentiment in South Korea, stoked by the conduct, and indeed the mere presence here, of 37,000 American troops.
A holdover from the Korean conflict of half a century ago, the troops, maintained at a cost to American taxpayers of $3 billion a year, are here at the behest of South Korea to help defend it against the North.
Huge anti-American protests in the past month, resulting in part from a presidential election campaign but also from anger over the acquittal of two American soldiers whose armored vehicle crushed two Korean girls last summer, are now stoking anti-Korean sentiments in America, analysts warn.
"In Washington, within the U.S. government and Congress, there is a distinct, anti-Korean backlash," Scott Snyder, Korea representative for The Asia Foundation, said here Friday.
On Wednesday, a high-ranking American diplomat in the region warned in an interview, "There are a lot of congressmen who are really angry with South Korea."
William C. Oberlin, the new president of the American Chamber of Commerce in Korea, bluntly warned Korean reporters on Friday of "the negative impact" of "incidents like the burning of the U.S. flag as was witnessed through media coverage in the United States."
