
In the Democrats' sharpest critique of President Bush's foreign policy, a group of Clinton administration officials joined Senate Democrats today in attacking the handling of North Korea. 
The group called for immediate direct talks with Pyongyang to prevent a nuclear arms race in Asia.
The group, which included former Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright and former Defense Secretary William J. Perry, said that North Korea appeared inexorably headed toward "serial production" of nuclear weapons but that the administration seemed too distracted by Iraq or too paralyzed by internal squabbling to stop the advance.
Several Democrats asserted that the administration appeared resigned to North Korea's building up to six nuclear weapons in the coming months, a move that would let Pyongyang conduct tests or sell fissionable material to terrorists. 
The Democrats referred to the situation as a crisis, a characterization that the administration has refused to make.
"In spite of the high stakes," the Senate minority leader, Tom Daschle of South Dakota, said, "the White House continues to sit back and watch, playing down the threat and, apparently, playing for time."
The spokesman for the White House, Ari Fleischer, said, "I think North Korea would like nothing more than to make this a crisis, because the more they can make this a crisis, the more they think they will get things in return."
A senior administration official involved in North Korea policy strongly denied that the United States was prepared to accept nuclear arms in North Korea. 
He said the administration had made headway in the last week in developing ideas for a multilateral forum.
The official also argued that it might take the reprocessing of spent fuel rods to bring a real sense of urgency to China, South Korea and Japan about the weapons programs.
In Seoul, newspapers printed dovish comments by officials here today, illustrating a gap between Washington and the new government of President Roh Moo Hyun.
While Washington argues that the nuclear program should be ended through multilateral talks, Mr. Roh said, "Ultimately this problem has to be resolved by President Bush and Chairman Kim Jong Il, and they have to be moved to solve the problem."
Mr. Roh's office confirmed today that on Feb. 
20, five days before his inauguration, an aide made a secret trip to Beijing to meet a high North Korean official. 
A South Korean newspaper, JoongAng Ilbo, which broke the news, said the aide, Ra Jong Yil, who is now the president's national security adviser, had proposed an early meeting between the leaders of the North and the South, ideally before Mr. Roh's expected trip here in May.
The newspaper said Mr. Ra had offered extensive economic aid to the North in return for ending the nuclear weapons program. 
Today, a spokeswoman for Mr. Roh, Song Kyoung Hee, declined to say what he discussed in Beijing.
Before taking office, Mr. Roh ruled out the use of military force in dealing with the nuclear program, a position that Unification Minister Jeong Se Hyun echoed today. 
Addressing concerns that the 24 American bombers en route to Guam could be used against North Korea, 2,115 miles north, Mr. Jeong dismissed such fears as "baseless anxiety."
"How can the U.S. ignore South Korea and go against our will in pursuing its North Korean policy?" he asked on SBS radio.
In Washington, Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld said deploying 24 long-range bombers in easy striking distance of North Korea should not be interpreted as "aggressive or threatening or hostile."
"As the situation with respect to Iraq becomes somewhat tense," Mr. Rumsfeld said, "it seems to me that it's appropriate for the United States to look around the globe and say, 'Where might someone think of taking advantage of that situation with respect to Iraq?'
"
The Democrats' critique initiated a new advisory panel formed by Mr. Daschle to help Senate Democrats articulate forceful alternatives to Mr. Bush's foreign and national security policies. 
Many Democrats say the party was hurt in the elections last year by not presenting clear rebuttals to the Republicans' positions on Iraq and domestic security.
The former officials who appeared with Mr. Daschle, including Samuel R. Berger, Mr. Clinton's national security adviser, and Ashton B. Carter, a former Pentagon official -- were intimately involved in Korean policies, and their remarks were in part intended to defend those policies against Republican criticism.
The policies included the 1994 framework under which North Korea agreed to freeze its nuclear programs in exchange for food and fuel. 
Last fall, Pyongyang declared that accord invalid after conceding that it was developing a covert program to enrich uranium.
The Democrats also clearly believe that North Korea represents the Achilles heel of Mr. Bush's foreign policy. 
Unlike Mr. Bush's forceful positions on Iraq, they contend, his positions have dithered on North Korea, allowing conflicts between hard liners and moderates in the administration to fester while sending confusing messages to allies.
"China doesn't know which part of this administration is in fact calling the shots," said Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. of Delaware, ranking Democrat on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. 
"If this is for regime change, China's not for it. 
If this is for denuclearizing the peninsula, China is for it."
In addition to calling for direct talks, the Democrats argued that the reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel rods, which can produce plutonium for bombs, should be a "red line" that would set off forceful responses from the United States and its allies, including economic sanctions and, perhaps, military strikes.
"The proposed policy of isolation -- isolation and containment -- will not work," Mr. Perry said as he called North Korea "the most dangerous spot" in the world. 
"We can hardly isolate North Korea more than they are already isolated."
The administration has declined to engage in direct talks with North Korea, arguing that doing so would reward what it considers blackmail and brinksmanship.
