
President Bush urged President Jiang Zemin of China today to help resolve the crisis with North Korea, telling him in a phone conversation that Beijing had a responsibility to prevent the North from developing nuclear weapons that could threaten much of Asia.
But even as he insisted that the crisis could be resolved peacefully, Mr. Bush told reporters that "all options are on the table," including military action, if diplomacy failed to prevent North Korea from resuming its efforts to build nuclear weapons.
"I will continue working diplomatically to convince Kim Jong Il that he will be further isolated if he continues to develop a nuclear program," Mr. Bush said of North Korea's leader.
Shortly after Mr. Bush conferred with Mr. Jiang, Pentagon officials said that Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld had ordered the aircraft carrier Carl Vinson from the West Coast to Japan, to replace the Kitty Hawk carrier battle group, which is heading to the Persian Gulf.
The swap ensures that America's military presence around the Korean peninsula will not shrink even if the United States attacks Iraq, allowing for what White House officials have called a "robust deterrent" against North Korea. 
The latest deployment comes on top of a decision to place 24 long-range bombers on alert to move toward the area on short notice.
North Korea issued a new round of threats today, saying that a buildup of American "aggression troops" could lead to nuclear war that would reduce both Koreas "to ashes."
The statement called on South Koreans to join the north in a "struggle to check and frustrate the U.S. arms buildup."
Concerns about North Korea's nuclear program intensified this week when the North announced that it was restarting a mothballed nuclear reactor at Yongbyon that can produce plutonium for nuclear weapons. 
The move came after evidence that the north had begun removing spent nuclear fuel rods from storage, possibly in preparation for reprocessing them for weapons.
Many American officials believe that China could play a lead role in pressuring North Korea, particularly now that America's relations with South Korea have been strained.
China is one of North Korea's largest trading partners and, since the collapse of the Soviet Union, has emerged as the largest provider of economic, food and fuel aid to the north, American officials said. 
By some estimates, half of China's foreign aid budget goes to North Korea.
American officials say the Chinese have been a conduit for American messages to North Korea and have worked with Washington to set up a multinational meeting at which American and North Korean officials could meet privately. 
But some officials have complained privately that Beijing could do more to pressure concessions from the North.
Speaking at the Foreign Press Center in Washington, John Wolf, the assistant secretary of state for nonproliferation, said a nuclear North Korea "would pose an enormous threat to its neighbors and would create an unstable situation in Northeast Asia, which would be a threat not only in the region but, given the importance of the countries in that region, it would be a threat that would worry us all."
He called North Korea "Missiles-R-Us," because of its history of selling ballistic missile technology.
