
As summer waned in this industrial port, Mr. Song, a middle-aged businessman, longed to make up with his estranged father. 
The two had once been partners in a clothing company, until the younger Mr. Song stormed off after an argument over money several years back. 
The two had not spoken since.
But time passed and Mr. Song, the son, now has his own successful business. 
So last September during the Mid-Autumn Festival, a traditional time for family reunions, he went to see his father, bearing gifts, only to have the presents thrown away and the door slammed in his face.
He was desperate for a reconciliation.
So who ya gonna call?
The Tianjin Apology and Gift Center, of course -- a company, just a few months old, whose motto is "We Say Sorry for You."
"Of course it is more sincere if you apologize by yourself, but often in China that is difficult or not possible," explained Liu Qing, the founder of the apology company, which recently took on the case of Mr. Song, who was too embarrassed by his situation to allow his full name to be used.
Apologies are complicated matters in Chinese culture, weighty acts that are rarely offered or accepted, which must be delivered just so, with the proper gravity. 
To Chinese, apologies require a great loss of face, and face is not something spent down lightly.
The offhand American "sorry about that" would never fly here.
"It's much easier for a Westerner to say "sorry" than compared with a Chinese -- I mean they're always saying 'excuse me' and 'sorry,' " said Zhou Xiaozheng, a sociology professor at People's University and a television commentator. 
"As a society, China lacks the spirit of apologizing."
But Chinese consumers, however awkwardly, seem to be warming to the concept. 
Tianjin and the central city of Xian now boast new, successful apology companies. 
And apology call-in shows on state radio have also started to appear. 
"Apologies help adjust relationships between people and so can reduce stress and solve problems," Mr. Liu said.
It is understandable that Chinese might need a little extra help in that department, of course, since they have few high-profile role models. 
Americans have President Clinton, who has apologized, live on television, to get himself out of personal and political trouble, Professor Zhou pointed out.
In contrast, Chinese officials have never openly apologized to the tens of millions of Chinese who were imprisoned, beaten or even killed during the Cultural Revolution from 1966 to 1976, even though the Communist Party has acknowledged that "errors were made" and that the period was "a disaster."
Inspired by Mao, millions of students denounced teachers and other intellectuals as bourgeois rightists, harassing and humiliating them, ransacking their homes and subjecting them to beatings.
"At one school I visited recently, the party secretary was beaten to death and the principal left handicapped," Professor Zhou said. 
"Today the students who attacked them are all grown up, many of them teachers and parents themselves. 
But up to now there is not a single person who has gone back and apologized for what they did. 
It is a problem with the whole society."
He added that many Asian cultures are apologetically challenged.
"Germany has been good at making apologies for what it did during World War II," he said. 
"But the Japanese are not good at this, nor are the Chinese. 
They are always looking for excuses and forgetting misdeeds."
Some Chinese scholars suggest that the Western penchant for apologies grows out of the Judeo-Christian tradition, in which a simple confession brings prompt absolution. 
In contrast, an apology in China involves a much more formal and traumatic event.
Indeed, in 1999 most Chinese were outraged at President Clinton's first apology after the NATO bombing of the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade because it was too casual -- delivered while Mr. Clinton was outdoors and wearing a polo shirt. 
Initially, the Chinese media did not even broadcast the tape, with editors huffing that "it was not really an apology at all."
Against that backdrop, Mr. Liu, a former lawyer with a long interest in psychology, decided that the people of Tianjin needed some help apologizing, "as a way of relieving pressure, reducing barriers and the many negative feelings between people today."
In fact, the apology company is an arm of a psychological stress reduction center that he also runs in some low concrete buildings that belong to the Hongqiao district government, his partner in what he hopes will be a profitable venture.
"Our society is changing very fast and competition is very harsh, so everyone now feels pressure in his heart," Mr. Liu said, sitting under a trellis bearing plastic fruit that covers the ceiling of the center's group counseling room.
The company offers more conventional psychological services like evaluations of stress levels and support groups for teenagers ($2.50 to $3.75 a session), as well as its less conventional offerings, like apologies ($2.50 per apology) or the opportunity to release tension by whacking a large blonde female mannequin with a stick ($1.25 for five minutes).
The apology company is not just a "say it with flowers" operation, and Mr. Liu, a scholarly man with a V-neck sweater and thick glasses, is passionate about his work.
The company's 20 employees, who deliver the apologies, are all middle-aged men and women with college degrees who dress in somber suits. 
They are lawyers, social workers and teachers with "excellent verbal ability" and significant life experience, who are given additional training in counseling.
"I think this work is very meaningful," said Zhang Xiuqing, 47, a soft-spoken former teacher in minimal makeup, a white blouse and conservative navy blue suit. 
"We all have our disputes, and we need a place to go to think them through and help to resolve them."
The center has had almost 100 clients since it opened in August, mostly estranged lovers and people mired in family or business disputes. 
On behalf of clients, the apologizers write letters, deliver gifts and make explanations.
The service worked for Mr. Song, the businessman, who was happily reunited with his father after five difficult visits by the apology company's representatives. 
But others remain a bit suspicious of the idea.
"I'm not sure how long it will last," said Professor Zhou. 
"In our increasingly commercialized society, people have the idea that you can pay money to others to do your work for you, and that includes apologizing.
"But if you are sincere, you should go and apologize by yourself."
