
The idea was born of curiosity, but also a bit of conceit.
Sure, an Olympic cyclist can finish a 152-mile road race in less than seven hours, but what would happen if you took away his finely tuned, aerodynamic, carbon-fiber racing bicycle and asked him to do battle on the streets of Beijing?
Would it be like hiring Big Brown to be a carriage horse in Central Park?
I was still finding my balance on my clunky, one-speed bicycle when Jason McCartney answered the question and exposed it for all its armchair arrogance.
McCartney, who two days earlier had raced for the American cycling team, threaded his rented bike through a crowd of rush-hour pedestrians, dodged a cluster of bicyclists commuting home and slipped into the flow of traffic on Jinyu Hutong, a busy street in central Beijing.
Then he turned left -- across two lanes of cars, trucks and buses.
I searched in the distance for McCartney's red USA T-shirt and remembered something else about my afternoon riding companion: He once worked as a bike messenger in New York City.
Bicycles are no longer the primary means of transportation in Beijing, where rising incomes have meant that many commuters can afford to upgrade to cars. 
Some estimate that as many as 1,000 new cars join the streets every day. 
That said, bicycles can still be found on every street, and they come in an array of shapes, sizes and uses. 
There are bikes with cargo beds that carry everything from bags of trash to new sofa sets. 
There are electric bikes and miniature scooters. 
Children bounce on the luggage rack behind their parents, and older women teeter on even older bikes. 
No one wears a helmet.
We were told that the Forbidden City was just a few blocks away, and we headed in that direction once I caught up with McCartney and our other riding companion, the Canadian cyclist Michael Barry. 
Barry, who writes occasionally for The New York Times, finished ninth in the road race; McCartney, whose job was to assist other American cyclists, did not finish.
In a car on the way to rent the bikes, McCartney, who is 34 and from Coralville, Iowa, had begun to sour on the idea of cycling around town with a reporter. 
A wrong turn had taken us 30 minutes out of our way, and thunderclouds darkened the sky. 
There were also concerns about upsetting his sponsor, Cervelo, if we rented the wrong brand of bike. 
''This is going to seem a little posed, don't you think?'' he asked.
But as we coasted along streets that were as flat as a moo shu pancake, McCartney was almost giddy. 
''Isn't this the best way to see a city?'' he shouted.
And it was. 
Heavy rains a day earlier had cleared Beijing of the humid air we all had been living with for the past week. 
The weather had been so oppressive that McCartney was one of more than 50 riders who did not finish the road race.
We breezed through Beijing in fast forward, pedaling past storefronts decorated with Chinese flags, a mother washing her toddler's face, a pair of soldiers standing at attention. 
A block or two later, the traffic cleared and the stone walls of the Forbidden City appeared. 
Through an archway, we saw a cobbled courtyard, stately trees and hordes of Chinese tourists.
''You want to go in?''
McCartney asked. 
Although he had arrived in Beijing a week before, this was the first sightseeing he had managed to do, given his demanding training schedule. 
While the road race had taken McCartney past many of the city's main attractions, they appeared as a blur. 
And because he is planning to compete in the Tour of Spain beginning Aug. 
30, McCartney was leaving Beijing the next day.
We rested our bikes on their kickstands and had a look around. 
Within minutes, we had become our own attraction. 
First there was the man who wanted to sell McCartney a Mao watch. 
The leader's hand bobbed up and down, ticking off the seconds. 
The man wanted 150 yuan, or about $22. 
McCartney smiled. 
''Twenty,'' he said, offering less than $3.
Then there was a teenage boy, who could sense that these two tanned, fit men clearly had something to do with the Olympics. 
''Did they win a medal?'' the boy asked. 
When he heard the answer was no, he walked away.
We hopped back on our bikes. 
Outside the walls of the Forbidden City, a canal ran parallel to the road. 
Tree branches dipped into the water and couples paddled boats that could be rented at a nearby dock.
McCartney and Barry had slowed to an easy pace, and I sensed my opportunity. 
Bending over the handlebars, I pedaled furiously, ringing my bell as I passed. 
After all, it's not every day you can say you cycled faster than a pair of Olympians. 
McCartney laughed as if he were indulging his 2-year-old daughter, Ginger.
During our break in the Forbidden City, McCartney had said something about learning to enter the ''flow'' of traffic, of anticipating where a car is headed and trying not to be there when it arrives. 
Back on the street, I tried to follow his advice.
Even with half the cars missing from the streets as part of the city's effort to cut down on pollution, merging into traffic was a balancing act. 
It required looking over one's shoulder, moving into an open space in traffic, and trying to avoid pedestrians -- all at once. 
I tried to reassure myself that in this authoritarian state, the Chinese drivers were likely doing all they could to avoid flattening an Olympic visitor.
I can't say I ever learned the flow concept, but things got easier when we cruised past Tiananmen Square. 
One-third of the wide boulevard is dedicated to bicycles, and the whistle-wielding traffic police kept everyone in line. 
McCartney snapped a picture of a giant portrait of Mao as we cycled past, one hand on the handlebars and one on the camera.
After a few more left turns and a near miss with a city bus, we returned to the sidewalk rental stand where we had begun. 
McCartney wheeled our bikes into the slots, crossing paths with Chinese workers who had paid a few yuan to park their bikes there for the day.
He still had a giant smile on his face. 
''Now, wasn't that a relaxing way to see the city?''
