
THE actress and businesswoman Liu Xiaoqing may have crossed the line when she proclaimed herself, apparently optimistically, as China's first female billionaire.
Yang Rong, the chief executive of one's of China's largest automakers, may have gone too far when he threatened to move operations somewhere where officials would treat him better.
And Yang Bin's attention-grabbing bid to transform himself from a troubled orchid tycoon into North Korea's capitalist ambassador was, in retrospect, a bit too brash.
Ms. Liu and Yang Bin are now under arrest. 
Yang Rong fled to Los Angeles last month, contending that he faced persecution in China. 
The three tested the limit of China's tolerance for flamboyant entrepreneurs -- and found it.
China's nouveaux riches are not going to jail for arrogance, exactly. 
But as top officials prepare to formally welcome some private entrepreneurs to join the Communist Party next month, they are also insisting that at least some rich people start playing by the rules.
Authorities have begun selectively enforcing tax, securities and zoning laws on a handful of businessmen and celebrities known for flaunting their wealth and proclaiming their independence. 
The message is clear: as capitalism becomes more legitimate in China, capitalists should act less like rogues.
"A few people in China have gotten rich beyond imagination, and the government needs to show that it controls rich people, too," said Liu Huan, a finance expert at the Central University of Finance and Economics in Beijing. 
"Private entrepreneurs have higher status now than before, but they also have more demands on them."
The crackdown on industry titans shows how China's economy -- however robust and Westernized it appears on the surface -- still answers to an ossified political system. 
The country has a growing number of multimillionaires and even a few billionaires, but their fortunes depend on the whims of a handful of Communist Party officials.
China recognizes that private enterprise, long the most dynamic part of the economy, has become its mainstay. 
As state-run companies continue to shrink and lay off workers, the private sector has surged ahead, increasing efficiency and production as well as the personal wealth of an entrepreneurial elite. 
Privately run businesses now account for just over half of the gross domestic product and employ 130 million people -- the lion's share of industrial workers, but only about one-fifth the total work force.
At least on paper, China has built the legal infrastructure to enforce commercial laws much as the United States does. 
The difference is that real enforcement occurs only when party bosses in Beijing decide that the time has come, and when they identify capitalists who have fallen from favor.
Wu Guoguang, an expert on Chinese politics at the Chinese University of Hong Kong, dismissed the idea that Chinese authorities had begun to insist on broad compliance with laws on the books. 
"If you started enforcing all the laws you'd have to throw every businessman in jail," Mr. Wu said. 
"Crackdowns like this happen for political reasons, and they target people selectively."
The cases of the two Mr. Yangs, who are not related, and Ms. Liu have different backgrounds, and they appear to have been under investigation for varying amounts of time -- in Ms. Liu's case, as long as five years. 
Still, they have a few things in common. 
All three names appeared last year on Forbes magazine's list of China's wealthiest people -- Yang Bin placed second, with an estimated $900 million in assets; Yang Rong came in third, with $840 million; and Ms. Liu was 45th, with $70 million.
They are among the most widely known businesspeople in China. 
Ms. Liu, a film star, became a commercial as well as a cultural icon in the 1980's by mixing business and entertainment like no one in China before her. 
Yang Bin almost single-handedly developed a market for tulips and orchids. 
Yang Rong navigated the bureaucratic auto industry to create the largest producer of minibuses.
THE three shared another trait that may have contributed to their undoing: They were not shy about advertising their wealth, power and independence.
Ms. Liu built on her celebrity years ago by publishing a memoir in which she espoused an Ayn Rand-style philosophy of putting herself first, a shocking idea when China was still recovering from the radical collectivism of the Cultural Revolution. 
More recently, Yang Rong boasted that China's government "never gave me a cent" and that he owed nothing in return. 
Yang Bin asserted that his appointment as the governor of a new capitalist development zone in neighboring North Korea put him above China's petty politics.
"My role now is more than that of a businessmen," he said in a interview late last week. 
"I am also an international diplomat and political leader."
A few hours after he gave that interview, Chinese police took him into custody.
Such flamboyance is not welcomed by political leaders. 
The Beijing leadership is already risking the outrage of old-line party members by standing Communist orthodoxy on its head and admitting businessmen as full members of the Communist Party -- perhaps even inviting some to join the powerful Central Committee. 
The proposal by President Jiang Zemin is scheduled to be adopted at the 16th Party Congress on Nov. 
8.
To make the change more palatable to hard-liners, the authorities pressed over the summer for rich people to start paying personal income tax. 
The tax has been on the books -- and roundly ignored -- for years. 
Hu Angang, a researcher at Qinghua University in Beijing, estimates that while the nominal tax rate is 45 percent, the government actually collects only about 0.6 percent of aggregate personal income.
Figures like that enraged Zhu Rongji, the plain-spoken prime minister, who is struggling to close a gaping budget deficit. 
"Why is it that the richer people are, the less tax they pay?" he said this summer.
Ms. Liu, 50, became the nation's most prominent target. 
She is in jail awaiting indictment on charges that she owes at least $1 million in taxes. 
Through her lawyer, she has denied the allegations of tax evasion.
While it is not clear why authorities made her the marquee name in their tax campaign, Ms. Liu has long ruffled feathers in China's conservative bureaucracy by calling much attention to her wealth and success.
She became a household name in China in 1979 when she starred with Joan Chen, who later went to Hollywood, in a revolutionary war epic called "Xiaohua" -- "Little Flower."
As her film career wound down in the 1980's, Ms. Liu turned herself into a brand, founding real estate, cosmetics, food, advertising and production companies. 
Her production company made several television series.
Ms. Liu boasted about her earning power as if it were a measure of stardom, asserting that she had become China's first female billionaire, measured in yuan, meaning that she was worth at least $120 million.
Whether that wealth belonged to her companies or herself, the government eventually decided that it was not getting its share. 
Ms. Liu's companies paid taxes on a relatively modest scale, and she herself paid no income tax, according to state media. 
If convicted of tax dodging, she could face seven years in prison.
Hubris also caught up with Yang Rong, a former Chinese central banker who left government service to start Brilliance China Automotive, which became the leading producer of minibuses that are a staple means of transportation around China. 
In 1992, using his connections at the highest levels of financial policy making, he arranged for Brilliance, based in Shenyang in northeastern China, to become the first Chinese company of any kind to list its shares on the New York Stock Exchange.
Brilliance said it made more than 63,000 minibuses last year and more than 29,000 in the first half of 2002. 
It reported a profit of 900 million yuan, or $108 million, on sales of 6.2 billion yuan in 2001. 
While 2001 profits were down 6 percent from 2000, they were still almost triple those in 1998. 
The company also received government permission earlier this year to let a subsidiary make sporty sedans in partnership with BMW of Germany.
But Mr. Yang, 46, began to overreach. 
In 1999, the finance ministry ordered him to unravel a shareholding structure that let him classify Brilliance as a state-owned business even as he controlled the company himself. 
Without state ownership, Brilliance would never have been allowed to list abroad or borrow from banks. 
The official media said he did not fully comply with the order, and prosecutors now allege that he used government property for his personal benefit.
Mr. Yang also alienated local authorities by threatening to relocate out of Shenyang. 
Provincial officials promptly demanded that the state assert more control over the company, which it nominally owned.
Rumors of troubles at the company hurt Brilliance shares. 
They have fallen more than 70 percent from their record high of $37.75 two years ago. 
They closed on Friday at $11 in New York, well below the $16 at which they were initially sold to the public a decade ago.
Perhaps the most striking reversal of fortune was that of Yang Bin, 39. 
An orphan who enlisted in the Chinese navy, Mr. Yang roamed Europe in the 1980's, became a Dutch citizen and traded textiles to Poland. 
Later, he began growing tulips and orchids in greenhouses around China, then created and quickly dominated the market for those flowers.
An affable man, he bonded with powerful people, including Li Lanqing, a vice premier and a member of the Chinese Politburo, and George Soros, the financier. 
Mr. Yang's company, Euro-Asia Agricultural Holdings, listed its stock on the exchange in Hong Kong in 2001 and instantly became a hit among foreign investors looking for a way to tap into China's private economy.
Last year, Euro-Asia reported a profit of 521 million yuan, or $63 million, on sales of 1.1 billion yuan.
But he, too, appeared to push authorities and investors too far. 
He bought a large chunk of agricultural land on the outskirts of his base in Shenyang, promising to make it the "breadbasket of northeast Asia."
Instead, he used hundreds of acres to create Holland Village, a kind of Dutch Disneyland, with life-size replicas of the Amsterdam train station, the royal palace and castles, windmills, moats and drawbridges.
The project's scale, including thousands of apartments, raised concerns that he was diverting funds from Euro-Asia to support a quirky folly estimated to have cost as much as $300 million. 
Official media also began questioning his use of the land, which is zoned for agriculture and is assessed at a lower tax rate than commercial property.
When the extent of the investment became widely known earlier this year, Euro-Asia shares plunged They also suffered because of the company's repeated clashes with Hong Kong securities regulators. 
Mr. Yang, for example, did not fully inform the public that he was selling large chunks of his own stake in the company. 
Over the last three months, its share price has plunged nearly 85 percent, to 38 Hong Kong cents, about 5 United States cents.
AS the pressure on him increased, Mr. Yang formed a friendship with Kim Jong Il, the leader of North Korea. 
Mr. Yang built greenhouses in the capital, Pyongyang, to ease the country's food shortage and donated more than 100 million yuan, or $12 million, to help North Korea buy rice and other necessities, according to a close associate of Mr. Yang.
Mr. Kim named Mr. Yang the governor of a new development zone on North Korea's border with China, called Sinuiju. 
The announcement, last month, caught authorities in Beijing by surprise; Mr. Yang said that neither he nor the North Koreans had consulted Chinese leaders in advance. 
China, in turn, surprised Mr. Yang. Police arrested him at his home in the theme park at 5 a.m. on the day he intended to drive to North Korea and inspect his new domain.
