
China plans to ease restrictions on overseas investors buying yuan-denominated shares, seeking to attract funds after the Shanghai and Shenzhen stock indexes slumped to a five-year low earlier this month.
The State Administration of Foreign Exchange will make it easier for institutions to transfer money out of and into China and will also increase the number of approved yuan investors, Chen Bingcai, deputy chief of the administration's capital account management department, said in a telephone interview.
Yuan-denominated Class A shares traded on the Shanghai and Shenzhen exchanges are now open to only a handful of approved foreign institutions under a quota system. 
Class B shares trade on both exchanges in foreign currencies, and are open to overseas investors.
ABN Amro Holding and Societe Generale won approval Thursday to invest a combined $125 million in yuan shares, bringing to $2.85 billion the total investment permitted under a market-opening plan. 
Chinese stocks rallied this month on optimism that the government would introduce policies to support prices.
''The government has obviously stepped up approval of foreign investors and investment quotas,'' said Liang Jing, an analyst at the Guotai Junan Securities Company in Shanghai. 
''It shows the government is supporting the stock market.''
The Shanghai composite index rose 3.1 percent and has gained 16.2 percent since Sept. 
13, when Premier Wen Jiabao said that developing the capital markets was a critical government objective. 
The Shenzhen composite index climbed 3 percent, bringing its increase to 18.2 percent in the last 10 days.
The foreign-exchange administration is drafting rules that will allow approved institutions to take money out of the country and then reinvest it in yuan shares without having to reapply for permission, Mr. Chen said.
''The main purpose is to expedite investment by foreign investors,'' said Mr. Chen, who did not give a time frame for the new rules to take effect. 
''It takes some time to discuss and revise the old rules.''
Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley and Deutsche Bank are among 21 investors approved to buy local-currency shares and bonds under a so-called qualified foreign institutional investor program introduced in December 2002. 
So far, 19 institutions have received investment quotas.
China has not set a cap for the investment that it will approve under the program, Mr. Chen said, responding to a report in The China Securities Journal that said the foreign-exchange administration planned to expand the investment quotas to $5 billion.
''More foreign investors are applying and they want to invest more, so China needs to approve more quotas,'' Mr. Chen said. 
''The government has never publicly set a target.''
China is also loosening capital controls as part of preparations to move to a more flexible currency. 
Besides the approved-investor program, the government is considering a ''qualified domestic institutional investor plan'' that would let local investors buy shares overseas.
China bans its citizens from buying stocks abroad to prevent an exodus of the foreign reserves that it uses to maintain the value of the yuan, which has been fixed at 8.277 to the dollar since 1995.
''China is opening the door wider for money to flow in and out of the country,'' said Yuan Rongsheng, a researcher at the Shanghai branch of the People's Bank of China. 
''However, there's a long way to go before making the currency fully convertible.''
The United States, Japan and other countries have urged China to drop the peg, saying it undervalues the currency and gives Chinese exporters an unfair trading advantage. 
China has said it needs to shore up the banking system and develop its foreign-exchange and derivatives markets before floating the yuan.
