
Growing demand from China promises a lucrative future for South Africa's iron ore and manganese companies -- if they can find a way to move the metals more than 500 miles from inland mines on the edge of the Kalahari Desert to costal ports.
The problem is that South Africa's government-run rail company does not have enough capacity and has been slow to do anything to improve the situation. 
Mining companies like Kumba Resources, Africa's largest iron ore producer, are so frustrated that they are even offering to buy their own trains.
''There's a huge business opportunity that we're not able to capitalize on because there are logistical constraints to getting the iron ore and the manganese to the coast,'' said Ebrahim Takolia, a spokesman for African Rainbow Minerals, a black-owned group that mines both metals in the Northern Cape area.
Asian demand for the metals, which are used to make steel and special alloys, has surged in recent years, but South Africa's share of the global trade has fallen.
Last year, China imported 157 million tons of iron ore, and it is expected to import 205 million tons this year. 
South Africa's share of the Chinese market, however, has fallen to 4 percent from about 12 percent 10 years ago, said Kumba's director of investor relations, Trevor Arran. 
The country's mining companies are hoping to take a larger portion of the market from competitors in places like Australia and Brazil.
''Even though our actual tonnage has grown, the market share has fallen because we haven't been able to keep pace with the percentage growth in China,'' Mr. Arran said. 
''That, to some degree, is due to our inability to grow our South African business, which is directly linked to transport constraints.''
Kumba produces about 30 million tons of iron ore a year, two-thirds of which is exported. 
It has a two-phase plan to increase production in the Northern Cape mines by an additional 19 million tons.
But that expansion is dependent on improvements in the government rail lines, which are run by Transnet, a company owned by the South African government that has recently undergone a number of management upheavals. 
In August, the entire board resigned after the company recorded a net loss of 6.3 billion rand ($1.1 billion), primarily from hedging losses at South Africa's national airline.
Kumba says that running an additional three trains -- with an estimated purchase cost of 2.5 billion rand to 3 billion rand -- could raise capacity on the line by 12 million tons and allow it to double its exports to China. 
African Rainbow Minerals, known here as ARM, says it needs two more trains to meet its expansion plans.
Kumba said that company officials had been talking to Transnet for more than two years about problems on the rail line that connects its mines to the sea.
''We cannot push a button on a project if we don't have the available infrastructure to carry it to the port,'' Mr. Arran said. 
''We would need Transnet to make a decision within the first couple of months of next year.''
The South African government has dismissed suggestions that it privatize parts of Transnet, like the rail line dedicated to carrying the iron ore, although in many countries mine companies operate their own rail lines. 
But the country's cabinet recently announced that the government would invest 37 billion rand, about $6.4 billion, over the next five years to upgrade the rail system and ports.
As part of these expansion plans, the South African government is investigating various public-private partnerships that might allow mining companies like Kumba and ARM to buy or secure financing for new trains. 
But so far, no details have been agreed on.
''One of the components of the plan is the establishment of public-private partnerships of various forms,'' said Edwin Ritchken, who is working on the plan at the public enterprises department, which will oversee the new investment. 
''So, what we're going to be looking at is working with the mining companies to find ways of facilitating significant quantities of investment to ensure the investment is adequate to meet their expansion plans.''
Mr. Takolia of African Rainbow Minerals said he expected Chinese demand to continue to grow significantly. 
''Their economy is growing so rapidly that they need resources to fuel some of their growth,'' he said. 
''We've got those resources.''
