
Tung Chee-hwa, Hong Kong's chief executive, is preparing to step down after coming under heavy criticism from Beijing and from local residents, two people familiar with the decision said Tuesday and Wednesday.
Both declined to detail when he might resign. 
But a newspaper in Hong Kong, The Standard, citing unidentified sources in Beijing, reported Wednesday that Mr. Tung had submitted his resignation more than two weeks ago and that it had been accepted at an emergency meeting of the Chinese Communist Party Politburo.
Government spokesmen here labeled reports of Mr. Tung's resignation as speculation and declined to discuss them.
Mr. Tung has struggled from one crisis to the next for the past two years, including a SARS epidemic, an unsuccessful effort to impose stringent internal-security laws, and showdowns with the territory's growing democracy movement.
More recently, he has lost the support of much of the city's influential business community after failing to sell $2.7 billion worth of retail space in public housing projects to investors in December, and then trying to hand over the last undeveloped peninsula in Hong Kong harbor to a single developer for the construction of several huge museums.
His resignation is likely to present Beijing with two political novelties: first, a Chinese territory run by a knighted former British civil servant, and then, a multicandidate election.
Under Hong Kong law, Mr. Tung's immediate successor would be Donald Tsang, who had a distinguished record of service during British rule here, was knighted by Queen Elizabeth II, and is famous here for invariably wearing bow ties.
The territory's Basic Law, a mini-constitution drafted mostly by Chinese officials before Britain handed over the territory in 1997, calls for new elections to be held within six months of the resignation of the chief executive.
Accepting Mr. Tung's resignation and holding elections now may make it easier for Beijing to control the process than if he were pressed to complete his second five-year term, which ends June 30, 2007.
According to the Basic Law, 2007 is when China had allowed for the possibility of open elections for chief executive. 
Before then, the Basic Law calls for an Electoral Committee of 800 prominent people, most of them allies of Beijing, to vote for the next chief executive -- or, as happened last election, to choose one candidate by acclamation.
That gradually legislated move toward democracy has been the source of tension between China and demonstrators in Hong Kong.
The disagreement came to a boil in April 2004, when the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress, the Communist Party-controlled legislature in Beijing, ruled out the possibility of open elections. 
The decision touched off a demonstration by several hundred thousand people on July 1.
The Standing Committee did indicate then that it might be possible to expand the membership of the Electoral Committee somewhat.
But that is a lengthy legislative process for which there may not be enough time before a long-term replacement for Mr. Tung is chosen, especially as pro-democracy lawmakers and activists have been unable to agree here on what changes should be made.
Beijing officials have gone out of their way in recent months to avoid expressing public support for any candidate. 
But there have been hints lately that they may be willing to accept Mr. Tsang. (He no longer calls himself Sir Donald.)
Stanley Ho, a well-connected casino and property tycoon who is the chairman of the Real Estate Developers Association, had been very critical in January of plans championed by Mr. Tsang to develop a museum complex on a vacant peninsula here. 
But Mr. Ho, who has had close ties to Beijing ever since the Korean War, abruptly endorsed Mr. Tsang two weeks ago as his favorite to become the next chief executive.
Speaking a day after the failed privatization effort of retail space in public housing, President Hu Jintao of China publicly chastised Mr. Tung and his top aides for not having paid enough attention to public sentiment in Hong Kong. 
Mr. Tung made several public apologies during his annual policy address on Jan. 
12.
''We have our inadequacies, and we have to summarize our experience and learn our lesson,'' he said, while promising to remain in office.
Emily Lau, a lawmaker and the convener of the Frontier, one of the pro-democracy parties here, said Mr. Tung's resignation would be both good and bad for the territory's democratic development.
Given the many rallies over the last two years at which protesters have called for Mr. Tung to step down, as well as polls showing low support for him, his resignation can be viewed as a sign of responsiveness to public opinion, Ms. Lau said, adding, ''He should have gone long ago.''
But protesters may take to the streets again to object to the likelihood that Mr. Tung's successor will be chosen by the same 800-member committee that twice selected Mr. Tung, she warned.
