
A Beijing court on Friday morning unexpectedly dismissed a state secrets charge against a researcher for The New York Times but sentenced him to three years in prison on a lesser, unrelated charge of fraud.
The verdict against the researcher, Zhao Yan, 44, spared him a prison sentence of 10 years or longer and also served as a blunt rebuke to the investigation by state security agents. 
Agents began detaining Mr. Zhao almost two years ago and accused him of leaking state secrets to The Times. 
He has consistently stated that he is innocent of both charges.
In another closely watched case, a Chinese court in Shandong Province on Thursday convicted an advocate for peasants rights and sentenced him to more than four years in prison. 
The advocate, Chen Guangcheng, is a blind man who tried to file a class-action lawsuit on behalf of women who were subjected to forced abortions. 
His case, like that of Mr. Zhao's, was considered a test of China's legal system, and his defense team described the conviction as a sham.
In Mr. Zhao's case, the Beijing No. 2 Intermediate People's Court rejected the state secrets charge in strong language in a 10-page verdict released Friday morning.
''On the charge against the defendant Zhao Yan that he provided state secrets abroad, the evidence is insufficient,'' the court ruling read. 
''The charge for this crime cannot stand, and this court does not accept it.''
Mr. Zhao's lead defense lawyer, Mo Shaoping, said, ''This is the way they proclaim someone innocent.''
The case has attracted international attention, including lobbying from President Bush. 
The verdict had been postponed, and some legal experts had suggested that the final result would be as much a political decision by high-level government officials as a legal one.
Mr. Mo said Friday that prosecutors had 10 days to decide whether to contest the innocence verdict on the state secrets charge to a higher court. 
He and another defense lawyer, Guan Anping, said they would meet with Mr. Zhao to decide whether to appeal the conviction on the fraud case. 
The lawyers hinted that an appeal was likely.
''I am not satisfied,'' his sister, Zhao Kun, said of the fraud conviction on Friday morning outside the courthouse. 
''The fraud charge also has no basis in fact. 
He should have been found completely innocent. 
According to my own feeling, the first charge also should never have been introduced. 
On this charge, the court respected the law.''
Mr. Zhao, formerly a muckraking journalist for different Chinese publications, has been imprisoned since September 2004. 
Under Chinese law, the time he has already served will count against his prison term. 
Mr. Mo said the court ruling stated that his release was scheduled for Sept. 
15, 2007.
Mr. Zhao joined The Times's Beijing bureau as a researcher in April 2004. 
The Times has consistently denied that he leaked any state secrets to the newspaper. 
''If the verdict is what it appears to be, we consider it a vindication,'' said Bill Keller, executive editor of The Times. 
''We have always said that to the best of our knowledge the only thing that Zhao Yan committed is journalism.''
On Thursday, Mr. Chen, the rights advocate, was convicted of destroying property and organizing a mob to block traffic. 
He earned the enmity of local Communist Party leaders in Shandong Province, in eastern China, when he sought to organize a class-action lawsuit against forced abortions and sterilizations there.
The New China News Agency announced the sentence, four years and three months, in a terse dispatch on its English-language news wire. 
The information did not appear in Chinese, and other state-run media have been banned from reporting on the matter.
Mr. Chen's two-hour trial last week and the long sentence appear to reflect a concerted effort by Chinese authorities to punish lawyers and rights advocates, who increasingly in recent years have helped defend people aggrieved about land seizures, environmental abuses, religious persecution and population controls.
Chinese lawyers and human rights advocates say they believe that President Hu Jintao has ordered a broad crackdown on people who call themselves ''rights defenders'' because he worries that they have tried to use legal pressure to undermine the Communist Party.
The case of Mr. Chen, a 34-year-old peasant, came as a particular shock to the legal and human rights community. 
Mr. Chen, blind as a result of a childhood illness, taught himself the law. 
He became a minor celebrity in China after he helped disabled people win cases against government agencies that did not grant them the full protections and benefits they are entitled to under Chinese law. 
He then took up the cause of women abused under family planning policies.
Central government investigators later found that such abuses had occurred, but local authorities in Shandong Province put Mr. Chen under house arrest for months and then charged him with destroying property and blocking traffic.
A team of the top rights lawyers in the country came to Mr. Chen's aid. 
They argued that the charges against him were fabrications. 
The crimes would have been difficult for Mr. Chen to commit, they said, given that he cannot see and was under constant police guard at the time.
But the Beijing lawyers were harassed, beaten and prevented from gathering evidence to support Mr. Chen in court, numerous people involved in his defense said.
On the eve of Mr. Chen's trial last week, three of his lawyers were accused by local thugs of stealing property. 
The lawyers were then detained by the local police and one of them was held until after Mr. Chen's trial had ended.
The case against Mr. Zhao was also marked by irregular and unexpected legal developments.
Earlier this year, the court withdrew both charges against him, prompting his lawyer to predict that he would soon be released. 
Instead, the court continued to hold Mr. Zhao, and prosecutors later reinstated the same charges. 
Mr. Mo vehemently complained, to no avail, that the tactic was illegal.
Jerome A. Cohen, an expert in Chinese law who has advised The Times on Mr. Zhao's case, characterized the verdict on the state secrets charge as ''an unusual and welcome precedent,'' but added that it was ''marred by conviction on the fraud charge, which was originally introduced as a fig leaf to justify the continuing detention of Zhao.''
He said in an e-mail message that ''conviction on the fraud charge helps to 'save face' for the law enforcement agencies.''
Typically in state secrets cases, he said, a defendant faces a near automatic conviction when investigators have made such a lengthy effort.
Indeed, investigators added the charge several months after Mr. Zhao was arrested on Sept. 
17, 2004, on the state secrets charge. 
It involved an accusation that Mr. Zhao, while working for a Chinese publication in 2001, had promised to write an article and intervene on behalf of a person with legal problems in exchange for a cash payment.
Mr. Zhao strongly denied the claim and a witness came forward on his behalf to dispute the charge.
The more serious state secrets charge was outlined in confidential state security investigation report. 
It accused him of leaking state secrets for a Times article about transition among the country's top leaders. 
The article, published 10 days before Mr. Zhao was detained, revealed that former President Jiang Zemin had unexpectedly offered to resign from his final leadership position, as military chief.
The investigation report did not accuse Mr. Zhao of being one of the anonymous sources cited for Mr. Jiang's resignation offer. 
Instead, security agents accused him of providing information about jockeying between Mr. Jiang and his successor, Hu Jintao, over positions in the military's high command. 
A reference to this jockeying was included as context at the end of the article.
As evidence, the investigation report cited a photocopy of a note in which Mr. Zhao had scribbled down a few sentences of political gossip about the jockeying. 
The note was left in the Times office in Beijing. 
Mr. Zhao's lawyers have maintained that such information should hardly constitute a state secret. 
Even so, questions remain about how security agents obtained a copy of the note. 
One possibility is that agents entered The Times's Beijing bureau without permission.
Mr. Zhao's trial was held in June. 
He was not allowed to call any defense witnesses and his family was forbidden from attending.
(Photo by The New York Times)(pg. 
A3)
