
The Toyota Motor Corporation signed an agreement here today with China's largest automaker to begin large-scale production of a wide range of models, becoming the latest multinational to place a big bet on China's fast-growing car market.
Toyota officials said that beginning next summer, the venture would produce about 100,000 minicars a year and 10,000 to 20,000 luxury sport utility vehicles. 
Toyota and its partner, First Automotive Works, will also build an assembly plant to begin turning out at least 50,000 midsize sedans a year in 2005.
Those plans are in addition to another joint venture that Toyota has already set up and that will begin manufacturing 30,000 compact cars a year, starting in October. 
First Automotive, known as F.A.W., also has an existing partnership, a venture with Volkswagen to build compact cars.
Fujio Cho, Toyota's president, said at today's signing ceremony in the Great Hall of the People in Beijing that his company planned to build 300,000 to 400,000 vehicles a year in China by 2010, a volume equal to nearly half its current output in North America.
"As China joins the World Trade Organization and gets the Olympics, the economy of China will develop quickly and it will become one of the most important markets for Toyota," he said.
Automakers sold nearly 750,000 cars and 750,000 trucks last year in China, making each market almost a 10th the size of the American car and truck markets. 
But sales have been rising swiftly, especially lately, with car sales up 40 percent so far this year as China's entry into the trade group forced it to lower import tariffs on cars, bringing prices down sharply.
Auto industry experts said that Toyota's deal underlined the large scale of foreign automakers' investments in China, and they warned that the situation could result in the same overcapacity and disappearing profit margins that have afflicted the auto industry in many industrialized countries.
"I knew they had ambitious plans, but that's a huge plan" that Toyota unveiled, said Graeme P. Maxton, the managing director of Autopolis Asia, a consulting firm in Singapore. 
"This is yet another company with huge ambitions for China, which means there is half a dozen of them all saying the same thing, and they can't all do it.'
Volkswagen, Honda and General Motors have all announced production plans in China similar or close to those of Toyota, while Ford, DaimlerChrysler and BMW are pursuing somewhat smaller ventures.
Japanese automakers face an extra obstacle here: lingering resentment about Japanese atrocities during World War II, when the Japanese army occupied large areas of China. 
A Japanese court ruled on Tuesday that the army had conducted deadly biological experiments on Chinese civilians, involving the release of bubonic plague and other diseases. 
But the court decided that surviving victims and relatives of the deceased were not eligible for compensation because of peace treaties concluded at the end of the war, a decision that provoked indignation here.
If the Chinese market does not grow fast enough to absorb all the cars envisioned, some of them could be exported. 
Honda has said that it would like to export cars from a new factory it will build in Guangdong Province in southern China.
But auto manufacturing is a capital-intensive business in which low-income countries like China have seldom had much success. 
Assembly plants here still tend to be either fairly high-cost operations that rely heavily on imported parts for lack of domestic suppliers, or else low-cost, low-quality operations selling modest numbers of cars that do not meet international standards for reliability and defect-free appearance. 
Big American, European and Japanese auto parts companies are setting up operations here as well, however, which could make factories here more competitive by the end of the decade.
Under the agreement, Toyota will provide management expertise, technology, marketing assistance and cash while F.A.W. will provide workers and much of the factories and equipment. 
Toyota will not take an equity stake in F.A.W.
"The auto industry in China is not fully developed now, but the market is booming, so F.A.W. and Toyota need each other," said Zhu Yanfeng, F.A.W.'s president.
Mr. Cho of Toyota estimated that building or expanding factories to produce 400,000 cars a year would require an investment of 300 billion yen ($2.5 billion) in other countries, but he said the cost in China had not been calculated.
The compact cars, midsize cars and what Toyota officials described as minivehicles are all to be produced in Tianjin, where F.A.W. is in the process of acquiring a controlling stake in a local car maker. 
The officials refused to say whether the minivehicles would be cars or some other kind of automobile.
The luxury sport utility vehicles, both large and midsize, are to be made in F.A.W.'s home city of Changchun, where F.A.W. operates an extremely large truck factory.
F.A.W.'s main expertise lies in trucks, for which it is China's dominant producer and one of the world's largest manufacturers. 
But it has long sold cars as well and has close ties to China's leadership.
Mao Zedong signed one of the first F.A.W. cars while China's prime minister in the early 1970's, Zhou Enlai, sent company managers to Toyota on one of the first overseas trips by Chinese auto managers to learn how cars are built in a capitalist country. 
Deng Xiaoping used to tour troops on military parades in Tiananmen Square while standing in an open-roofed Red Banner limousine made by F.A.W. 
China's current president, Jiang Zemin, has visited the company's operations on at least three occasions.
