
The developer of the first skyscraper downtown since the Sept. 
11 attack and the Chinese company that signed a lease to move into the top of the 52-story building disagree on whether the deal has fallen apart.
Larry A. Silverstein, the developer of the building, 7 World Trade Center, said yesterday that the deal, which was trumpeted by state and city officials, had collapsed.
But the company and their supporters at the Partnership for New York City say the deal for the ''China Center'' is still on -- and that they hope to deliver a $45 million letter of credit to Mr. Silverstein as early as today.
Real estate executives and people involved in the deal say that the dispute may have as much to do with the possibility of getting a higher rent from another tenant in a suddenly resurgent downtown market, as it does with the difficulties of negotiating with foreign company that must obtain approvals from 106 separate people in far-off China.
When the deal was announced in January, Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg and Gov. George E. Pataki described it as the first step in establishing the rebuilt World Trade Center as the preferred location ''for hundreds of international companies that are emerging from Asia and elsewhere.''
Deputy Mayor Daniel L. Doctoroff said yesterday that it would be ''a real tragedy for Lower Manhattan'' if the deal were scuttled.
But Mr. Silverstein said yesterday that the company, Beijing Vantone Real Estate Company, failed to meet a deadline Monday for posting a security deposit on a 15-year lease for the top five floors at 7 World Trade Center, at Greenwich and Vesey Streets. 
In a letter to Vantone, Mr. Silverstein said, ''We no longer have confidence in your ability to fulfill the terms of the proposed lease transaction.''
He said it was the fourth time that Vantone had missed a deadline.
''While it is unfortunate that an agreement could not be finalized,'' Mr. Silverstein said in a statement issued yesterday, ''this is a minor and temporary setback.''
But Xue Ya, director of the China Center for Vantone, said yesterday that Mr. Silverstein had imposed the Monday deadline unilaterally, 10 days after the two sides signed a lease. 
He said Vantone still wanted to put the China Center, a business and cultural complex, in the heart of Lower Manhattan.
''They plan on delivering the letter of credit and going forward with the deal,'' said Kathryn Wylde, president of the Partnership, an alliance of business executives that has played a pivotal role in the deal.
Lynn Krogh, a spokeswoman for the governor, said that Mr. Pataki remained ''hopeful that the China Center will make its home on the World Trade Center site or elsewhere in Lower Manhattan.''
At the urging of government officials, the Partnership and downtown business executives, Mr. Silverstein reluctantly signed a preliminary agreement in January with Vantone to lease 200,000 square feet in his nearly vacant tower for an annual rent of roughly $50 a square foot. 
The state and the city have provided relatively large tax breaks and cash incentives to lure tenants.
But the downtown market has improved dramatically since then. 
Mr. Silverstein, who recently raised the asking rents in his tower by about 10 percent, is also close to striking major deals with Moody's Investors Service and the Darby & Darby law firm. 
Real estate executives are convinced that Mr. Silverstein could now lease the top of the tower for a higher rent than Vantone has agreed to pay.
In a financial milestone for the trade center redevelopment, the city's Industrial Development Agency gave its preliminary approval yesterday for $1.62 billion in tax-exempt Liberty Bond financing for various projects at the site.
Silverstein Properties is to receive $921 million in financing for the construction of three towers on the trade center site, along Greenwich Street between Vesey and Liberty Streets. 
The Port Authority of New York and Jersey is to receive $702 million in financing to build the Freedom Tower and the retail space in the three towers on Greenwich Street.
City and state officials divide control over issuing Liberty Bonds. 
Last month, the state gave preliminary approval for $1.67 billion in financing for Mr. Silverstein's three towers, bringing the total Liberty Bond commitment to $2.59 billion, roughly 60 percent of the project cost. 
The balance is to come from insurance proceeds and conventional financing.
The remainder of the city-controlled bond financing, $50 million, was given yesterday to a hotel that is being developed by the Moinian Group as part of a mixed-use tower at 123 Washington Street.
