
Chen Ming-hwa, a 22-year-old college student, watched intently as a repairman here modified the engine on his gray 125-cc Kymco motorcycle to increase its power to the equivalent of a 180-cc bike.
But for Mr. Chen, the modification is not enough. 
By the end of the year, he hopes to buy an imported Kawasaki motorcycle with a much bigger engine that displaces at least 500 cubic centimeters. 
"I'm getting a little bit tired of a small bike," he said. 
"I want the feeling of a bigger bike."
Mr. Chen and many other motorcyclists in Taiwan will get their first chance on Monday. 
Under the terms of its accession to the World Trade Organization last December, Taiwan, one of the world's largest motorcycle markets, is dropping a ban on private registrations of bikes with engines bigger than 150 cc.
More powerful motorcycles have been reserved for the police and the military here since before Mr. Chen was born, and they have acquired a special mystique here as a result.
The ban was imposed in 1979 to conserve energy, but it has served as a trade barrier as well. 
Taiwan's three motorbike manufacturers -- Kymco; San Yang Industry; and Yamaha, a joint venture between a Taiwanese company and Yamaha of Japan -- are extremely strong competitors in the market for small motorcycles, supplying the entire domestic market and exporting another one-third of their production as well. 
But the Taiwanese manufacturers have little expertise in building large motorcycles.
Practically every major motorcycle manufacturer in the world is now preparing to re-enter the Taiwan market with bigger bikes, from full-line Japanese makers like Honda and Kawasaki to luxury and specialty brands like BMW of Germany and Harley-Davidson of the United States. 
They are drawn to an unusual market where motorcycles outsell cars by two to one -- the result of $2.20-a-gallon gasoline prices, chronic traffic jams and incomes still below Western standards.
"Not importing for more than 20 years -- definitely, a lot of buying power accumulates," said Roland Lu, the special sales manager for motorcycles here for Bayerische Motoren Werke. 
BMW is planning to sell motorcycles with engines up to 1,200 cc in Taiwan later this year, for prices reaching $30,000.
Yeh Feng-ming, a spokesman for San Yang, said that his company and its domestic competitors were confident that most Taiwan buyers would continue to want small domestic motorcycles, because they are very cheap by world standards and can be serviced practically everywhere. 
Motor scooters with 50-cc engines retail for around $1,000 here; 150-cc motorbikes, about twice that. 
The domestic manufacturers are also trying to develop motorcycles with engines of up to 250 cc.
Still, government officials are watching carefully. 
"Taiwan is pretty advanced in the small scooters," said Yeh Wei-yu, the senior engineer for motorcycles at the Industrial Development Bureau. 
"The local industry is way behind on the larger bikes."
Many industries in Taiwan, including high-technology businesses like semiconductor and computer manufacturers, are moving operations to mainland China. 
But the motorcycle industry has stayed here, employing 10,000 people in this nation of 20 million, and that gives it extra influence with government officials who worry about the loss of manufacturing jobs.
China is trying to jump directly from bicycles to cars, skipping over motorcycles, which produce nearly as much air pollution as cars. 
The Chinese government has discouraged the establishment of a large domestic motorcycle industry.
While dropping the ban on private registrations of large motorcycles, Taiwanese regulators are taking several steps that will tend to slow any shift toward big imported bikes. 
For starters, they are imposing strict tailpipe emissions rules on motorcycles over 250 cc.
Regulators are also drafting the world's most stringent standards for how hot the exteriors of motorcycle exhaust systems can become. 
With 10 million motorcycles in use here, nearly one for each adult, many commuters in shorts suffer burns on their legs from grazing other motorcyclists' tailpipes and mufflers in dense traffic.
The government will also require special drivers' licenses to operate bikes with engines over 250 cc. 
Motorists must take 32 hours of instruction to earn the special licenses, and the government has so far offered only a single small class, using government-owned bikes. 
Private driving schools are lining up to offer the course once they, too, can legally register big motorcycles.
Mr. Yeh said that all these policies were meant to protect the public interest, not to erect new, less obvious trade barriers. 
"Taiwan cannot afford to do anything to hinder the market," he said, because of a national commitment to abide by free-trade rules.
Some motorcycle shop owners are skeptical that there will be many buyers for big motorcycles, especially at first. 
They warn that the market even for small motorcycles has been weak because of a long recession that is only now starting to show signs of ending, and because of Taipei's new subway system, opened in stages over the last four years.
Lee Huang-fu, the manager of a motorcycle store across the street from where Mr. Chen was having his bike engine upgraded, sat next to a battered desk and looked sadly at his selling floor, where a few salesmen loitered with little to do. 
"The economy is bad," he said. 
"People cannot afford even the small bikes nowadays."
