
The chiefs of the merged New York Stock Exchange and Euronext said Tuesday, on the eve of the opening day of trading of its shares, that they were determined to create a truly global market that would include operations in China.
''NYSE Euronext is an adventure that is still only at its beginnings,'' said Jean-Francois Theodore, the deputy chief executive of NYSE Euronext, the first trans-Atlantic exchange. 
The combined markets have the ''capacity to influence and attract others,'' Mr. Theodore added, and would ''favor further stock market consolidation, particularly in Europe.''
John A. Thain, the chief executive of NYSE Euronext, said the company planned to expand its operations in Asia.
Euronext agreed to merge with the NYSE last June and shareholders approved the deal in December. 
As of Friday, holders of 91.42 percent of Euronext had tendered their shares to NYSE Euronext and the offer has been extended. 
On Wednesday the new stock begins trading in Paris and New York.
NYSE Euronext executives say the total capitalization of companies listed on the exchange is about $28.5 trillion, greater than the combined total for the world's next four-largest exchanges -- the London Stock Exchange, the Tokyo Stock Exchange, Nasdaq and Deutsche Borse, which runs the Frankfurt stock exchange.
Still, NYSE Euronext is expected to face stiff competition from smaller and more nimble newcomers as well as from established rivals as they consolidate and as Europe introduces regulations allowing new rivals.
Competition could also come from a group of banks that have pledged to set up a share-trading system known as Turquoise, adding to pressure on established exchanges to lower prices and capture new business.
Mr. Thain emphasized that one motivation in forming NYSE Euronext was to win business from companies shying away from the United States, where strict regulations were introduced after a wave of accounting scandals. 
''If a company isn't going to list in the U.S.,'' he said, ''we want them to list on Euronext.''
But he also made the point that some Russian companies might not be welcomed. 
''We are very concerned about the quality of corporate governance'' in Russia, Mr. Thain said. 
''I think with a number of Russian companies these things are called into question.''
Mr. Thain and Mr. Theodore said they would welcome more European exchanges like Borsa Italiana in Milan as part of the so-called Euronext model, which has allowed cities like Brussels and Lisbon to retain their bourses while joining a Europe-wide system.
But Mr. Thain said he saw the greatest opportunities for NYSE Euronext in China, where he expected the authorities to make it possible for foreign companies to own minority stakes in stock exchanges, perhaps within the next two years.
''At the moment the Chinese government would not allow us to own a piece of, say, the Shanghai stock exchange,'' he said. 
''That is what I hope will change over time.''
NYSE Euronext already has a strategic alliance in Japan with the Tokyo Stock Exchange, and it owns a 5 percent stake in the National Stock Exchange of India.
To overcome skepticism in Europe about domination of Euronext by the NYSE, the structure of the new company was finely balanced during negotiations last year. 
The American headquarters are in New York with the international headquarters in Paris and a center for derivatives operations in London, with other offices in Amsterdam, Brussels and Lisbon.
The company has equal representation of Europeans and Americans on the board and management positions. 
When the chairman is European, the chief executive has to be American, and vice versa.
