
The Treasury Department declined again Wednesday to designate China as a currency manipulator, despite the increasing pressure from Congress.
In its latest semiannual report to Congress on the currency policies of countries around the world, the department reiterated its complaint that the recent appreciation in the Chinese yuan was ''too limited and modest,'' but said that the government's heavy intervention did not meet the legal definition for currency manipulation.
China should ''significantly accelerate'' the appreciation of the yuan's effective exchange rate ''to minimize the risks that are being created for China itself as well as the world economy, of which China is an increasingly critical part,'' the report said.
China abandoned a strict currency peg in July 2005, but it maintains a trading band around an unspecified basket of currencies that includes the dollar and euro.
That band has gradually been widened, and the yuan has appreciated 12.1 percent against the dollar since it was de-pegged. 
It appreciated about 6 percent against the dollar this year. 
It has strengthened only 3.8 percent against China's major trading partners since July 2005, however.
Treasury Secretary Henry M. Paulson Jr. has resisted pressure from members of Congress from both parties to take action against what they claim is a grossly undervalued currency that provides China with an unfair trade advantage.
Mr. Paulson has instead chosen diplomacy, though he came away from last week's ''strategic economic dialogue'' in China with no new concessions on the currency front.
Two bills have passed out of Senate committees that would retaliate against China's currency policy, though neither has been brought up for a full vote.
The Treasury report also said that global economic growth had ''performed exceptionally well'' this year, but that the effect of credit market problems on global capital flows remained difficult to measure.
The report noted ''steady progress'' in reducing global imbalances, including the United States current-account deficit, which fell to 5.1 percent of gross domestic product in the third quarter of this year after peaking at 6.8 percent of G.D.P. at the end of 2005.
