
The Russian government was silent tonight about the White House's apparent decision, over its objections, to quit the 1972 Antiballistic Missile Treaty. 
But in academic and legislative circles outside the Kremlin, experts split over whether the snub was a bump on the road to a true Russian-Western alliance or a more serious roadblock.
The debate had little to do with the merits of the case for or against the treaty, which the Bush administration calls a cold war relic and the Kremlin calls the cornerstone of nuclear arms control. 
It had everything to do with Russian domestic politics.
Many here see Russia's president, Vladimir V. Putin, as perilously far ahead of public opinion in his campaign to bind Russia to the Atlantic alliance of democracies after the terrorist attacks in September. 
One question was whether the White House was undercutting Mr. Putin at a critical juncture in that campaign, handing his opponents fresh evidence of what many Russians see as America's blithe disregard for their interests.
Some expressed incredulity tonight that the White House would part ways with Russia on such a high-profile issue at such a crucial time.
"I can explain it only by two things: either it is absolute deafness or urgent internal demands, a desire to convince the public of the United States that President Bush is faithful to his election promises," Vladimir P. Lukin, the vice speaker of Russia's lower house of Parliament, said in an interview tonight. 
"I don't know why he does it. 
He is popular even without it."
Mr. Lukin, a moderate, Western-oriented politician, said he was especially puzzled by the apparent American intent to withdraw from the treaty just as the country is attempting to hold together a global coalition against terrorism.
Mr. Putin had been courting China and India as strategic allies as recently as this summer, only to shelve those overtures after the Sept. 
11 attacks on the United States in favor of a full-fledged attempt to ally Russia with a Western alliance against terror.
Mr. Putin's move triggered a shift in Western attitudes toward Russia, even to the point where NATO nations have seriously discussed admitting Moscow to at least some alliance forums.
Anatoly I. Utkin, an expert on arms control at the Russian government's United States and Canada Institute, said tonight that many Russians will see the White House's announcement as a rebuff to Moscow's overtures, just as they chafe over the West's refusal to grant Russia relief from Soviet-era debts or to recognize its key role in negotiating an end to the 1999 NATO war on Yugoslavia.
Russian-Western relations may cool as a result, he predicted.
"Mr. Putin came to the conclusion a fortnight after the tragic events of Sept. 
11 that we should be together with the West. 
He appeared on Russian television screens on Sept. 
24 in a moving gesture. 
He was thinking about real change," he said. 
"The question is, are Americans grateful people?
Or why are they so rude?"
Mr. Lukin and others suggested that the impending White House announcement will again push Moscow closer to China. 
Mr. Putin signed a strategic agreement in Beijing last summer that committed Russia and China to near identical security policies on a number of issues, including the American proposal to abandon the antiballistic missile treaty.
Most experts believe that any American renunciation of the ABM treaty will resound far louder in China, which has deployed only a few dozen nuclear-tipped missiles. 
Some say China will respond with a massive buildup of its nuclear force, which could also pose a long-term strategic concern to Russia.
But some leading Russian scholars of East-West relations argued today that the effect of a withdrawal on Mr. Putin was exaggerated. 
In that view, a decision by the United States to leave the missile treaty so that it can build a rudimentary shield against incoming missiles basically does not affect Russia, which has more than enough missiles to overwhelm any American defense.
The scholars say that any argument that Russia and the United States still had reason to attack each other has been effectively demolished by the two nations' alliance against terrorism after the attacks on New York and Washington.
"There's an agreement here to disagree -- and I stress the word agreement," Dmitri Trenin, an expert on Russian foreign relations at the Moscow Center of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, said in a telephone interview today. 
"I think there will be problems. 
But I also think they're manageable."
Average Russians, like average Americans, pay little attention to the details of arms control, he said. 
Meanwhile, the politically minded should be mollified by a pending agreement to slash the American nuclear arsenal to fewer than 2,000 warheads.
Andrei Piontkovsky, who heads Moscow's Center of Strategic Research, said he believed that the treaty withdrawal should not unduly disrupt relations because the two sides disagree more over symbols than substance. 
Leaders in Moscow and Washington agree that neither country poses a threat to the other, he said.
"The problem is the accommodation of the Russian public," he said.
