
As the muezzin calls worshipers to morning prayers in this former capital of the Ottoman Empire, a small army of women in head scarves is sewing the final stitches on Adidas sweat pants and Guess T-shirts at the sprawling Biesseci factory here.
They are the foot soldiers of Turkey's quest to get its textiles onto the runways of Milan, the shelves of London boutiques and the racks of American shopping malls.
But Bursa's aim of becoming a global textile manufacturing center is at risk. 
Once linked with China as part of the Silk Road in the 15th century, this city of nearly two million, across the Marmara Sea from Istanbul, now faces its greatest threat from China's low-cost textile producers and the costs associated with Turkey's drive to join the European Union.
As Europe and Turkey prepare for membership talks, which are scheduled to begin Monday in Luxembourg, a growing number of Turkey's textile producers are asking whether the country should distance itself from a Europe that may be intent on rejecting it.
''We don't need the E.U., and they don't want us anyway,'' said Bekir Celikten, the foreign trade manager at Any Tekstil, a textile firm based in Bursa that exports intricately embroidered curtains to more than 100 countries, including China. 
''If we maintain our superior quality, investment will come here anyway.''
At Biesseci, which spins cotton, dyes yarn and exports apparel to more than 50 countries, including Germany, France, Italy and the United States, Ismail Beceren, the general manager, starkly describes his problem.
''We can't go downmarket, because it's impossible to compete with China on price and the E.U. is bringing us extra costs,'' he said. 
''We either improve quality and productivity and move upmarket, or we die.''
Factories like Biesseci once benefited from free land, offered after Turkey's founder, Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, declared Bursa to be Turkey's textile capital in 1925. 
He implored local residents to ''build as many factories as mosques'' to ensure Turkey's economic prowess.
Today, such subsidies have been phased out because of the European Union's stringent state-aid rules. 
Meanwhile, European plans to lift quotas, by 2008, that limit Chinese textiles imported into the bloc are viewed as a ticking time bomb that threatens the industry's demise.
The country's links with Europe have helped the Turkish economy -- but they have also pushed up wages, lifting the salary for Biesseci assembly-line workers to $675 a month, compared with $38 to $75 a month for a textile worker in China. 
This is reflected in the price of goods. 
While American and European wholesalers pay $60 for a dozen Turkish bras, Mr. Beceren said, a dozen Chinese bras cost just $2.
To survive, dozens of Turkish firms have moved some of their production from Turkey to lower-cost countries like Bulgaria, Uzbekistan and Ukraine, as well as places in Africa. 
Yesim, a clothing maker that produces sweatshirts and T-shirts for companies like Gap, Nike and Zara, outsources the production of basic items to Bulgaria and Moldova. 
''We have to cut costs,'' said Hayriye Torun, Yesim's export manager.
Ms. Torun said Turkey desperately needed more global fashion brands to create buzz. 
She said she was unhappy that there were still no Turkish Armanis, but closer links to Europe might help.
''The problem is that Europeans still think of Turkey as a poor, agricultural country full of women in head scarves,'' she said. 
''The image needs to catch up with the reality.''
