
BUILDING a classical piano duo is hard work. 
It poses problems of synchronization and timing, and is complicated by the purely human side of collaboration. 
Try doing it with your future spouse -- and you thought planning a wedding was exasperating.
But for Per Tengstrand and Shan-shan Sun, two Highland Park pianists who plan to marry in March, forming a creative team was natural. 
''We were a couple,'' Mr. Tengstrand said, ''but were so busy performing on the road that we never saw one another.''
The pianists became the Duo Tengstrand-Sun in January 2002, and in December 2003, they beat nine other teams to take first in the Murray Dranoff International Two Piano Competition in Miami. 
Considered to be the only competition devoted to two-piano and four-hand repertory, it came with a $20,000 stipend and a series of concert dates. 
Oh, and their first CD is due out soon.
Ms. Sun and Mr. Tengstrand met at the Cleveland Institute of Music in 1997. 
Mr. Tengstrand, from Malmo, Sweden, was visiting for the Cleveland International Piano Competition. 
Ms. Sun, from China, was a graduate student at the conservatory. 
They both happened to be practicing in the same corridor, and they started to talk. 
Soon, they struck up a long-distance relationship.
Among professional duo-piano teams, Mr. Tengstrand and Ms. Sun have unusual credentials. 
While there have been well-known couples, the genre is best known for sister acts like Katia and Marielle Labeque of France and the Pekinel twins of Turkey.
''If you think of the Labeque sisters or the Pekinel twins, their style is all about complete uniformity,'' Mr. Tengstrand said. 
''We have a different style. 
We are a man and a woman, Swedish and Chinese, East and West -- two completely different cultures. 
But when you put them together, something is born from the two parts.''
Mr. Tengstrand and Ms. Sun also lead full solo careers. 
Ms. Sun recently performed with the Gothenburg Symphony in Sweden. 
Mr. Tengstrand performs frequently with Neeme Jarvi of the New Jersey Symphony Orchestra. 
From Jan. 
6 to Jan. 
9, Mr. Tengstrand will present the 50-minute Stenhammar Piano Concerto No.1 with the orchestra -- Mr. Jarvi conducting -- as the orchestra presents its Northern Lights festival throughout the state.
In 1997, Mr. Tengstrand agreed to be the subject of a Swedish documentary film called ''The Soloist.''
The film captures Mr. Tengstrand's life both onstage and off for three years, while struggling to balance his relationship with Ms. Sun and give 80 performances a year.
Toward the end of the film, Mr. Tengstrand lands in intensive care for a week after a car wreck in Sweden. 
He recovers and realizes that ''you have to appreciate the closest people around you.''
Ms. Sun and Mr. Tengstrand got engaged soon after, and today say they have found balance. 
''Duo playing is still a new thing to us,'' Ms. Sun said. 
''It's demanding, but I think we'd like to keep at it.''
