
No institutional concern at the United Nations has been studied more with less to show for it than the need to broaden the membership of the 15-nation Security Council to reflect the world of today rather than the one that existed at the Council's inception nearly 60 years ago.
The Security Council is action central at the United Nations, the one body that can pass resolutions binding on all 191 members and cut through the delay and obfuscation that can thwart decision-making elsewhere in the ranks.
Yet its composition is indisputably out of date. 
Its definitive authority -- the right to cast a veto -- is in the hands of the post-World War II powers of the United States, Britain, France and Russia, as well as China, and out of reach for countries like Brazil, Germany, India and Japan, which have gained economic and regional prominence since 1945.
The United Nations recognizes the need of such reform, but it has considered the possibility of ever coming to terms with the issue so remote that it assigned it to a panel called the Open-Ended Working Group, long derided at headquarters as the ''never ending'' committee.
Now the subject is about to get high profile attention when a panel of 16 international figures commissioned by Secretary General Kofi Annan publishes its recommendations on Thursday on how to update the United Nations to face such 21st-century challenges as terror, failed states, nuclear proliferation, poverty, environmental decay and mass violence and genocide.
Speaking after a year in which the United Nations and its most powerful constituent, the United States, had fallen into disagreement over Iraq, Mr. Annan announced the establishment of the panel in a speech to the General Assembly on Sept. 
23, 2003. 
''We have reached a fork in the road,'' he said. 
''This may be a moment no less decisive than 1945 itself, when the U.N. was founded.''
While the 60-page report will address critical issues like amending the charter to permit some uses of pre-emptive force as legitimate acts of self-defense or seeking a definition of terrorist acts that would not allow people to class them as acts of resistance, its section on Security Council reform will be avidly consulted inside the United Nations.
According to diplomats who have seen it, the report recommends expanding the panel to 24 members with 6 each from the Americas, Africa, Asia and Europe under 2 alternative formulas. 
The present makeup is 5 permanent veto-bearing members and 10 other countries, elected in annual blocks of 5, which serve two- year terms.
One of the two suggested options would create a new tier of eight semi-permanent members with renewable four-year terms and one additional conventional two-year term member. 
The other would expand the number of permanent members to 11 from 5 and the number of those elected to two-year terms by 3.
Neither option, however, extends granting veto power beyond the existing five countries -- a point that is sure to sharpen the debate in the General Assembly, which seems certain to continue into next summer.
Changes in the composition of the Security Council must be approved by two-thirds of the 191 United Nations members and ratified by the legislatures of two-thirds of those governments, including those of all five permanent Council members.
The Council was last expanded, to 15 from 11, in a 1963 General Assembly vote that took effect in 1965. 
In 1971, Communist China took over the permanent seat on the Council that had been occupied by the Nationalist Chinese.
The debate is expected to be intense because of the importance of the issue to many countries that want to be included and possibly just as many that object to the inclusion of others. 
Bill Rammell, a British Foreign Office minister who presented his country's ideas to the panel this summer, commented on the regional rivalries at work.
''For every country you can name,'' he said, ''there are two or three next in line who feel their positions entitle them to frustrate the process.''
In Africa, the leading contestants are South Africa, Nigeria and Egypt. 
In the Americas, Mexico and Argentina will have doubts about the primacy of Brazil. 
In Asia, Pakistan can be expected to oppose India, and China is wary of admitting Japan and, with its veto, could single-handedly keep Tokyo out.
Egypt wants Arab and Muslim permanent representation on the Council while Indonesia pressed its case this fall to be considered the voice of what its foreign minister, Hassan Wirajuda, called ''moderate Islam.''
Italy, which does not want to be the only major Western European country without permanent representation on the Council, has publicly sought to undermine Germany's candidacy. 
It suggests instead that there be a seat for the European Union, although the charter at the moment recognizes only nation states, not groups of states, as members.
Japan's is the only candidacy for permanent membership that the United States has endorsed unequivocally. 
In October, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell appeared to back Brazil's candidacy in a speech in Sao Paulo, but State Department officials pointed out afterward that his expression of support had been carefully worded and conditional.
Russia pledged its support for Brazil's candidacy during a visit by President Vladimir V. Putin to Brasilia last Monday.
While the United States is the leading financer of the United Nations, accounting for 22 percent of the budget, Japan is a close second, at 19.5 percent, and Germany third, at 8.7 percent. 
As for the four other existing permanent members, Britain is at 6.1 percent, France at 6 percent, China at 2.1 and Russia at 1.1.
There is a widespread perception that this opportunity to deal with the problem will not arise again, and, with that in mind, the front-runners Brazil, Germany, India and Japan this fall formed an aggressive lobby of mutual support to push for permanent membership for themselves and two unnamed countries representing Africa.
Strategists for the group say they now intend to campaign hard in the General Assembly for full permanent member status with the right to cast vetoes -- a power not assigned in either of the report's options.
The General Assembly voting will not be on the recommendations but on ballot items honed in the debate that will emerge from them. 
So while the never-ending conversation on Security Council reform may be nearing completion, there still could be lengthy closing arguments.
