
The United Nations' chief human rights body, composed of 53 nations, will begin on Monday its annual review of abuses worldwide facing concerns that the international commitment to human rights is being eroded by the war against terrorism.
Human rights campaigners have accused the United States, Russia, China and other countries of adopting security measures that jeopardize basic rights.
The Commission on Human Rights is also under pressure to take action during its six-week session to help stem the rising Palestinian-Israeli violence, to censure Zimbabwe for its electoral practices and to condemn Russia over reports of atrocities in Chechnya.
For the first time since the commission was founded in 1947, the United States will not be a member. 
In a vote last May, the United States lost its seat -- to its surprise and fury, especially because more than a dozen countries on the commission, including Sudan, have dubious human rights records. 
The Bush administration has been seeking to have the seat restored, which appears likely to happen next year.
The absence of the United States has cast doubt on the survival of efforts it has long led to take countries like China and Cuba to task for abuses against their citizens. 
It can participate as an observer, but it cannot vote.
"Many burning issues can't be resolved without the active participation of the United States," said Krzysztof Jakubowski, Poland's delegate to the United Nations in Geneva, and the incoming chairman of the commission. 
"The United States is the symbol of the fight for human rights, and I come from a country where the understanding of this is profound."
The United States, which is reproved annually for its use of the death penalty, is also likely to be criticized this year for its treatment of captured Al Qaeda and Taliban fighters at the Guantanamo Bay Naval Station, in Cuba, and its proposal that suspected foreign terrorists be tried by military tribunals.
"The United States government has cynically used the banner of terrorism to support rewriting of international humanitarian law to suit its own purposes," said Reed Brody, advocacy director of Human Rights Watch.
Mary Robinson, the United Nations high commissioner for human rights, has called for the United States to recognize its captives at Guantanamo Bay as prisoners of war and to send them before a "competent tribunal" instead of acting unilaterally.
That position, widely endorsed by European countries, received support last week from a panel of the Organization of American States, which issued a finding that the detainees fell under the Geneva Conventions' wartime protections.
Amnesty International is also urging countries to take up the matter of the hundreds of people held in the United States after a sweep for possible suspects after the Sept. 
11 terrorist attacks.
Rights campaigners say they are worried that Russia is hiding behind the terrorism issue as an excuse to cover up rights violations in Chechnya. 
They criticize Russia for failing to act on two previous commission recommendations to investigate abuses in the province and to punish those responsible.
Last year, Cuba dodged outright censure but was stung by criticism of its detention of dissidents and suppression of political opposition. 
In a retaliatory measure, Cuba could try to condemn the United States' treatment of detainees at its Guantanamo Bay base.
Using a procedural maneuver, China has largely evaded full-fledged debate on its human rights record in the last decade. 
With the United States sidelined, it is unclear whether any country will pursue the uphill effort to hold China to account for its repression of religious groups and minorities in Tibet and other areas.
China has already taken the offensive by issuing a report last week criticizing the American military buildup as a violation of human rights. 
That followed a release of the annual State Department human rights report in the United States that accused China of using terrorism as a pretext for clamping down on Muslims in the Xinjiang region.
The issue that overshadows all others is whether its members can do anything to calm the boiling Middle East crisis. 
Human rights groups have said that Palestinians and Israelis have both singled out civilians for attacks, but the groups have directed their most severe criticism at Israel.
Mr. Brody of Human Rights Watch said Israel had used "excessive and indiscriminate force" intended "to maximize civilian casualties."
Both Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International want the United Nations rights panel to make sending monitors to the West Bank and the Gaza Strip a priority.
