
China must tie its economic growth to faster improvements in the legal and political rights of its citizens, the United Nations high commissioner for human rights, Louise Arbour, said here on Friday.
''China has declared its commitment to human rights and has raised expectations for the country to match its growing prosperity with a firm commitment to advancing human rights,'' Ms. Arbour said at a news conference at the end of a five-day visit to China.
Chinese officials said ''change had to be gradual,'' she noted. 
''While I do not disagree, I believe the stage is set for expecting more than modest progress in the coming years.''
Ms. Arbour's visit, her first as the United Nations' top human rights advocate, underscored widespread concerns about rights in China at a time when the government is promising to strengthen the country's legal system but is also cracking down on dissent, sometimes harshly.
The United Nations delegation's discussions with Chinese officials and judges focused on strengthening the judiciary, limiting the death penalty and abolishing detention without trial.
The talks resulted in a signed agreement that will allow the United Nations' human rights agency to help China move toward ratifying the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which codifies many internationally agreed-upon human rights standards.
Ms. Arbour balanced her praise for China's growing body of laws promising rights with a warning that the country was far from the standards enshrined in the covenant and might even have recently experienced ''slippage'' in its protection of individual rights.
But she said she would be ''very surprised'' if there was not ''significant progress'' in coming years.
During Ms. Arbour's visit, however, several Chinese human rights critics in Beijing were placed under police surveillance or house arrest. 
They included Liu Xiaobo, a writer who was imprisoned for several years after the violent suppression of anti-government protests in 1989, and Hou Wenzhou, the executive director of the Empowerment and Rights Institute, an American-financed organization that was searched by the police on Tuesday.
Ms. Arbour said she asked Chinese officials about what appeared to be harassment, and she also presented them with a list of 10 longtime political detainees of concern to the United Nations human rights commission.
She said the detainees included the Panchen Lama, a 16-year-old Tibetan spiritual leader Beijing has under its control, as well as a journalist and a labor activist.
Chinese officials told Ms. Arbour that the detention of Ms. Hou was a ''routine police check'' of residency papers, but Ms. Arbor said he had no way to verify the explanation.
''I think it's ironic that the way the Chinese government prepares to host the United Nations Commission on Human Rights is by placing dissidents under house arrest,'' said Hu Jia, a critic of the government who said he had also been held in his apartment by eight or nine police officers since the eve of Ms. Arbour's arrival.
While noting ''serious concerns'' about the Chinese government's human rights violations, Ms. Arbour said she expected that in coming years the country would develop more open, impartial courts and revise many of its laws to comply with the covenant.
''China will have to spend some of its new wealth on developing this kind of infrastructure if it is serious about human rights,'' she said.
But the United Nations officials said they received no clear assurances on the two issues at the top of their agenda: labor ''re-education'' and the death penalty. 
China's labor re-education system allows the police to imprison citizens in special labor camps for up to four years without trial.
Human rights organizations and Chinese legal reformers have long called for the abolition of the practice and say the camps are used to hold political protesters and to detain people when evidence is insufficient to obtain a court conviction.
''Re-education-through-labor is a longstanding irritant,'' Ms. Arbour said. 
About 250,000 Chinese are currently held in labor re-education camps, she added.
Judges on China's Supreme People's Court responded vaguely to the delegation's request for details about executed Chinese prisoners, Ms. Arbour said.
She praised China's announcement that it would soon send all death sentences to its Supreme Court for review, but also called for more information about the number and nature of executions.
China does not provide public information about these executions, but human rights organizations estimate that about 10,000 or more occur every year.
