
A divided Security Council approved a resolution on Wednesday establishing an international tribunal to prosecute suspects in the assassination of Rafik Hariri, the former Lebanese prime minister.
Ten of the 15 members of the Council voted in favor, one more than the nine votes needed for passage. 
But five countries -- Russia, China, South Africa, Indonesia and Qatar -- abstained.
In statements read by their ambassadors, the five argued that the resolution represented outside interference in Lebanon's domestic politics. 
Also, they opposed the fact that the measure had been drafted under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter, which deals with threats to international peace and carries the power of enforcement.
The United States and its European allies on the Council, who sponsored the measure, noted that Fouad Siniora, the Lebanese prime minister, had specifically called for a resolution that would be binding. 
That, they contended, could be guaranteed only by invoking Chapter VII, which allows for the possibility of economic sanctions and travel bans, among other measures.
Mr. Hariri was an outspoken critic of Syria, and his killing, in a Beirut car bombing in February 2005, caused an outcry that eventually led to the withdrawal of Syrian troops and security services from Lebanon. 
Since then, preliminary findings from a United Nations inquiry into the bombing pointed to involvement by Syrian security services.
Syria has said it would not cooperate with the court, and reaffirmed that in a statement on Wednesday.
The prospect of an international tribunal has provoked deep political conflict in Lebanon, where the pro-Syrian, Hezbollah-led opposition has blocked parliamentary consideration of a statute to set up such a court. 
On May 14, Mr. Siniora declared an impasse and asked the Security Council to take action.
In the Council on Wednesday, Wang Guangya, the ambassador of China, criticized the resolution as one ''that will give rise to a series of political and legal problems likely to add to the uncertainties embodied in the already turbulent political and security situation in Lebanon, and will create a precedent of the Security Council interfering in the domestic affairs and independence of a sovereign state.''
In response, Emyr Jones Parry, the ambassador of Britain, said: ''This is not a capricious interference in the domestic affairs of a sovereign state. 
It is a considered response to a request from the government of Lebanon for action to overcome a continued impasse in Lebanon's internal procedures, despite long and serious efforts.''
The sponsors tried to placate Russia, which objected to immediate action, by delaying the effect of the resolution until June 10. 
If the Lebanese Parliament does not act by then, the resolution will automatically ''enter in force,'' calling for the creation of a court outside Lebanon with a majority of international judges and an international prosecutor.
