
The Pentagon opened high-level talks with the Chinese military today for the first time since President Bush took office, the latest sign of improved American-Chinese relations.
At the Pentagon today, Douglas J. Feith, the under secretary of defense for policy, and Gen. Xiong Guangkai, the deputy chief of the Chinese general staff, discussed a range of major issues that have been the source of past tensions, including Taiwan, North Korea, Iraq and military exchange programs.
In a news conference afterward, Mr. Feith said that although there were no major breakthroughs, the renewal of the annual sessions -- known as the Defense Consultative Talks -- was an important step to reducing the threat of conflict between the militaries.
"The talks were useful," Mr. Feith said. 
"They were real discussions. 
They were not just stilted set pieces. 
And that's good."
The talks began during the Clinton administration but were suspended after the collision of a Chinese fighter jet and an American surveillance plane off Hainan island in April 2001, leading to a tense standoff.
But Bush administration officials say relations have warmed markedly since the terrorist attacks of Sept. 
11, and the White House urged the Pentagon to renew the talks.
Mr. Feith said the United States delegation had urged the Chinese to increase their efforts to stop the export of Chinese technology that could be used to produce nuclear, chemical or biological weapons in countries like North Korea, Syria and Iraq. 
He said the Chinese had made no promises, but had asserted that they were no longer providing missile technology to North Korea.
"They have said that they want a nuclear-free Korean peninsula," Mr. Feith said. 
"We agree on that. 
And it is clear that they have more lines of contact into North Korea than we do."
As expected, there was far less agreement on Taiwan. 
Mr. Feith said the Chinese had refused to renounce the use of force against Taiwan, and had made no offers to reduce the number of ballistic missiles they have pointed across the Taiwan Strait.
He also said the two delegations had discussed the next step for inspections in Iraq, though he offered no details.
General Xiong, a hard-liner who once warned that China could strike Los Angeles with nuclear weapons if the United States intervened in a conflict over Taiwan, has also asked to meet with the national security adviser, Condoleezza Rice. 
But White House officials could not confirm that a meeting had been scheduled.
