
INVESTORS who worry that the American property market may be peaking have another option: putting money into real estate abroad.
Such moves have become more attractive, thanks to the export of an American form of real estate ownership, the real estate investment trust. 
REIT's, which generally own commercial properties like office towers, shopping malls or apartment buildings, are required to distribute most of their profits as dividends each year. 
Within the last four years, France, Japan and Hong Kong have allowed real estate companies to operate like American REIT's, and lawmakers in Britain and Germany are taking steps in that direction.
The spread of this ownership structure has contributed to a flood of dollars into three American mutual funds that specialize in foreign real estate. 
Investors put $79.3 million into the two largest, Alpine International Real Estate and ING Global Real Estate, from July 1, 2004, through Wednesday, compared with a net inflow of $4.1 million to both funds in the first half of 2004, according to AMG Data Services.
''Investors are aware that real estate prices have moved up a lot in the U.S.,'' said Samuel A. Lieber, manager of the Alpine fund. 
''There's too much money trying to chase property. 
Smart investors are saying, 'Let's go abroad.'''
Real estate fund managers say that higher American property prices are not the only reason for investing overseas. 
Real estate priced in euros or Japanese yen, they say, may benefit from any further decline in the dollar. 
And owning foreign real estate is a good way to diversify a portfolio in general, because real estate markets around the world are not as closely linked as stock and bond markets.
''All things being equal, I would rather invest in a REIT,'' said Steve Burton, co-manager of the ING fund, noting that REIT's are generally taxed at lower rates and tend to have higher dividends.
The Alpine and ING funds are the only large foreign real estate funds that are marketed to individual investors, and have been open at least a year. 
Alpine International Real Estate had a total return of 31.2 percent over the 12 months through Thursday; while ING Global Real Estate returned 22.9 percent, according to Morningstar Inc.
Fidelity has joined the fray, too. 
The rising number of publicly traded property companies around the world and the adoption of REIT's in particular was one reason that its executives decided to start the Fidelity International Real Estate fund last year, said Steve Buller, the fund's manager. 
It opened on Sept. 
15 and accrued $123 million in assets by Dec. 
31.
Mr. Buller says he does not hedge currencies and has no plans to do so. 
Lately, that approach has helped the fund's performance. 
The fund returned more than 17 percent in its four months, and Mr. Buller attributes more than a third of that to the decline of the dollar. 
But if investors own shares for several years, currency movements should cancel one another out, he said.
The ING fund has a 5.75 percent front-end load, or sales charge, while the other two funds are no-load. 
The ING portfolio also differs from the other two in that about half of its assets are usually invested in the United States; the other funds generally invest most of their assets abroad. 
Lately, the ING fund managers have not been hedging currencies, either, because ING research indicates that the dollar has more room to decline, Mr. Burton said. 
They may hedge in the future, he said, if they think the dollar is poised to rise.
Mr. Burton said he favored the Hong Kong real estate market because he thought it would benefit from economic growth in China. 
One of the fund's largest holdings is Sun Hung Kai, based in Hong Kong. 
The company owns a wide range of office, retail and residential properties, including a majority stake in IFC 2, a towering office building that opened on Hong Kong's waterfront a couple of years ago. 
Mr. Burton said that he expected Sun Hung Kai's earnings and cash flow to grow faster than those of most American property companies over the next few years; he also said that he thought the stock was trading at a 10 percent discount to the value of the properties owned by the company.
Mr. Lieber also favors the Hong Kong real estate market. 
''Real estate cycles are tied to economic cycles, and there's also a supply and demand issue,'' he said. 
''If a market is very tight, you'll see prices jump, like they have in Hong Kong last year.''
He has invested 12 percent of the Alpine fund in Hong Kong, making it the second-largest market in the portfolio. 
The Hong Kong real estate market faltered after 1997, Mr. Lieber said, because of investor uncertainty about the British handover to China and the Asian currency crisis of 1997 and 1998. 
That market has since recovered to roughly the level it reached by the mid-1990's; but as the gateway to China, he said, Hong Kong still has strong growth prospects.
Mr. Lieber has not hedged currencies in the fund in the last two years, and he has no plans to do so again for a long while.
French companies account for 20 percent of the Alpine fund's holdings. 
Unibail, a French property company that was transformed into a real estate trust in 2003, is one of its largest. 
Shares of Unibail rose 56 percent in 2004, partly because of a company announcement in October that it intended to make a special distribution of 23 euros a share, or about $30, which it paid on Jan. 
7.
The distribution was generated, in part, by a large office tower, called the Coeur Defense, which Unibail opened in Paris in 2001 and completed leasing last summer. 
''Unibail took a 60's-style building down to its skin, gutted it, modernized it, and added tremendous value,'' Mr. Lieber said.
Club Med, which trades on the Paris exchange, is another French company that Mr. Lieber likes, though he said it would be more accurate to describe it as a global company because it owns resorts around the world. 
Executives are working to change Club Med's image, he said, emphasizing family getaways rather than the singles lifestyle.
BUT the recent flow of new money into foreign real estate funds gives pause to Dan McNeela, a Morningstar fund analyst. 
He said he was concerned that investors might be focusing too much on the gains these funds made during the fall -- gains that were partly fueled by the sharp decline in the dollar. 
''These funds might not continue to have the same wind at their backs,'' he said.
While Mr. McNeela said foreign real estate funds were a viable way to diversify, he advised investors not to put more than 10 percent of their portfolios in real estate funds of all kinds, including those that invest in the United States. 
But with that caveat, he added, ''I think foreign real estate funds might be the final step for investors building a well-rounded portfolio.''
