
The United States responded guardedly on Tuesday to a move by China to volunteer details about 56 political prisoners and suspected spies whose prison sentences have been or may be reduced.
The release of the information, apparently an effort by China to enhance its human rights image, comes as the Bush administration is weighing whether to press for a motion criticizing China at the United Nations Human Rights Commission meeting next month in Geneva.
The prisoners' names, alleged crimes, sentences and other details were given to the Dui Hua Foundation, an organization based in San Francisco that campaigns for improving human rights in China, on Jan. 
25, it announced Monday on its Web site, www.duihua.org. 
They include 13 Tibetans accused of campaigning for Tibetan independence, 20 Chinese citizens from the southern province of Fujian accused of spying for Taiwan, and prisoners sentenced for their involvement in the anti-government protests of 1989.
A State Department official in Washington said Tuesday that the United States had not yet made a decision on any resolution about China's human rights record at the meeting in Geneva.
''We have seen the list passed by the Chinese government to the Dui Hua Foundation, but we have no comment at this time,'' she said. 
The official declined to give her name, citing State Department rules.
John Kamm, the foundation's executive director, said the foundation had faxed the information to the State Department the day after receiving it, and American officials discussed the list with their Chinese hosts during meetings last week.
''This is the first time that Beijing has provided information on a large group of prisoners whose names are not known in the West,'' he said in a statement issued on the foundation's Web site. 
Half the prisoners listed were previously unknown to foreign governments or international human rights groups, Mr. Kamm said.
Other human rights organizations that focus on China were less enthusiastic about the announcement. 
Liu Qing, the chairman of Human Rights in China, a group based in New York that monitors cases of political persecution, said that judging by his organization's records, it was probably not the first time China had volunteered information on previously unknown prisoners.
''I don't think this is a major breakthrough,'' he added in a telephone interview. 
''The Chinese government has simply been taking these out-of-date cases to shape international opinion.''
But Mr. Kamm said the release of the prisoner list suggested that China could be taking a more relaxed attitude toward clemency for some political prisoners. 
Previously, Chinese jails gave parole and sentence reductions to about a third of those jailed for conventional crimes, but rarely if ever to political prisoners. 
Human rights organizations and observers generally estimate there are 2,000 or more people in China imprisoned for political crimes.
''At least over the last year they have granted clemency in some cases,'' Mr. Kamm said in an interview, referring to political prisoners. 
The Dui Hua Foundation cited examples of reductions of sentences from just a few weeks to several years in the announcement this week. 
Most of those reductions took place last year.
While China's gesture may help muffle some Western criticism of it at the human rights meeting in Geneva, it comes at a time when the Chinese government has sought to severely control dissidents and political critics.
After the recent death of Zhao Ziyang, the Communist Party leader who was pushed from power for sympathizing with student protesters in 1989, dozens of dissidents were held in their homes under police watch, and hundreds of farmers and workers who came to Beijing to petition government offices were swept up and forcefully removed from Beijing by the police.
''I don't think this will have much of an impact on the U.S. position, though it's a welcome decision,'' said Mr. Kamm, referring to the new prisoner list. 
China's human rights situation remained largely unchanged from year to year, he added. 
''What I'm seeing is a bit more transparency and accountability.''
