
Unlike most of the world, India has reacted positively, if somewhat ambiguously, to President Bush's proposal for a missile defense, and in response the Bush administration is continuing the warming trend in American-Indian relations that began under Bill Clinton.
On the third anniversary of India's nuclear tests, which led the United States to impose sanctions on India, Deputy Secretary of State Richard L. Armitage said here on Friday that the United States was worried about Pakistan's development of a nuclear arsenal, but he did not mention a paired worry about India's own nuclear capacity.
India, the world's largest democracy and the dominant power in South Asia, has long sought to be treated distinctly from its subcontinental rival, Pakistan, ruled by the military since late 1999, and to win legitimacy for its decision to develop what it calls "a minimum nuclear deterrent."
Pakistan has been troubled by the friendliness developing between the United States and India, and today Gen. Pervez Musharraf -- perhaps stung by Mr. Armitage's remarks -- reacted coolly to Mr. Bush's proposed defense plan.
Asked about Mr. Bush's proposal, the general was quoted by Pakistan's official news agency as saying that the government opposed "any action that re-initiates a nuclear and missile race."
His remarks came in the midst of Chinese Prime Minister Zhu Rongji's visit to Pakistan. 
Military experts say China has provided Pakistan with nuclear technology in the past, and China sees Mr. Bush's missile defense proposal as a challenge to the effectiveness of its nuclear force.
After India conducted nuclear tests in 1998, Pakistan responded with its own tests. 
Both were roundly condemned at the time.
So Mr. Armitage's comments in New Delhi were music to the Indian government. 
It was also pleasing to India that the United States was consulting Indian leaders about America's nuclear policies -- given the United States' vehement criticism of India's nuclear tests.
At a news conference after meeting with Indian officials, Mr. Armitage said Mr. Bush's missile defense program was aimed at offering protection from states like Libya, Iraq and North Korea. 
While he did not explicitly include Pakistan, he did say that American concerns about Pakistan were well known.
American officials have long fretted about Pakistan's political instability and deep economic problems, as well as the growing assertiveness of Islamic fundamentalists there.
On Mr. Bush's proposed nuclear policies, India's prime minister, Atal Behari Vajpayee, said he welcomed Mr. Bush's decision to step away from the development of offensive nuclear weapons -- and pointedly reiterated India's need for its own nuclear deterrent.
India has been lavish in its praise for Mr. Bush's plan to make deep cuts in America's nuclear arsenal, but it has been less explicit about its position on the missile defense itself, which other countries worry would encourage a new arms race and destabilize the global strategic balance.
According to Indian officials, President Bush has accepted an invitation to visit India, though no date has been set.
