
An American diplomat called today for Hong Kong's government to disclose "as soon as practicable" the legal language of its planned anti-sedition law. 
Criticism of the legislation continues to spread here and abroad.
A march last Sunday against the government's plans drew the largest crowd for a political demonstration here in many years. 
A poll released last Friday by an independent academic group showed the sharpest drop in public confidence in personal freedoms since Britain handed this territory over to China in 1997.
Pro-Beijing political parties are organizing a large demonstration next Sunday in favor of tough legislation providing long prison sentences for sedition, treason, the disclosure of official secrets and other security issues, as well as broad investigative powers for the police. 
Some employees here of Chinese state-owned enterprises and some students at government schools have complained of being ordered by supervisors and teachers to attend the demonstration, although the Hong Kong school system and the main Chinese enterprises have denied they are applying such pressure.
One issue is the government's refusal to provide the actual language of the bill it intends to present to the territory's Legislative Council. 
The government issued a "consultation document" two months ago that outlined its plans, but said the actual legislation would be sent directly to the Council in February for committee hearings and then a vote.
Democratic activists want a public debate before the bill goes to the Council. 
It is extremely rare for the Legislative Council, dominated by pro-Beijing business interests, to amend a bill sponsored by the government, the activists point out.
The governments of Australia, Britain and Canada, as well as the American and European Chambers of Commerce, have urged the Hong Kong government to allow public debate on the bill before starting the legislative process.
James Keith, the American consul general here since August and the director of the State Department Office of Chinese Affairs before that, said three times today, in response to questions after a speech here, that the precise legal language should be released as quickly as possible.
Paul Brown, a Hong Kong government spokesman, said tonight that the government would stick to its original plan and send the bill directly to the Legislative Council, with a request that it be approved before the Council adjourns in July.
Organizers had told the police to expect 5,000 people at last Sunday's march. 
But 12,000 people gathered in a park to start the march, according to the police, and organizers said there were 60,000 people by the time the march reached central government offices, two miles away.
