
At the end of Monday night, the gold medal did not belong to the United States men's gymnastics team, but that did not matter.
The six men finally had Olympic medals in their hands -- silver ones -- and they were in awe. 
On the medal stand, olive wreaths atop their heads, they examined their rewards gently, as if they were eggs, as if squeezing them too hard would put cracks in their waking dream.
After 20 years of waiting, a United States men's gymnastics team had won an Olympic medal, its first since winning gold in 1984, the year of the Soviet boycott. 
The only other medal the team won was a silver in 1932.
The Japanese team won its first gymnastics Olympic gold medal since 1976, finishing with a score of 173.821, a comfortable margin ahead of the United States, which totaled 172.933. 
The Romanians were third (172.384) and the Chinese, the defending Olympic and world champions, were never a factor, finishing fifth (171.257), behind South Korea (171.847).
''I know that they wanted the gold, but this is an enormous accomplishment,'' said Bart Conner, a member of the United States' 1984 team. 
''It was awesome.''
The Americans waited apprehensively for the final rotation to end. 
The United States was in third place then, behind Romania and Japan, and needed a strong finish to win the silver. 
With three of their teammates going up on the high bar, the rest of the men stood by, some staring and holding their breath, some pacing, some frozen. 
Others shielded their eyes, unable to watch.
Blaine Wilson, a five-time national champion, was one of those looking away. 
After six operations, three Olympics and so many years of disappointment, the 30-year-old Wilson said he felt as if his entire career was in the balance. 
In his final major competition, one fall by a teammate, one slip-up, and Wilson would, once again, leave an Olympics empty-handed.
''Sometimes you want it so bad, sometimes you want so much that it makes you sick,'' he said. 
''I thought of all I've been through to get this far and I couldn't take it.''
About six months ago, Wilson tore his left biceps tendon clear off the bone while competing on still rings. 
He struggled through a painful rehabilitation to make it back for these Games, but not for a chance at an individual medal -- for a chance at a team medal. 
The United States men had not finished higher than fifth at an Olympics since winning the gold in 1984. 
''I knew we were going to win a medal this time,'' Wilson said. 
''I just didn't know which kind.''
The United States team started the evening with great performances on the floor exercise, with no scores lower than 9.7. 
It dropped to third, though, after a poor performance on the still rings. 
Wilson had a team-high 9.637 on that event, but Jason Gatson, who left out a required strength move in his routine, scored a 9.125.
The United States gymnasts had walked into the Olympic Indoor Hall confident, but with faces as still and serious as Greek statues. 
The drop in the standing caused them mild panic.
''We started to doubt ourselves and think that we couldn't get it done,'' Guard Young said. 
''But a pep talk kept us going.''
Just before the parallel bars, the United States coach, Kevin Mazeika, gathered his athletes and rallied them, saying they had enough time to move up. 
Wilson butted in, saying, ''We can do this,'' and adding a curse word or two.
The team responded. 
The crowd did, too, starting to chant, ''U.S.A.!
U.S.A.!'' and finally drowning out the enthusiastic chorus of Japanese and Chinese fans.
Gatson rebounded from his still rings routine to score 9.825 on parallel bars. 
Then on the final event for the United States, the high bar, the team passed the Romanians, who had a botched dismount and a nasty fall.
One American nearly had the same fate. 
Paul Hamm, the reigning world champion in the all-around, flew over the bar during a release move and his right hand slipped off the bar when he tried to regrasp it. 
He held on, but left out the third of his three consecutive release moves, scoring a 9.462 in what is normally one of his best events.
''I was feeling incredible pressure at that moment because I knew everyone was counting on me,'' Hamm said.
The Japanese were the last up on the high bar and performed as if they were in their practice gym, with no worries at all. 
The lowest score among their three competitors was a 9.787, leaving the Americans with silver.
As they walked to the medals stand, Bob Colarossi, president of USA Gymnastics, had tears in his eyes. 
The men's team, always in the shadow of the women's, has come so far since finishing fifth in the 2000 Games.
''We revamped our program after Sydney to do this, and we did this,'' Colarossi said. 
''I'm just so proud.''
The flags were raised and the Japanese national anthem played while the Americans on the podium bit their lips to keep from crying.
They had come through a lot to get there. 
Gatson's back injury required cortisone shots and epidurals. 
Guard Young's father sacrificed money and time during medical school so his son could train. 
As children, Paul and Morgan Hamm worked out in their backyard on makeshift equipment their father made.
And Wilson will now end his career the way he had imagined, as an Olympic medalist.
''I'm never going to take this medal off, never,'' he said. 
''I'm going to sleep with it, shower with it, eat with it. 
I'll be an old man and still be wearing it.''
