
Secretary of State Colin L. Powell, reopening the trans-Atlantic rift over Iraq -- this time about expanding the authority of the United Nations there -- said today that a French proposal to cut back the role of the American-led occupation was unacceptable.
Arriving in Geneva after midnight for intensive talks on Saturday about what role the United Nations should play, Mr. Powell also labeled as "totally unrealistic" a French suggestion that Iraq establish a provisional government in a month, write a constitution by the end of this year and hold elections next spring, all under United Nations auspices.
"It is delightful if one could do that, but one can't do that," Mr. Powell told reporters on the way here, adding that the French proposals were "interesting, but not executable."
His comments lent a sense of deja vu to the Geneva talks, which were called by Kofi Annan, secretary general of the United Nations, expressly in order to avoid a repetition of the dispute that divided the United States from France, Germany and Russia in the weeks leading up to the Iraq war.
Mr. Powell said that an overly rapid timetable toward self-government would disrupt the efforts of the Iraqi Governing Council to restore stability in Iraq. 
He said the French proposals were "interesting, but not executable."
By contrast, American officials have said that a new Iraqi constitution probably could not be adopted until well into next year, and that it might take as much as a year after that for a democratically elected government to be installed. 
In the meantime, the United States wants to retain the main authority over the transition.
All the differences revolved around the timetable for self-rule in Iraq, and who would oversee it. 
Perhaps surprisingly, American and European diplomats say there is far less disagreement over the idea that a United Nations mandate is needed over the occupying security forces while the United States should remain in charge of them.
As recently as a couple of weeks ago, American officials worried that the control of the troops would be a major point of contention with other countries as Washington sought a United Nations blessing for a force that eventually may involve more troops from other countries, including some that opposed the American war in Iraq.
But Mr. Powell's blunt dismissal of the French proposal on Iraq's political timetable reflected continuing difficulties on the subject with France, Russia and Germany.
Mr. Annan is seeking to avoid a repetition of the breakdown that occurred when these countries, along with China, lined up to oppose an American and British request for a Security Council resolution in support of a war with Iraq. 
He virtually summoned the envoys of the five permanent members of the Security Council -- the United States, France, Britain, China and Russia -- to Geneva to attend this weekend session.
American officials say they are hopeful that another confrontation can be avoided, in part because this time Germany and Russia seem to be trying hard to bridge the differences between France and the United States. 
But they say they do not expect any breakthroughs this weekend.
A sign of the difficulty came in today's Le Monde, the leading French newspaper, in which the foreign minister, Dominique de Villepin, wrote that it was "urgent to transfer sovereignty to the Iraqi people themselves."
The transfer, he said, must be carried out under United Nations and not American auspices.
France has said several times that the United States must move beyond "the logic of occupation" if it is to win support from the international community for a multinational troop presence and, even more, for the billions of dollars that Washington seeks for Iraq's reconstruction.
Such talk is clearly exasperating to Mr. Powell and other American officials. 
Before leaving for Europe on this trip, Mr. Powell gave interviews to French, Russian and German media in which he all but ridiculed the idea that somehow the United States was wedded to being an occupier.
"Nobody wants to turn sovereignty back to the Iraqi people as fast as the United States does, President Bush does and I do," Mr. Powell told France 2, a television network. 
But he said that the American occupation under "can't suddenly just step aside and turn it over -- to whom?"
He said that "since the United States and its coalition partners have invested a great deal of political capital, as well as financial resources, as well as the lives of our young men and women -- and we have a large force there now -- we can't be expected to suddenly just step aside."
At another point, Mr. Powell said: "We can't simply cede all responsibility and authority to the U.N. The U.N. isn't ready to handle it. 
The U.N. has not asked for it."
Aboard his plane, Mr. Powell told reporters that despite the deep differences with France, it might be possible to find language on which all sides could agree. 
He suggested that France was talking about abstract notions of sovereignty, whereas Washington would be willing to make some practical compromises.
"It's easy to toss out nice theories about sovereignty, occupation and liberation and all that," he said. 
But he said that "as a practical matter" the United Nations was not "properly staffed" to handle the transition to self-government in Iraq.
"We will work to see if there is not language that can bridge this," Mr. Powell said, adding that "any language that would buy into what Minister de Villepin has been saying" was not acceptable.
American officials said that they remained hopeful that they could avoid a nasty dispute that would lead to a veto by France or any other of the permanent members of the Security Council. 
In addition, Mr. Powell said the United States could probably get at least nine countries on the Council to support its basic approach, enough to have the resolution approved if there is no veto.
"If there is anything that worried me, it would be a veto," Mr. Powell said.
"We need to get out of some of the rhetorical arguments we're having," he told French television. 
"One I hear is that the United States believes in the logic of occupation. 
Nonsense. Every European should know that the United States of America has always believed in the logic of liberation."
