
The United States resumed reconnaissance flights off the coast of China today for the first time since a collision on April 1 between a Navy surveillance plane and a Chinese fighter jet bruised relations between the two nations, defense officials said.
An unarmed Air Force RC-135 took off from Kadena Air Base in Okinawa, Japan, flew its mission in international airspace off China's northeastern coast during daylight hours there and returned to its base without incident -- and without being trailed by Chinese interceptors, officials said.
"There was no reaction from the Chinese," one Defense Department official said today after the RC-135, a military version of the Boeing 707 that is designed to collect and analyze communications signals, had landed.
Officials said the Air Force jet, which can carry a crew of up to 27, was sent without an escort of United States fighters. 
After the collision last month, some officials said future reconnaissance flights should include armed escorts, but those suggestions have clearly been rebuffed, at least on the northerly circuit flown today. 
Chinese pilots have been less aggressive in intercepting American flights in this area than they had been over the South China Sea.
China had demanded that American patrols be halted off its entire coast after the collision of the Navy EP-3E surveillance plane and the Chinese fighter over the South China Sea, which resulted in the death of the Chinese pilot and the detention of the 24-member American crew for 11 days after it made an emergency landing on Hainan island.
That incident presented the Bush administration with its first foreign policy challenge, and even now a resumption of military-to-military contacts between the two nations is being reviewed case by case. 
Conservatives criticized the administration for what they perceived as an apology to Beijing, when the Pentagon had said it was the Chinese pilot who caused the collision. 
The resumption of surveillance flights demonstrated that the United States was returning to what it considered normal military operations, Pentagon officials said.
The officials declined to say when the next intelligence-gathering mission would be ordered to fly near China.
And Ari Fleischer, the White House spokesman, said he would not comment on the resumption of surveillance flights "other than to say that, as you knew right from the beginning, it has always been the position of the United States that it is our prerogative and right to fly in international airspace, to preserve the peace by flying reconnaissance missions."
Technicians from Lockheed Martin Corporation who were sent last week to inspect the damaged Navy aircraft, which is still on Hainan, reported that the plane could be flown off the island after one or two of its engines were replaced and propellers and flight-control surfaces like flaps and rudders were repaired, military officials said.
Pentagon officials had expressed concerns that the aircraft's left wing had been so badly damaged in the collision that it could not support the load of takeoff, and that the plane would have to be taken apart, crated and carried away by barge. 
But the wing was found to be structurally sound, officials said today.
"The plane is flyable," one military official said. 
"We know we can change out engines. 
That's not a simple task, but we can do it in a week."
Chinese officials, however, have not given permission to repair the plane or to fly it out of Chinese territory. 
Administration officials said today that it was possible China would not allow the plane to fly off the island and would, instead, require the aircraft to be cut apart and hauled away.
Military officials who have been briefed on the engineering review of the Navy surveillance plane said the Lockheed Martin technicians were unable to say whether the Chinese had culled useful information from any equipment or computer programs not destroyed by the crew during the emergency landing.
"The Chinese restricted what the team could do inside the plane," one military official said, pointing out that the Chinese could have dismantled and examined what was left of the gear and reinstalled it before the American technicians arrived.
"They reported that it all looked quite orderly," the official said. 
"It was all spruced up."
The crew members of the Navy surveillance plane reported that they had completed their emergency procedure for destroying sensitive equipment and computer programs aboard the plane in the harrowing minutes after the crash and before they were ordered off their crippled aircraft after landing on Chinese territory. 
Even so, with the plane remaining in Chinese custody for several weeks, administration officials said they could not rule out that the Chinese had gained some intelligence windfalls from the downed craft.
The technical team from Lockheed Martin has been huddling with engineering and maintenance experts from the Pacific Fleet and the Naval Air Systems Command to propose the best options for recovering the aircraft, officials said.
Their analysis will be presented to Adm. Dennis C. Blair, commander of American forces in the Pacific, who is expected to forward his recommendations to Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld later this week.
