
President Bush, in a significant shift in his approach to North Korea, authorized American negotiators to say last week that he is prepared to take a range of steps to aid the starving nation -- from gradually easing sanctions to an eventual peace treaty, senior officials today.
But, officials emphasized, these inducements would be phased in slowly only as North Korea starts surrendering its nuclear weapons, dismantling the facilities used to develop them and permitting inspectors free run of the country.
The proposals were described to the North Koreans at the talks, which were held in Beijing last week. 
They constituted a major departure from the official White House statements earlier this year that North Korea would see no benefits from a new relationship until it shipped all its weapons out of the country and dismantled all of its nuclear facilities.
The North Koreans did not immediately respond to the new approach, but American officials said they would continue to follow the strategy in future talks, which they expect will resume in October.
In adopting the new strategy, the White House apparently acceded to some of the arguments from within the State Department, and from allies like South Korea, that the talks would break down if Washington could not describe some vision of how relations could improve.
In a brief telephone conversation this evening, Mr. Bush's national security adviser, Condoleezza Rice, disputed the notion that Mr. Bush was making a significant change in strategy. 
She emphasized that any major benefits to North Korea would come only after it could no longer pose a nuclear threat or rebuild its nuclear capacity.
In the past, Ms. Rice has criticized the Clinton administration's 1994 nuclear freeze agreement with North Korea for giving the country fuel oil before it dismantled anything.
But she and other officials said that Mr. Bush was presented with the new negotiating strategy at his ranch in Texas last month, and approved the specifics after a meeting of his senior national security aides in late August.
"We're going to give these talks a real chance," Ms. Rice said. 
"This is the best opportunity for getting a resolution for a long time."
But she quickly added that "a lot depends on North Korean behavior."
The latter remark was a clear reference to North Korea's threat, delivered at the talks last week, to conduct a nuclear test and its past threats to make its supplies of plutonium available to the highest bidder. 
In the past, Mr. Bush has called such comments "blackmail."
The crucial change in the approach at the Beijing talks was in providing for a sequence of rewards to North Korea, according to a State Department official who spoke to reporters today and other officials.
Late last year, the White House publicly dismissed the notion that North Korea would see any benefits before its entire nuclear infrastructure was eliminated. 
But even then, a behind-the-scenes struggle was playing out between State Department officials who favored offering some rewards to the North Koreans for intermediate steps and hard-liners in the Pentagon and the vice president's office.
That struggle continued, and officials said the parties were fully engaged in it up to the time the negotiators, led by James A. Kelly, the assistant secretary of state for East Asian affairs, left for Beijing.
But the senior State Department official said today that that "we made clear that we are not seeking to strangle North Korea," and the negotiators said "we are willing to discuss a sequence of denuclearization measures with corresponding measures on the part of both sides."
That approach, dubbed "more for more," has long been advocated by the deputy secretary of state, Richard L. Armitage. But it has been opposed by hard-liners who believe that no agreement with North Korea can ever be trusted, and that it will never give up all aspects of its nuclear program.
Mr. Armitage and Secretary of State Colin L. Powell proposed the new strategy to Mr. Bush last month. 
Several officials said that it was further nurtured without the involvement of many of the aides to Donald H. Rumsfeld, the secretary of defense, who have sought to limit the offers to North Korea.
"It helped that a lot of them were on vacation, or thinking about Iraq," one of the architects of the new approach said today.
That approach, officials in the administration said, was partly an effort to show China, Japan, Russia and South Korea that Mr. Bush was serious about coming up with a diplomatic solution, and to gain their support for a more confrontational approach if North Korea should reject the overtures.
But while the administration officials went out of their way to describe the new strategy as a model of flexibility, they made it clear that the first moves are up to the North Koreans. 
All of the benefits North Korea most wants -- energy supplies and formal peace treaties -- would come only after arms inspectors had free run of the country for "challenge inspections" of suspected nuclear sites, and after almost all of nuclear infrastructure is shipped out of the country, officials said. 
"That's going to be the hardest part for them to swallow," one of the officials said.
Another senior administration official -- a hard-liner on North Korea -- predicted that "the North Koreans will never do it."
Other officials have noted that while North Korea has discussed giving up its nuclear facilities for the right price it has said it would never give up its existing "nuclear deterrent."
In fact, it was far from clear that the North Koreans picked up on Mr. Bush's new message, officials said.
After Mr. Kelly laid out the American proposal, the North Korean delegation said the United States was seeking to strangle North Korea, and was secretly considering a pre-emptive strike.
Russian officials who attended the talks suggested that the North Koreans had not been listening to Mr. Kelly's presentation.
"Sometimes their script seemed to be couched in assumptions about what we were going to say," an American official said, "not what we did say."
In recent days China has publicly chastised the Bush administration for not showing enough flexibility. 
China's vice foreign minister, Wang Yi, who acted as the host of the six-nation talks, said earlier this week the United States "is the main obstacle" to any settlement.
In private, American officials insisted that the Chinese were simply trying to demonstrate to the North Koreans that they were willing to pressure both sides.
