
TAIWAN'S president, Chen Shui-bian, would seem to have enough on his plate these days, what with the governments of China and the United States playing a game of superpower chicken in the skies above his island. 
But as Mr. Chen plans a quick stop in the United States next month, a visit certain to inflame the Chinese, he has already outlined a major priority of the trip.
He wants to buy a pair of cowboy boots.
And he is not alone.
The cowboy boot, that pointy-toed icon that country singer Jerry Jeff Walker immortalized as "manly footwear," is almost trendy. 
For some people, especially here in Texas, it has never gone out of style. 
And there was, of course, that period of mechanical bull-induced insanity that swept the nation after "Urban Cowboy."
But now the industry is benefiting from some high-profile product placement, courtesy of President Bush.
"He is really helping the western wear and boot business, like his dad," former President George Bush, said Rocky Carroll, a custom boot maker here, speaking of "43" and "41," as the current and former commanders in chief have taken to calling each other. 
"Since he became president, more doctors, more lawyers and a lot of the Secret Service are wearing them."
The statistics to measure a "Bush bump" in boot sales are hard to find, because there is no association that tracks the sales of only the cowboy variety. 
Boots are a niche within the larger footwear industry. 
And custom boots are a niche within the niche. 
Lisa Lankes, a spokeswoman for Justin Brands, which owns lines like Justin Boots and Tony Lama, estimated that two million pairs are sold annually, roughly three-quarters of them in the Southwest. 
Justin Brands is a unit of Justin Industries of Fort Worth.
But people in the industry agree that sales are picking up, and, equally important, that there is a buzz about boots these days. 
"Boots never go away," Ms. Lankes said. 
"We're starting to see some interest in high fashion that will ultimately trickle down and hit the mainstream."
The runway show that signaled the return of the boot was staged in January at what was otherwise known as the presidential inauguration. 
At the Black Tie and Boots Inaugural Ball, sponsored by his fellow Texans, Mr. Bush was joined by Gov. Rick Perry of Texas and the state's two senators, Kay Bailey Hutchison and Phil Gramm.
There, for the world to see, particularly the cameras, they hitched up pants legs (and a skirt) to reveal four sets of custom cowboy boots, each pair made by Mr. Carroll. Had the models not all been Republicans, the late President Lyndon B. Johnson probably would have smiled at the unabashed Texas-ness of the moment. 
Mr. Bush's pair, sewn from black eel skin, was embossed with the blue presidential seal, in case anyone forgot the reason for the party.
"Tom DeLay, who was on the stage and the only one wearing blue jeans, said, 'Rocky, I need some boots,' " Mr. Carroll recalled. 
(Mr. DeLay, the majority whip of the House of Representatives, suffers no shortage of boots; he and a fellow Texan, Dick Armey, the majority leader, are members of the Congressional Boot Caucus, a group whose sole membership requirement seems to be wearing cowboy boots.)
Mr. Carroll, 63, is the unofficial boot maker to the president, whichever president happens to be in office. 
By his count, he has made customized boots for the last six, back to Gerald Ford. 
Mr. Carroll still keeps the "lasts," or the molds he carved to match the shape of each presidential foot, in case he needs to make another pair. 
Mr. Carroll says he has made 56 pairs for former President Bush and 25 pairs for the man who defeated him, Bill Clinton. 
He said that Mr. Clinton had the biggest foot, 13D, and that Jimmy Carter had the smallest, 9D.
There is no traditional career path toward becoming the presidential boot maker. 
Mr. Carroll got the job by giving them free boots. 
"I never charge a president," he said. 
"I just feel honored to do it."
Besides, he added, "I really couldn't even pay for the advertising I get out of this."
Ronald Reagan became curious enough about Mr. Carroll that he requested an audience. 
"He called me and invited me to the White House because he wanted to meet his boot maker," Mr. Carroll said. 
"When the White House operator called me, I said, 'What did I do?'
"
Mr. Carroll said he once met Mr. Reagan at an airport in Texas. 
"I said, 'Mr. 
President, where are your boots?'
" Mr. Carroll recalled. 
"He said, 'Oh, my gosh, Nancy dressed me, and I'm in Texas and I'm wearing shoes.'
"
The world headquarters of Mr. Carroll's boot empire is a dumpy building in North Houston known as RJ's Boot Company. 
A quarter-inch of dust clings to the motionless ceiling fan, and a pile of junk covered by a plastic tarpaulin sits in the floor space that could be called the showroom. 
There are stray skins from alligators, ostriches and eels, and the air smells like leather and polish. 
The only hints of grandeur are the signed presidential photographs on the wall.
"If the Statue of Liberty needed boots, she'd probably get them from Rocky Carroll," said Bill Sturgis, 52, an oil-and-gas auctioneer who visited the shop recently. 
Mr. Sturgis owns 13 pairs of Rocky Carroll boots and credits them for easing his back problems so that he can stand all day for his job. 
Another customer claims that his boots cured him of polio, although the jury is apparently still out on male pattern baldness.
Many Texas men, of course, are more loyal to their boot maker than to their first wives. 
The Wheeler Boot Company in Houston celebrated its 40th anniversary in October, thanks to customers like Glenn Lilie, who owns 46 pairs of custom Wheeler Boots. 
(To his credit, Mr. Lilie has been married to his first and only wife for 36 years.)
"If I was having a bad day, since I don't drink, I'd go and spend two hours on a pair of cowboy boots and get it out of my system," said Mr. Lilie, 59, the chief executive of the CPI Group, an oil-field services company in Houston. 
"They're unique, if you design your own pair. 
There's a multitude of toe styles, a multitude of colors. 
Jiminy Christmas, it's way beyond your basic black and brown."
Mr. Carroll, who made his first pair of boots at the age of 6 and is the son of a boot maker, could not agree more. 
To honor the economic summit held in Houston in 1990, he made a commemorative boot on which he stitched the flags of the seven major industrialized nations.
Cowboy boots can display school mascots, company logos, the state flag of Texas and just about anything else. 
He stitched "QE2" on a pair for Queen Elizabeth because there was not enough room for the entire name. 
He also has a pair of boots on display in Mr. Reagan's presidential library. 
Even Pope John Paul II was given a pair.
MR. CARROLL usually spends a few days making a pair of boots, but he says that in an emergency, he can rush out a pair in eight hours. 
His prices begin at $295, he said, and top out at $40,000, which is what he charged Elizabeth Taylor for a diamond-crusted pair.
According to "Art of the Boot" by Tyler Beard (Gibbs Smith, 1999), a glossy coffee-table book for the true bootist, the Mona Lisa of custom boots is the pair known as the Tony Lama "El Rey III."
Made with black alligator and English calf, inlaid with 24-karat gold and encrusted with 384 diamonds and rubies, the boots are valued at $50,000. 
Both the El Rey and the El Rey II pair were stolen during traveling exhibitions, so the El Rey III pair has constant security. 
Custom boot makers say boots like these take months to create.
Eventually, the day may come when a president must muster on without a pair of Rocky Carroll boots. 
Mr. Carroll says he is considering selling his company. 
Of course, he also says he is planning to clear away that pile of junk under the tarp in his shop -- and his customers know that he has been saying that for 10 years.
