
Volkswagen, Europe's largest carmaker, said yesterday that its first-quarter profit almost tripled, ending two years of declines, on cost cuts and increased sales of Audis.
The company reiterated that its full-year profit would rise. 
Net income rose to 70 million euros ($92 million) from 26 million euros, Volkswagen said in a statement to the Frankfurt stock exchange. 
Profit beat the median estimate of 57 million euros of eight analysts surveyed by Bloomberg News.
Sales fell 2.4 percent, to 21.1 billion euros.
''As expected, the most important automotive markets experienced a relatively difficult start to 2005,'' the company said in the statement. 
''We believe that price pressure will continue unabated.''
Patrick Juchemich, an analyst at Sal. 
Oppenheim in Frankfurt, commented, ''This will bring a bit of relief to shareholders who have feared that the situation would get worse.''
Mr. Juchemich, who has a neutral rating on the stock, added, ''The outlook is at least realistic that pricing pressure isn't going away.''
Bernd Pischetsrieder, Volkswagen's chief executive, plans to cut 3.1 billion euros in costs this year and has frozen wages in Germany to stem the earnings slide. 
The Western European market, where the company gets more than half its sales, shrank 2.5 percent in the first quarter, while rebates in the United States and competition in China are putting pressure on profit.
Mr. Pischetsrieder, 57, said on March 8 that first-quarter results would be ''unsatisfactory'' following a ''miserable'' first quarter last year.
Operating profit gained 41 percent, to 464 million euros, beating the analysts' estimate of 381.5 million euros. 
Vehicle sales fell 8.4 percent, to 1.17 million units.
Volkswagen, based in Wolfsburg, Germany, invested in new models including the new version of the Passat, Golf Plus, the new Polo and the Fox small car model.
Mr. Pischetsrieder is counting on growth at Audi to help increase profit. 
Audi first-quarter vehicle sales rose 1.8 percent to 195,044 units, led by a 9.8 percent gain in Europe.
Passenger-car sales in China, the world's third-largest vehicle market, slowed to 15 percent last year, after surging 76 percent in 2003 and expanding 50 percent in 2002.
Volkswagen also announced that Wolfgang Bernhard would take over as head of the Volkswagen brand group starting May 1. 
Mr. Bernhard, who nearly became head of DaimlerChrysler Mercedes Car Group last year before his abrupt departure, became a member of Volkswagen's management board on Feb. 
1.
