
Stocks fell sharply on Wall Street yesterday, a day after the market tumbled because of worries about slowing domestic growth and tighter borrowing conditions.
It was the worst week for the American stock market in nearly five years, with the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index dropping nearly 5 percent, after a sharp sell-off in the last half-hour of trading. 
The Dow fell 208.10 points yesterday after dropping 311.50 points on Thursday; it declined 4.23 percent for the week.
Investors took little comfort from a government report released yesterday that showed the economy grew at a strong pace in the second quarter, which Bush administration officials cited in an effort to assuage the public after the rout in the market on Thursday.
The stock market has become increasingly volatile in the last several months as the slumping housing market and problems in the debt markets are taxing the American economy. 
At the same time, stronger growth is China, India and Europe have kept the global economy humming.
''The economy is still strong, job growth is still healthy, the unemployment rate is low, and the global economy is booming,'' said Liz Ann Sonders, chief investment strategist at the brokerage firm Charles Schwab. 
''But there are cracks here and those cracks seem to be gaining more of the market's attention than the stronger components. 
We'll have to see which one takes hold.''
Early yesterday, President Bush and four of his top economic and financial officials went on the airwaves to try and dispel worries about the economy. 
They cited a Commerce Department report that showed that the economy rebounded in the three months that ended in June; it grew 3.4 percent, which was up from a pace of 0.6 percent in the first quarter.
''And so I want the American people to take a good look at this economy of ours,'' Mr. Bush said. 
''The world is strong -- the world economy is strong. 
I happen to believe one of the main reasons why is because we remain strong.''
While markets did bounce up briefly early in the day, investors found little solace in the latest economic report or the soothing words from Washington.
When trading ended, the S.& P. had fallen 1.6 percent, or 23.71 points, to 1,458.95; it is now up 2.9 percent for the year after having been up 9 percent last week. 
The Dow fell 1.5 percent, to 13,265.47, and is up 6.4 percent for the year, about half what it was a week ago. 
And the Nasdaq composite index fell 37.10 points, or 1.4 percent, to 2,562.24. 
With several swings, the stock market resembled a roller coaster ride -- though one that probably provided little amusement for many investors. 
The Dow, for instance, swung 254 points from its high to the nadir at which it ended the day. 
With a half-hour left in trading, it appeared that stocks would close only modestly down for the day before they plunged -- the Dow dropped about 135 points in 25 minutes.
Crude oil prices surged nearly 3 percent, closing at $77.02 a barrel, a penny short of its record. 
Treasury notes and bonds were little changed, though high-yield bonds and other debt continued to fall yesterday.
Earlier, European markets closed essentially flat, after the decline Thursday in the United States, but markets across Asia suffered one of the worst days of the year, with the benchmark Japanese index falling 2.4 percent. 
The one major exception was China, where markets were mixed.
The Commerce Department's report on the gross domestic product, the broadest gauge of the economy's output, showed that stronger government spending and exports were the driving forces in the second quarter. 
It also showed, to the concern of some economists, that consumer spending slowed significantly to a 1.3 percent pace, from 3.7 percent in the first quarter.
Still, the chief concern for investors appears to be what is happening with interest rates and the ability of consumers and businesses to borrow money.
Yesterday, the British candy maker Cadbury Schweppes said it would delay the sale of its beverage unit, which makes Dr Pepper and 7Up, because of ''extreme volatility'' in the market, which is another way of saying it has become harder to raise money for acquisitions. 
The news came just days after private equity firms and their bankers had trouble finding investors willing to lend the money needed to acquire Chrysler, the automaker, and Alliance Boots, the British drugstore chain.
Shares of Blackstone, the private equity firm that went public in early June, fell $1.40, to close yesterday at $24.30. 
The stock opened trading at $31 and reached as high as $38.
Tobias M. Levkovich, chief United States equity strategist for Citigroup, said it appeared that stock market investors had become rapt by the sudden and significant changes in the credit markets, almost to the exclusion of other factors that usually have a greater influence on share prices, like corporate profits, which remain healthy.
''There is the potential for fear generating undue fear,'' Mr. Levkovich said. 
''Nonetheless, it becomes real because it's in the market.''
Bondholders are now demanding that borrowers pay them 3.9 percent more than the yield on the 10-year Treasury note, 4.78 percent, to hold junk bonds, up from a premium of just 2.1 percent in early June, according to KDP Investment Advisors, a research firm.
In the stock market, the information technology, energy, health care and information technology sectors posted some of the biggest declines. 
In the energy sector, shares of major oil producers fell even as crude oil prices jumped and Chevron issued a strong profit report that was in line with analysts' expectations.
Mr. Levkovich suggested that the sell-off could be driven by profit-taking, given that the energy sector is up nearly 19 percent for the year.
Investors may be thinking, '' 'I've made money here and I want to protect my winnings,' '' Mr. Levkovich said. 
''You never lose money taking a profit.''
