
China and South Korea made subdued expressions of concern on Tuesday after disclosures that Japan's prime minister had presented an offering to a Tokyo war shrine, as officials in Tokyo tried to play down the gift's significance.
There have been worries here that Prime Minister Shinzo Abe's gift last month of a ceremonial plant to Yasukuni Shrine, a Shinto memorial to Japan's war dead, could set off fresh anger across Asia. 
Previous prime ministers have outraged Japan's Asian neighbors by visiting Yasukuni, which includes war criminals among the enshrined and has become a symbol in the region of what many see as Japan's unrepentant attitude toward its wartime aggression.
Seoul and Beijing have so far shown restraint after news of the offering first appeared on Monday. 
In a statement, South Korea's Foreign Ministry called the gift ''very regrettable'' and said it ran ''counter to establishing a correct perception of history.''
A Chinese government spokeswoman, Jiang Yu, told reporters that Yasukuni was an ''important and sensitive political issue'' and asked Japan to ''strictly abide'' by its pledges to cooperate with China.
Since taking office last year, Mr. Abe has left intentionally vague whether he plans to visit the shrine, an ambiguity aimed at appeasing Japanese conservatives while not provoking former wartime victims like China, with whom Japan has growing economic links. 
On Tuesday, Mr. Abe refused even to acknowledge that he made the offering, despite the fact it had earlier been confirmed by both the government and the shrine.
''As long as matters concerning the Yasukuni Shrine remain a diplomatic issue, I make it a rule not to comment whether I will visit the shrine, or whether I have made an offering to it,'' he told reporters.
Other Japanese leaders said they expected the reaction in Asia to be muted. 
The governing Liberal Democratic Party's secretary general, Hidenao Nakagawa, said Mr. Abe had made the offering as a private citizen, not as prime minister. 
He also said there was no change in Mr. Abe's stance on Yasukuni, which has already been explained to South Korea and China.
