
MOST Australians like to think they have a healthy relationship with Asia, and they often point to the visit of China's president, Hu Jintao, a year ago to make the point. 
The Chinese leader, addressing Parliament a day after President Bush did, offered contracts to buy natural gas and iron ore and lingered to see the sights. 
Mr. Bush, in contrast, offered little in the economic department and rushed off in less than 24 hours.
But Mr. Hu's visit also touched a chord in Australia that illustrates a standoffishness that lurks beneath that country's increasing involvement with its neighbors -- a let's-have-Asia-on-our-own-terms attitude.
This has been a theme in Australia since it abandoned its efforts to keep Asians out altogether, under what was called the White Australia policy, some 30 years ago.
Mr. Hu said in his speech that ''back in the 1420's, the expeditionary fleets of China's Ming dynasty reached Australian shores,'' referring to an admiral named Zheng whom Chinese scholars say was one of the world's great navigators.
Australians have always lionized an English explorer, Captain James Cook, who claimed the island continent for Britain in 1770, and in some quarters the suggestion that a Chinese sailor beat Cook was deemed the height of presumption. 
''Forget Cook, a Chinese eunuch found Australia'' was a headline in The Australian Financial Review.
This weekend, Australia completed an election campaign between Prime Minister John Howard of the conservative Liberal Party and Mark Latham of the opposition Labor Party, in which they differed primarily about who can hand out the most money to maintain the hedonistic lifestyle of many Australians. 
Still, Asia figured in the backdrop, even in this contented period. 
It has not been so long, after all, since the 20th century, when Australians feared Asia's multitudes and fought against Japan.
''The European migrants had a tentative hold on the huge continent,'' said Neville Meaney, an associate professor of history at Sydney University. 
''When they looked at a map they saw the teeming millions 'up there.'''
Since the 1970's, Australia has gone through an ''amazing transformation'' in its demeanor toward Asia, he said, starting with its abandonment of the White Australia policy, which essentially barred Asian immigration. 
There have been successive waves of Asian immigration since. 
And Australia's prosperity now is underpinned by China's hunger for its iron ore, aluminum and gas.
But ingrained wariness of the huge Asian populations to the north survives.
Mr. Howard acquired his political philosophy from Sir Robert Menzies, a prime minister whose campaign literature in the 1950's showed red arrows swarming south from Communist China. 
Now, although Mr. Howard has visited China repeatedly to shore up the economic relationship, he has also advertised a willingness to stage pre-emptive strikes against terror threats in the region.
Many Asians say this harks back to Australia's old form. 
''Even if the government was considering the policy, the indelicacy of publicly stating it is quite amazing,'' said Mr. Meaney. ''What advantage does he get except to show the electorate he's strong?''
Another element of Mr. Howard's policy also appeals to the historic notion of trying to keep Asia at bay. 
He won the 2001 election largely on the strength of his stand that boatloads of asylum seekers would not be allowed into Australia, and asserted during that campaign that some asylum seekers on one boat had thrown children overboard. 
An official inquiry later found a lack of evidence for the claim. 
But Mr. Howard -- who was seen at the time as trying to depict the refugees as unfit for residence in Australia -- has insisted that he was acting on information told him at the time.
That saga, say his critics, reinforced Australia's popular strict border policy, which Mr. Howard has defined as: ''We decide who comes into this country, and on the basis on which they come.''
For their part, the Labor Party has proposed a different Asia policy, although the border policy would remain.
The likely foreign minister in a Labor government is Kevin Rudd, a Mandarin speaker who served in Australia's Beijing embassy. 
He said Labor's foreign policy would combat terror in Southeast Asia on the ''principle of cooperation and not pre-emption.''
As a start, Labor proposed supporting the failing Indonesian school system with $20 million.
At home, the Labor Party says it would dramatically increase funds for Asian languages, a step that might even save the teaching of Indonesian at Sydney University, the first campus in Australia to teach it.
Indonesia is Australia's closest Asian neighbor, but enrollments to learn its language have diminished to the point that the university is considering dropping the course, Mr. Meaney said.
Indeed, enrollments in all Asian languages are down on Australian campuses, a remarkable reminder of the nation's mercurial manners toward its neighbors.
