
President Bush prides himself on order and does not care much for surprises. 
That explains why his aides painstakingly plotted out the first days, weeks and months of his presidency and are already thinking in detail about what they want to happen next year and the year after.
Yet the carefully constructed game plans have been spoiled by two dramas in recent days that are largely beyond Mr. Bush's control but could have deep consequences not only for the world but for his presidency: the standoff in China and a stock market that, to put it in the mildest of terms, is looking sick and making people feel sicker.
"This is a routine of life, particularly presidential life," said Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr., the historian who was an aide to John F. Kennedy. "They can't control the world. 
They can't even control Congress. 
They can't control the weather. 
And they have to learn to live with novelty."
Indeed, presidents are inevitably judged not simply by how they followed through on campaign promises but by how they reacted to the unexpected.
Franklin D. Roosevelt did not go looking for World War II. 
Ronald Reagan did not anticipate the air controllers' strike that consumed his early days in office. 
Bill Clinton would never have known before the Oklahoma City bombing that his reaction to it would enhance his stature and help him stare down Newt Gingrich.
Now, after 10 weeks that were more steady than unsettled and at a point when he planned to be zeroing in on winning Congressional support for his budget, Mr. Bush is distracted by debacles that no one ever imagined.
Beyond China and the economy, an energy crisis has emerged in California.
Just as exasperating for Mr. Bush is that one of the grandest legislative triumphs thus far has not belonged to him. 
It was championed by his chief rival, Senator John McCain of Arizona, whose campaign finance overhaul plan was approved by the Senate on Monday.
"The campaign was about a set of circumstances that aren't applying to his presidency right now because the world is such a volatile place," said Ed Rogers, a veteran of the Reagan White House. 
"But unfortunately, a lot of being president is how you handle the punches that are thrown at you rather than the things that you affirmatively want to do."
For Mr. Bush, White House veterans agree, the challenges are substantial, not only because he is a novice on the world stage but because polls show that the public is not convinced that he has the ability to deal effectively with a slumping economy or the background to preside over an international crisis.
Yet for some of these predicaments, Mr. Bush has very few options, if any.
"They've done a pretty good job so far," said Lyn Nofziger, who was an aide to Mr. Reagan, "But now, all of a sudden, we're going to see how they react under pressure."
There also may be some opportunities for Mr. Bush if he can begin to combat a perception, especially among Democrats, that he is not quite up to the job.
"When something sudden like China happens, it's a real test because you're faced with the possibility of unguarded moments, and you're faced with different reactions by different people in your administration," said former Senator John C. Danforth, Republican of Missouri. 
"To keep everything in check is a real challenge."
So far, Mr. Danforth said, Mr. Bush has helped himself because "he is cool, he is firm, he is completely in control."
Others argue that the economy may present a longer-lasting problem for Mr. Bush because the standoff with China will eventually end -- though the sooner the better for the president.
By contrast, the entire underpinning of Mr. Bush's campaign was prosperity, and the uncertainty over the economy touches every calculation, from his proposals on trade to Social Security to the tax cut. 
Mr. Bush's aides had hoped that he could muster greater support for his tax cut by promoting it as providing the economy a needed jolt; instead the measure is in danger in the Senate.
"In some ways, Jiang Zemin is less of a problem than Alan Greenspan," said Ross K. Baker, who teaches political science at Rutgers University.
"Diplomats are good at dealing with one another so that there are face-saving devices," Mr. Baker said. 
"But when a president gets caught in a business cycle, there's not much he can do about it. 
There's a whole host of economic problems that can't be dealt with by skillful negotiation or a strong cavalry charger."
In a striking contrast to President Bill Clinton, Mr. Bush has so far been reluctant to use the bully pulpit of the presidency to speak out at length, especially about the situation with China. 
On Monday and Tuesday, he stepped out of the Oval Office to issue terse statements on China. 
He took no questions, though he is expected to be quizzed on Thursday at a convention of newspaper editors here.
"People will be watching to see how he deals with it," said Fred Greenstein, a presidential historian at Princeton University. 
"He has to establish a secure presence. 
You don't want to be as overexposed as Clinton was. 
But I don't think you have to be the little man who wasn't there."
But Representative Rob Portman, an Ohio Republican with close ties to Mr. Bush, said he was not worried that the president had been the little man. 
On China, he said, Mr. Bush "has been relatively less visible than President Clinton might have been in the same instance. 
I think that's appropriate. 
President Bush is more interested in taking a less active role in trying to get out front on issues that he cannot control."
Representative Anne M. Northup, Republican of Kentucky, said she was been impressed that the White House did not seem rattled. 
She said she was pleasantly surprised that Karl Rove, the president's top political adviser, showed up as promised at a meeting this morning of conservatives.
"This administration knows that they've got a couple of very serious challenges in front of them, but they're not quaking," Ms. Northup said.
"There's none of this, 'Oh my gosh, what are we going to do?'
They're very businesslike. 
There's no sense of panic. 
There's no sense of, 'This isn't fair. 
How did this happen to us?'
"
Foreign policy is one area where presidents can often count on bipartisan support. 
At meetings on Capitol Hill today, Mr. Portman said he found "a remarkable deference" to Mr. Bush among lawmakers in both parties. 
But Mr. Bush's own party remains deeply split between those who would contain China's growing power and those who favor closer diplomatic ties and deeper and deeper economic engagement.
Still, even if Mr. Bush is able to score politically on China, the unfolding developments could smother his agenda.
"Right now everybody wants the message to be about taxes," said a Republican strategist with close ties to the White House. 
"Even if he has a victory on China, it's still been a distraction. 
You can't weave it into the calendar of what the White House wants to do."
White House officials were not saying whether the president consulted his father, a former ambassador to China, on these latest developments in China and with the stock market.
Even so, President Bush can certainly take a lesson from the two biggest external events on his father's watch: the Persian Gulf war and the breakup of the Soviet Union. 
Mr. Bush drew raves from the public and from Congress for his handling of those international events.
But voters' memories were short. 
The elder Bush was a one-term president.
