
THE main language spoken at the Shanghai auto show is Chinese, but the vocabulary of the designs is polyglot: Italian flourishes, high Japanese roofs, German solidity, American assertiveness.
What is missing?
Almost anything that could indicate the emergence of a distinctly Chinese school of automotive design.
China has the world's fastest-growing auto market and has already overtaken Japan in domestic sales; it now trails only the United States. 
Both multinational and Chinese automakers have learned that it is a lot easier to build new car factories than to instill a new generation of Chinese designers and engineers with the sensibilities to have a lasting effect on global automotive design.
Chinese automakers like Chery, Great Wall, Landwind and others rely on Italian design studios to come up with concept cars that lend pizazz to their increasingly elaborate auto show displays. 
Production models remain similar to existing Western and Japanese models -- sometimes suspiciously so, like the Chery QQ, a best seller here, which is similar to the Chevrolet Spark.
Such limitations are not stopping automakers from trying to determine what buyers in China really want. 
And with money and talent pouring into the industry, practically everyone here agrees that it is only a matter of time before China starts to become known for car design as well.
''Each country has their own vocabulary or tastes for design, and especially in China they have a very long history'' to develop such tastes, said Katsumi Nakamura, president and chief executive of the Dongfeng Motor Company, a joint venture of Nissan and the Dongfeng Group.
With first-time car owners accounting for three-fifths of car buyers, the emphasis so far has been on showiness and providing lots of features that dealership employees can easily explain to customers. 
''The current perception of Chinese customers is: luxury means putting on wooden panels, the seat of the car should be leather, and a luxury car should have a sunroof,'' Mr. Nakamura said.
The emphasis on flash and interiors has frustrated designers who want to foster a greater appreciation in China for the subtleties of exterior design. 
''We have to teach the Chinese a more functional Italian way to use a car -- not just for status,'' said Roberto Piatti, chief executive of Torino Design in Italy, which created the Lui sport utility concept vehicle and Lei concept coupe for Chery for the Beijing auto show in November.
Sometimes, Chinese designs are surprising. 
The Great Wall Coolbear concept vehicle, first shown in Beijing, was created by Chinese designers who flew to European and American design institutes for help and then ended up producing a high-roof vehicle reminiscent of the Scion xB.
At least one Chinese company has started showing a knack for savvy marketing, although its vehicle designs remain derivative. 
The classiest displays at the Beijing and Shanghai auto shows belonged not to a luxury brand like Mercedes or Cadillac, but to the Shanghai Automotive Industry Corporation, known as S.A.I.C. 
The automaker displays its British-influenced sedans on a large polished wooden stand akin to those used by Jaguar at the Detroit auto show.
Last year, S.A.I.C. acquired technological rights to the Rover 75 from the MG Rover Group, which is now defunct, while Nanjing Auto bought the rest of the company, including the fabled MG brand. 
Ford acquired rights to the Rover car brand to retain control over its Land Rover division, so S.A.I.C. has renamed its model the Roewe, which is also easier to pronounce in Chinese.
Rover was a decidedly middle-market brand, at best, before it went bust in Britain. 
But Roewe is being presented here as an up-market line. 
To make sure no one missed its European heritage in status-conscious China, the S.A.I.C. cars have unusually large badges displaying two regal lions. 
At the Beijing show, an enormous television screen showed a video again and again of Rovers being driven around country estates -- although some of the estates looked more Mediterranean than British.
''We're proud of the fact our I.P.R. has British heritage,'' Phil Murtaugh, S.A.I.C.'s executive vice president said, using an abbreviation for intellectual property rights.
Purely Chinese automakers hold less than a third of the market, and tend to be so dominated by engineers that they have only begun to build design staffs. 
So the real work in figuring out how Chinese consumers differ from buyers elsewhere has mainly fallen to the multinationals that control more than two-thirds of the market through 50-50 joint ventures with local partners.
For starters, chrome is popular.
Ford showed a new version of the Mondeo sedan on Thursday that was actually designed in Cologne, Germany, for the Chinese market, although its design was based on consumer research in China. 
The molding atop the doors is shiny chrome on the Chinese model, while the more understated Mondeo sold in Europe has black rubber or plastic molding, said Martin Smith, executive director for design at Ford of Europe.
But Mondeos destined for China are more elegant in one way than those marketed in Europe. 
Chinese Mondeos, which will be built in Chongqing, will have real light-emitting diodes for taillights; the new Mondeo sold in Europe will use conventional taillights designed to look as if they have light-emitting diodes.
The Chinese Mondeo will get the real thing because it is being marketed to automotive trendsetters as a premium sporty vehicle, not the family car that it is in Europe. 
Chinese trendsetters, called ''demand progressives'' by Ford's bureaucracy, are actually more aware of the latest technologies and more insistent on acquiring them than are comparable buyers in Europe or the United States, Mr. Smith said.
General Motors showed a Buick Riviera concept car here in an effort to evoke the subtle attention to detail in the lines on Chinese porcelain. 
Designers at G.M.'s joint venture with S.A.I.C. modified Buick's traditional double sweep-spears on the side of the car so they seem to fade away in the middle only to reappear at the rear.
The subtlety, easily lost if not explained, is deliberate. 
''To put a Chinese lantern on the headlights, that's not something I get too excited about,'' said James Shyr, the joint venture's design director.
Every show has some losers. 
Chinese auto shows have more than their share because municipalities and provinces across China have been setting up their own carmakers even though some have scant expertise.
At the Shanghai show, a military-green S.U.V. from Beijing Automobile Works made a Hummer look graceful. 
The lime-green F3-R subcompact hatchback from BYD Auto demonstrated that even a bright pastel cannot rehabilitate a bland design -- and might draw attention to the blandness.
Not all the dubious entries were Chinese. 
The Iran Khodro Industrial Group showed a gray sedan with a 1.8-liter engine that would probably not sell well in the United States even beyond any geopolitical objections: the manufacturer promotes itself as IKCO and the car would probably attract the nickname Ick-o, a reasonable description for an almost starkly functional vehicle that seems inspired by the worst failures among small cars of the 1970s.
But the broader trend toward more competitive offerings is unmistakable -- and someday the cars displayed here, or their immediate descendants, are likely to show up in dealerships in the United States.
''The domestic market will be saturated someday,'' said Tong Dongcheng, vice president of Dongfeng Motor, ''and we'll have to export and take some market share.''
