
BYRON LANGFORD, 16, of Darien will teach English to children in China. 
Matt Doyle, 17, of Fairfield will combine trekking and construction work in Thailand. 
Jake Conway, 16, leaves West Hartford on June 20 for Guatemala, where he, too, will mix community service and sightseeing.
The companies that organize these trips said that teenagers have been signing up in record numbers. 
Where There Be Dragons of Boulder, Colo., and i-to-i of Denver said they were having their best year ever. 
So is Rustic Pathways of Willoughby, Ohio, which said applications have been growing 50 percent a year. 
Global Routes of Northampton, Mass., will be sending 315 students on trips this summer, the most in the company's 19-year history, and had to turn students away.
''Touring has moved from the central part of the activity to being very much secondary,'' said David Venning, founder of Rustic Pathways, which has run summer programs for teenagers for 25 years. 
''It used to be 'Let's tour France.'
Now it's 'Let's go work on an irrigation project on the Mekong River.'''
These trips can be expensive. 
A five-week trip to Ecuador, including a visit to the Galapagos Islands, for example, costs $5,350. 
Once air fare and spending money are added, families could spend about $6,400 to send their children overseas to do unpaid volunteer work.
The teenagers and their parents said the expense is worth it. 
The students soak up foreign languages and unfamiliar customs, while doing community service. 
As one mother said: ''They do have to get out of their environment and reflect on those things that money doesn't buy. 
It's not their fault they come from Fairfield County.''
It is also not lost on participants that the experiences could look good to a college. 
The volunteer work often ends up on college applications and as the subject of college essays. 
While college admissions officers said the programs do not materially improve an applicant's chances, college consultants said the perception is that they do.
''I always say, 'Don't do it for college,''' said Matthew Greene, an independent educational consultant at Howard Greene and Associates in Westport and New York. 
''Families are letting the tail wag the dog, trying to put a community-service veneer on the student. 
Kids detest that. 
Colleges have become very cynical about students who spend a lot of money going far away to do service and travel that they think will impress colleges.''
The reasons to join excursions like these are for the self-development and maturity a student can gain, or for language immersion, the reasons these programs were developed in the first place, he said.
Byron Langford, a sophomore at St. Luke's School in New Canaan who also has lacrosse camp and summer school on his calendar, said his trip to China will probably be the subject of his college essay, ''but I'm doing it for myself, too.''
His school requires 80 hours of community service to graduate, and to fill those hours, he wanted one in-depth project.
''This trip was something I could relate to, having lived in Singapore for four years,'' he said. 
''I think it will teach me lessons about how other people live.''
The two-week trip, run by Cross-Cultural Solutions of New Rochelle, will cost $2,279 plus air fare, and his sister, Annie, 14, and mother, Florence, are going, too.
For Thailand-bound Matt Doyle, this is his third overseas trip in as many summers. 
He has heard these working vacations ''are definitely an extra point or so'' with colleges, but that's not why he goes.
''I do it because I enjoy community service and going to exotic places,'' said Matt, a junior at Greens Farms Academy in Westport who is traveling with Global.
Priya Chandrasekaran, a Global program director, said all of their programs were full.
''We've turned people away,'' she said. 
''The Spanish immersions are really popular.''
The favorite is a four-week Costa Rica trip, $3,850 plus air fare and a suggested $400 materials fee.
Teenagers from the Northeast and California make up the majority of high school students traveling to developing countries with Where There Be Dragons, said Emily Braucher, associate marketing director. 
''Our programs are challenging emotionally and physically,'' she said, adding that students looking solely to pad a resume ''are usually not the best fit.''
Chris Lewine, 17, this year's salutatorian at Weston High School, resents it when people suggest his five-week trip to Ghana last summer was a resume builder.
''It's a sensitive subject,'' he said. 
''I cannot deny that it probably helped my application and I would not deny that it was one of my reasons for going, but it was not at the top of my list. 
I love travel, I love foreign cultures and I love community service. 
It was not just a ploy to get into Yale,'' where he is headed in August.
Building a dozen public latrines and a basketball court and painting a mural of a world map at a school were some of the tasks he tackled in a village ''where there were more goats than people,'' said Chris, who wants to major in international studies.
The teenagers stayed in pairs with local families, learning their ways and teaching them about hygiene and composting, with the help of a translator. 
''The last day there was an enormous celebration to thank us,'' he recalled.
The final week, ''our reward,'' he said, included a walking safari and a stay at a beach resort. 
''I had an amazing time,'' he said.
Chris's younger brother, Nico, junior class president at Weston High, will spend July in Thailand, on the same trip as Matt Doyle, building a water tank and community center. 
''I hope to gain a new perspective,'' said Nico, who also volunteers with his church youth group. 
The cost: $4,050 plus air fare to Bangkok.
College counselors said summer can make or break a college application. 
If all else is equal, and one kid is working on a tan while another tackles something serious, the one doing meaningful work will get the spot, said Katherine Cohen of IvyWise, an educational consulting company in New York. 
But for community service to look meaningful, it should be done over a period of years, not in one three-or four-week chunk, she said. 
Any trip abroad should be at least six weeks to be significant and should reflect a student's particular interests.
And what about those who can't afford the luxury of foreign travel or must earn money over the summer?
''If you're a low-income kid working at McDonald's, that's something we value,'' said Richard Shaw, dean of admissions and financial aid at Yale. 
Similarly, Mr. Greene said he has read ''powerful essays'' about summer jobs at coffee shops and diners.
A strong academic program and good performance within that program account for 80 percent of the admissions decision, Mr. Greene said. 
''It's only when the academics are in place that extracurriculars will make a difference,'' he said. 
''These are called tipping factors.''
Those tipping factors need not include costly travel. 
Opportunities for volunteer work exist in cities all over the state, Mr. Greene said.
At Yale, where only 9.7 percent of the 19,451 applicants were accepted this year, Mr. Shaw said an expensive community service trip is ''just another factor among many we would look at. 
It doesn't carry a lot of weight.''
If students do what makes them happy, that will come through on the application, he said.
Trinity College in Hartford seeks evidence that students will contribute on campus and off, said Larry Dow, dean of admissions and financial aid. 
''This particular college is very much interested in making the connection to its urban surroundings and the global community,'' he said. 
One working vacation by itself may not tip the balance, but a folder that shows a ''commitment to civic matters'' earns high marks. 
Of 5,700-plus applicants, slightly more than 2,000 were admitted this year, he said.
Parents said they believed their children were broadening their cultural awareness by volunteering overseas.
''Education is more than classrooms and getting an A on something,'' said Dr. Stephen Conway, a neurologist from West Hartford. 
''We want our children to become more worldly and see how the rest of the world lives.''
His son, Jake, 16, went to Spain after eighth grade to learn Spanish. 
Last year, Jake spent six weeks in Mexico on a study-work program, helping out in a camp for disabled children.
''It was an unbelievable cultural experience,'' said Jake, 16, a sophomore at Hall High School. 
This summer, Jake sought something ''even more rural, intense and cultural,'' and selected a four-week $5,000 trip to Guatemala.
As proof these journeys are not just a steppingstone to an elite learning institution, Dr. Conway pointed to his daughter, Sarah, a senior who was accepted at Amherst College, but deferred enrollment for a year, preferring to first study and do community service in Spain and Costa Rica.
For some students, service precedes travel. 
Victoria Stockman, 17, president of the China Care Club at Greenwich Academy, where she is a junior, has helped raise money for Chinese orphans since her freshman year. 
She and 10 others from the school and their brother school, Brunswick School, will travel to Beijing and Taiyuan this month to work at children's homes that are run by China Care and orphanages. 
They will also determine how best to allocate $7,000 they collected this year through sales of T-shirts and baked goods.
Being there ''is very empowering,''' said Matt Dalio, a Harvard junior from Greenwich who started China Care when he was 16 and marvels at its growth to more than 20 clubs and a $1 million operating budget. 
Most club members are passionate about China Care, Victoria said. 
If a few are traveling just to impress colleges, that doesn't bother her. 
''At least the community service is getting done,'' she said.
Troy Peden, founder and editor of GoAbroad.com, a Web site that provides a directory of 22,000 study-abroad and community-service organizations, said that companies in business for as many as 20 years now market to high school students, instead of just to college students.
''Parents of today's teens were the first generation to have foreign study programs widely available, and they value similar opportunities for their children,'' said Mr. Peden, the study-abroad director at Jacksonville University in Florida. 
''There isn't any profession that the resume doesn't look better with international experience.''
