
9 P.M. (13); 10 P.M. (49) CHINA PREP ''Wide Angle'' reports on the shaping of the next generation of Chinese leaders (above, a middle-school scene) as it follows four students through their final year at an elite high school where 1,800 teenagers compete for 59 spots in the country's top two universities. 
A year-end exam will determine their fate; those who score poorly will be forced to take low-paying jobs or go to trade schools. 
The students, who are busy with schoolwork from 7 a.m. to 11 p.m., Monday through Saturday, are Mei Jiachin, a genius mathematician from a farming family; Zhang Lie, who wants to follow in his father's footsteps by studying law and joining the Communist Party; Chen Zhibo, a misfit science student who aspires to become the Bill Gates of China; and Gao Mengjia, a nerd -- his description -- with visions of becoming a hedge-fund manager. 
A rich one.
8 P.M. (ABC Family) THE SECRET LIFE OF THE AMERICAN TEENAGER Amy (Shailene Woodley) tries to figure out where to live. 
Ricky (Daren Kagasoff) struggles to take responsibility for what he's done.
8 P.M. (Animal Planet) KILLING FOR A LIVING A look at animals who kill their own kind (like the female American crocodile, right), whether for dominance, food or mates.
9 P.M. (Investigation Discovery) REAL INTERROGATIONS It's almost like being there: this new series offers glimpses of actual sessions between police and suspects. 
In the premiere episode detectives turn up the heat on Richard Schenk, the husband of Rika Schenk, 68, who has disappeared.
9 P.M. (Oxygen) TORI & DEAN: HOME SWEET HOLLYWOOD The season ends as Tori and Dean return home with their new baby, Stella, and throw a housewarming party.
9 P.M. (Sci Fi) EUREKA The town's annual dog show results in a malfunction; Allison (Salli Richardson-Whitfield) finds her wedding plans are affected by earthquakes; and Zoe (Jordan Hinson) worries about how the accelerated physics program will affect her life.
9 P.M. (Sundance) IT'S NOT EASY BEING GREEN Dick Strawbridge, a retired Army officer turned green guru, helps Chris and Carla Fletcher, former urban dwellers who traded in city life for a farm in Aberdeenshire, Scotland, extend their rainwater-harvesting system.
10 P.M. (13); 11 P.M. (49) BELARUSIAN WALTZ Belarus is called ''Europe's last dictatorship,'' and since 1994 Aleksandr G. Lukashenko has ruled that former Soviet republic with an iron fist, imprisoning those who oppose him, silencing the press and refusing to investigate the assassinations of dissidents. 
But the performance artist Alexander Pushkin has refused to stand down, publicly mocking the dictator's pretensions. 
This ''P.O.V.'' documentary from Andrzej Fidyk looks at this merging of old-style authoritarianism and contemporary street theater.
10 P.M. (ABC) PRIMETIME: MEDICAL MYSTERIES This season premiere investigates the case of an Indonesian man with a rare immunological deficiency that causes warts that look like tree bark.
10 P.M. (Bravo) MILLION DOLLAR LISTING Josh tries to mend his relationship with Dr. Sam by finding him a condominium, even though it's his rival Chad's listing. 
Meanwhile Chad tries to impress his father by selling two condos.
10 P.M. (FX) RESCUE ME In this ''mini-sode'' with Gina Gershon, left, the firefighters play a game to keep their minds off their difficult task.
10 P.M. (History) EVOLVE They were designed to kill, butcher and devour. 
But these days we use them mostly to chew. 
This episodes looks at jaws, from a shark's razor-sharp serrated teeth to a lion's deadly canines.
11 P.M. (SoapNet) GENERAL HOSPITAL NIGHT SHIFT A French-speaking woman attacks Patrick (Jason Thompson) in the emergency room; Jagger (Antonio Sabato Jr.) lets Saira (Azita Ghanizada) evaluate his son, Stone (Cameron Boyce); Epiphany (Sonya Eddy) and Toussaint (Billy Dee Williams) go on their first date; and Kyle (Adam Grimes) teaches a sex education course. 
KATHRYN SHATTUCK
