
''From time to time,'' said Michel Barnier, the French foreign minister, ''it can be useful to listen to each other.''
The comment, made in an interview devoted largely to France's desire to improve ties with the United States, reflects a global preoccupation as President George W. Bush embarks on his second term this week with a new foreign policy team. 
Countries around the world, whether allies or not, want to be heard -- about terrorism, yes, but also about development, trade, the environment and the weak dollar.
The first-term view of America as an unrivalled power with a single focus, uninterested in consultation, its perceived arrogance captured by the photographs at Abu Ghraib, will be hard to shake. 
Still, Mr. Barnier suggested, ''the United States cannot be alone for the next 30 years, confronted by the problems of the world.''
For a moment after Sept. 
11, 2001, the war on terror dictated new alliances. 
Russia and China, among others, found common cause with America in battling militant Islamists. 
But that season may be ending: Russia is irked by what it sees as American meddling in its back yard, not least Ukraine, and China is complaining about American support for Taiwan and opposition to the lifting of a European embargo on arms sales.
America, of course, is not as isolated as the French may believe. 
Romania's new president, Traian Basescu, rode to victory last month on a platform of close adherence to the line in Washington and London. 
Romanians loved it. 
Like others in central and eastern Europe, they still see the United States as a beacon.
But in the West, America's image is tarnished, and Mr. Bush is widely disliked. 
From Berlin to Madrid, people want proof that the trans-Atlantic alliance still counts and still involves mutual respect.
Mr. Bush is scheduled to visit Brussels next month, a gesture meant to show new sensitivity to Europe's concerns. 
His mission will not be easy, but the situation in Iraq may focus minds on the need for cooperation.
The Middle East is the nexus of the world's expectations from the president. 
Mr. Bush and his secretary of state-designate, Condoleezza Rice, may ease hostility to America if they are seen to bring fresh energy -- and greater balance -- to their approach to the Palestinian conflict, and if they can find a way to start withdrawing from Iraq this year.
The war against Islamic terrorism will inevitably remain a central focus for the United States, one whose urgency pushes all else aside in many Americans' view. 
How Mr. Bush conducts it, and especially the outcome in Iraq, will probably prove to be pivotal to his legacy.
But to concentrate on Islamic terrorism to the exclusion of all else would probably hurt the president in the rest of the world. 
Africa wants greater attention to debt relief and more open trade. 
Latin America feels neglected and is turning to China as an economic partner. 
The Dec. 
26 tsunami focused attention on poverty, an issue where the world wants more American leadership.
That is America's lot, the poisoned fruit of its power: The world looks to it for peace, for prosperity, for virtually everything. 
The burden is an impossible one, and one complicated by all the ambivalence that great power inspires. 
Even as they look to Washington, countries resent the fact that they are obliged to do so.
What most of the world wants from Mr. Bush is for American power to be wielded with greater subtlety. 
Otherwise, the coalitions he has fostered to confront North Korea's nuclear weapons or Iran's nuclear ambitions may prove fragile, potentially leaving him to face an expensive, perilous and lonely new war.
America's might is unrivalled. 
The question is how best to use it
