
IT'S not easy running a jazz club anywhere at anytime, much less in largely suburban New Jersey, in what are hardly the best economic times.
The audience for the music, while dedicated, is small. 
Jazz accounted for only 3 percent of recorded music sales last year, according to Nielsen SoundScan, which tracks retail sales nationwide.
Being next to New York cuts both ways, say musicians, promoters and patrons. 
While more people are aware of and exposed to the music, a New Jersey jazz fan working in Manhattan can stay in the city and choose from over a dozen places to hear music nearly any night of the week.
On the plus side, the northern half of the state can listen to WBGO-FM, anaward-winning public radio station devoted exclusively to jazz, which frequently announces local performances. 
And many professional jazz musicians live in Essex , Bergen and Hudson counties, ranging from respected sidemen and studio players like John Lee, Earl May and Geary Moore to better-known leaders and stars like Bill Charlap, Jon Faddis, Slide Hampton and Bucky Pizzarelli.
Several places offer jazz once or twice a week, among them the Priory and Renaissance Caf in Newark, Crossroads in Garwood, the Cornerstone in Metuchen and Luna Rossa Restaurant in Clifton. 
But only three present jazz all week and consistently book top talent -- Trumpets in Montclair, Shanghai Jazz in Madison and the recently opened Cecil's in West Orange.
''It is damn difficult,'' said Enrico Granafei, one of Trumpets' owners. 
Mr. Granafei, who was born in Italy in 1952, runs Trumpets with his wife, Kristine Massari, 50. 
They took over the business in 1999, three years after another couple failed to revive it. 
Trumpets was founded in the late 1980's by Emily Wingert, who ran it for eight years.
Shanghai Jazz is owned by David Niu, born in Taiwan in 1960, and his wife, Martha Chang, 38. 
They took the space over from Ms. Chang's parents, who ran it as a Chinese restaurant, Four Seas Cuisines of China, until they retired in 1995.
Neither couple has children, and both share a passion for jazz. 
Mr. Granafei is a working jazz harmonica player, and often sits in with the musicians at Trumpets; many are his friends . Mr. Niu has an infectious fan's enthusiasm for the groups he presents. 
''Wow!
Was that great music or what?'' he exclaimed happily before a cheering crowd on a Saturday night after a lively set by Mr. Lee's group, which featured a guest appearance by the trumpeter Jon Faddis, the former director of the Carnegie Hall Jazz Band.
While both couples share the tasks of running their clubs, they know other parts of the working world as well. 
Ms. Massari has been an Italian teacher in the West Orange public school system for 14 years. 
Besides being a musician, Mr. Granafei worked as a "freelance interpreter" to make ends meet. 
Ms. Chang, a former Fulbright scholar, is completing her doctorate in Chinese politics at Harvard while she runs the restaurant with her husband. 
Mr. Niu is a lawyer who practiced in Morristown and Manhattan before becoming a fulltime restaurateur and club owner.
While Mr. Granafei proudly calls Trumpets a club with food, not a restaurant with music, he admitted it was hard to attract people who really care about the music -- which complicates the club's finances.
A respectful crowd of about 30 customers who paid a $20 cover charge and a $10 drink minimum were on hand on a recent Friday night in Montclair to hear Grammy-award winning vibraphonist Dave Samuels -- in a room that could easily have held more than twice that many. 
By contrast, the next night in Madison, nearly 100 people, most of whom had ordered a full-course meal, packed the dining room and bar to hear Mr. Lee's quartet play with Mr. Faddis.
When asked if Trumpets is profitable after paying bands anywhere from $500 to $1,200 or more per night, Mr. Granafei said, ''Let's put it this way, we survive.''
At Shanghai Jazz, meanwhile, the Chinese cuisine often entices patrons to spend more than the $30 minimum. 
That, as well as keeping the cost of bands under $1,000 per night (while offering them free food), has made the club profitable Mr. Niu says when pressed.
Indeed, the food and the atmosphere attract musicians as well as customers.
''No one goes into the gig thinking they're going to make a lot of money,'' said Mr. Lee, a South Orange resident. 
''But the musicians all love the food, and they always have a good time. 
It's almost like an off night.''
Both sets of owners said they have their pick of top musicians from the plentiful local talent. 
At this point, Mr. Niu said, ''they call us.''
Ms. Massari says she and her husband are focusing on for bringing in international jazz acts. 
Many, like Vitali Imereli, the violin virtuoso from Estonia by way of the former Soviet Georgia, were personally recruited by Mr. Granafei, who regularly plays at jazz festivals in Europe.
New Jersey's newest jazz club impresario, the drummer and producer Cecil Brooks 3rd, believes New Jersey has so many talented jazz musicians eager to play live gigs that there is room for another fulltime club.Last month, he opened Cecil's in downtown West Orange, which seats about 75.
Having once booked acts at Trumpets, Mr. Brooks knows there are easier ways to make money than running a jazz club. 
''Maybe,'' he said, ''I'm a fatal optimistic.''
Cecil's, 364 Valley Road, West Orange, (973)736-4800. 
$10 music charge on weekends; no minimum. 
Web site: cecilsonline.com.
Shanghai Jazz ,24 Main Street, Madison, (973)822-2899. 
No cover, but a $20 food and drink minimum on Friday; $30 on Saturday. 
Web site: shanghaijazz.com.
Trumpets, 6 Depot Square, Montclair. 
(973)744-2600. Music charge from $10 to $20; $10 drink minimum. 
Web site: trumpetsjazz.com.
