
America's intelligence agencies often struggle to reach consensus on what is happening in the intelligence black hole of North Korea. 
That has been particularly true in the past month, as officials examine satellite images suggesting that something suspicious is happening in the mountains near the town of Kilju, on the country's northeast coast.
To some, including several North Korea experts who have served across a number of administrations, the activity is the latest sign that North Korea may be preparing for its first test of a nuclear weapon.
The new American ambassador to Japan, J. Thomas Schieffer, seemed to suggest as much when he told a group of Japanese lawmakers that ''I believe they have taken some preparatory steps'' for a test, as an embassy spokesman quoted him saying. 
Japanese officials quoted Mr. Schieffer as calling a test highly likely, according to Kyodo, a Japanese news agency -- a view held by some North Korea experts in Washington.
But the State Department spokesman, Richard A. Boucher, asked if this confirmed that North Korea had indeed taken the first steps toward a test, replied, ''I wouldn't quite read as much into his statements as you do.''A similar ambiguity pervades what various intelligence officials have been saying in recent days as they describe their views on broad questions like the intentions and capabilities of Kim Jong Il, North Korea's leader, and narrower questions like whether, in fact, the North Koreans have built a reviewing stand so that their leaders can feel the ground shake if a test happens.
Last week, three sources in different parts of the United States government told The New York Times that they had seen or been briefed on evidence of what looked like grandstands erected at a distance from the suspected test site, raising suspicions that preparations were in place for observers of a possible test. 
They acknowledged that even if there were grandstands, they could exist for another purpose.
But one agency cautioned at the same time that it knew of no evidence of any such structure. 
This week officials at the intelligence arm of the State Department expressed the same view. 
As written intelligence reports are usually shared among agencies, their inability to confirm the information was striking.
Some positions are shifting: a senior administratrion official who confirmed the presence of the grandstand last week said late Wednesday that he was now uncertain whether the structure was related to the test site. 
But he said he was more concerned than ever that the North might be tempted to test.
Because the issue of North Korea's obtaining nuclear weapons is of such far-reaching importance, and because this kind of military intelligence is so highly sensitive, officials will describe the intelligence only very cautiously, each divulging only limited information, and none agreeing to be identified, or even to let their organizations be named.
Those involved in trying to interpret intelligence from North Korea are haunted by a long history of missteps -- both overestimating and underestimating the country's abilities.
''There's a reason I call North Korea the longest-running intelligence failure in the history of American espionage,'' said Donald Gregg, a C.I.A. station chief in Seoul during the cold war who returned there as the American ambassador. 
''And I can say that with pride because I was part of the failure.''
The Bush administration has long been a divided camp on how to deal with North Korea -- whether to pressure the country until it collapses or negotiate with it in hopes it will give up its weapons. 
As that debate has continued, North Korea has stepped up its claims of progress in a nuclear arms program that it once denied existed at all. 
So on the immediate question of what is happening above Kilju, the problem is matching up what satellites see with estimates of what the North Koreans want the United States to believe.
Trucks have been moving in and out of the site for months, and lately some technical analysts have said they believe the trucks are bringing in material to fill a hole, sometimes a sign that an underground test site is being sealed up again. 
Others have reported similar evidence.
But the White House also warned of a possible test last October, because of similar activity, and was worried about the issue (though it said nothing publicly) during a spate of activity in January. 
Part of the problem, experts say, is that because North Korea has never conducted a test, no one understands whether its preparations look like the kind that were seen in the old Soviet Union or in China, both of which have helped North Korea's program in years past. 
''We might not know until it is fired off,'' one American official conceded the other day. 
Another said that while the activity was worrying, it could be ''part of the ebb and flow of what we've seen for a while.''
Of course, there is the possibility -- some say probability -- that the North is engaging in either deception or deliberate message-sending.
The problem is made more difficult by the fact that the United States has almost no human spies, and there are so few telephones in North Korea that there is not much conversation to tap. 
Moreover, some experts say that assessments may be colored by mistakes made seven years ago -- mistakes that produced contradictory lessons.
In 1998 American intelligence agencies missed the evidence that India and Pakistan were preparing to test their nuclear weapons, an intelligence failure that prompted official inquiries that concluded the United States could never make the same mistake again.
But the same year, satellite images of a secret nuclear site called Kumchang-ri, near North Korea's border with China, led to a scare that the North was building a secret reactor or reprocessing plant to cheat on its agreements with the United States. 
The United States demanded access. 
When North Korea granted it -- in return for some aid -- the inspectors found a huge cavern. 
It was empty. 
To this day, arguments persist about whether North Korea abandoned the project when it was caught, or was digging to deceive.
