
DON'T look now, Las Vegas -- Macao is trying to steal your limelight. 
This former Portuguese colony on China's southeastern coast is in the midst of a gambling-driven transformation. 
Once a haven for savoring a colonial culture that developed over half a millennium, Macao is now being flooded with the familiar trappings of money and modernity.
Gambling is nothing new to Macao. 
In 1961, Stanley Ho, an entrepreneur from Hong Kong, linked up with a few other investors to buy the colony's gaming franchise from the Portuguese government. 
Mr. Ho's group held that franchise until 2002, three years after Macao became part of China, when gambling was opened up to competition.
Soon, that competition will include more than a dozen new casino-hotels with well over 15,000 rooms, according to news releases and a report by organizers of Expo Real Asia, an international property conference.
The bulk of the new properties are being built by the Las Vegas Sands Corporation -- which already runs a casino on Macao's northern island -- along a stretch of the southern island called the Cotai strip. 
The hotels will bear names you know: Four Seasons, St. Regis, Shangri-La, Conrad and Raffles for the high rollers; Sheraton, Hilton, Fairmont and Traders for the rest. 
InterContinental, Mandarin Oriental and others are also planning new properties, as are some of the biggest names in Las Vegas: Macao's own Venetian and MGM Grand are to open next year.
The first two heavy hitters to challenge Mr. Ho's flagship, the Casino Lisboa, have already arrived. 
Stephen A. Wynn, the Las Vegas gambling magnate, opened the Wynn Macau on Sept. 
6 on the Avenida de Amizade. 
Right next door, on Oct. 
19, the Galaxy Entertainment Group of Hong Kong inaugurated the StarWorld.
In style, the two properties could not be more different. 
The Wynn adopts a restrained (for a casino) aesthetic, with mild lighting even on the gaming floor and decor in beige and brown with occasional splashes of red. 
The small lobbies lead to a shopping promenade dotted with names like Tiffany, Louis Vuitton and Prada.
At 600 square feet, the Wynn's rooms are cavernous. 
There are motorized drapes, sensor-operated snack racks, ministereos with iPod docks and many more gizmos. 
Luxuries in the enormous bathrooms, putting aside a perplexingly weak shower, include dual-fiber robes, fancy shaving kits and a deep-soaking tub.
But the service, except in the well-staffed spa, leaves something to be desired. 
No army of liveried personnel descends to open taxi doors or to help guests with luggage, and check-in can be a chaotic affair. 
Quite a few of the young employees speak little or no English, with ''sparkling water'' and ''open for lunch?'' proving incomprehensible.
A few steps away from the Wynn, whose architecture is a smaller copy of the property's curvy-roofed namesake in Las Vegas, is the far more avant-garde StarWorld. 
It's a stack of colorfully lit blocks of different sizes and designs, the brainchild of Rocco S. K. Yim, whose firm has several notable buildings in Hong Kong and mainland China to its credit.
The contrast extends to the festive atmosphere in the lobby. 
Musicians mingle with leggy greeters in a gaping, gaudy lobby splashed with copper and gold like a Catskill resort. 
The casino above jangles with a sensory overload of lights and sounds.
Rooms are smaller and cheaper at the StarWorld but still luxurious. 
The minibar is stocked for partying: energy drinks, throat lozenges and condoms along with Chinese favorites like dried cuttlefish and rice wine. 
Service is almost instantaneous, with a high level of English fluency.
Not to be outdone, or at least not without a fight, Mr. Ho has also been investing in the new, modern Macao. 
His Casino Lisboa now houses Robuchon a Galera, an outpost of Joel Robuchon, the globetrotting French chef. 
And a structure that looks much like a giant celery stalk, the Grand Lisboa, is reaching into the sky behind its famous predecessor for an opening in 2008.
Mr. Ho's company is also behind Macao's Fisherman's Wharf, a new commercial complex between the Sands and the ferry terminal. 
It's an almost theme park, with shops built into a low-lying village that changes its geography and century on every block, from ancient Rome to New Orleans' Bourbon Street -- anything but Macao. 
The complex also has an excellent Portuguese restaurant, Camoes, where patrons can dine outside at a mock colonial villa.
There's no doubt that the casino boom and the economic effects of sitting on mainland China's doorstep are changing Macao. 
Just ask Baloy Velasco as he serves up hot chocolate, cakes and muffins at caffechocola, one of many recently opened cafes near the Largo do Senado, the hub of a flashy, pedestrians-only shopping area.
Tourists used to come primarily from mainland China, Hong Kong and Taiwan, he said, but the casinos are drawing Europeans and Americans. 
Is it a change for the better?
''Of course,'' he said, adding that tourists have more money now. 
''We can support the economy.''
A couple of blocks away, past a bevy of American, Chinese and Japanese brands like Starbucks, McDonalds, Samuel & Kevin (clothing) and Milktop (ice cream), Pinto Livros has just opened a new music shop. 
The all-white space is home to a fabulously esoteric collection of compact discs, including the Art Ensemble of Chicago, Yuichiro Fujimoto and Charlotte Gainsbourg.
Even as the casino boom helps new businesses to open, it also makes their managers' lives more difficult. 
''Most people like me, we want to expand our businesses, but we can't find the people,'' said Keyvin Bi, general manager of if, or Inspiring Fascination, a boutique that opened in 2003 with urban-chic fashion from Europe and Asia.
The casinos are hiring away young workers, he said, paying dealers more than double the salary he can offer for a shop assistant. 
Now he has to hire staff directly from China; their work permits don't allow them to switch jobs.
That problem is only going to get worse, to judge by the development on the Cotai strip. 
Take a bus or taxi down to Taipa Village on the southern island, and walk down the pedestrianized Rua do Cunha just after 6 p.m. on a weekday evening. 
Cross Rua Correia da Silva, walk up Escada do Coxo and you'll find yourself in the midst of a milelong river of hardhat-carrying laborers streaming from the building sites.
Looming over them, out of all human proportion, will be the gargantuan hulk of the Venetian. 
It blots out the sky -- just try to take a photograph!
-- with a menacing cement silhouette only faintly lit by fluorescent construction lights. 
As the darkness of evening descends, few sights come closer to the postapocalyptic nightmares of Orwell's novels, Pink Floyd's videos or Terry Gilliam's films.
On the way back, you might want to visit Valentina Comidas to console yourself with a warm, flaky rendition of the Portuguese egg tart. 
It's one holdover from Macao's past that hasn't been overwhelmed yet. 
In fact, there may even be more Portuguese eating them in the near future.
''Right before the handover and in the first few years, the number of Portuguese dropped by a substantial number, but lately we are witnessing an increased number of Portuguese coming back or coming for the first time to Macao,'' said Pedro Moitinho de Almeida, Portugal's consul general. 
''Quite a few Portuguese will be interested to see what Macao is and what the Portuguese left behind.''
CASINOS BY THE DOZEN
GETTING THERE
Ferries from Hong Kong leave every 15 minutes from Sheung Wan (www.turbojet.com.hk), with round-trip fares from 280 Hong Kong dollars (about $35 at 7.93 Hong Kong dollars to the U.S. dollar), and every half-hour from Tsim Sha Tsui (www.nwff.com.hk). 
Helicopter service is also available for substantially more (www.heliexpress.com). 
Flights serve major cities across East Asia, mostly on Air Macau (en.airmacau.com.mo) and Air Asia (www.airasia.com).
The country code for Macao is 853. 
Hong Kong dollars are always accepted in lieu of Macao's patacas.
WHERE TO STAY
The Wynn Macau (Rua Cidade de Sintra NAPE; 853-986-9966; www.wynnmacau.com) has deluxe rooms with weekday rates starting at 1,500 Hong Kong dollars plus tax. 
Use of the Internet, spa or fitness center costs extra.
Next door, rooms at the Galaxy StarWorld (Avenida de Amizade; 853-2838-3838; www.starworldmacau.com) cost around 1,200 Hong Kong dollars including tax. 
Internet service and the rooftop pool are free.
A less expensive option is the Pousada de Mong-Ha (Colina de Mong-Ha; 853-2851-5222 ; www.ift.edu.mo/pousada), at the government-run tourism school. 
Elegantly decorated rooms run from 500 Hong Kong dollars with no tax assessed.
WHERE TO EAT
At Robuchon a Galera (Hotel Lisboa, 2-4 Avenida de Lisboa; 853-2837-7666; www.hotelisboa.com; reservations: 853-2888-3888), a set lunch with a glass of wine can be had for about 500 Hong Kong dollars, while 15-course tasting dinners go for 1,700.
Camoes (Shop 101, Lisbon-Evora, Fisherman's Wharf; 853-2822-2200) has excellent renditions of Portuguese favorites like suckling pig and feijoada, along with plenty of fresh fish and good wines. 
Dinner with a bottle of wine -- only house wine is by the glass -- costs about 500 Hong Kong dollars.
The recently renovated 360degrees Cafe (Macau Tower, Largo da Torre de Macau; 853-2893-3339; www.macautower.com.mo; reservations: 853-9888-622) offers sweeping, rotating views of Macau's neon-lit landscape. 
Buffet meals with Chinese, Portuguese and Indian specialties and a beverage cost 248 Hong Kong dollars plus a 10 percent service charge.
