
A prominent Hong Kong reporter detained by China on spying charges was actually a patriot who worked behind the scenes to help Beijing improve relations with Taiwan and Hong Kong, his wife said in an open letter to China's president, Hu Jintao, which was released Friday.
The reporter, Ching Cheong, the chief China correspondent of Singapore's main newspaper, The Straits Times, often worked with a senior Beijing researcher to guide China's strategy for managing Hong Kong affairs, Mary Lau, his wife, said in the letter.
That researcher, Lu Jianhua, a sociologist at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, has himself disappeared and two of his colleagues said Friday that they thought he had been detained for leaking state secrets. 
On Thursday, Reuters reported that Mr. Lu was being detained.
Ms. Lau asserted that Mr. Ching and Mr. Lu jointly played critical roles in President Hu's successful effort to build bridges to Taiwan's two main opposition parties, overtures that resulted in historic trips to the mainland by the leaders of the two parties in April and May.
''We can say that the current developments in cross-strait relations basically result from taking up Ching Cheong's suggestions -- or at least that he was a proponent,'' she wrote.
''I believe that Mr. Lu Jianhua and Ching Cheong made an important contribution to the issue of China's reunification,'' she added.
Her claims about her husband's dual role as journalist and informal adviser to Chinese leaders add a twist to a case that has rattled local and foreign journalists in China and prompted an outpouring of international concern about Beijing's clampdown on press freedom.
Ms. Lau portrayed her husband as a pro-Beijing activist who would never spy for a foreign country. 
Mr. Ching's employer, The Straits Times, and many Hong Kong journalists who know him offered a different defense. 
They said Mr. Ching was a consummate professional whose efforts to report on delicate political topics might have prompted Chinese authorities to muzzle him.
China on Tuesday accused Mr. Ching of spying for unidentified foreign intelligence agencies and contended that he had confessed to that crime. 
If convicted, he could receive the death penalty.
Mr. Lu's status remained uncertain. 
Officials at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences and the Foreign Ministry declined to comment on his case. 
Colleagues said he had not been seen at his office for more than a month.
Ms. Lau offered an explanation for what friends of Mr. Ching say they believe may be critical incriminating evidence contained on the hard drive of his computer, which State Security officers retrieved from Hong Kong after they detained Mr. Ching in the southern city of Guangzhou on April 22.
The computer contains records of Mr. Ching's communications with sources on the Chinese mainland as well as documents that the Chinese authorities could easily classify as secrets, including internal speeches by Mr. Hu, these friends said.
Ms. Lau wrote that her husband obtained Mr. Hu's speeches from Mr. Lu because he needed them for his work on behalf of the Chinese government.
''To improve communication and to solicit more of Ching Cheong's views about the return of Hong Kong and China's reunification, Mr. Lu Jianhua often told Ching Cheong about leaders' speeches, including internal speeches by you and other leaders,'' Ms. Lau wrote. 
''This should count as a work requirement, not revealing secrets.''
China's most senior reporters and editors have privileges normally reserved for government officials, including access to meetings, documents and other information that under the country's vague rules can often be treated as state secrets. 
They risk retaliation from the police if they use such inside information to write articles officials consider unfavorable.
Mr. Ching had been the No.2 editor of Wen Hui Pao, a Communist Party-backed newspaper in Hong Kong, before he resigned after the 1989 crackdown on the Beijing democracy movement. 
Even then he was regarded as having well-placed sources both in Hong Kong and on the Chinese mainland. 
He often wrote detailed accounts of elite political struggles for The Straits Times and for political magazines in Hong Kong.
