
If the Federal Reserve stops raising interest rates later this year, will the rest of the world go along?
When Fed policy makers meet on Wednesday to set overnight interest rates, they will almost certainly increase them by another quarter-point, to 5 percent. 
And investors will search for any clues about a pause in further rate increases.
But a growing number of economists are looking at a different possibility: that changes in the global economy could keep pushing up long-term interest rates long after the Fed stops raising its benchmark rate.
The result would be a mirror image of the ''conundrum'' that perplexed Alan Greenspan, the former Fed chairman, all last year. 
The conundrum was that long-term interest rates remained low and overall credit conditions relatively easy even as the Fed raised short-term rates.
Now, even as Fed bankers indicate that they may be near the end of their increases, the long-term interest rates that determine home mortgage rates and companies' borrowing costs have crept higher.
Increased anxiety about future inflation has been partly to blame, analysts say. 
But long-term rates have edged up around the world, suggesting that global forces are at work.
Japan, the world's second-largest economy after the United States, is growing faster than it has in more than a decade, and the nation's central bank, which has kept interest rates negligible, is expected to start raising them again. 
European growth, though rising more slowly than in the United States, is accelerating, and the European Central Bank, after pausing in April, is expected by many to resume increases. 
Its benchmark short-term rate, at 2.5 percent, has been raised twice since December.
Meantime, China's economy surged by nearly 10 percent last year, and Chinese leaders promise to spur the kind of domestic demand that would keep more money at home.
Higher growth leads to more competition for investment capital, which tends to drive up interest rates. 
And as rates rise in foreign countries, there is less incentive to seek higher returns in the United States.
That could pose a challenge for Ben S. Bernanke, who took over as Fed chairman in February. 
Mr. Bernanke has argued that the combination of low interest rates and the United States' expanding trade deficit stemmed in part from a ''global savings glut'' -- a vast pool of idle money in Asia and other parts of the world that found its way back into the United States.
As Robert J. Barbera, chief economist at ITG/Hoenig, sees matters: ''It looks increasingly obvious that there is a boom on the globe today; it's just not happening here. 
That in turn would suggest that the moderating activity here in the United States may not elicit lower interest rates. 
What was a conundrum for Greenspan then becomes a problem for Bernanke.''
Robert V. DiClemente, chief United States economist at Citigroup, said that speculation about the changing global demand for money had helped feed a run-up in long-term rates.
''I think people are speculating about this, speculating that growth rates may converge, that savings will come more into balance and that there is going to be a draw on capital that's going to suck money out of the United States,'' Mr. DiClemente said.
To be sure, part of the recent rise in long-term interest rates reflects worries about inflation.
One proxy for inflation worries is the gap between yields on conventional Treasury debt and the yields on inflation-adjusted Treasury securities, or TIPS.
That gap widened last month to 2.8 percentage points, from 2.7 points, and much of the widening occurred after Mr. Bernanke told lawmakers that the Fed might temporarily stop its rate increases.
Recent economic data about inflation has been mixed. 
Overall consumer prices have climbed markedly, largely because of oil prices; the Fed's preferred gauge of core inflation, which excludes food and energy costs, is up about 2 percent over the last 12 months.
That is about the upper limit of what Mr. Bernanke has described as his comfort zone for inflation. 
Meanwhile, growth in the United States was much faster in the first quarter than most economists had expected. 
And while job creation slowed to 138,000 in April, unemployment was only 4.7 percent and hourly wages climbed 3.8 percent over the last year -- the biggest jump in five years.
But many analysts say the inflation outlook remains fairly tame. 
Nonfarm productivity, the amount of output for each hour of work, rose at an annual pace of 3.2 percent in the first three months of 2006.
Higher energy prices seem to have had little impact on other consumer prices, and corporate profits are so high that many companies can absorb higher wages without raising prices.
The view of Fed officials that they are near the end of their rate-raising efforts is predicated on the expectation that the nation's growth will slow from an annual pace of 4.8 percent in the first quarter to about 3 percent in the second half of 2006. 
But even if the Fed is sanguine about inflation, global forces could push up borrowing costs.
An increase in global interest rates would not necessarily be bad news for Mr. Bernanke. Higher long-term rates would help cool down American economic growth, and the housing market in particular, without requiring the Fed to take more action on its own.
But higher global rates could also slow the United States economy enough to increase unemployment.
Either way, analysts said, the economy is more dependent on global forces than was true a decade ago.
''It is more exposed because of the fact that it needs massive amounts of cash from the rest of the world,'' said Nigel Gault, senior economist at Global Insight, a forecasting firm in Lexington, Mass. 
''In a strange way, the world is riskier for the United States if everyone else is doing better.''
