
WITH so many of us sticking closer to home this holiday season and getting back to basics, it might be appropriate to think along those lines when deciding what to drink. 
What I have in mind is something festive for welcoming the new year, but something American. 
Specifically, I am thinking of Schramsberg, at Calistoga in the Napa Valley, the best-known and, so far as I'm concerned, the best of the homebred sparkling wines.
By now, the Schramsberg story is part of Napa Valley lore: how the vineyard was started in 1862 by an itinerant barber named Jacob Schram, who employed a small army of Chinese workers to hollow cellars out of the slopes; how Robert Louis Stevenson, a guest of the Schrams in the 1880's, described them in his book "The Silverado Squatters" as "dug deep in the hillside like a bandit's cave."
The Schrams stayed until just before Prohibition, when they sold the place as a summer home.
After Prohibition was repealed, the estate passed through several hands. 
Wine was made there, none of it very good. 
Then, in 1965, Jack and Jamie Davies arrived from Los Angeles, he a Stanford and Harvard-trained businessman, she an energetic housewife interested in art.
It was the 60's and like so many others in those days, the Davies were looking for a more meaningful life. 
With absolutely no experience, they decided to become winemakers. 
What's more, they wanted to make champagne. 
They drove the bats from the caves and out of the old Schram house. 
They planted grapes, bought some battered old winemaking equipment and, depending mightily on the kindness of winemaking neighbors, began their new life. 
Most of the neighbors thought the idea of making sparkling wine, really top-quality sparkling wine, was insane.
One of Jack Davies's earliest supporters was Robert Mondavi, then still in his family's business, the Charles Krug winery. 
With his vines still in their infancy, Mr. Davies went out to find some chardonnay grapes, which were then viewed with suspicion by many California growers. 
He was able to buy riesling grapes from a grower who suggested he trade them for chardonnay wine.
Mr. Mondavi gave him 500 gallons of Charles Krug chardonnay for the riesling grapes. 
That chardonnay became the first Schramsberg champagne.
The early years at Schramsberg were tough. 
The hardest part was not winemaking; it was wine selling. 
The Davies traded the bucolic Napa Valley life for what seemed like an endless stream of airports and hotels as they traveled the country plugging their wine. 
There had never really been a top quality American champagne, and it took years to convince distributors and restaurateurs that things had really changed.
A big break came in 1972 when President Richard M. Nixon, a wine fancier who liked Schramsberg, took 13 cases of it to China for his historic meeting with Premier Chou En-lai. 
A few mentions on national television accomplished more than years of ringing doorbells. 
Sales boomed. 
And the Davies's new fame alerted some of France's elite Champagne houses to California's potential.
Moet Hennessy's Domaine Chandon opened in 1977. 
Within a few years Piper-Heidsieck, Roederer, Deutz and several other Champagne firms had wineries or were making sparkling wine at California wineries. 
There were predictions that the French invasion would cut into Schramsberg's market. 
In fact, the Calistoga winery has more than held its own in a market that continued to expand through the 1980's and 1990's.
The French are adamantly opposed to anyone using the name Champagne on any sparkling wine not made in the Champagne region and over the years they have successfully blocked anyone in Europe who has tried to use it. 
They have never used it on the sparkling wines they produce in the United States.
But United States law allows the use of the name Champagne so long as it is accompanied by a regional designation, like "Napa Valley."
Consequently there are many American "Champagnes."
Jack Davies, who died in 1998, always insisted that "Champagne" was a generic name and he used it on all his sparkling wines. 
That ended last June.
His son Hugh, now the general manager of Schramsberg, said the 1998 wines, now being released, would be the first not to carry the designation "Napa Valley Champagne" in the 36 years since production began. 
When his parents started the winery, he said, no one in the Valley was making sparkling wine from pinot noir and chardonnay, the grapes used in Champagne, nor were they using the methode champenoise, the French technique for producing the wine.
"At that time, sparkling wine implied a lower status, and times have changed," Hugh Davies told the Wine Spectator. 
Furthermore, Schramsberg grapes no longer come just from the Napa Valley. 
They come from more than 60 vineyards stretching from Monterey, far south of San Francisco, to the Anderson Valley, 100 miles north of Calistoga in Mendocino County. 
Production comes to about 45,000 cases a year. 
The caves now hold two million bottles.
The Schramsberg line includes seven "cuvees," or styles of sparkling wine: the vintage-dated Blanc de Blancs, Blanc de Noirs, Brut Rose and Cremant; the nonvintage Mirabelle Brut, at about $16; the ultrapremium vintage-dated Reserve; and the top-of-the-line J. Schram, which is as high as $125, named for the barber who started it all.
There is one more sparkling wine produced at Schramsberg. 
Called Querencia, it is made from classic Champagne grapes. 
Profits from its sale go to the Jack L. Davies Agricultural Preserve Fund, which was created after he died to help support his goal of preserving the valley's rural nature.
