
Job cuts in Europe and the United States may be offset by growth in Asia if Barclays and ABN Amro complete their nearly $91 billion deal.
The two banks plan to expand in Asia while moving or eliminating more than 23,000 jobs -- many in Europe and the United States -- and selling the LaSalle Bank, based in Chicago, to Bank of America. 
About half of those 23,000 jobs will be relocated, thousands of them to India.
Asia is the ''most important area of growth,'' for Barclays' investment bank, Robert E. Diamond Jr., the president of Barclays, said in a telephone interview on Tuesday.
The combination would create ''one of the premier foreign banks in Asia,'' a fit that was a major reason for the deal, Mr. Diamond said.
Barclays' chief executive, John S. Varley, was exuberant about the opportunities in Asia when he announced the deal in London on Monday. 
''ABN has much better exposure in Asia than Barclays,'' he told members of the news media.
Barclays' plans mirror those of multinational corporations like General Motors and Citigroup, which have been increasing investments and staffing in Asia while making spending cuts in Europe and the United States. 
Wall Street investment banks, in particular, have headed aggressively into India and into smaller Asian markets like Vietnam while bolstering their operations in China, where they have been lured by strong economic growth.
ABN Amro's history in Asia dates back nearly 200 years to the time of Dutch colonial rule in Indonesia. 
The bank focuses on organic growth, has a string of retail branches and long relationships with thousands of corporate clients. 
Meanwhile, Barclays has been expanding its Asian trading operations, luring employees from Wall Street peers for its bond, equity and loan trading desks.
ABN Amro and Barclays have complementary assets in China. 
Barclays' strategy has been to build its investment bank and fund management business. 
ABN Amro has five branches in China and recently was allowed to incorporate there, which will allow it to conduct local currency business.
In India, Mr. Diamond predicts, ''there will be no question'' about being the premier foreign bank. 
In recent weeks, Barclays has plastered advertisements across billboards in Mumbai, emphasizing the bank's long global history. 
Barclays has been increasing its investment banking activities in India in the last year, and Mr. Diamond is planning a trip there in May.
Bankers and analysts in Asia said that a Barclays and ABN Amro combination could become a formidable competitor in some markets. 
Still, many suggested that if the banks were really serious about their Asian presence, they might try another takeover down the road.
''The thing that's lacking in their strategy is the acquisition of a bank with a presence in India and China,'' said Deepak Parekh, chairman of HDFC, one of India's largest banks.
Like many foreign banks, ABN Amro has made some missteps in Asia and has battled with local governments. 
In 2004, the bank sold its majority stake in the Bank of Asia, based in Thailand, for 442 million euros ($600 million). 
Last year, it paid $4.5 million to a state-owned Vietnamese bank after a trading dispute.
ABN Amro's biggest rivals, like Morgan Stanley, Goldman Sachs and Merrill Lynch, have been ramping up in Asia for years.
A Barclays-ABN Amro bank would have ''some formidable competition,'' said Lynn Exton, senior vice president at Moody's Investor Service in London. 
''It's a huge region, margins are under pressure and I'm not sure they have the depth of relationships that are necessary'' to succeed in Asia.
''It is going to require some serious investment in terms of management resources and focus,'' she said.
In 2006, ABN Amro's operating income in Asia increased 22.8 percent, to 1.5 billion euros ($2 billion), or just 6.6 percent of the bank's total operating income of 22.7 billion euros ($31 billion). 
Barclays does not break out its Asian operations, but it did mention that they were important to the company's profit growth in 2006.
Mr. Diamond has predicted in the past that Barclays Capital will increase its business in Asia by 20 percent to 30 percent a year. 
On Tuesday, he said that together the two banks could have the same growth rate, ''but from a higher profit base.''
