
It is more than 7,000 miles from New York's various corporate headquarters to the skyscrapers of Shanghai, but the workings of media companies like Time Warner and NBC Universal loom large in the mind of Li Ruigang.
Mr. Li runs the Shanghai Media Group, a budding Chinese conglomerate with a striking number of tentacles in media and entertainment and a thirst for partnerships with foreign companies chasing the dream of Chinese fortunes.
MTV Networks, VNU, CNBC, Universal Music Group, Sony, Discovery Communications and the National Basketball Association are just some of the companies that are in business with SMG, as the company is known.
''If you have a hundred partners, then you can learn a hundred different things from them,'' Mr. Li said at a recent meeting in his office.
The wide scope of its activities and the pace with which Mr. Li, 38, has sought out Western partners in less than four years have established him as a favored ally for companies that have been laboring to crack China's vast market.
''He is all over the lot,'' says Sumner M. Redstone, the chairman of Viacom, which owns MTV Networks. 
''Li is clearly a pioneer in bringing innovative partnerships to the Chinese people.''
In the process, Mr. Li is trying to transform China's government-controlled media from within. 
SMG was created just five years ago when the Chinese government consolidated state-run media by region to prepare for the country's entry into the World Trade Organization.
What started as a merger of mostly local TV and radio interests now encompasses pay television, TV production, a home-shopping venture, music labels, newspapers and magazines, sports teams and arenas, theaters, Web sites, and nascent mobile content and Internet TV ventures.
Mr. Li gives the impression of someone who could move easily among the lunch crowds at the Ivy in Los Angeles or Four Seasons in New York. 
He calls Rupert Murdoch of the News Corporation, Robert C. Wright of NBC Universal and Mr. Redstone close friends, mentions a possible venture with Creative Artists Agency and says he has ''met with all of the big investment banks.''
A Chinese edition of Variety named him Showman of the Year for 2005. 
Although he speaks solid English, Mr. Li had a news anchor from SMG's Dragon Television serve as a translator during an interview so that he could speak more confidently.
His partnership with Viacom includes deals to be the co-host of MTV Asia's annual Style Awards, which took place here in November; to co-produce children's programming with MTV's Nickelodeon channel; and to syndicate various MTV Networks programming through SMG's 13 over-the-air television channels and 17 national digital TV channels. 
Viacom holds a 25 percent equity interest in its ventures with SMG -- the only foreign company to have such an arrangement, according to Mr. Redstone.
But Western companies eager for deals were reminded in 2005 that the media in China are still subject to strict and sometimes fickle oversight. 
A tightening of policies by the government of Prime Minister Wen Jiabao suspended several planned programming joint ventures, including Viacom's most ambitious plan, a Nickelodeon-branded children's channel that it would own with SMG.
Mr. Redstone said in a recent interview that he expects the project to gain approval, but declined to predict when. 
Mr. Li agreed. 
''It depends on the regulations and policies of the Chinese government,'' Mr. Li said. 
''The best thing to do is be patient now.''
That channel and some of SMG's other ventures, which have been announced with much fanfare but have not yet amounted to much, underscore the central tension that Mr. Li faces. 
He has to balance carefully his desire to emulate the media titans of the West -- and his dreams of eventually taking the company public -- against the complex and shifting moods of the policy makers and censors in Beijing.
On the one hand, he is a civil servant given the task of preserving a ''state asset,'' as he called the company. 
Yet Mr. Li must make SMG competitive with foreign media that can increasingly reach Chinese homes, whether through illegal satellite dishes and pirated DVD's or legitimate outlets like high-speed Internet.
Foreign media companies have formed ventures with several of China's other regional broadcasters and with China Central Television, the country's national broadcaster. 
But in echoing Shanghai's legacy as China's go-go international trading hub, Mr. Li has positioned himself as the most progressive of his peers.
''He's very commercially driven,'' said Wei Zhang, the chief operating officer of Star China, a subsidiary of the News Corporation. 
In her previous role as managing director of CNBC China, Ms. Wei set up one of Mr. Li's first foreign joint ventures with the business news network, a TV program called ''Strategic Decisions.''
Mr. Li, who began his career as a TV reporter and documentary producer, says he honed his media mogul aspirations during several months spent in New York in 2001 and 2002 as a visiting scholar at Columbia.
When not studying, he visited media executives in New York. 
He also came to know the inner workings of China's communications regulators; before his Columbia stint, he worked for three years in local government as an adviser to the deputy mayor of Shanghai, responsible for media.
The research firm Media Partners Asia estimates that SMG had revenue of $385 million in 2005, which, Mr. Li said, was nearly double its size of three years ago, ranking the company as the country's second-largest media group after China Central Television, which had sales of almost $1 billion.
While these sound like small numbers for a country of 1.3 billion people -- SMG's revenue amounts to about 60 percent of the annual revenue for the Fox News Channel alone in the United States -- they underscore the challenges and opportunities for media businesses in China.
The confluence of piracy, intellectual property issues and the running of much of the media as local public utilities has made China the perennial next big thing. 
But pay-television markets are finally developing, and SMG has a big stake, through licenses, in distributing its content via cable, satellite and the Internet.
Vivek Couto, an analyst with Media Partners Asia, estimates that the digital pay-television market in China will expand from $50 million in revenue in 2005 to $700 million by 2010 and $2.8 billion by 2015 -- as digital cable, satellite and Internet Protocol TV ventures grow. 
Meanwhile, China's television advertising revenue, Mr. Couto predicts, should grow from $3.5 billion today to $8 billion by 2010, buoyed by the 2008 Beijing Olympics and the growth of digital services.
Mr. Li's strategy is to have his 5,200 employees pull together as much content as possible and distribute it across as many technologies and outlets as possible.
That programming covers a wide swath: children's shows; a documentary produced with the N.B.A. about Yao Ming, the basketball star who once played for an SMG team; reality shows like ''The Winner,'' a variation on ''The Apprentice''; and China Business News, the national daily newspaper begun in 2004 in partnership with regional media groups.
Mr. Li is keen on relationships that can export his programs to expatriate Chinese audiences in foreign markets. 
Earlier this month he announced a deal to provide content to Intel's new Viiv Internet format, a collaboration intended to make SMG shows and interactive content available to broadband subscribers inside and outside China.
A public listing for SMG, said Mr. Li, is his ultimate goal. 
Some smaller Chinese regional media companies, notably Hunan Satellite and Beijing Youth Daily, have taken parts of their businesses public on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange. 
But Mr. Li said that there was little strategic sense in a stock issue unless the capital raised could be used to consolidate China's regional media companies.
Asked if that sort of ambition has caused some in government to question whether his plans for SMG are too aggressive, Mr. Li nodded and said, ''Definitely.''
For now he must contend with turf wars that could hamper plans to expand SMG's reach. 
For example, SMG holds one of two national licenses to operate Internet-based pay-television services nationwide, but some local authorities in other regions have said these new services cannot be marketed without their approval.
''There are a lot of efforts, but still a lot of challenges,'' Mr. Li said. 
''The market is very awkward.''
