
Harried nurses at Children's Hospital on the east side of Beijing spent Wednesday behind a small desk, registering infants in a rapidly filling logbook. 
Anxious parents, fearing they might have unwittingly fed their infants tainted formula, waited for hours to determine if their babies had been harmed.
One father, Zhang Gaofeng, 35, had waited more than a day at the hospital with his wife, Wang Hui, and their 22-month-old daughter, Yue. 
The couple had fed Yue the Sanlu brand of baby formula now at the center of a nationwide food safety scandal that has left three infants dead and sickened more than 6,000 babies. 
Mr. Zhang, a migrant worker, blamed corporate greed.
''They are trying to make a profit off the people who are not rich enough to afford the imported brands,'' he said as he waited in the hospital parking lot with other families. 
''Poor people can only afford the low-end products like this one.''
He said the Sanlu product had cost about $3.20 for two days' worth of formula, compared with about $5 for the top brands.
The anxiety at Children's Hospital is just one snapshot of a scandal that has broadened every day since it became public last week. 
On Wednesday, Health Minister Chen Zhu reported that more than 1,300 infants had been hospitalized and that 158 had suffered acute kidney failure after being fed formula contaminated with the industrial additive melamine.
With anger rising, the State Council, China's cabinet, pledged an overhaul of the nation's dairy industry, and government officials tried to reassure people by issuing a statement that ''most'' of China's baby formula was safe.
But public confidence seemed shaken. 
''What should we eat, then?'' asked one person on an Internet discussion forum. 
''I'm furious!
The milk powder is now exposed, but what about other tainted food that we don't know about?
What has the central government been doing every day?''
Melamine, the contaminant, is used to make plastics and fertilizers but banned from food production. 
In the past, it has sometimes been illicitly blended into agricultural products as a cheap way to raise protein levels.
Milk producers sometimes inflate their supplies by adding water. 
But the diluted milk has lower nutrient levels, so melamine, high in nitrogen, is then added to restore those levels artificially to meet protein requirements. 
Infants who drink the formula for sustained periods can develop kidney stones and suffer kidney failure.
Initially, the contamination was thought to be confined to baby formula produced by the Sanlu Group, one of China's largest dairy companies. 
But investigators have since discovered traces of melamine in batches of powdered formula made by 21 other dairy companies, including the biggest, Mengniu Dairy. 
Mengniu and other companies have recalled tainted products, even as government officials have promised to correct the problems so that big operators can resume or even expand production to meet demand.
''They can absolutely undergo a major overhaul in a short period of time,'' Li Changjiang, head of the General Administration of Quality Supervision, Inspection and Quarantine, said Wednesday during a news conference carried live on national television.
A quick remedy might seem overly optimistic, given that China experienced a similar baby formula scandal in 2004. 
Last year, after a string of food and drug safety failures, government officials promised to root out official corruption and strengthen regulation of the food and drug industries. 
Now, a group of lawyers is organizing lawsuits on behalf of parents against dairy companies.
The authorities have arrested four suspects, offered free medical care to ailing children and sent investigators across the country to inspect dairy operations. 
Four officials in Hebei Province were fired Tuesday, including Tian Wenhua, chairwoman and general manager of Sanlu Group, based in Hebei. 
Ms. Tian was also fired from a post in the Communist Party.
Meanwhile, a nationwide inspection examined 491 batches of formula selected from the 109 companies that produce baby formula in China. 
The Sanlu brand contained the highest levels of melamine, according to state media reports. 
In all, 22 companies were found to have produced some batches of bad formula. 
Two of them, Yashili, which is based in Guangdong, and Suncare, based in Qingdao, export to Asia and Africa, but it was unclear whether those products contained melamine.
Public indignation seemed to deepen as the scope of the crisis became known. 
Several bloggers called for the resignation of Mr. Li, the top quality control official. 
People also complained that the government had taken greater precautions on food safety for athletes during last month's Olympics than for the public.
''Why are the dairy products supplied for the Olympics safe?'' asked a blogger who used the name Absentminded. 
''Why are the dairy products exported to other countries safe?
Why do the dairy products for ordinary Chinese people have problems?''
The government tried to mollify the public by providing information on how to look for symptoms of poisoning. 
On Wednesday afternoon, a popular Internet chat room operated by People's Daily, the Communist Party's newspaper, offered a live question-and-answer session with a doctor and a government scientist.
At Children's Hospital in Beijing, nurses shooed away a foreign journalist who tried to enter a special clinic established for infants who may have ingested the tainted formula. 
One nurse said as many as 200 babies were brought for testing on Wednesday. 
Babies were undergoing two urine tests and an ultrasound to check for kidney stones.
Mr. Zhang, the migrant worker, said his daughter was still waiting for the second urine test. 
The waiting list was so long that her ultrasound was not scheduled for six more days.
''I read a story in the newspaper two days ago,'' Mr. Zhang said, explaining how he learned about the danger. 
''I was stunned. 
My concern is whether or not people will be held accountable and whether they will be put in jail. 
They might simply buy their way out.
''I want to see them jailed or even executed for this.''
