
Alexis Vila, a former Olympic wrestler who crashed his sport utility vehicle into a crowded terminal at Fort Lauderdale-Hollywood International Airport on Sunday, was hospitalized for psychological evaluation.
Vila, 33, of Williamston, Mich., was taken into custody after he ran from his S.U.V. following the crash. 
He sustained minor scrapes. 
No one else was injured.
Vila was held at a hospital under the Baker Act, which allows the authorities to hold people in protective custody for 72 hours for mental evaluations if they are deemed a danger to themselves or others, the sheriff's spokesman Jim Leljedal said yesterday.
''He's just going to stay at the hospital,'' Leljedal said.
It was unclear if Vila, who defected from Cuba in 1997, had been charged. 
The S.U.V. slammed into a Southeast Airlines ticket counter and smashed through a wall before stopping.
Two sheriff's deputies and a federal air marshal tackled Vila as he tried to escape, and they took him into custody, officials said.
At the Atlanta Olympics in 1996, Vila won the bronze medal for Cuba in the 105 1/2-pound division.
He wrestled for Cuba from 1993 to 1996, never placing lower than third in a world championship event.
After winning a gold medal at the 1997 Pan American Games, Vila defected.
Okafor Prepares for Athens
Emeka Okafor, the Charlotte Bobcats' top draft choice, is not on their summer league team. 
He has gone to Los Angeles to work with a trainer in preparation for the Olympics.
''He's working on some individual skills and also our program,'' Bobcats Coach Bernie Bickerstaff said yesterday.
Bickerstaff said Okafor would not be among the 14 players opening summer league play today in Minnesota. 
He also would not play on the team that goes to Utah later this month.
The Bobcats are concerned that Okafor, a former Connecticut star who was the second overall pick in this year's draft, will be tired from too much summer basketball when the N.B.A. season begins in the fall. 
So they have limited what he will do in Charlotte since he is likely to have a busy schedule with the United States Olympic team.
Yao to Play for China
Yao Ming of the Houston Rockets and Menk Bateer of the San Antonio Spurs will lead the Chinese basketball team at the Athens Olympics.
The official Xinhua News Agency announced the lineup yesterday, citing Chinese Basketball Association officials in Dallas, where the national team played the Dallas Mavericks' summer team.
The Chinese squad also includes Liu Wei, Zhu Fangyu, Du Feng, Guo Shiqiang, Yi Jianlian, Li Nan, Chen Ke, Zhang Jingsong, Mo Ke and Zhang Yunsong.
Fire Hits Outside Stadium
A small fire slightly damaged a storage area outside the main Olympic stadium yesterday, the Athens fire department said.
The fire, which melted some plastic pipes and a few plastic seats, occurred outside the 75,000-seat stadium and might have been caused by a short circuit. 
A small section of an outside cement wall appeared blackened.
Construction crews preparing the stadium for the Olympics, Aug. 
13 to 29, did not stop working while the small fire was extinguished.
In Alabama, for Zimbabwe
Kirsty Coventry, Brendan Ashby and Kim Brackin will travel from Alabama to Greece, all in the name of Zimbabwe.
Auburn's Coventry and the former Alabama swimmer Ashby constitute Zimbabwe's swim team for the Athens Games.
Brackin, an Auburn assistant, will be their coach.
''It's very cool,'' Coventry said, referring to the all-Alabama team. 
Coventry, a 2000 Olympian and this year's N.C.A.A. 
200-meter backstroke champion, is a legitimate contender for Zimbabwe's first swimming medal.
