
My Thursday column is about Darfur in the aftermath of the ICC Chief Prosecutor’s announcement that he is seeking an arrest warrant for Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir. 
I argue that instead of wringing our hands over the dangers, we should applaud this action — and that it just might create additional leverage to end the slaughter. 
I didn’t have space to quote him, but I had a long talk with David Crane, the prosecutor of the Sierra Leone tribunal, and he is convinced that this is the beginning of the end for Bashir. 
I’m not sure that’s true, but I think it’s possible.
In particular, I think a crucial question is whether China will be less reluctant to stand with Bashir now that he faces prosecution, just as China backed away from Slobodan Milosevic after he was indicted. 
If China slows down on arms sales to Sudan — which is just at the outer limit of what is possible — that would change the game in Sudan.
Let me preemptively make a point about China. 
First, lots of Chinese readers will indignantly note that the U.S. sells much more in weaponry to African countries than China does. 
True, but we don’t sell to countries that slaughter their own people, and when the U.S. does nasty things I criticize it for it. 
I’ve written far more critical columns about the U.S. in Iraq or Guantanamo than about China in Darfur — and by the same token, Chinese should be ready to acknowledge their government’s foreign policy outrages.
More broadly, there is a difference between dictatorships or countries with bad governance and those that commit genocide, and Sudan is the worst of the worst. 
This is the modern equivalent of the Rape of Nanjing, except that if you take the Rabe estimate for the toll in Nanjing, then about ten times as many people have been murdered in Darfur as were slaughtered in the Rape of Nanjing — and Beijing is supplying the arms to commit those massacres in Darfur. 
Does China really want to go down in history for facilitating the Rape of Darfur?
So I welcome the prosecution of President Bashir for genocide, and I hope the Chinese government will wake up and cut off the flow of arms.
