
In addition to my Monday column on North Korea, I also have a videoprepared by my travel buddy, Naka Nathaniel, based on our interviews with the North Koreans. 
Check it out.
For those who want to find out more, there’s also a fine report by Human Rights Watch, published in March, about the crackdown in North Korea. 
Read it here.
A couple of additional thoughts on the North Korean issue. 
First, the UNHCR, the refugee agency at the UN, has begun pushing China to allow access to the the North Koreans before they are returned. 
China has rebuffed UNHCR and its chief, Antonio Guterres, but I think the issue will gain more traction. 
The U.S. has also raised the issue with China, but not very forcefully.
I’ve reported in North Korea twice over the years, but I always find that you learn more about North Korea on the Chinese side of the border, because then you can freely interview North Koreans. 
When I was in North Korea the last time, the L.A. 
Times had a reporter on the Chinese side of the border, and she frankly had much better insights into what was going on in North Korea than I did.
One of the points that struck me was the claim, by one woman, that one-fifth of North Koreans in her area now listen to Chinese radio broadcasts. 
The others in her group echoed that, but others I asked said that in their areas it was much lower. 
Of course, in any case it’s hard to know, because it’s illegal to listen to foreign broadcasts and so it’s done secretly. 
North Korean radios have fixed channels, and you can’t turn the dial to tune to other stations. 
You’re allowed to bring in boom boxes from China, but you have to take them to a government office, which disables the radio.
Likewise, South Korean videos and cd’s seem to be getting more popular and are spreading in the black market. 
I’ve heard that the North Korean police sometimes cut off power to an apartment building — which locks the video inside the video player, making it impossible to take out and hide. 
Then the police check each apartment for illegal videos stuck in the players.
On the Chinese side, one official said that the crackdown has to do with the Beijing Olympics. 
He said that China wants the North Koreans gone from the border area by the time of the Olympics, because they disturb the peace and are a distraction. 
Incidentally, Human Rights Watch published an excellent report in March about the crackdown on the North Korean side. 
That report calls on China to honor its international obligations and stop sending people back to North Korea to be abused.
I was enormously impressed with the Chinese who, at great personal risk, help the North Koreans in the border area. 
Almost all are ethnic Koreans, and most are Christians (South Korea has a large Christian population, and partly as a result the Koreans in China have disproportionately become Christian as well). 
I kept asking them why they would take these risks, and overwhelmingly they said it was because of sympathy for fellow Koreans, coupled with their faith.
Of course, not everyone is so charitable. 
There’s also a flourishing sex trafficking business, taking North Korean girls and making them work as prostitutes or dancers in China’s brothels and clubs. 
Any girl who doesn’t oblige is just handed over to the police for repatriation.
In general, the Chinese I spoke to tended to believe that the North Korean regime will collapse in the next decade, just as the Maoist regime had. 
But the North Koreans in general seemed to think that Kim Jong Il will stagger on and transfer power to one of his sons.
So what do you think?
Please post your comments here.
