
Federal authorities charged 13 people yesterday with operating a murderous gang headed by a man in China who wielded power on New York streets through a violent group of enforcers.
Seven murders, three kidnappings and many cases of extortion were among the charges cited in a racketeering indictment. 
The defendants were identified as leaders, members and associates of a gang called the Green Dragons. 
Investigators called the group one of the most violent gangs in the city, with operations based in Queens since January 1986.
"This indictment, for all intents and purposes, destroys the Green Dragons and their leadership," said Andrew J. Maloney, the United States Attorney for the Eastern District of New York. 
He said some members were cooperating with the authorities.
The heavily armed gang resorted to murder more quickly than Chinese gangs that had been in the United States longer, Mr. Maloney said. 
"They put a lot of weight on terror," he added.
Among the murders were those of a woman and a man who were kidnapped from a restaurant in Queens last year and shot in their heads while kneeling with their hands tied behind their backs, investigators said. 
The woman had testified in a case against some Green Dragons, they said.
 
'Deep Within' China
A 35-year-old man, Kin Fei Wong, was charged with being the founder and leader of the gang. 
The authorities said he was born in China, lived in the United States for a time and then operated the Green Dragons from "deep within" the Fujian Province of China. 
He was accused of being a major heroin trafficker who conducted extensive criminal activities and used the Green Dragons as an enforcement arm to maintain his authority in this country.
Investigators said the Green Dragons, most of them in their late teens or early 20's, carried out extortions, robberies and other crimes to finance their activities and sometimes graduated to more important criminal roles for their leader in China. 
Eleven of the 13 defendants are in custody, several of them since November, when initial charges were filed. 
Kin Fei Wong is one of the two not arrested.
"We don't have a treaty with China that would cause his extradition," Mr. Maloney said. 
But the prosecutor said he thought that China would turn over the suspect to American authorities.
Mr. Maloney said wiretapped telephone conversations showed that the leader in China regularly sent orders to the gang leader in New York, identified as Chen I. Chung, 22, who "recruited new gang members from the schools and playgrounds of Queens, promising them money in exchange for their loyalty."
Mr. Maloney said the gang extorted payoffs of up to $2,000 a week from Chinese restaurants in Queens. 
He hopes, he added, that the indictment will send a message to the growing Asian community that "the police and Federal authorities are ready and willing to help them rid themselves of these lawless gangs."
If convicted, each defendant could face 20 years in prison for racketeering, and those named in murders could face life in prison.
