
The Chinese authorities have recently detained at least two democracy advocates, including one who spent a decade in prison for political beliefs, Chinese familiar with the cases say.
Students at Beijing University said a fellow student, Peng Rong, was detained on Friday, one day after President Bush recommended the renewal of most-favored-nation trading status for China.
Two weeks ago, Liu Qing, a leader of the Democracy Wall movement in 1978-79, was picked up and accused of not having a valid permit to live in Beijing, associates said.
One of the most prominent dissidents in China, Mr. Liu was freed from prison at the end of 1989 after having served 10 years for advocating democracy and human rights and also for publicizing prison conditions.
After his release, Mr. Liu steered clear of overt political activity.
Fellow students said they were not certain why Mr. Peng had been detained or whether he might be released. 
But they said they suspected the reason was that he signed and put up a poster on May 11 urging an end to foreign economic sanctions against China.
 
Exact Charges Unclear
Although the poster echoed the official position, it is illegal to put up posters or petitions without approval. 
A year ago, posters at Beijing University helped set off student demonstrations.
University authorities deny that Mr. Peng was detained because of the poster, students said. 
They attribute the action to ''counterrevolutionary'' activities. 
Three other students who also signed the May 11 petition have not been arrested so far. 
But one or more other students were also detained in connection with the incident, two university teachers said.
Mr. Peng took part in the students' demonstrations a year ago, but he was not detained in the months after the army's June 4 suppression of the demonstrations and he was not on the list of 21 students sought after the violence.
No other arrests of students have been reported since 211 political prisoners were released this month, apparently as a gesture to the United States.
Still, the authorities are worried about unrest on the anniversary of the military action or before Beijing plays host to the Asian Games in the fall.
