
With a troublesome economy and social issues as focal points of their rancorous race for the United States Senate, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato and Attorney General Robert Abrams have virtually ignored any discussion of foreign policy issues.
Even on those rare occasions a foreign policy issue has been raised, like military budgets and the future of Russia, their answers have been framed in domestic concerns, like the impact on jobs and trade possibilities.
But a broader examination of their positions on world affairs reveals a striking difference between them despite their relative agreement on narrow issues like favoring improved relations with Israel after the periods of strain through the last four years.
In essence, Mr. D'Amato, a Republican seeking his third Senate term, and Mr. Abrams, a Democrat in his first bid for national office, embrace fundamentally different visions of the future, in that Mr. Abrams sees a world less threatening to the United States than Mr. D'Amato does.
 
Quick-Strike Force
The disparity emerges through the role they see the United States playing in the near future and the degree to which they would reduce the current national defense budget of $290 billion over the next five years.
While both envision the kind of mobile, quick-strike military force used in the Persian Gulf war in 1991, with a strong presence in Europe and other strategic places, Mr. D'Amato's force would be larger. 
He favors reductions of $85 billion in the defense budget over the next five years, and a decrease of 400,000 troops, to 1.5 million. 
Mr. Abrams would cut spending by more than three times as much, $280 billion over the same period, and require only 1.1 million troops.
Both see the need for reducing the 300,000 troops stationed in Europe -- Mr. Abrams to 75,000 to 100,000; Mr. D'Amato, to about 100,000.
In a recent interview, Mr. D'Amato assailed the continuing presence of Saddam Hussein in Iraq and the ethnic wars in Yugoslavia, citing them as reasons for slower defense reductions. 
He said the demise of the Soviet Union and Communist governments in Eastern Europe was no guarantee military threats had evaporated. 
He called North Korea "still a military threat" and said he worries about countries like Iran and China buying weapons on the open market.
 
Similar Concerns
Mr. Abrams cited similar concerns in a separate interview but not to the degree expressed by Mr. D'Amato, who he said "hasn't yet realized the cold war is over."
Mr. Abrams argued that the cuts and troop levels he advocates, drawn from a recent study by the Brookings Institution, would be sufficient to safeguard the interests of the United States.
While he would keep the United States military advantage over other countries, he played down the need for the United States to act as "the world's policeman," saying he preferred what he described as the "collective action" of the gulf war.
In an election year in which voters are far more focused on domestic concerns, Mr. D'Amato's approach of seeking smaller cuts in military spending is tied to jobs. 
He says slashing the military further would not only undermine national security but also devastate New York's economy by eliminating hundreds of thousands of jobs from defense contractors like Grumman on Long Island and General Electric in Schenectady.
But Mr. Abrams argued that the longer-term economic stability of New York requires conversion of military production to consumer businesses and reallocating dollars saved from military spending into programs to rebuild the nation's infrastructure. 
Mr. D'Amato favors the same kind of programs but a more gradual conversion rate.
 
'Responsible Reductions'
"With the end of the cold war, we cannot bury our head in the sand and miss this opportunity," Mr. Abrams said. 
"We can remain the strongest military power in the world, but at the same time get the benefit of the end of the cold war with responsible reductions in the military budget."
On trade issues, Mr. D'Amato favors approval of the North American Free Trade Agreement with Canada and Mexico, which means he supports the measure as written.
Like Gov. Bill Clinton in the Presidential race, Mr. Abrams supports the agreement in principle but would prefer amendments or parallel legislation to require Mexico to enforce its environmental standards and insure worker safety and the United States to provide retraining programs for Americans losing their jobs when their employers move to Mexico.
Both candidates contend that trade relations with China, specifically most-favored-nation status, should be tied to improved human-rights policies in China, especially in the wake of the Chinese Government's crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators in Tiananmen Square in 1989.
But Mr. Abrams takes a harder line against the Chinese Government than Mr. D'Amato, saying "the furthering of democratic principles and human rights should be at the cornerstone of foreign policy" with China.
The Senator called China a "very, very difficult situation."
In July 1991, he voted against granting most-favored-nation status to China because of Tiananmen Square. 
Less than two years later, when the issue came before Congress a second time, he voted with the minority to grant most-favored trade status as a way to encourage the Chinese leadership to adopt more democratic principles.
But a month later, after the President vetoed Congressional rejection of favored-nation trade status, the Senator joined 59 other senators in an override vote that fell 7 votes short.
Mr. Abrams contended that Mr. D'Amato's change in position represented either an inconsistency in position or political opportunism, in that it never appeared that the Senate would gather enough votes to deny China the preferred status.
The Senator disagreed, saying his initial support in 1991 was based on the President's satisfying concerns of Congress through an executive order that, among other things, protected Chinese students living in the United States by not forcing them to leave. 
His override vote, he said, was cast in the spirit of supporting human rights.
Both candidates chided the Bush Administration for reacting too slowly to help Russia toward democracy and a market economy. 
Both would encourage investment to further open Russia to American products.
