
Anatomically modern human beings, believed by many scientists to have first evolved in Africa, may have independently evolved in China and other parts of the world, a joint American-Chinese anthropological team has concluded.
That finding, being reported today in the British journal Nature, is based on the sizes and features of two very old skulls excavated from a site in China's Hubei Province.
The scientists, led by Dr. Li Tianyuan of the Hubei Institute of Archeology and Dennis A. Etler, a post-graduate student in anthropology from the University of California at Berkeley, believe the skulls are at least 350,000 years old and may represent a transition between Homo erectus and Homo sapiens. 
They describe the crania, or brain cases, of the two skulls as the most complete ever found in Asia for fossils of such great age.
Other scientists say the age of the skulls has not been determined precisely enough to support the conclusion that their owners actually lived at about the same time Homo sapiens appeared in Africa. 
But one matter on which paleoanthropologists appear to agree is that if the great age of the Chinese skulls can be confirmed, those specimens will be extremely valuable in helping to decipher the history of human evolution.
 
More Modern Features
The two skulls and other contemporary fossils were excavated by Dr. Li and a Chinese team in 1989-90. 
Although Chinese authorities have not allowed either the skulls or plaster casts made from them to leave China on loan, Mr. Etler, who speaks Mandarin, was permitted to work with Dr. Li in a collaborative study.
From the structure of rock sediments in which the skulls were embedded and from the remains of other animals in the same sediments, the scientists inferred that the human skulls date from the middle Pleistocene epoch some 350,000 or more years ago. 
More precise dating by measurement of ratios of radioactive isotopes has not been completed, Mr. Etler said in an interview.
Dr. Li and Mr. Etler evaluated 28 characteristics of the skulls, comparing them with comparable characteristics of other fossil human skulls. 
The best preserved of the two Chinese fossils has a long, low cranial vault, parietal bones that converge in a characteristic way, and other features that mark it as belonging to the species Homo erectus, the precursor of Homo sapiens. 
Homo erectus appeared in the fossil record some two million years ago and survived until less than 500,000 years ago.
But Dr. Li and Mr. Etler found other characteristics in the Chinese fossils not typical of Homo erectus but more similar to those of Homo sapiens -- the immediate ancestors of modern man (which is designated Homo sapiens sapiens). 
The more modern features include a rather flat face and sharply angled cheek bones. 
The Chinese skulls thus appear to the two scientists to represent a transitional blend of Homo erectus with Homo sapiens.
Paleoanthropologists are in broad agreement that Homo erectus originated in Africa and later migrated to other parts of the world. 
Among the first fossils scientists discovered of that species (formerly called Pithecanthropus erectus) were those unearthed before World War II in Java and China, and Homo erectus has also been found in Greece and elsewhere in Europe.
But there is little agreement among anthropologists as to where Homo sapiens started out.
"Dr. Li and I believe that alternatives to the idea that Homo sapiens originated in Africa are possible," Mr. Etler said. 
"We believe that modern man may have developed independently in various parts of the world from Homo erectus ancestors, migrating, intermingling, and finally fusing together as a kind of amalgam that we call Homo sapiens. 
Another possibility is that Homo sapiens actually began in China and radiated from there."
Dr. Philip Rightmire of the State University of New York at Binghamton is one of the scientists who sharply disagree.
"This is a controversial subject," he said, "but I do not believe in a multiregional origin for Homo sapiens."
The history of the human genus is one of movement, which for Homo erectus, began from Africa about one million years ago, he said. 
The hypothesis that modern man might have evolved first in Asia is not supported by any evidence, including the fossils studied by Dr. Li and Mr. Etler, he said.
Dr. Rightmire, who has examined photographs of the fossils, believes they are those of early Homo sapiens, not Homo erectus, and that their estimated age of more than 350,000 has yet to be proved. 
The features that Dr. Li and Mr. Etler believe mark the fossils as those of Homo erectus are so badly distorted, Dr. Rightmire said, that no conclusions can be drawn from them.
"Paleoanthropology is always controversial, even when specimens are well preserved, which these skulls are not," he said. 
"Neither the dates of the fossils nor their original shapes, which are squashed and crusted with some of the rock in which they were embedded, are yet known with any accuracy."
Mr. Etler acknowledged that the bones are too distorted to make definitive measurements, but said their general forms are suggestive.
 
Role of Ethnic Pride
"Others may disagree with our interpretation, and that's fine," he said. 
"But we felt it was important to bring this great Chinese material to the attention of scholars in the West."
Some scientists, including Dr. Rightmire, suggest that Chinese ethnic pride might color contentions by Chinese scientists that modern human beings might have evolved in China rather than Africa. 
Dr. Etler counters that a similar but opposite bias may color the theorizing of British and American paleoanthropologists who work exclusively with African fossils.
The recent discovery of a 1.6-million-year-old Homo erectus jawbone in the former Soviet republic of Georgia suggests that that species migrated from Africa much earlier than was formerly believed, and that modern man therefore had plenty of time to develop from his primitive ancestors in many parts of the world besides Africa, Mr. Etler said.
