
The White House said today that the national security adviser, Brent Scowcroft, made a secret trip to China in July, shortly after President Bush suspended high-level meetings with the Chinese Government over the June crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators. 
Deputy Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger also went on the trip.
Word of the July visit came as the White House was still fielding criticism about a more recent visit to Beijing by Mr. Scowcroft and Mr. Eagleburger. The two men went to China 10 days ago to mend relations after hundreds of students died in June at the hands of the Chinese military in Tiananmen Square. 
That crackdown stirred deep anger and calls for sanctions among the American public and in Congress.
The second trip was announced by the White House only after Mr. Scowcroft and Mr. Eagleburger arrived in Beijing. 
July's trip had been kept secret, and it was made public by the White House today after it was reported by Cable News Network.
The pictures of Mr. Scowcroft during the visit this month, toasting Chinese leaders by candlelight ''as friends to resume our important dialogue,'' set off a wave of criticism in the United States. 
Many critics responded strongly again today to the news of the July visit, saying Mr. Bush has misled the American people.
Senator George J. Mitchell, Democrat of Maine, the majority leader, said he was ''astonished'' to learn that Mr. Bush had sent the two officials to China on ''another midnight mission, barely a month after the brutal killing of pro-democracy student demonstrators.''
''At that time, the President was saying there could not be business as usual with a Government that took such actions,'' he said. 
''Yet this is increasingly what seems to be happening.''
He said the trips ''make a mockery of our profession of concern for human rights and the stated ideals of our democratic system of government.''
Mr. Bush has been annoyed by the criticism of his policy in an area where he considers himself an expert, and he responded today in an interview with news-agency reporters, saying:
''I notice now that some of the critics who were so opposed and using this fantastically, diabolically anti-me language, they come up now saying, 'Well, if you get A, B and C, then it will be all right or then we'll understand.'
Let them just stay tuned in.''
The President would not say whether China had offered any gestures of good faith in return for his decision to make the diplomatic overtures after the June killings.
Mr. Bush also said he did not know when the Chinese dissident Fang Lizhi would be able to leave the United States Embassy in Beijing, where he has taken refuge since the crackdown.
The July visit came a month after the violent assault by Government forces on pro-democracy demonstrators, mostly students, and days after Mr. Bush directed on June 20 that there be a ban of all high-level exchanges of American officials with Beijing.
 
Statement by White House
In a statement today on the July visit, the White House said: ''General Scowcroft did undertake a mission to China for President Bush in July to personally underscore the U.S. shock and concern about the violence in Tiananmen Square and to impress upon the Chinese Government the seriousness with which this incident was viewed in the U.S. 
The President felt this face-to-face mission, like the one recently completed by General Scowcroft, was necessary to show the sense of purpose and direction of the U.S. 
Government.''
But if the purpose of the trip was to criticize the Chinese action, it is unclear why the White House did not make it known at the time. 
The implication drawn by some in Washington was that even in July, Mr. Bush was worried about cutting ties to Beijing.
Marlin Fitzwater, the White House spokesman, said he could not rule out the possibility that General Scowcroft or others had traveled to China on missions that continue to remain a secret. 
''The President has had years of experience with China,'' he said of the July trip. 
''He knows that face-to-face declarations are important to them.''
 
Duplicity Is Charged
But critics said, essentially, that President Bush has been duplicitous.
''They apparently were doing what they told us they were not doing,'' said Representative Lee Hamilton, Democrat of Indiana and chairman of the Europe and Middle East subcommittee of the Foreign Affairs Committee.
''I'm very perplexed,'' he said. 
''They were doing what they told us they were not doing. 
They told us they were not making these contacts while they were making these contacts.''
Experts on China agree that it is likely that Mr. Scowcroft's initial trip to China was intended not only to express concern but to begin the healing of the Chinese-American relationship.
''Tiananmen put the relationship off track, and everything since then has been to try to put it back on track,'' said Gerrit Gong, a China expert at the Center for Strategic and International Studies and until recently a special assistant to the Ambassador to China.
''Even in a meeting that is a mix of sorrow and anger, there is always an eye toward moving the relationship forward.''
