
A dynamite explosion on a train bound for Shanghai killed 20 people and seriously injured 11 more on Monday night, the official New China News Agency reported early today.
Authorities said that the explosion occurred in the lavatory of a passenger coach.
It occurred three weeks after a train in Shanghai killed six people when it rammed its way through a human blockade of pro-democracy demonstrators. 
It was not clear this morning whether there was any link between this explosion and the Shanghai incident on June 6, or whether the new incident was politically motivated.
In Shanghai, residents were protesting the use of machine guns to crush Beijing's democracy movement. 
An angry Shanghai crowd set fire to the train after it killed the six civilians. 
Three men were executed a week ago for their role in starting the fire.
So far, the authorities have not announced any suspects in the most recent blast, which occurred as the train was approaching a bridge on its way from the nearby city of Hangzhou.
While the explosion appears to be an attempt at sabatoge, other such incidents in China have been reported in the recent months, usually as part of robbery attempts. 
This time, however, the damage seems to have been more serious, and there were no reports of attempted robbery.
 
Press Law Delayed
In another matter apparently related to the official crackdown on protest, the Chinese Government on Monday indefinitely postponed consideration of a proposed law that would have given news organizations limited guarantees of independence from the Government.
The official New China News Agency reported that a long-awaited meeting of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress would convene on Thursday, a little more than a week after it was originally scheduled to meet. 
But the agenda has been entirely changed.
Late last month, many in the democracy movement hoped that the Standing Committee would revoke martial law, and some even talked about the possibility that it might summon a full meeting of the National People's Congress to dismiss Prime Minister Li Peng. 
A law to increase protection of the press was also on the agenda.
That meeting was canceled. 
Now the main topics are to ''study and discuss the documents'' of the Central Committee meeting that took place Friday and Saturday, ''listen to a report on quelling the counterrevolutionary rebellion in Beijing,'' and ''examine and approve a draft law on rallies and demonstrations.''
