
In the first of what is expected to be a series of transfers, the Japanese Government said today that it would return 301 Chinese who sailed here over the summer falsely claiming to be Vietnamese refugees and seeking to resettle in Japan.
The group of 270 males and 31 females, including 13 children younger than 15 years old, were a small part of a wave of about 3,000 Chinese and Vietnamese who arrived on Japanese shores this summer and fall, taking unprepared Japanese authorities by surprise.
They sought asylum, but Japan has said that many were Chinese who came to Japan seeking better economic opportunities and were not fleeing political persecution.
Japan has thus treated them as illegal entrants rather than refugees, which means that they cannot obtain jobs in Japan or qualify for Government services. 
Most have been living in overcrowded detention centers awaiting Government checks on their status and backgrounds.
The Japanese Government also said today that the wife and son of the suspect in the hijacking of a Chinese jetliner to Japan over the weekend returned voluntarily to China today. 
The suspect, who has been identified by Japanese news organizations as Zhang Zhenhai, a manager for an electrical power plant in the northern Chinese province of Hepei, remains in a Fukuoka hospital with a broken pelvis that he suffered when he was pushed from an open door of the jet after it landed in southern Japan on Saturday.
Japan is to turn the first group of boat people over to Chinese officials at the port of Nagasaki on Thursday. 
The Chinese Government agreed to take the people after long negotiations with Japan and has hired a passenger ship for the two-day return trip to southern China, the Foreign Ministry said.
Toshio Tsunozaki, director of the Foreign Ministry's refugees and human-rights division, made clear that at least some of the Chinese were being returned against their will. 
''Many are willing to go back because they have no opportunity to work in Japan,'' he said.
