
Amid new concern over stepped-up attacks by Khmer Rouge guerrillas, the United States, the Soviet Union, China, France and Britain are to meet here on Monday to discuss ways of reviving stalled peace efforts on Cambodia.
Announcing the meeting today, a French Government spokesman said the five Governments would give special attention to an Australian plan to put Cambodia under a temporary United Nations administration pending free elections.
Diplomats said the meeting was proposed by Washington and immediately endorsed by Moscow. 
As permanent members of the United Nations Security Council, the five powers have special responsibilities for international peace and security under the United Nations Charter.
''There has been a lot of talk of an enhanced role for the U.N. in Cambodia,'' a United States official said. 
''The situation on the ground makes it more urgent. 
The United States has been trying to get the diplomatic track going again for some time.''
 
Talks and a Surge in Fighting
A monthlong 19-nation peace conference on Cambodia ended in failure here in August amid sharp differences between the Vietnamese-backed Government of Prime Minister Hun Sen, which controls Phnom Penh, and three loosely allied rebel groups, including the Khmer Rouge.
At the time, officials said they did not expect new peace talks until after the warring factions had tested their strength anew during the current six-month dry season and, in particular, in the wake of the withdrawal of Vietnamese troops last September.
But diplomats said peace efforts are now being renewed in response to a surge of fighting and assertions of major victories by the Khmer Rouge, which brought terror to Cambodia during the rule of Pol Pot from 1975 to late 1978. 
More than a million Cambodians died under the Khmer Rouge rule.
In recent days, the Khmer Rouge radio has asserted that its rebels launched a major attack on Battambang, Cambodia's second largest city, and grenade attacks on Phnom Penh. 
Reports from Cambodia confirmed an increase in rebel activities, but said the Khmer Rouge assertions were exaggerated.
 
China Favors Sihanouk Plan
A senior Australian official, Michael Costello, reportedly met Prime Minister Hun Sen over the weekend to explain his Government's peace plan. 
He then flew to Bangkok for talks with Chinese, Indonesian and Vietnamese officials. 
Mr. Costello is expected to arrive in Paris on Thursday.
The Australian plan, modeled after a similar formula that enabled Namibia to hold free elections and end its occupation by South Africa last year, has been welcomed by the United States, France, Britain and the Soviet Union.
But China, which supports the Khmer Rouge, has said it favors a plan put forward by the former Cambodian ruler, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, involving formation of a four-party coalition government comprising the three rebel groups and the Hun Sen regime to rule until free elections are held.
