
China today expelled seven European labor advocates, including legislators from Britain, Germany and Switzerland, for going to Tiananmen Square and unfurling banners calling for free labor unions.
The police detained the Europeans for nearly 17 hours before taking them to the Beijing airport and escorting them onto a morning flight to Hong Kong.
The expulsions occurred on International Labor day, a holiday observed in China to honor workers.
 
Explanation Demanded
The detentions prompted a flurry of diplomatic activity and complaints, with the British Foreign Office summoning the Chinese Ambassador on Thursday for an explanation. 
Chinese Foreign Ministry officials met in Beijing today with ambassadors of the countries involved to account for the detentions and expulsions.
"What they did violated China's relevant laws and regulations," the official New China News Agency quoted an unidentified Foreign Ministry official as saying.
The report also said the Europeans, who were traveling on tourist visas, "deliberately tried to make trouble."
On Thursday the group went to Tiananmen Square, the site of the 1989 democracy protests that were crushed by the army, and opened up a banner saying "Long Live Free Trade Unions," in English and Chinese. 
They were quickly taken into a van by the Chinese police and brought to a police station in the Forbidden City where they were interrogated, according to James Miles, a journalist with the BBC, who was present and was also detained.
Mr. Miles and two German television reporters who were present were interrogated and released after five hours. 
But the legislators were kept overnight at a hotel near the airport, and reportedly were not allowed to get in touch with their embassies.
Those detained were Robert Parry, a British Member of Parliament from Liverpool; Cornelia Matzke, a legislator from the German state of Saxony; Gotthard Krupp-Boulboulle, a representative from the Committee for Democratic Rights in Germany; Irene Savoy, a Swiss legislator; Alain Denizo, a French trade unionist; Jean-Pierre Barrois, a French unionist and college lecturer, and Olivier Doviane, a French journalist.
Earlier this year, Chinese authorities expelled three Canadian legislators after they had publicized plans to lay wreaths in Tiananmen Square. 
Last fall, the police also interrupted and briefly tried to detain three American legislators who had brought flowers to Tiananmen Square.
