
Prime Minister Li Peng called on China to "take a bolder approach to reform" today and said that its foremost task was to restructure the economy to stimulate economic growth.
Mr. Li, delivering his annual Government work report to lawmakers, suggested that the nation's rising living standards were the crucial factor that allowed Communist rule to survive in China instead of collapsing as it has in other countries. 
He indicated that the Government would make every effort to make people richer in order to repel capitalist subversion.
"To make China a powerful socialist country standing firm as a rock in the East, we must concentrate on our domestic affairs -- above all, on more rapid economic development," the Prime Minister said.
 
Address to Parliament
Mr. Li's speech was delivered to 2,500 delegates at the opening session of the annual National People's Congress, China's rubber-stamp Parliament. 
The address had been eagerly awaited for any light that it might cast on the power struggle that is believed to be under way between moderates and hard-liners within the leadership.
Instead of taking a clear position, Mr. Li seemed to take both sides. 
He called repeatedly for bolder reforms, but emphasized the need for stabilityI. 
He took a far more cautious line than the attitude suggested in a recent series of official articles that have gone so far as to recommend adopting elements of capitalism.
In the more audacious parts of the speech, Mr. Li borrowed from comments and proposals offered by Deng Xiaoping, the country's 87-year-old paramount leader, during a trip to southern China in January. 
Mr. Deng has engineered the latest push for more economic liberalization as the best way to preserve Communism in China.
 
'Emancipate Our Minds'
"We must further emancipate our minds, dare to innovate and take a bolder approach to reform and opening up," Mr. Li said. 
He called for more stock markets and for state-owned factories to compete in the market.
Though he said the focus of reform would be efforts to make state-owned enterprises competitive, Mr. Li did not offer many specifics about steps the leadership would take in its "bolder approach."
He also bowed in his speech to the hard-liners' demands for ideological campaigns and vigilance against subversion.
"We must be on the watch for any ideological trend toward bourgeois liberalization, checking it the moment it appears and never allowing it to run rampant," Mr. Li said. 
"Otherwise, there will be serious consequences."
The Prime Minister also called for dealing harshly with criminals, presumably alluding to democracy campaigners as well as to thieves and murderers.
"If we are too tenderhearted, we shall come to grief," he said.
Mr. Li also called repeatedly for buttressing political education programs, especially for university students. 
He said that social scientists "should continue to take Marxism, Leninism and Mao Zedong thought as their guide."
 
Dam Project Approval
This year's work report was less dismissive of human rights than in the past, and Mr. Li said that countries should discuss human-rights concerns. 
But he gave no indication that China was prepared to release political prisoners or tolerate dissent.
"It is not acceptable for a small group of countries to impose their human-rights criteria or models upon others," Mr. Li said. 
"Nor is it permissible to use human rights as a pretext for interfering in other countries' internal affairs."
Mr. Li called on the National People's Congress to approve the proposed Three Gorges Dam, a controversial project on the Yangtze River that has been under discussion since the 1920's.
Proponents of the Three Gorges dam say the project would generate huge amounts of electricity and reduce the risk of a catastrophic flood that might kill one million or more people. 
Critics say the project would flood one of China's most scenic areas, would offer only limited flood-control benefits, and is too costly and complex for China to tackle now.
Mr. Li's comments indicate that the Congress is almost certain to approve the Three Gorges project.
