
CHINA IN SEARCH OF ITS FUTURE
Years of Great Reform, 1982-87.
By John Woodruff.
Illustrated. 218 pages. 
Seattle:
University of Washington Press.
$19.95.
This is not a book filled with personal reflections on the splendor and mystery of China. 
It is a soberly analytical account by a correspondent whose observations probably were limited by the bureaucratic obstacles that the Chinese Government places in the paths of writers for powerful American newspapers.
But if he misses the daily simplicity and beauty of China, John Woodruff, The Baltimore Sun's Beijing correspondent from the fall of 1982 to the summer of 1987, gives social scientists, China scholars and historians an excellent, insightful look at the political, economic and social reforms under Deng Xiaoping, successor to Mao Zedong, who for 27 years ruled the lumbering land of one billion.
''China in Search of Its Future'' chronicles five years of reform in what likely has been the most peaceful, prosperous and politically stable decade China has experienced in the 20th century. 
Mr. Woodruff does not linger on the devastating damage - material, cultural and psychological - wrought by Mao's impassioned young Red Guards during the Cultural Revolution, which lasted from 1966 until Mao's death 10 years later. 
Instead, he describes how the Chinese in the 1980's find themselves teetering between Marxist dogma and a craving for a democracy that recently has inspired mass demonstrations in the streets of Beijing, Shanghai and other cities.
In fact, some of the more revealing chapters in this book - when Mr. Woodruff puts aside the dry but obligatory details on factories and farming - deal with China's future by describing its youth. 
The author's detailed account of student demonstrations leading up to New Year's Day in 1987 foreshadows this spring's chaotic upheaval. 
Mr. Woodruff tells of one foreign correspondent who asked a student during the demonstrations of 1987 where he was headed. 
''The student looked puzzled for an instant, then grinned as if delighted by his own cleverness. 
'I'm going to democracy,' he said.''
Those demonstrations provoked the veterans of the Communist Party to oust their leader, Hu Yaobang, blaming him for a lax atmosphere that allowed such freedom of expression. 
The demonstrations of today were spawned in part by the recent death of Hu, a man since lionized by the students as an avuncular figure of progressive reform.
The book contains plenty of detail on the inner wranglings of the six-member Standing Committee of the Politburo, and Mr. Woodruff cleverly uncovers the machinations of the ''dirty business'' of politics through dialogue with the ''born Red'' - the privileged children of China's revolutionary elite, the vanguard of the Long March in 1949. 
Fang Xiuqing, the 31-year-old daughter of an old revolutionary, explains to Mr. Woodruff that her coveted Beijing apartment was won through guanxi - a word as widely used as glasnost and perestroika are in the Soviet Union today. 
It simply means Ms. Fang has connections. 
Her father had known an elderly Politburo member, formerly a marshal in the People's Liberation Army during the civil war.
In a startling attempt to prove to the masses that special treatment of the ''born Red'' generation would not be tolerated by the party's Central Committee, three young sons of high-ranking Shanghai officials were executed in 1986. 
They had been convicted of gang-raping women, of using their fathers' names to lure women to parties and of extending promises of foreign study and job transfers. 
The executions, and the unusally extensive publicity given them in the Chinese news media, ''were, in effect, a brutal form of official apology for how far the party had permitted its officials, and their sons and daughters, to use and abuse their positions,'' Mr. Woodruff writes.
The Chinese have a saying, that their women ''hold up half the sky.''
However, as Mr. Woodruff writes, women in China still are forced to retire five years earlier than men. 
The nation's controversial one-child policy - an effort to curb the population - has caused some rural couples hoping for male heirs to practice the ancient atrocity of killing infant girls. 
The picture for women in China today would appear to be a bleak one. 
''But most of the women I knew seemed, for the moment, to be preoccupied with how much better life is now than it was a few years ago,'' Mr. Woodruff writes. 
''They were not much inclined to ask themselves whether men had it even better.''
Mr. Woodruff, now chief of The Baltimore Sun's Tokyo bureau, concludes that he is reluctantly optimistic about the progressive reforms he observed during his nearly five years in China. 
''My sense is that the rapid and dramatic changes I saw are indeed potentially historic, but that the key word in the sentence may yet prove to be 'potentially.'
It still seems too soon to feel certain that the Deng Xiaoping years will prove, in retrospect, to have been more than the greatest in a long line of ambitious starts.''
