
CHINA JOURNAL, 1889-1900
An American Missionary Family
During the Boxer Rebellion.
With the Letters and Diaries of Eva Jane Price and Her Family.
Foreword by Harrison E. Salisbury.
Introductory notes and annotations by Robert H. Felsing.
Illustrated. 289 pp. 
New York:
Charles Scribner's Sons. 
$22.50.
When I was a child in China, the closest things we had to grandparents were two elderly saints known to our whole missionary community as ''Uncle'' Jimmy and ''Aunt'' Sophie Graham. 
The Grahams and their son James had lived through the Boxer Rebellion. 
My mother told me the story of how an armed mob, inflamed by the sinister Boxers, surrounded the walls and battered on the gate of the mission compound. 
The Grahams had barricaded themselves in an upstairs bedroom trying to delay the massacre that seemed certain.
At last the gate gave way, and the Grahams could hear the screams as the mob surged into the courtyard. 
Without thinking what she was doing, Sophie lifted James from his cradle and carried him to the window. 
The baby, entranced by the mass of people below, laughed aloud and began to wave his arms.
Someone looked up, saw the happy child and waved back. 
Another waved and another until, unbelievably, the violent mob was transformed into a smiling, waving crowd. 
A few minutes later, the would-be assassins waved their final goodbyes and quietly left the compound. 
James was a grown man and a missionary himself when I knew him. 
But he never ceased to be known as the baby through whom God had wrought a miracle of deliverance.
What I wasn't told as a child was how precious few such miracles had been during the summer of 1900 in north China. 
More than 200 foreigners and an estimated 30,000 Chinese were brutally murdered during the Boxer Rebellion. 
Many of the victims were infants and children.
The I Ho Chuan, or Righteous, Harmonious Fists (nicknamed Boxers by Europeans), got their name from paramilitary rites that, they claimed, made them invulnerable to foreign bullets. 
They began as one of the many secret patriotic and religious societies that flourished in late 19th-century China, fed by the anger caused by the Opium Wars and related acts of humiliation imposed on China by the Western powers and Japan.
The missionaries had come in the wake of and under the protection of foreign gunboats. 
They and their early converts were particularly hated by the Boxers, who circulated rumors that these foreign devils and their secondary devils poisoned village wells, sold baby girls into prostitution and slavery, caused natural disasters by their magical incantations and grossed enormous profits by exporting human body parts.
In contrast to the Boxers' furious motto - ''Protect the country, kill the foreigner!''
- the patriotism and religious fervor of Eva Jane Price, a Congregationalist missionary from Iowa, seems touchingly naive. 
In ''China Journal, 1889-1900,'' a collection of letters and diaries, she often sounds uncomfortably patronizing, a Midwestern housewife who does indeed hold cleanliness near to godliness: ''I wish I could send you a picture of the crowd that comes in [to Sunday services] just as we see them - some men half naked, children nearly nude, women nursing their babies with not even a handkerchief to cover their breasts, an occasional boy with a hen or basket of eggs to sell (which we do not buy of course on Sunday), some dirty, lousy fellows but with souls to be saved.''
Usually Eva Price seems very much of her own time and place, but here and there are hints that she is more: ''Hurrah for China!
A place where the women can wear the breeches and be fashionable!''
And as the years pass her compassion for the Chinese seems more evident than in her early descriptions of their filth and ignorance: ''The dust is deep, deep, and I do not know what these poor people will do. 
There is suffering now and what there will be by spring is hard to say. 
They are poor, poor as Job's turkey. 
It makes me begrudge the food I eat when I know so many around us have so little to eat.''
In his foreword to the book Harrison E. Salisbury compares the Prices' story to a Greek tragedy. 
It is in some ways an apt comparison. 
The death of the Price family at the hands of the Boxers is known from the beginning, and Eva, playing out the tragedy, does not know how her story will end and cannot hear our warnings. 
She has no notion of herself as a tragic heroine. 
She is simply a devoted daughter far from home, seeking through her descriptions and commentary on life in this distant land to bind herself to those she has left behind.
I began reading ''China Journal, 1889-1900'' as I would begin to read Sophocles - with a feeling of dread that always lurked in the background. 
But despite all, I came to love Eva, whose letters remind me not of Antigone's oratory but of my own mother's letters from China - by turns funny, earnest, sad, exasperated, lonely, brave, depressed.
How brave those missionary women were. 
They truly went out like Abraham, not knowing whither they went. 
They tried against great odds to make a home for their husbands and children in an inhospitable land. 
They wanted to do good, and they never ceased to be homesick. 
In the late 19th century it took three months for a letter between China and the United States to travel in one direction. 
So when the grief-stricken Eva writes to tell of the death of her baby son, it is six months before her mother's word of comfort arrives.
I wonder if ''China Journal'' would have been published 20 years ago by anyone but some small denominational press. 
Even in the church the missionary endeavors of a generation or two ago have been regarded with some embarrassment, if not suspicion. 
The annotator of Eva's letters, Robert H. Felsing, shares this negativism. 
''Despite the murder of over 200 of their comrades in 1900,'' he writes, ''few missionaries ever grasped the ugly possibility that their activities in China may have been truly harmful to the Chinese.''
The Boxers are not simply exotic villains to us today. 
We understand all too well the ominous combination of wounded nationalism and fanatic religion. 
Still, it is too easy for us to judge the errors of another generation. 
Perhaps it was hubris rather than a divine call that led to the deaths of the Prices and thousands of their fellow Christians. 
If so, the story is a tragedy in the classic sense. 
However, if we let Eva speak for herself, she would not consider her life a tragedy, but a small part in the universal drama whose ultimate end is joyful.
