
A bit more than six years ago, when Britain agreed to hand over this territory to China in 1997, the Chinese leaders pledged that Hong Kong could continue to revel in its capitalism, vices and freedoms. 
Most Hong Kong people then seemed relieved by the agreement, for they thought they could tolerate such a marriage based on separate bedrooms.
But these days, at the halfway mark between that 1984 Joint Declaration on Hong Kong's future and the actual turnover to China, there is growing doubt about the value of the Chinese pledges.
In particular, a flurry of recent attempts by the Chinese authorities to influence Hong Kong policy has led some people to ask this question: If China insists on interfering with Hong Kong affairs now, when it is British, then how can Hong Kong hope to remain unmolested after 1997?
The latest development began this month when Lu Ping, the newly appointed Chinese official in charge of Hong Kong affairs, asserted several times that the British authorities were being deceptive in their public statements about how construction of a new Hong Kong port and airport development would be financed.
Mr. Lu was apparently alarmed that the British were planning to empty Hong Kong's coffers with the $16 billion development project, saddling China after 1997 with a burden rather than a benefit.
 
Lectures Seen as Puzzling
The details are murky, but some Hong Kong residents thought that Mr. Lu's comments betrayed a confusion about the projects and about the territory's financial system. 
More fundamentally, it struck some people as bizarre that Chinese leaders should be lecturing Hong Kong on either finance or open government.
A cartoon in The Hong Kong Standard showed Prime Minister Li Peng, in a dilapidated office that suggested China's economic backwardness, declaring, "We'll have to show Hong Kong how to run an economy."
"If China is already interfering, in such a vocal manner, with such high-ranking officials, now when the Brits are still here, what chance is there that the people of Hong Kong will be left alone and allowed to exercise 'a high degree of autonomy' as promised after 1997?" asked Martin C. M. Lee, a leader of the democratic forces in Hong Kong.
He added: "There are more and more breaches of the Joint Declaration, breaches in spirit and breaches in letter. 
That's why so many people are leaving. 
Why, even the bank is leaving."
 
Passport for a Bank
He was referring to the announcement last week that the Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation, the local bank whose history has been intertwined with the territory's for 125 years, was creating a parent company with a legal domicile in Britain. 
The bank's action may further undermine confidence and raise emigration, already running at about 1,200 a week.
"If the bank is getting a foreign passport, then I guess I should too," said a Hong Kong Chinese who works for the bank.
To be sure, the mood is not unreservedly bleak. 
The stock market is weak but steady. 
The property market is firm, and money continues to be made, more here than in most parts of the world. 
Hong Kong still has more Rolls-Royces per capita than anywhere else in the world, and there are some signs that as time passes since the military crackdown in China in June 1989, the fear and the urgency with which people sought foreign passports may have diminished.
The 1984 Joint Declaration stipulates that after 1997, Hong Kong will be able to govern its own affairs, keep its own currency, and maintain its capitalist system for at least 50 years. 
China will manage foreign affairs and defense, but otherwise the future Special Autonomous Region is supposed to be left to itself. 
Chinese officials once even attended the ribbon-cutting of a hostess nightclub, where prostitutes meet and then go home with customers, to show their open-mindedness.
 
Long Lines at Consulates
"There were very high expectations created by the Joint Declaration that have not been met, but I think some of those expectations were unrealistic," said George Baeder, director of the Pacific Rim Consulting Group in Hong Kong.
Referring to the furor over Mr. Lu's comments on airport financing, he added, "It's inevitable that we'll see more of these explosions, rather than fewer, and this won't send very encouraging signals."
The six years since the signing of the Joint Declaration have seen momentous changes that testify to Hong Kong's resilience as well as trauma. 
There are long lines in front of foreign consulates, as residents seek immigration visas, but frenetic construction is continuing to alter the skyline in the background.
At the half-way mark on the way to 1997, the social changes are also manifest. 
Words have taken on new meanings: "astronaut" is one who leaves family behind to live abroad and win a passport. 
Fortune tellers are now called on to advise on questions of emigration as well as marriage.
 
Crime Is on the Rise
Strikes and crime are on the rise, and some people fear that the greatest danger for Hong Kong is not Chinese policies after 1997 but emigration and the social breakdown that comes with the rush to the exits before then.
Perhaps the most fundamental structural change since the Joint Declaration is the growing economic and social integration of Hong Kong with the Chinese province of Guangdong to the north. 
Hong Kong companies subcontract with low-wage factories across the border, while Hong Kong people routinely cross the border to save money on everything from vegetables to funeral plots.
While Mr. Lu's comments are the latest example of what some in Hong Kong see as Chinese "meddling," there have been many previous such incidents. 
Some were obscure -- like Chinese comments about urban planning in the New Territories part of Hong Kong -- and others were more direct, like demands that people in Hong Kong stop any attempts to subvert Communism in China.
Particularly since the 1989 crackdown, there has been apprehension that the Chinese authorities will try to stamp out "subversion" in Hong Kong even if that means ignoring the freedoms guaranteed in the Joint Declaration -- many of which are also guaranteed in the Chinese Constitution, to little effect.
