
President Bush had an embarrassingly conspicuous front-row seat here Sunday to a spectacle that may have been inspired by a new theory that has come to be known as ''new authoritarianism.''
The spectacle, which ended up souring his visit, included a lecture from China's Communist Party leader about how democracy could ruin China's new policies, and sharp warnings against United States support for China's incipient human rights movement.
The finale was the use of more than 100 policemen to prevent China's best-known dissident, Fang Lizhi, and a prominent American scholar, Perry Link, from joining a banquet to which they had been invited by Mr. Bush during his 40-hour stay in China. 
Mr. Fang, Mr. Link and their wives were not allowed to board taxis or buses and were obliged to trudge through Beijing streets for one and one-half hours before two Canadian diplomats came to their assistance.
China expressed regret late tonight that the United States had made a ''fuss'' over the incident, and suggested that it was inappropriate for Mr. Bush to invite Mr. Fang without first consulting with Chinese officials. 
The statement followed a meeting between Ambassador Winston Lord and a Chinese Deputy Foreign Minister called to discuss the issue.
'Bush Was a Little Weak'
Mr. Fang, on the other hand, said today Mr. Bush's decision to raise the issue was ''a good beginning.''
But when pressed by reporters, he indicated that he thought ''Bush was a little weak'' in his handling of human rights matters on his visit, and he added that the United States appeared much more willing to criticize rights abuses in the Soviet Union than in China.
The police action to exclude Mr. Fang from the banquet and the Chinese condemnations of democracy surprised almost everyone here.
Part of the explanation for the actions may lie in the doctrine of new authoritarianism, which for the last two months has been hotly debated in official circles here.
Oddly, the theory is inspired not by Marx or Lenin, but by the experience of China's capitalist neighbors. 
Critics of socialism have often pointed out to Chinese officials the success of economies like those of Taiwan, South Korea, and Singapore. 
Some officials duly cited their use of market incentives, but also noted that they relied for most of their development on one-party authoritarian Governments.
''Authority is essential in modern economic life,'' a commentator wrote this month in People's Liberation Army Daily. 
In the present ''chaotic economic order,'' he continued, ''we should stress authority, strictly enforce orders and prohibitions and consciously safeguard overall interests.''
Of course, new authoritarianism is only one of the current fashions. 
Democracy is even more fashionable, not only among intellectuals and artists but even among Communist Party officials.
Moreover, many Chinese and foreign analysts doubt that the new doctrine can prevail. 
Mr. Fang said in a recent interview that while there will be ups and downs, democracy will be the trend in China. 
And Mr. Link said today that in the last decade whenever the Government had clamped down on intellectual freedom, intellectuals had quickly wriggled away and become even more outspoken than before.
 
Some Criticize Theory
Indeed, it is striking that the debate over new authoritarianism has been conducted in largely democratic fashion. 
Some newspapers have printed articles lauding it and urging greater stabilityI and order. 
Others have criticized the theory. 
The disagreements suggest that the official press is less monolithic than it used to be.
Workers' Daily, for example, this month lambasted new authoritarianism as ''an unrealistic prescription to save the world.''
Guangming Daily concluded in a long commentary that ''democracy involves a cost, but the cost of rejection of democracy would be even higher, such as the Cultural Revolution.''
New authoritarianism has various shades. 
One of the mildest is espoused by Wu Jiaxiang, a Communist Party official and protege of the party's General Secretary, Zhao Ziyang. 
Mr. Wu argued in the World Economic Herald last month that the doctrine should still be centered around respect for individual rights, at the same time that it rejects democratic decision-making for now. 
That tends to be a common theme among intellectual supporters of the new doctrine, but for others there does not seem to be much difference between new authoritarianism and any other kind.
Some foreign diplomats and many Chinese believe that Mr. Zhao shares the idea of new authoritarianism, but it almost certainly is not his alone. 
The chaos and turmoil that China has seen in this century have impressed upon many senior Chinese officials that one of the greatest threats to development is disorder.
The senior Chinese leader, Deng Xiaoping, has often cautioned that too much freedom could incite disruption, and he told Mr. Bush as much on Sunday. 
In their meeting, Mr. Deng said that without stabilityI, the achievements of recent years could be lost, a Foreign Ministry spokesman reported.
Such concerns have become increasingly common in recent months, as it becomes clear that the Government's orders often are simply ignored. 
Provincial leaders have refused to halt construction projects as ordered, for example, and some farmers are refusing to turn over their grain to the state, as they are supposed to.
