
EVENING CHATS IN BEIJING
Probing China's Predicament.
By Perry Link.
321 pp. 
New York:
W. W. Norton & Company. 
$24.95.
WHEN a young Chinese introduced Perry Link to his friends a few years ago, he offered perhaps the most flattering tribute he could muster. 
Beaming as he presented Mr. Link, the young man said, "The Communist Party hates him."
It will hate him even more after "Evening Chats in Beijing."
Mr. Link, a Princeton University professor of Chinese literature who angered the Chinese leadership in 1989 by repeatedly helping the dissident leader Fang Lizhi, marvelously captures the gloom prevailing among many Chinese intellectuals. 
Relying mostly on conversations with his Chinese acquaintances in 1988 and 1989, when he lived in Beijing, Mr. Link portrays better than anyone I know the sense of crisis and despair shared by many Chinese scholars in the capital.
What is the worst job in China today?
Night-soil collector?
Bricklayer?
Goatherd?
No, according to a young poet, the most painful job is teaching nursery school students.
"What do you teach the little ones?" the poet is quoted as saying. 
"To tell the truth?
If you do that, you are dooming them. 
Do you have the right to doom them?
But what, on the other hand, is your alternative?
Can you teach them to speak falsely?
Could you face yourself as a teacher if you did that?"
Few tribes anywhere in the world brood so much and so despairingly (or so articulately) as Chinese intellectuals. 
In part, the melancholy derives from disappointment that one of the world's oldest and greatest civilizations has produced nothing more than another third world dictatorship. 
And if China's intellectuals sometime seem particularly neurotic, one reason is that for decades they have been cowed into submission. 
They force back the bile and go on working for a system that oppresses them.
"Evening Chats in Beijing" is a lively survey of today's China as seen by these brooding intellectuals. 
Mr. Link speaks and writes Chinese about as well as any foreigner, and he ranges knowledgeably over plenty of terrain. 
He discusses the shortage of housing, the irritation at corruption, the uses and abuses of history and the dichotomy between reality and the China that smilingly presents itself to the outside world in meetings, speeches and newspapers. 
To study China is to search constantly for the relationship between reality and that official China.
"There is truth in Chinese newspapers, but you have to know how to find it," one person advises Mr. Link. "This often means reading upside down. 
If they say great strides have been made against corruption in Henan, you know that corruption is especially bad in Henan. 
If they say dozens of police were hurt in a clash with students, you know hundreds of students were injured if not killed."
More journalistic than scholarly, "Evening Chats in Beijing" benefits from numerous pithy comments by Mr. Link's friends, almost all of whom remain anonymous. 
In a discussion of how the Chinese adapt to cramped housing, which often forces several people to share a room, a young writer says, "I didn't know that sex could include sound until I saw American films."
This is a terrific book, but one should recognize that it offers a slice of China rather than a general introduction. 
One of the fundamental trends shaping China -- the economic boom of the last dozen years -- gets scant attention, and the peasants who account for the bulk of the population are scarcely mentioned. 
Though the voices in this book are among the most eloquent in China, they are not typical. 
Most Chinese are not anguished scholars who worry about the nation, but peasants whose concerns are directed at the harvest and their families.
Senior intellectuals in Beijing are a tiny and incestuous, if influential, elite. 
Indeed, they are such a small coterie that in many cases I was able to guess who the speakers were, based on Mr. Link's brief descriptions (I hope the security forces are more easily fooled).
Still, the discussions are frank and incisive. 
One can't help being impressed by the thoughtfulness with which China's brightest minds ponder their fate and castigate themselves along with everyone else. 
The Chinese in these "Evening Chats" are brilliantly and brutally honest, and it is a pleasure to eavesdrop.
