
THE JOY LUCK CLUB
By Amy Tan.
288 pp. 
New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons. 
$18.95.
In 1949, when the Red Army marched into Beijing, America's ''special relationship'' with China abruptly ended, and so hostile did our two countries become toward each other that people on both sides of the widening divide seemed to lose the ability even to imagine reconciliation.
Apart from the international crises, and even wars, there was another consequence, which, although more subtle, was equally tragic. 
Those millions of emigrants who were part of the great Chinese diaspora - beginning in the middle of the 19th century when indentured laborers went to California, and ending in the 1950's when millions of refugees fled Communism - were left almost completely cut off from their homeland. 
While the members of the older generation who had grown up in China before Mao Zedong were at least able to bring a sustaining fund of memory with them into exile, the younger generation was denied even this slender means of connection to the ancestral homeland. 
Seeing old China as hopelessly backward, and contemporary China as besmirched by Communism, many in this new generation of Chinese-Americans wanted nothing more than to distance themselves as far as possible from the zuguo, or motherland.
But, unlike the children of European emigrants, they had obviously Oriental features, which made it difficult for them to lose themselves in the American melting pot. 
Living in the confinement of Chinatowns with parents who spoke broken English (''tear and wear on car,'' ''college drop-off'') and who clung to the old Chinese way, they felt an indelible sense of otherness that weighed heavily on them as they tried to make their way into middle-class American life.
When political barriers began to fall in the 1970's, older emigrants welcomed the chance to end their long and agonizing exiles. 
But their sons and daughters looked with a deep ambivalence on the idea of having to awaken a dormant Chinese side in themselves. 
And so, as the exterior world went about recognizing China, re-establishing diplomatic relations and initiating trade and cultural exchanges, these young Chinese-Americans found themselves wrestling with a very different and infinitely more complicated interior problem: how to recognize a country to which they were inextricably bound by heritage, but to which they had never been. 
It is out of this experience of being caught between countries and cultures that writers such as Maxine Hong Kingston and now Amy Tan have begun to create what is, in effect, a new genre of American fiction.
Born in Oakland, Calif., in 1952 to a father educated as an engineer in Beijing and a mother raised in a well-to-do Shanghai family, Amy Tan grew up in an American world that was utterly remote from the childhood world of her parents. 
In ''The Joy Luck Club,'' her first novel, short-story-like vignettes alternate back and forth between the lives of four Chinese women in pre-1949 China and the lives of their American-born daughters in California. 
The book is a meditation on the divided nature of this emigrant life.
The members of the Joy Luck Club are four aging ''aunties'' who gather regularly in San Francisco to play mah-jongg, eat Chinese food and gossip about their children. 
When one of the women dies, her daughter, Jing-mei (June) Woo, is drafted to sit in for her at the game. 
But she feels uncomfortably out of place in this unassimilated environment among older women who still wear ''funny Chinese dresses with stiff stand-up collars and blooming branches of embroidered silk sewn over their breasts,'' and who meet in one another's houses, where ''too many once fragrant smells'' from Chinese cooking have been ''compressed onto a thin layer of invisible grease.''
The all-too-Chinese ritual of the Joy Luck Club has always impressed her as little more than a ''shameful Chinese custom, like the secret gathering of the Ku Klux Klan or the tom-tom dances of TV Indians preparing for war.''
She is made uncomfortable by the older generation's insistence on maintaining old customs and parochial habits, which she views as an impediment to breaking loose from her parents' cultural gravity. 
What she yearns for is to lead an independent, modern and American life free of the burden of her parents' Chineseness and the overweening hopes for their children that they can't even ''begin to express in their fragile English.''
''At first my mother tried to cultivate some hidden genius in me,'' recalls June. 
''She did housework for an old retired piano teacher down the hall who gave me lessons and free use of a piano to practice on in exchange. 
When I failed to become a concert pianist, or even an accompanist for the church youth choir, she finally explained that I was late-blooming, like Einstein, who everyone thought was retarded until he discovered a bomb.''
What she fears most of all is being dragged under by all that the Joy Luck Club symbolizes and transformed ''like a werewolf, a mutant tag of DNA suddenly triggered, replicating itself insidiously into a syndrome, a cluster of telltale Chinese behaviors, all those things my mother did to embarrass me - haggling with store owners, pecking her mouth with a toothpick in public, being color-blind to the fact that lemon yellow and pale pink are not good combinations for winter clothes.''
Part of June's struggle is to distance herself from the kind of helpless obedience that she recognizes in traditional Chinese women, and that she fears is manifesting itself in passivity in her own American life. 
''I was raised the Chinese way: I was taught to desire nothing, to swallow other people's misery, to eat my own bitterness,'' says June's mother, spelling out the dangerously congenital nature of this Chinese female submissiveness. 
''And even though I taught my daughter the opposite, still she came out the same way!
Maybe it is because she was born to me and she was born a girl. 
And I was born to my mother and I was born a girl. 
All of us are like stairs, one step after another, going up and down, but all going the same way.''
With a weary fatalism that speaks for June as well, her sister Lena confesses her propensity for ''surrendering everything'' to her American husband ''without caring what I got in return.''
However, after the death of June's mother a mixture of grief, guilt and curiosity, coupled with the relentless goading of the aunties of the Joy Luck Club, conspire to draw her into the very world from which she had so assiduously sought to distance herself. 
As the aunties talk over their mah-jongg game, even scolding June at one point for her evident lack of interest in her parents - ''Not know your own mother?'' asks one of them. 
''How can you say?
Your mother is in your bones!''
- June begins to see her mother's generation in a different light. 
Rather than viewing the aunties as expressionless aliens from an opaque and distant land who hound and embarrass their children, bit by bit she begins to understand the real dimensions of the ''unspeakable tragedies they had left behind in China,'' and to sense how vulnerable they actually are in America. 
Slowly she begins to comprehend how, after all they have endured, they might well be anxious and concerned lest all cultural continuity between their pasts and their children's futures be lost.
''Because I remained quiet for so long now my daughter does not hear me,'' laments one auntie. 
''She sits by her fancy swimming pool and hears only her Sony Walkman, her cordless phone, her big, important husband asking her why they have charcoal and no lighter fluid.''
It comes as a revelation to June that ''they are frightened. 
In me, they see their own daughters, just as ignorant, just as unmindful of all the truths and hopes they have brought to America. 
They see daughters who grow impatient when their mothers talk in Chinese, who think they are stupid when they explain things in fractured English. 
They see that joy and luck do not mean the same to their daughters, that to these closed American-born minds 'joy luck' is not a word, it does not exist. 
They see daughters who will bear grandchildren born without any connecting hope passed from generation to generation.''
When the aunties finally inform June that the two half sisters her mother had been forced to abandon during the war miraculously survived and are now living in Shanghai, she is finally jolted into feeling the ways in which her mother is, in fact, still ''in her bones.''
But it is not until she actually leaves with her aging father for a pilgrimage to China and a rendezvous with these half sisters that the reader feels the intensity of heat building up, heat we know will finally fuse her to her hitherto elusive ancestral home. 
And when at last she steps off the plane to embrace these errant relatives who have grown up on the other side of the divide that once separated China from the United States so absolutely, we feel as if a deep wound in the Chinese-American experience is finally being sutured back together again:
'' 'Mama, Mama,' we all murmur, as if she is among us.
''My sisters look at me proudly. 
. . . And now I also see what part of me is Chinese. 
It is so obvious. 
It is my family. 
It is in our blood. 
After all these years, it can finally be let go.''
As Amy Tan tells us of her own homecoming on the jacket of ''The Joy Luck Club,'' it was just as her mother had told her it would be: ''As soon as my feet touched China, I became Chinese.''
Woven into the narrative of the lives of June and her mother are the stories of the three other Joy Luck aunties and their California-born daughters. 
Moving back and forth across the divide between the two generations, the two continents and the two cultures, we find ourselves transported across the Pacific Ocean from the upwardly mobile, design-conscious, divorce-prone and Americanized world of the daughters in San Francisco to the world of China in the 20's and 30's, which seems more fantastic and dreamlike than real.
We come to see how the idea of China - nourished in America by nothing more than the memories of this vanished reality - has slowly metamorphosed in the minds of the aunties until their imaginations have so overtaken actual memory that revery is all that is left to keep them in contact with the past. 
When we are suddenly jerked by these sequences from the comforting familiarity of the United States into a scared child's memory of a dying grandmother in remote Ningbo, to remembrances of an arranged marriage with a murderous ending in Shansi or to recollections of a distraught woman abandoning her babies during wartime in Guizhou, we may readily feel bewildered and lost. 
Such abrupt transitions in time and space make it difficult to know who is who and what the complex web of generational Joy Luck Club relationships actually is.
But these recherches to old China are so beautifully written that one should just allow oneself to be borne along as if in a dream. 
In fact, as the story progresses, the reader begins to appreciate just how these disjunctions work for, rather than against, the novel. 
While we as readers grope to know whose mother or grandmother is getting married in an unfamiliar ceremony, or why a concubine is committing suicide, we are ironically being reminded not just of the nightmarishness of being a woman in traditional China, but of the enormity of the confusing mental journey Chinese emigrants had to make. 
And, most ironic, we are also reminded by these literary disjunctions that it is precisely this mental chasm that members of the younger generation must now recross in reverse in order to resolve themselves as whole Chinese-Americans; in ''The Joy Luck Club'' we get a suggestion of the attendant confusion they must expect to endure in order to get to the other side.
In the hands of a less talented writer such thematic material might easily have become overly didactic, and the characters might have seemed like cutouts from a Chinese-American knockoff of ''Roots.''
But in the hands of Amy Tan, who has a wonderful eye for what is telling, a fine ear for dialogue, a deep empathy for her subject matter and a guilelessly straightforward way of writing, they sing with a rare fidelity and beauty. 
She has written a jewel of a book.
 
THE WICKED ENGLISH-SPEAKING DAUGHTER
In the weekly meetings of her writers' group, Amy Tan says, ''I learned to listen, I learned to see fiction.''
She wrote three stories in three years; then, when they were sold to be part of a collection, she closed down her technical writing business and wrote 13 more in four months, using the alternating voices of Chinese mothers and their American daughters.
Ms. Tan, who is 37 years old, was born in Oakland, Calif., shortly after her parents emigrated from China. 
Her father, an electrical engineer and a Baptist minister, died when she was 15. 
Her mother, who came from a wealthy Shanghai family, had a disastrous first marriage in China, and left three daughters there in 1949 - something like her character Suyuan Woo.
''My memory is that I found out about them when my father died. 
We were having a fight and yes, she said, she did have these perfect, wonderful, Chinese-speaking daughters in contrast to me, the wicked English-speaking daughter,'' Ms. Tan recalled in a telephone interview from her home in San Francisco.
Her mother returned to China in 1978. 
''She would write me letters from China, and when she came back I was so relieved that she still loved me.''
Her mother, Ms. Tan said, expected her to be a neurosurgeon and a concert pianist in her spare time. 
''In me she saw this opportunity to look at so many chances in life, to take advantages and be strong and not depend on men.''
She says her mother is proud of her now but doesn't see ''The Joy Luck Club'' as autobiographical - although ''all my friends say that it's like listening to my mother and me talk, though the details are not from our life together.''
 
EDEN ROSS LIPSON
 
'THEY ARE ALL DEAD'
Even without makeup, I could never pass for true Chinese. 
I stand five-foot-six, and my head pokes above the crowd so that I am eye level only with other tourists. 
My mother once told me my height came from my grandfather, who was a northerner, and may have even had some Mongol blood. 
''This is what your grandmother once told me,'' explained my mother. 
''But now it is too late to ask her. 
They are all dead, your grandparents, your uncles, and their wives and children, all killed in the war, when a bomb fell on our house. 
So many generations in one instant.''
She had said this so matter-of-factly that I thought she had long since gotten over any grief she had. 
And then I wondered how she knew they were all dead.
''Maybe they left the house before the bomb fell,'' I suggested. 
. . . ''Some of them could have escaped.''
''Cannot be,'' said my mother, this time almost angrily.
 
From ''The Joy Luck Club.''
