
Dressed in a sequined jacket and white slacks, a slender blue-eyed, black-haired singer swivels his hips around the stage under the light of a flickering strobe as a crowd of 15,000 Chinese youngsters, officials and even grandparents watch the spectacle in fascination.
The singer's troupe of agile Chinese dancers - the women sometimes wearing no more than skimpy bathing suits - pranced about the circular stage in twos or threes, posing as butterflies or silver robots or rotating their hips in time with him.
The rock star is Fei Xiang, a dashing 28-year-old American who has dazzled about half a million Chinese around the country in a six-month tour that ends tonight. 
He has sold more cassette tapes than any other singer in China, the Culture Ministry says, and his murmuring love songs and glitzy stage shows have made him perhaps the most popular singer on the Chinese mainland.
Mr. Fei, whose American name is Kris Phillips, has an American father and a Chinese mother from Beijing. 
He was born in Taiwan, where he grew up until he moved to California to attend Stanford University. 
He speaks both Chinese and English without an accent, but he sings only in Chinese. 
He plans to leave the Chinese music world and begin a career as an actor in New York.
 
'Not So Much His Singing'
His stardom here is partly the result of his looks and his American connections. 
Fans invariably comment on Mr. Fei's 6-foot-3 frame and his blue eyes, and on his links with the United States.
''It's not so much his singing,'' said a young Chinese man who attended a concert the other day. 
''It's because he's from America and because to Chinese women he's like a prince riding up on a white horse.''
At one of his farewell-to-China performances, the audience chuckled when he dressed in gaudy robes, sang a modern version of Beijing opera, then stripped down to a T-shirt and swimming trunks for a song about summer. 
Some viewers looked mildly embarrassed when Chinese dancing girls appeared in scanty silver costumes.
Since the crackdown on the democracy movement in May, the Chinese authorities have banned some Western-style films and books and may have blacklisted some popular Chinese singers. 
One of those in disfavor is Cui Jian, who was becoming one of Beijing's hottest singers, with lyrics that expressed an inner struggle and cried out for change and freedom. 
Other popular singers, like Hou Dejian, who was affiliated with the democracy movement, are staying out of sight.
 
'Not a Bourgeois Liberal'
Mr. Fei, on the other hand, has been given a free rein. 
Not only has he been allowed to go ahead with his tour despite the campaign against ''bourgeois liberalization,'' or Western influences, but one of his performances is to be shown on national television. 
One reason for the distinction is that Mr. Fei is less overtly political than other singers; another is that he is perhaps excused in part because he is American.
''He's not a bourgeois liberal,'' said Lu Hongsheng, a director of art and literature at the Culture Ministry. 
''His singing and his acting are very natural. 
And his attitude is earnest. 
He is very hard working.''
While Mr. Fei does not write his own lyrics, some of his songs subtly challenge Chinese tradition:
''Listen to me, Dad, give me the freedom to grow up,'' he sings in a song called ''Say No More, Dad.''
''I don't want to listen to all that you've arranged for me.''
From the moment he gave his first concert in Beijing on May 19, the evening martial law was declared in the capital, Mr. Fei has seen his reputation soar in 63 performances in 12 cities. 
Throughout the tour, the house has been packed for every performance except in the southern city of Canton, where Cantonese songs are preferred to Mandarin ones. 
Ticket prices ranged from $2.15 to $10.80, considerable sums in a country where a month's salary is typically $40.
 
An Overnight Star
Mr. Fei began to sing in Taiwan after graduating from the Neighborhood Playhouse School of the Theater in New York City. 
In 1985, he abandoned Taiwan for the Chinese mainland, partly because the mainland was a larger market and partly because his career was not doing as well as he hoped. 
He had the good fortune to be picked for a Chinese New Year program that was broadcast on national television.
''That show established everything overnight,'' Mr. Fei said. 
''When it counts, I am considered a foreign guest, but the audience doesn't treat me as someone from outside.''
Since his debut, Mr. Fei has recorded five cassettes - most of them in recording studios in Canton - for the Chinese market, and this has brought him the equivalent of about $200,000 for each of the three years he has worked in China. 
Ten percent of his earnings go to the Government as royalties, and the rest, after taxes, is paid in local currency. 
He says he converts the money to dollars with private businessmen, a common practice.
 
Aside From Money
Mr. Fei's three-day farewell engagement in the capital this week brought in $152,838 in ticket sales alone, although he says he loses money on his concerts because of the high costs, including importing the sound system, stage, lights and mixing board.
Mr. Fei's income in China may be less than he could earn as a popular singer in Taiwan or even Hong Kong, but his ascent to the top of the Chinese market, he says, became a personal challenge mixed with a desire to contribute to China's fledgling entertainment industry.
''It's important in China to develop a popular culture,'' Mr. Fei said. 
''In China, the Government has gotten by with filling the people's lives with five-year plans, and now that is no longer going to happen. 
People aren't going to fill their minds, their days, their lives with that stuff anymore.''
