
When members of the International Olympic Committee vote later this week on several changes to the executive board, the 11 officers and members who virtually run the organization, He Zhenliang of China is widely expected to gain a position as vice president.
Attaining such an elevated status among the 92 individuals who maintain and shape the Olympic Games is an honor unto itself. 
In He's case it also carries an implicit vote of confidence that Beijing can successfully stage the 11th Asian Games next year, despite concerns over more clashes like those last spring in Tiananmen Square between Government troops and members of a pro-democracy movement.
The disturbances caused minor disruptions in preparations for the Games when crews were unable to deliver construction materials to various sites and some workers wandered off the job to watch or participate in the demonstrations.
'Not So Serious'
''I can't say the turmoil had no affect on things,'' said He, a 59-year-old vice minister for physical culture and sports in Beijing and an I.O.C. member since 1981. 
''But it was not so serious. 
The disruption was only for a few days, and all the preparations went on without one day of stopping.''
Just as the 10th Asian Games in 1986 enabled Seoul, South Korea, to prove it could successfully stage the Olympics, which proceeded free of incident last fall, the next Asian Games play a critical role in Beijing's attempt to show itself as a worthy Olympic host. 
Chinese sports officials envision Beijing bidding for the summer Games of 2000, which the I.O.C. will award in 1993. 
A final decision by Chinese authorities, He said, would be made after the Asian Games.
Meanwhile, the Chinese Goverment and the municipal government of Beijing have demonstrated their support of the next year's Games by allocating more than $600 million for the renovation of 11 existing sports facilities, the construction of 16 new ones and other capital improvements. 
Altogether, He said, the athletes from as many as 39 countries will use 33 different competition venues and have access to 46 training facilities.
Ultimately, however, the success of the 1990 Games and Beijing's viability as a host for the Olympics a decade later are more likely to be measured in political terms, a prime consideration since 1972 in Munich, where members of the Israeli team were murdered by terrorists.
 
Constant Fears
In Seoul, preparations for the 1986 Asian Games and the 1988 Olympics continued under constant fears of disruptive activity by North Korea and by the occasional student demonstrations in Seoul that turn violent. 
Not all the fears were unfounded: A week before the Asian Games, a bomb exploded in Seoul's Kimpo Airport, killing five people, and 10 months before the Olympics, a bomb exploded aboard a South Korean airliner in mid-flight, killing 115.
North Korea denied involvement in either incident, but that did little to reduce the anxiety level in South Korea. 
Nor did the periodic clashes between students and the police in Seoul, which continued as the Olympics were under way.
While the present calm in and around Beijing would seem to indicate a return to normalcy in the aftermath of events last spring, the president of the Olympic Council of Asia, Sheik Fahad al-Ahmad al-Sabah of Kuwait, was concerned enough about next year to raise the issue of security and the current state of martial law in meetings with Chinese government leaders on a recent 10-day visit.
 
Strong Sense of Support
''The safety of the participants in the Games is the first thing I discussed with the Chinese people,'' al-Sabah said in an interview today. 
''I wanted to make sure there would be no military or political interference, and I was assured by the highest authorities that everything would be as normal.''
During his visit, al-Sabah said that he sensed nearly unanimous support for the Asian Games by the people he met, including students. 
The only opposition he has encountered since June, he said, was from Chinese students living in Hong Kong and the United States.
''They wrote me letters saying that Beijing should not have the Games,'' he said. 
''My reply to them was that I would listen to the Chinese people living in Beijing and China, not those living outside.''
By the end of the year, sports officials in Beijing will have a better sense of where they stand with regard to the Asian Games, which open in 13 months. 
The last of regional championships in 10 sports will have been held, giving the system and facilities a test run, with almost a year to rectify any remaining problems.
''Thailand has had the Games three times, India twice and China never,'' said He. 
''Our people are keen to see the Asian Games succeed, not only for themselves but for all the people of Asia.''
