
At the ribbon-cutting ceremony for a customs station on the China-Hong Kong border, Gordon Y. S. Wu was patiently listening to an address by a senior Chinese official. 
It was one of Mr. Wu's first China ventures, and all his profits from building the station were to come from public tolls.
Suddenly, Mr. Wu's face went red. 
The deputy mayor of Shenzhen, a special economic zone on the border, was saying that no tolls would be charged.
"He took me by surprise," said Mr. Wu, a short, blunt-talking man who is principal owner and managing director of Hopewell Holdings Ltd., a property development company that is one of the largest foreign investors in China. 
" 'Hey, there's supposed to be a contract,' I said. 
But he said he wanted to take care of the Hong Kong people and charge no toll."
Mr. Wu complained to Zhao Ziyang, Prime Minister at the time the project was finished in 1985. 
Mr. Zhao agreed with Mr. Wu but would not overrule the deputy mayor. 
Finally, China agreed to buy Mr. Wu out of the contract.
Since then, doing business in China has not gotten much easier. 
But Mr. Wu, one of Asia's best-known developers, is stubbornly plodding ahead.
Indeed, while many of Hong Kong's taipans, or "big bosses," are trying to relocate their empires to Western countries before Britain cedes control of the territory to the Chinese in 1997, Mr. Wu is rolling the dice in the other direction -- toward China itself.
Mr. Wu is betting that dramatic growth in China and other developing countries in Southeast Asia will provide a steady stream of profits for at least the next decade or so.
The bets are enormous. 
Mr. Wu's company is building a 188-mile superhighway connecting Hong Kong, Macao and the city of Guangzhou in southern China's Guangdong Province. 
He is proposing to build a multibillion-dollar road and rail network in Bangkok, Thailand. 
And he is planning to erect a 91-story hotel in Hong Kong.
Not everyone thinks Mr. Wu will emerge a winner.
"Gordon Wu is trying to reduce his exposure in Hong Kong, but he's getting more exposed to Thailand and China," said Edward Chan, an analyst at ChinTung Research International Ltd. 
"They will continue to be fraught with political risks."
Mr. Chan says Hopewell has capital commitments in Asia of an estimated $6.8 billion over the next 10 years. 
It already has $250 million invested in China, according to Mr. Wu.
But others say that Mr. Wu's projects in southern China could not only change the landscape but could mean a giant economic leap for Guangdong and Hong Kong -- and, of course, for Hopewell Holdings.
"He may have too many ideas in his head at one time, and many people think Gordon Wu is talking too big, given the resources he has," said Steven So, an analyst at Jardine Fleming Securities in Hong Kong. 
But if he can succeed with the superhighway, "then more governments will have confidence in Hopewell to do construction in their countries."
For his part, Mr. Wu is characteristically confident. 
"I always deliver on what I say," he said. 
"Maybe not in the time I want."
Mr. Wu, the seventh of nine children, began his company in 1969 with a $2 million loan guaranteed by his father, who had owned a taxi fleet. 
In the early 1970's, when Mr. Wu was still a relative unknown, the Government objected to him putting up a 66-story headquarters building outside Hong Kong's traditional business district. 
Mr. Wu took the case to Hong Kong's Supreme Court and won.
For a decade, his building was the tallest in Hong Kong until the Bank of China surpassed it in 1990. 
Mr. Wu is now planning to construct the Tower Hotel, which would take back the title.
Mr. Wu and his family own at least 51 percent of Hopewell Holdings, which earned the equivalent of $93 million in the year ended June 30.
Along the way, Mr. Wu, who is 55 years old and holds a degree in civil engineering from Princeton University, has earned a reputation as the quintessential Hong Kong entrepreneur, an ambitious man who takes on enormous risks and challenges.
To get his bankers on board, he often sinks in large chunks of his own capital and then persuades them to lend more money without a guarantee. 
Repayment comes only from the cash flow generated by the project. 
This way, Hopewell, which is traded on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange, can limit its exposure to its share in a joint venture with a foreign partner.
Nowhere is this combination of risk-taking and limited exposure more at play than with Mr. Wu's biggest project to date: the superhighway connecting Hong Kong, Macau and Guangzhou, which is expected to cost $1.2 billion.
During the past several years, Hong Kong has shifted its manufacturing base to Guangdong Province, but the infrastructure there, while better than elsewhere in China, is still quite poor.
Trucks and cars transporting merchandise or raw materials between Hong Kong and Guangzhou must take narrow winding roads, stopping at times to let farmers cross with their chickens or pigs. 
The 75-mile trip takes seven hours by bus; Mr. Wu hopes to cut that to 90 minutes.
"I first proposed the superhighway in 1979, and that's when people said I was a dreamer," said Mr. Wu. "I saw it as a parallel to the New Jersey Turnpike."
"Deng Xiaoping had just announced an open door and reform and so I said, 'Hey, let's go in there, sweet talk them into giving us a franchise and do something meaningful,' " Mr. Wu said. 
"They all believed in railways. 
I told them railways belong to the 19th century, and I went on to explain Henry Ford."
The project took a great deal of sweet-talking, but finally Mr. Wu was able to break ground in 1987, operating through a joint venture with the Guangdong authorities. 
The project has been delayed numerous times, and construction was halted for three months after the 1989 military crackdown in Beijing.
Because of political demonstrations in China, and jitters in the financial community toward the mainland, Mr. Wu had to cancel plans to raise almost $500 million through a stock rights issue scheduled for May 1989. 
Instead, Mr. Wu put up $150 million of his own capital before he went to the banks to raise $800 million last year. 
Despite the political uncertainty, the banks supported him. 
The Chinese are expected to contribute more than $100 million to the financing.
Mr. Wu plans to earn his return through tolls, charging the equivalent of about $12 for cars from Hong Kong and less for Chinese cars. 
Mr. Wu will get 40 percent of the profits for the first 10 years and 30 percent for the next 20 years, with the remaining profits going to his Chinese partners.
By the year 2000, Mr. Wu could make annual profits of $170 million from the tolls, according to James Capel (Far East) Ltd. 
This would be on top of recovering his equity and repaying bank loans.
The first phase of the project, to link Hong Kong to Guangzhou, is scheduled for completion in mid-1994. 
But Mr. Wu hopes to complete it a year ahead of schedule so that he can collect early toll profits as a bonus agreed to by the Chinese authorities.
Some analysts are skeptical that Mr. Wu can finish ahead of time, given the difficulties he already has had, but Mr. Wu has beat the clock before.
In 1987, he completed a coal-fired power station for Guangdong in 22 months, about one year before the projected completion date. 
He collected about $50 million in bonuses.
While doing business in China is not easy, it is no more difficult than in many other parts of the developing world, Mr. Wu said.
"It's like pulling teeth, but the Philippines is just as difficult," said Mr. Wu. "They have the Filipino bureaucracy."
Mr. Wu recently completed a $42 million power plant in Navotas, north of Manila. 
He signed the contract in November 1989 and brought in his shovels and bulldozers, only to confront a military coup attempt against President Corazon Aquino at the end of December. 
After that settled down, there was a flood, an earthquake and two typhoons. 
By August 1990, Mr. Wu sent out the first bit of electricity and everyone congratulated him.
Now, he is negotiating the construction of a $710 million coal-fired power plant in the Philippines, which he hopes to complete in 1994, and another power plant in Guangdong Province, which is expected to cost $1.4 billion.
This summer, Mr. Wu raised about $725 million through a rights issue, mainly to finance the power plants, some hotel development and the grand transportation scheme he is planning for Bangkok.
"A fellow walking the tightrope at the circus to me is very dangerous," Mr. Wu said, in discussing the risks he takes. 
"You pay me a million dollars and you'd never get me up there. 
But to the fellow who knows, it's easy, isn't it?"
 
 
 
THE ROAD TO BANGKOK
When asked whether his company might be too dependent on China, Gordon Y. S. Wu points to a pile of maps of Bangkok and launches into his favorite topic these days: his proposed $3.2 billion double-decker elevated road and railway system for the Thai capital, which has a population of about 6 million.
"It's big, innovative, profitable," he said.
The project began a few years ago, when Mr. Wu found himself in heavy traffic on a business trip to Bangkok, long known for its congested streets and roads.
"I got stuck like everybody else on Sukhumvit Road," he said. 
"A lot of people start cussing and swearing about the traffic. 
I look at it and say, 'Here's an opportunity. 
Let's crack that problem.'
"
Using Tokyo's transportation system as a model, Mr. Wu has proposed tearing up Bangkok's current railway and turning it into an elevated system with shops below. 
He would then add a second level over the railway to accommodate a six-lane highway.
There are two big advantages to this approach, he said. 
There is no need to demolish any housing, because the proposed system would follow the existing rail route. 
And profits would come not so much from passenger tickets -- which could sell for as little as 25 cents -- as from the shopping malls, restaurants and other properties that Mr. Wu would develop underneath the 37 miles of railway line.
Just as final contract negotiations for the project were taking place in February, however, Thailand was shaken by a military coup.
Now, Mr. Wu is embroiled in negotiations with the new Government over development rights and tax concessions. 
While he still must overcome some local opposition, Mr. Wu says he is optimistic he will soon be able to sign a contract.
He is hoping to send in his bulldozers before the end of the year. 
If all goes smoothly, he says, the project should be completed in 1999.
