
So often in Japanese business life, success comes to those who avoid risks and follow the well-trodden paths. 
Then there are people like Kazuo Wada, chairman of the Yaohan Department Store Company, who personifies another Japanese type: the devoted renegade.
The avuncular Mr. Wada, a trim 61-year-old man with a ready smile who prefers plain gray suits, is an unlikely radical, but in his genteel but determined way he has built one of Japan's most unusual retailers by breaking just about every rule of the game as it is played here.
His guiding business philosophy, he said, has been ''to give my company a special character that nobody else had.''
He has clearly succeeded.
Atypical Geography
Where the economic and Government center of Tokyo has been the focus for most big Japanese retailers, the Yaohan supermarket chain has eschewed the capital for the provinces. 
While most Japanese companies expanding overseas have gone to the wealthy nations of Europe or the United States, Yaohan has focused on Hong Kong, Malaysia, Singapore, Taiwan and Brunei.
Instead of renting landmark locations, Yaohan generally searches for less glamorous but practical sites -the kinds of places where you might find a vegetable stand, which is how Yaohan got started in a provincial town outside Tokyo.
And most Japanese companies have only one ideology: work hard and be loyal. 
But Mr. Wada and his mother, Katsu, who helped found the company, are leaders in a new Japanese religion, known as Seicho No Ie, which is loosely translated as House of God's Children. 
It is an amalgam of Shinto, Buddhism and Christianity, which stresses the Confucian ethic of respecting authority and of seeking harmony. 
Nearly all of Yaohan's managers are members of the sect.
Yet no step has been more unusual, or risky, than the one Mr. Wada announced late last year to move Yaohan's international headquarters from Japan to Hong Kong, the politically fragile British colony that is to revert to Chinese control in 1997.
Many Chinese professionals are fleeing Hong Kong because of concern over how the Communists on the mainland will manage the prosperous capitalist enclave. 
But where they spot trouble, Mr. Wada says he spots opportunity. 
As he noted, from his new home in the prestigious Peak district of Hong Kong island, he will look out over the largest potential market in the world.
The headquarters move is partly a matter of thrift. 
Hong Kong has some of the lowest taxes in the world, and land prices there are considerably cheaper than the inflated levels of Japan.
''Taxes and land are one consideration,'' Mr. Wada admitted. 
''But more important was that I see big possibilities in Asia and China in the future. 
This is the era of Asia.''
Of China, he states bluntly that it is not rich enough yet to support his supermarkets, but that will come. 
He said that over the next few decades he plans to develop along the country's relatively prosperous coastal regions a huge network for buying goods as well as for a chain of stores. 
It will all add up to one of the most extensive, if not the largest, distribution systems connecting all of Asia.
''Yaohan has developed into an interesting story, in part because they have realized that there is clearly a higher profit potential overseas than in Japan, given the costs you face here,'' said Mike Allen, a retailing analyst at Barclays de Zoete Wedd, a securities house.
Mr. Allen said he is somewhat skeptical of Mr. Wada's ability to pull off his plan. 
Two problems are the store's middle-brow image, which may make it hard for it to distribute higher margin goods later, and some labor problems that he said it has had in the United States, reportedly because of its insistence that employees follow the company's rigid tenets. 
That may make it tough for Yaohan to maintain consistent service outside of Japan. 
Nonetheless, Mr. Allen said the strategy is potentially attractive in the long run.
Although Mr. Wada's unusual vision is distinctly Asian, it is not being applied only to this part of the world. 
Yaohan operates six stores in the United States, including a large supermarket in Edgewater, N.J., just across the Hudson River from Manhattan. 
The store sells Japanese and Asian foods almost exclusively.
In New Jersey, Mr. Wada plans to build Yaohan's first hotel, which will have some unusual features, by Edgewater standards. 
Its roof will be equipped with a traditionally Japanese pool-sized communal tub. 
After taking the cedar-scented waters, guests will be able to relax in Japanese cotton robes, yukata, on the traditional straw tatami mats, eating Japanese food and sipping sake as the lights of New York City blink in the background.
In Japan, Yaohan has 55 company-owned stores and another 35 franchised stores around the country. 
In addition, it has 22 stores overseas, including a big new wholesale distribution center in Singapore.
About a third of the $1.2 billion in sales it registered in the fiscal year that ended May 20, 1989, come from its international business. 
But it expects the overseas sales to match the domestic sales by 1992. 
The company reported a profit of $18.5 million in the last fiscal year, a 32 percent jump from the previous year.
 
A Folk Hero
As different as it is in many ways, Yaohan is very much a creature of Japan. 
Mr. Wada's mother has become something of a folk hero here, with a life story that could have been written by an Asian Horatio Alger. 
Her tale was told, in fact, in one of the most popular television series ever broadcast in Japan, which gave her the fictional name, Oshin.
It told of how she came from a family so poor she was put to work before she was 10 years old, and of how her hard work and persistence brought her business success and, eventually, a good husband. 
Together, they started a greengrocer that eventually became the chain of stores in the hands of her dedicated and pious son. 
It is the sort of tale of struggle and success against long odds that the Japanese immediately identify with.
Although Yaohan is publicly held, members of the Wada family dominate the management and maintain the largest shareholding. 
One younger brother, Terumasa, is president, and another, Mitsumasa, is senior vice president. 
Together, the family members own about 13 percent of the company's stock.
For his part, Mr. Wada concedes that, in many ways, he was forced to take the international route. 
''The main reason was high land prices'' in Japan, he said. 
''If land had been more reasonable, I wouldn't have gone overseas.''
 
Low-Rent Neighborhood
In an interview in the decidedly modest office his company keeps in a low-rent Tokyo neighborhood, he also said: ''I had the choice of opening stores in Osaka, Tokyo or overseas. 
Given the situation with land prices, I chose overseas.''
After an initial failure in 1971 in Brazil, which has a large Japanese community, he persisted and began to open successful stores around Asia. 
Yaohan's first American location, at Fresno, Calif., was opened in 1979. 
Now Yaohan has stores in California in Los Angeles, San Francisco, Costa Mesa and Torrance, as well as the New Jersey store. 
Mr. Wada admitted that the largest, in Edgewater, was not profitable yet, but he said it was meeting all his projections.
Although the American stores show promise, Mr. Wada said Asia still offers the best prospects for growth because of the region's explosive accumulation of wealth and rising standard of living. 
He rattles off precise figures of the national income of the nations of Southeast Asia, and clearly specifies Yaohan's prospects in each.
Once he moves to Hong Kong in a couple of months, Mr. Wada will be giving up his new $7 million home on a spectacular seaside site in Atami, a hot spring resort 55 miles southwest of Tokyo. 
But, as he put it, ''All of Asia will become my home.''
