
China faces a difficult battle in Congress this summer to retain its preferential access to the United States market, but you would hardly know it from the unconciliatory remarks being made by Chinese officials.
Ambassador Zhu Qizhen, in a speech last week outlining his Government's position in the coming debate, took a hard and at times menacing line. 
China has not violated any human rights, he said; it does not have a problem trade surplus with the United States, and it keeps adequate controls over its exports of arms and nuclear technology.
 
Retaliation Is Likely
China will also use high tariffs to drive American companies out of its markets if the United States does not renew the current trade privileges, Mr. Zhu added. 
Billions of dollars in contracts and thousands of jobs in industries from aircraft manufacturing to agricultural chemical production would be at risk, he said.
Mr. Zhu's remarks were only a little more strident than other policy statements by Chinese officials. 
For China has pursued a pugnacious four-pronged lobbying strategy here that has dismayed its friends and gladdened its foes.
Mr. Zhu's comments were not what members of Congress had hoped to hear. 
The massacre at Tiananmen Square in 1989, along with reports in the last month by a human rights group and a Congessman that political prisoners are being forced to produce goods for export, have so stained the reputation of China's leadership that diplomats' assurances carry little credibility.
A growing number of American lawmakers say they want China's "most favored nation" trade status revoked outright. 
"The Ambassador's threats will strengthen their case," said Representative Nancy Pelosi, a California Democrat who opposes renewal unless it is linked to human rights improvements.
 
Bush Decision Due by June 3
President Bush must notify Congress by June 3 if he wishes to renew for one year China's most-favored status, which is due to expire on July 3. 
A motion of disapproval, which seems likely to be introduced, would have to pass both houses of Congress within 90 days, and it probably would provoke a Presidential veto.
When President Bush renewed China's trade status last year, the House voted to disapprove the renewal. 
The Senate considered similar action but did not take a vote before the 90-day time limit expired, so the renewal stood.
Several lobbyists who favor renewal expect that this year President Bush will recommend a renewal of the special status, that both houses of Congress will disapprove it, and that the President will veto the disapproval. 
It is possible, though unlikely, that Congress will then override the veto.
Another possibility is that Congress will pair its disapproval of the status for China with approval of a renewal for the Soviet Union, said one lobbyist who favors a renewal for China. 
In that case, the President would face a particularly difficult dilemma, because the Soviet Union is in desperate need of certain trade subsidies and other credits that indirectly depend on a renewal of its status.
 
Tariff Would Rise to 47.48%
The U.S.-China Business Council, a Washington-based group of American companies with investments in China, has estimated that the average tariff for the 25 biggest categories of American imports from China will rise to 47.48 percent, from 8.35 percent, if most-favored status is not renewed. 
With this status, Chinese products enter the United States at the lowest rate available to any American trading partner for each category of goods.
The test of China's strategy will come soon. 
Congress appeared increasingly likely last week to authorize the Administration to negotiate a free-trade agreement with Mexico and another round of reductions in global trade barriers. 
At the same time, China's trade status was moving quickly toward the top of the agendas of Washington's economic policy makers.
An eclectic alliance of trade protectionists, anti-Communist conservatives and liberal human rights advocates opposes an unconditional extension.
The strongest of China's four lobbying themes has been that Congress and the Administration should value the United States' strategic relationship with China too highly to risk endangering it for the sake of human rights or trade surpluses. 
President Bush, a former chief of the American liaison office in Beijing, is widely seen as particularly influenced by this argument.
 
Overestimation by Chinese
But the Chinese consistently overestimate how much weight is given to such long-term considerations on Capitol Hill, said Warren W. Williams, the president of the American Chamber of Commerce in Hong Kong. 
Mr. Williams has led a delegation to lobby Washington in support of the Chinese.
"Their fundamental lack of understanding of how things work in Washington, D.C., is a continuing surprise," he said.
Another Chinese lobbying tactic is to insist that China guarantees different human rights, including rights to food and shelter, than the the United States does. 
American officials, by this argument, should not judge a foreign country by their own standards.
Chinese officials also criticize American trade statistics showing that China shipped $15.1 billion worth of goods to the United States last year while importing products worth only $4.8 billion. 
Excluding Chinese exports that pass through Hong Kong, the trade is nearly in balance, Mr. Zhu contended. 
But this argument has not been persuasive in Washington, Mr. Williams said.
 
Attempt to Intimidate U.S.
The last of China's four approaches to lobbying in Washington has been intimidation. 
"I have a fondness for the American people," Mr. Zhu said after his speech on Tuesday. 
"I really don't want to see West German or Japanese people there, taking over."
Business conditions for Americans in China are said to be deteriorating already. 
For three weeks, Chinese negotiators have been stalling in contract talks with American companies, said an American businessman with extensive contacts there, who spoke on condition that he not be identified. 
He said the Chinese negotiators were acting on Government instructions.
But in a possible change of tack, the New China News Agency said Saturday that China would send a buying mission to the United States, Reuters reported.
Some people in Washington question the credibility of Chinese threats to exclude American businesses and products. 
"They may not love capitalism; they may not love human rights, but they love money," Representative Pelosi said.
