
IN the pottery and porcelain of most of the world, there are few developments that do not have some relation to Chinese ceramics. 
An exhibition that gives some sense of the evolution and highlights of Chinese ceramics, as well as a shorter history of Japanese ceramics, can be seen at the Asia Society in Manhattan through Sept. 
3.
The show covers five major periods of Chinese ceramics: the Tang dynasty (618 to 907), notable for glazed earthenware; the Song dynasty (960 to 1279), known for its stoneware and the green glaze known as celadon; the Yuan dynasty (1279 to 1368), when porcelain began to appear; the Ming dynasty (1368 to 1644), associated with blue and white wares, and the Qing dynasty (1644 to 1912), notable for rich floral porcelains.
The first object the viewer sees is a striking glazed earthenware horse about 30 inches long. 
The realistically modeled cream and tan animal is a tomb figure from the Tang dynasty, dated around the eighth century, as is a glazed sculpture of a court lady playing cymbals. 
She was probably one figure in a funerary set that would have constituted a whole burial orchestra.
Celadon ware from northern China in the Song dynasty is not as familiar as the pale, rich jadelike celadon of southern China. 
The olive-hued glaze on several small northern pieces in the show is incised with stylized leaves and flowers.
Chinese ceramics were traded over much of the world. 
A 17th-century platter showing a gazelle in a garden belonged to Shah Jahan, who built the Taj Mahal.
The exhibition, in which all the work is from the Asia Society's permanent collection, includes a number of Ming pieces in blue and white porcelain. 
On many dragons cavort among waves or clouds. 
The Chinese section ends with a few examples of fruit and flower paintings on porcelain, a technique perfected under the Manchus in the Qing dynasty.
The Japanese work that makes up the rest of the ceramics exhibition covers a shorter but important stretch of time: the 17th and 18th centuries. 
This era saw the development of porcelain in Japan, the expansion of the Japanese export market, the emergence of legendary potters like Ninsei and Kakiemon and the continued creation of pieces for the traditional tea ceremony.
Among the stoneware tea-ceremony objects on display is a modern-looking square dish with a broad ceramic handle used as a food tray. 
There is also a tea storage jar boldly painted with black birds on a cream glaze by Ninsei, a mid-17th-century potter known for his masterful painting on earthenware.
Among the porcelain pieces are several figures. 
Two guardian lions, about 10 inches high, are elaborately patterned and colored in the style of Kakiemon. 
The first potter named Kakiemon, or his son, is credited with establishing overglaze painting on porcelain in the last third of the 17th century.
Also on view at the Asia Society, 725 Park Avenue (70th Street), is a continuing exhibition of Korean porcelain of the Yi dynasty (1392 to 1910). 
Since both Korean and Chinese ceramics influenced Japanese work, it is interesting to compare all three.
