
The only fact that everyone agrees on is that some gangsters visited Tang Rimei's home in the southern Chinese city of Shenzhen one day last year and beat her brother to death in front of her.
Miss Tang, a slender 23-year-old woman, says the reason is simple: she was a whistle-blower, calling attention to a web of corruption involving senior officials at the company she worked for. 
The easiest way to silence her, after threats failed, she said, was to murder her and her brother, adding that the killers became frightened and ran away before they got to her.
The authorities offer little comment. 
They hint that the killing may have been the result of a street quarrel or a misunderstanding over Miss Tang's use of a company-owned apartment. 
But they do not explain why the trial of the accused killers was abruptly suspended a month ago when one of them reportedly stated in court that the company chief had ordered the attack.
"This case shows that the reforms in China haven't been carried out correctly," said Yang Zhenguo, a co-worker of Miss Tang who backs her up on every detail. 
"And it shows that there are no human rights in China."
 
Window Into Corruption
The case offers a remarkable window onto the web of corruption in southern China, the most prosperous part of the country. 
Shenzhen, which is nestled next to Hong Kong, is probably the richest city in China and is known for a freewheeling atmosphere.
It is impossible to confirm independently the accusations that Miss Tang and Mr. Yang make, but the general portrait that they paint of widespread graft fits with accounts from many other Chinese. 
The only unusual aspect of this case, aside from the killing, is that Miss Tang and Mr. Yang have escaped to Hong Kong and are willing to be quoted by name.
Miss Tang first went to Shenzhen in 1989 and eventually found work at the Yellow River Corporation, a successful trading company that spent large sums of money cultivating support from party and government officials. 
She said she was appalled when the company chief, a man named Wang, asked her to forge contracts that would be used to defraud the banks.
The executives at Yellow River specialized in defrauding banks and out-of-town companies, said Miss Tang and Mr. Yang, who also worked there.
 
Writing a Thousand Letters
Miss Tang said that when she tried to report her allegations about Yellow River, local officials simply laughed and reported her to Mr. Wang. According to her account, Mr. Wang cut off her salary and sent thugs to harass her. 
This only outraged Miss Tang even more, and she took an extremely rare course in China: she fought back.
She began writing letters to officials all over China, more than 1,000 letters in all. 
She also pasted posters around the city denouncing the corruption.
Her older brother, Tang Richeng, came to Shenzhen to protect her. 
Because Shenzhen is a special economic zone adjacent to Hong Kong, it is illegal for outsiders to enter without permission, but Miss Tang said she and her brother bribed soldiers and police to get working papers.
According to Miss Tang's version of events, a gang of hoodlums led by two Yellow River employees came to Mr. Yang's company-owned apartment in which she had found refuge, and announced that they were going to kill her on orders of "Boss Wang."
She quotes them as saying that a deal had been worked out for them to serve a few months in prison and then be released.
"My big brother tried to protect me, so they hit him with their iron bars," she recalled. 
"I was screaming, 'Help!
Help!'
They hit me a little bit, but because my big brother was protecting me they mostly hit him. 
Then some people came by, and they got scared and ran away."
The accused killers were arrested a few days later, but Miss Tang said that when she demanded that Mr. Wang be arrested as well, the police detained her and threatened her. 
After what she described as two more attempts on her life, which she says she foiled by barricading herself inside the apartment so that the hired killers could not get to her before she had raised the neighborhood with her screams, she fled China. 
Now she is applying for a visa to resettle in the United States.
The trial of the accused killers was held in late February. 
But after the reported confession of one of the Yellow River employees that Mr. Wang planned the whole operation, the court suspended the trial indefinitely.
"Some things are still under investigation," Chen Zongyi, the Deputy Chief Judge of the Intermediate People's Court in Shenzhen, said by telephone.
But an official of the Yellow River Corporation, who would identify himself only by his surname, Sha, said Mr. Wang was still employed and receiving his paychecks, but was not coming to work.
Mr. Sha said Yellow River officials had merely been trying to force Tang Rimei from the company-owned apartment when a fight resulted in which her brother was killed.
"This incident has been exaggerated," Mr. Sha said. 
"It was all a misunderstanding."
