
The pigs amble lazily among the mud-brick houses and the grinning children play Ping-Pong on flat bits of ground, for an almost picture-perfect image of bucolic contentment. 
But villages like this one in central China still have their secrets, perhaps dark ones, as something is missing in these hamlets: several million little girls.
Newly released data from China's 1990 census support previous suspicions that 5 percent of all infant girls born in China are unaccounted for. 
It is not clear what has happened to them.
Are they killed at birth, drowned in a bucket of water by the midwife, on instructions from parents who want a son rather than a daughter?
Or are they given up for adoption?
Or perhaps they are raised secretly to evade the one-child policy?
Some evidence suggests that a combination of these factors accounts for the missing girls, although officials usually insist that very few are killed.
"There's no infanticide here," said Jin Mingai, the Mayor of Daijiawan, a remote hillside community accessible only by foot trail. 
Mr. Jin squirmed on his stool and acknowledged that every couple in the village had managed to produce a son, despite family planning restrictions, but he added firmly, "The peasants here would never drown their own daughters."
Villagers overwhelmingly give the same answer, and perhaps they are right. 
But one of the great mysteries of China is what happens to about half a million infant girls who are born alive each year but then vanish.
 
Sons Inherit Family Line
The girls almost certainly disappear because of the traditional preference, common in many parts of Asia, for sons rather than daughters. 
But in a larger sense, they are the unintended casualties of China's 12-year-old "one-child policy."
While Chinese couples are limited to having one or two children, as is now the case, they are sometimes reluctant to "waste" their allotment -- or risk heavy fines and stiff punishments if they exceed it -- on a daughter. 
They fear that if they go ahead and raise a girl, they may miss the chance to have a son later on.
"If they have a son, most couples will usually be satisfied and stop," said a local official here in Hubei Province. 
"But there are some couples that think they absolutely must have a son, and they keep on trying no matter how many daughters they've already had."
Boys are preferred partly because they customarily do more farm work. 
But the most important reason is that in Chinese families, girls "marry out," and the family line passes only through sons. 
Couples also want boys as a kind of social security, because it is sons who are charged with caring for their parents in old age.
For now, the question of the missing girls is such a puzzle that even the number of those missing is only an inference, based on skewed sex ratios of newborn infants.
Data released in May from the 1990 census indicate that for every 100 girls aged less than one year there were 111.3 boys. 
This disparity was not a fluke: a survey conducted in 1989 found 112.5 boys, while one in 1987 found 110.5.
 
Suspiciously Large Gap
All around the world, male births outnumber female births, but in China the gap is suspiciously large. 
In countries with good statistics -- and where female infanticide is not considered an issue -- the ratio is constant at about 105 or 106 boys to 100 girls.
If the true ratio at birth in China is about 105.5 boys to 100 girls, but so many girls were not reported that the official ratio jumped to 111.3, then something happened to more than 600,000 infant girls last year alone.
Chinese officials sometimes dispute such calculations, and suggest that it is a bit arrogant for Westerners to claim that birth ratios of 105 or 106 to 100 are universally valid.
"It's hard to say why, but in Asia some nationalities have higher ratios," said Li Honggui, director of the general office of the State Family Planning Commission. 
"Every country is different."
 
Normal Ratio About 106 to 100
Yet there is considerable evidence that China, too, has a natural sex ratio at birth of between 104 and 106 males for every 100 females. 
The sex ratio for newborn infants in the 1964 census was 103.8 to 100, and in the 1953 census it was 104.9. 
It was beginning with the 1982 census, after the one-child policy was implemented, that the figure surged.
Moreover, even now, for first-born infants, China has a fairly normal sex ratio of about 106 to 100. 
It is only the second-born, third-born, fourth-born and fifth-born infants that are disproportionately male. 
Among fifth-born children, the ratio is more than 125 males to 100 females.
Presumably this is because couples will accept a daughter if she is their first child, because they expect that they can find a way legally or illegally to have another child.
With later births, parents may feel that this is their last opportunity to have a son. 
In addition, they know that they may well be fined heavily if they flout the policy and raise the child, while if they declare that it is stillborn, they will not get in trouble.
"They may think, 'If it's a boy, I'll own up and pay the fine, but if it's a girl then I won't pay a cent,' " said Huang Baoshan, a spokesman for the State Family Planning Commission.
There are various ways that parents can evade the fines, and some evidence suggests that many of the missing girls are informally given up for adoption. 
They are not registered at birth but are left bundled on the doorstep of an official or someone else who will take care of the infant.
Two Swedish experts working in conjunction with a Chinese demographer concluded recently on the basis of an extensive survey that up to half of the 500,000 infant girls who go missing each year are in fact adopted informally. 
Some villagers confirm that this is a common course for households that have unauthorized pregnancies and give birth to girls.
A second possible explanation is that parents, unwilling to pay fines for their daughters, send the infants to be raised by relatives in other areas. 
A third possibility, in areas where family planning supervision is lax, is that parents simply raise their daughters at home without registering them.
Of course, a fourth alternative is infanticide. 
Most Chinese -- including those who are critical of the Government -- say they believe that infanticide is uncommon, but with as large a population base as China's, even a tiny proportion of infanticides would equal a large number of killings.
If there are killings, they apparently take place primarily in remote villages, like Daijiawan, where women give birth at home and the midwife is a neighbor and probably a relative. 
In these villages, there are no police stations or autopsies, and babies are quietly buried without anyone taking a close look.
Zeng Yi, a Chinese demographer, argues that the missing girls are hidden rather than killed, except in rare cases that do not affect the overall statistics. 
One indication that some of the missing girls are merely hidden is that population surveys have sometimes found more five-year-old girls than there were female births registered five years earlier. 
That presumably means that they were hidden from the authorities at earlier ages.
The latest census data arguably support that hypothesis. 
While the sex ratio for newborn infants was a highly abnormal 111.3 to 100, it dropped to about 108 for toddlers and declined further to 107 for elementary school-age children.
"At a young age, the girls are hidden," Mr. Zeng said. 
"Then when they grow up they are reported, perhaps because they go to school."
 
Ultrasound Testing
While most Chinese believe that infanticide is rare and declining -- partly because more births are taking place in hospitals, where it is not so easy to drown a newly born infant -- another trend may result in an even more skewed sex ratio. 
That trend is the growing use of ultrasonic testing to determine the sex of the fetus. 
If it is a girl, the parents can abort the pregnancy and try again.
Since 1987, doctors have been forbidden by law from telling parents the sex of their fetus, but it is widely acknowledged that the law is frequently violated. 
A carton of cigarettes apparently is a typical bribe to be told the sex of the fetus, and sometimes the information is offered gratis.
"It's quite normal to tell the parents the sex of their child," said a doctor in Beijing. 
"And anyway, there are no secrets in China."
 
