
Success, Amy Tan has learned, is never what you expect it to be.
"In some ways it's like being a kid in a candy store," the 39-year-old best-selling author says, pouring coffee in her suite at the Carlyle Hotel. 
"But there's also the loss of privacy. 
I'll be getting up from a nap on an airplane, and someone will come over to me and say, 'You're Amy Tan.'
And I'll realize that I look like everybody else does when they've just awakened on a plane, and I want to say, 'No, I'm not.'
"
Three years ago, Ms. Tan was a freelance technical writer living in San Francisco and working on her first novel. 
That book turned out to be "The Joy Luck Club," a tale of Chinese-American women and their immigrant mothers. 
It jumped onto the best-seller lists in the spring of 1989, and a few weeks later its paperback rights were sold for $1.2 million.
Ms. Tan's second novel, "The Kitchen God's Wife," is being published this month by G. P. Putnam's amid much promotional fanfare. 
Early reviews have been glowing and it would be surprising if the novel, in which an elderly immigrant woman tells her daughter the story of her harsh and oppressive life in China before the revolution, did not wind up on the best-seller list.
With money sometimes comes celebrity, a status that Ms. Tan says has affected her life on the ground as well as in the air. 
For one thing, she has had to move. 
"I was determined at one point to keep everything the same," she says. 
"Which is a very idealistic, romantic notion. 
We lived in a very nice house, but we were on the first floor, and every day there were people walking by and pointing at it. 
My mailman would tell everybody what mail I had received. 
I felt very exposed."
So she and her husband, Lou DeMattei, a tax lawyer, packed up and headed a couple of blocks away, to the third floor of a condominium. 
As she speaks, Ms. Tan carefully rearranges a shimmering orange-gold cape that is wrapped around her shoulders. 
Her legs are crossed, and much of the time so are her arms, as if she is shielding herself from public prying. 
She is trying very hard to be outgoing and cheerful, but her nervousness shows. 
She seems, surprisingly, a little shy. 
It is not that she is still a novice at interviews; it's that she really doesn't like them.
"I have a different personality in public than I have in private," she says. 
"I put on the public personality. 
I ironed these clothes for you this morning. 
Otherwise what I would be wearing would be really grungy."
 
Different in Private
She is a lot sillier in private, she says, "and a lot bitchier."
She is more comfortable, she says, "when I'm walking around back home with my husband, or when I'm having a conversation with him, and he's sort of drifting off trying to read the paper, and I say: 'Well, this is good; I'm as boring as I always was.'
"
"The Kitchen God's Wife" didn't come easy, she says. 
While she was writing it, she was very much aware of another aspect of success: the fear that the second book will not be as good, or as well received, as the first.
"I see all the faults," she says. 
"I know what's been put in and what's been taken out. 
I know where the mistakes are, and I'm always afraid someone's going to catch them and say, 'You put the wrong emphasis on this,' or 'You used the wrong angle on that.'
"
She also didn't want to be typecast. 
"I didn't want to be pegged as the mother-daughter expert," she says. 
So at first she tried writing something very different from "The Joy Luck Club."
But that something wasn't working, and there were a number of false starts. 
"It was an attempt at rebellion," she says. 
"And I realized that rebellion was not a good reason to write what I was writing."
Then, suddenly, her mother provided the inspiration. 
"My mother kept complaining about how she had to tell everybody she was not the model for the mother in 'The Joy Luck Club,' " Ms. Tan says. 
"She told me that next time I should write her true story. 
And then one day she said something that I thought was remarkable.
"I knew she had lived in China during World War II, that she had been married to someone else before my father, and I asked her what the war had been like. 
I expected to hear all these exciting tales, and instead she told me, 'I wasn't affected.'
"But then she mentioned that maybe two or three times a week, when the bombs fell, she would have to run to the east gate or the west gate. 
'We were always running,' she told me. 
'We were always scared that the bombs would fall on top of our heads.'
So I said to her: 'Wait a minute. 
You told me you weren't affected by the war.'
And she replied: 'I wasn't. 
I wasn't killed.'
"
For Ms. Tan, the statement was a remarkable revelation about the difference between her own perspective on life and her mother's. 
"I decided I wanted to try to capture the shock of that difference," she says.
She changed many details, but the novel keeps close to the basic outlines of her mother's life in China before, during and after the war: "Everything from her horrible marriage, to her children dying, to being in jail, to escaping right before the revolution in 1949."
 
An Effort at Understanding
Her goal, she says, was to try to understand her mother. 
"She is such a strong person," Ms. Tan says. 
"And I could never understand why she lived with such a horrible man for 12 years of her life. 
She once told me that she might even kill him if she ever saw him again. 
If she hated him that much, why didn't she leave him?"
But Ms. Tan came to learn more and more about the subservient role of women in that Chinese society. 
"My mother was repressed so much by her family, by the society she lived in," Ms. Tan says. 
"And then I started thinking about all the different myths we grow up with, all the assumptions and the expectations. 
There are these things that form and control our lives that we never question."
The novel's title, Ms. Tan says, is a reference to a Chinese tale about a man who wronged his wife and was then elevated to the status of a deity -- "a perfect metaphor," she says, for those unquestioned governing myths.
Ms. Tan wrote the novel in 1989, while the student demonstrations were taking place in Tiananmen Square in Beijing. 
"People would always say that the students were so brave," she says. 
"I wanted to understand what it is like to live a life of repression and to understand the fear that one has, and what you have to do to rise above that fear."
Ms. Tan says she has already done research for her next novel, and expects to begin writing it as soon as she has finished promoting "The Kitchen God's Wife."
And with the writing, she knows, will again come the pressure.
"If I get an award, I look at it and I thank somebody and I give it to my mother," Ms. Tan says. 
"And if my mother wants to throw it away, she can throw it away. 
I don't keep that stuff around. 
I don't keep my books on my coffee table. 
I don't want to see any reminder of them. 
There's an unreality about it. 
My life with the last book ended when I made the final corrections."
She takes a sip of coffee and looks up expectantly. 
Is the interview over?
Yes, she is told, it is. 
She laughs, the carefree laugh of a schoolchild at dismissal.
"Great," she says.
