
Sir Run Run Shaw, the Asian tycoon who tried to help Macy avoid bankruptcy by offering a $250 million loan, was turned down in part because board members hardly know him. 
Some members heard his name for the first time in March 1991, when he bought a 10.3 percent stake in Macy.
Yet in Hong Kong, where he has dominated the movie business for decades, Sir Run Run is a highly visible billionaire known to virtually every household.
Even at age 84, Sir Run Run politely pauses for photographers at the elite social gatherings he frequents, sometimes with a movie actress on each arm. 
He often wears the black gown of a traditional mandarin, a gesture to the educated backround into which he was born in Shanghai in 1907.
Sir Run Run is credited with making China's first film in 1924, but he left Shanghai before long for Singapore, where he and his brothers produced hundreds of low-budget kung-fu movies. 
In 1959, Sir Run Run brought his growing fortune to Hong Kong, where he earned a reputation for careful, shrewd real estate investments.
"He is a very, very conservative investor," said Terry Fok, research director at Kim Eng Securities in Hong Kong, who tracks Sir Run Run's flagship company, Shaw Brothers. 
"He's got vast personal wealth, but is unlikely to ever do anything dramatic with it."
Shaw Brothers, now valued at about $255 million, includes movie studios, theaters and a 30 percent stake in Hong Kong's largest television station. 
Sir Run Run's 66 percent stake is worth about $172 million.
His private holdings, however, are estimated to be worth somewhat more than $1 billion. 
He owns sizable tracts of land and high-rise buildings in Hong Kong, Singapore, and Vancouver, British Columbia, as well as a share of Shangri-la International Hotels.
Like other Hong Kong financiers, he has shied away from other United States investments because of corporate taxes, which do not exist in the British colony. 
Sir Run Run has never disclosed his full holdings, and prefers to conduct business with people whom he knows personally. 
In the Macy case, he was persuaded to invest by Myron E. Ullman 3d, now Macy's vice chairman, who had done business with Sir Run Run in Hong Kong.
"He's very secretive about his investments," said Alan Ng, an analyst at S.G. 
Warburg in Hong Kong. 
"He seems to keep a lot in cash, but we haven't seen him spend much in Hong Kong in the past 10 years."
Despite his frequent public appearances, Sir Run Run protects the secrecy of his private life, often telling interviewers only that he is a widower who likes to rise before dawn to practice Chinese shadow-boxing.
Even the source of Sir Run Run's unusual name, different from his given name in Mandarin Chinese, Shao Yifu, is a mystery. 
An elder brother was called Run Me Shaw, and articles in the gossipy Hong Kong press have credited the boys' father with choosing English-language nicknames that played on the similarity of 'Shaw' to the word 'rickshaw,' the hand-pulled taxis of old China that were at once a symbol of aristocracy and exploitation.
"Run Run" was the name that the financier used when he was knighted by Queen Elizabeth of Britain in 1977, largely for his philanthropy in Hong Kong, where he donates some$20 million each year to hospitals, charities and schools.
