
WHEN British India shuddered on the faultline of religion and split apart at independence in 1947, a new nation for Muslims, which they called Pakistan, was born.
But Pakistan, washed in the sun-seared south by the Arabian Sea, and fringed at the north by the soaring, snowy peaks of the Hindu Kush and the Karakorams, was new in name only. 
This narrow land, enclosed on three sides by India, China, Afghanistan and Iran, was where much of the subcontinent's culture originated.
India may have taken the name, but Pakistan got a lot of the history -- prehistoric, Hellenistic, Persian, Buddhist and Mogul. 
Alexander the Great rode into its valleys. 
So did the Emperors Darius and Cyrus the Great. 
Archeological sites at Mohenjo-Daro in Sind and at Taxila in the North-West Frontier Province reveal sophisticated cultures thousands of years old. 
Museums at the sites preserve their artifacts and tell the stories of the ruins.
Pakistan also has good samples of the Indian subcontinent's dramatically varied geography. 
There is an undeveloped seacoast, quiet mountain valleys with cool, clear streams, deserts - camels loom over cars at traffic lights in Karachi - and fertile agricultural plains that bloom and die and bloom again in rhythm with the rains.
The Indus, the river that gave life to the subcontinent's earliest civilizations, flows nearly the full length of Pakistan, from mountains to sea.
One of the world's great overland journeys can be made from the north of Pakistan to China along the recently completed Karakoram Highway, a contemporary addition to the ancient Silk Route, which opened West Asia to the Orient.
What Pakistan doesn't have is tourists, at least not many of them, not yet. 
The country, emerging from more than a decade of military domination, returned to democracy recently and exuberantly, and now hopes to welcome more visitors, while considering how to develop its tourist attractions, and what kind of tourists it wants.
Pakistan remains at heart a pious, though not fundamentalist, Islamic nation. 
Women are dressed modestly in trousers and tunics - the comfortable shalwar-kamiz suit that Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto is helping to raise to new fashion heights. 
No alcoholic drinks are served or consumed in public places, though non-Muslim foreigners may buy local beer, whisky, gin and rum from room service menus in international hotels. 
Bringing alcohol into the country is illegal and gambling is forbidden by both law and religion.
Most Pakistanis, however, are friendly and tolerant people. 
Outsiders who understand and generally respect their customs - avoiding shorts or other skimpy clothes in public places and removing shoes in mosques - feel little or no hostility or sense of opprobrium. 
Service, if sometimes unpracticed or erratic, is never disingenuous or slick. 
Accommodation is adequate to excellent in most towns and all cities, where good cars can be hired for free-lance trips.
Urdu is the national language, but all the regions have their own languages and English is sometimes used as a link. 
English will be spoken in all tourist areas and in most hotels. 
The best time to travel is in the spring, when snows melt in the north and temperatures are pleasant. 
Summer is hot almost everywhere except high in the hills. 
Temperatures in Pakistan's cities, especially in the south, can rise above 100 degrees, and the desert sun is punishing. 
After October, snows close the mountain passes, including those along the Silk Route, which reopens for the season on May 1.
Pakistan used to be accessible overland from Kabul to the west and Delhi to the east along the old Grand Trunk Road until war in Afghanistan and separatist unrest in India's Punjab state closed those routes to most travelers.
The country is now most easily reached by air, and perhaps in the future will be served by cruise ship. 
Pakistan can be sampled as a side trip to an Indian vacation, or as a stopover on the way to Southeast Asia or China. 
Pakistan International Airlines, which is both a domestic and international carrier, is one of South Asia's most pleasant travel surprises, with efficient service and clean, well-cared-for aircraft. 
Flying inside Pakistan is cheap and safe, and most tourist destinations can be reached by plane from larger cities.
There are two international gateways to Pakistan by air: Karachi in the south and Lahore (or on some days Islamabad) farther north. 
Karachi, Pakistan's largest city and a busy seaport, is the best base for exploring the lower end of the Indus River valley and the archeological ruins of Mohenjo-Daro.
Jawaharlal Nehru, India's first Prime Minister, called the Indus civilization the precursor of all later cultural periods in India. 
At Mohenjo-Daro, connected to Karachi by air, a metropolis with educational institutions, civic buildings and a drainage system flourished before 2500 B.C.
Like another apparently large and highly developed city at Harappa, in Pakistan's Punjab state to the northeast, Mohenjo-Daro appears to have vanished into history, leaving no clues to its language and thus locking away its secrets. 
The site was not unearthed until 1922, and restoration work since then has been sporadic. 
But some of the city's street plan is visible, and a collection of pottery, weapons, toys and household objects can be seen in the museum at the site.
From Karachi, tourists can also go west to the country's largest and most remote province, Baluchistan. 
The Baluchi capital, Quetta, like Peshawar to the north, is a frontier town populated by fierce-looking, often armed, men true to the past. 
It is not a city of either charm or historical interest, since much of it was destroyed in an earthquake in 1935 that killed 23,000 people. 
But it serves as a base for hiking and for drives into mountain passes and valleys. 
Its bazaars are full of colorful Baluchi handicrafts, including embroidered clothes and jackets and pillows decorated with tiny mirrors.
The city of Karachi is not regarded as a tourist attraction, but it is not without its points of interest. 
In the seaside suburb of Clifton, where the Bhuttos and other wealthy and influential Pakistanis - as well as a few oil sheiks from the Persian Gulf - have homes (or minor palaces), there are camels to ride along the beach. 
Families come out to stroll on Fridays, the Pakistani day of rest, when children don their finest clothes. 
Curbside, makeshift shooting galleries are popular here, a reminder of Pakistan's long fascination with guns.
A visit to Karachi should include a stop at the tomb of Pakistan's founder, Mohammed Ali Jinnah, known as Quaid-e-Azam, or Father of the Nation. 
The white marble, domed mausoleum stands on a hill, visible from some parts of the city. 
It is set in a large public park where families come to relax or picnic. 
Jinnah, whose Karachi home has also been made into a small museum, is Pakistan's most revered leader, and a hero on whom politically fractious Pakistanis agree.
The National Museum of Pakistan is in a garden off Dr. Zia-uddin Ahmed Road in Karachi, the country's first capital. 
Open every day but Friday from 10 to 4, the museum offers a panoramic look at Pakistan's history and regional cultures. 
Like several other exceptionally good museums found in Pakistan - two others are at Lahore and Peshawar - the National Museum is housed in a building erected during British colonial times. 
A Muslim Gallery in the museum is devoted to the rich Islamic cultures that converged in Pakistan.
It is the northern part of Pakistan, rather than Karachi or the southwest, that is most popular with tourists, who can travel easily and comfortably along the Lahore-Rawalpindi-Peshawar route, making as many side trips as time and interest permits.
Lahore is a classic Mogul city with added elements of Victorian brick and stone. 
Its character is intellectual and political. 
Rawalpindi, four or five hours away by road or rail or less than 45 minutes by air, is the military center of Pakistan, and a thriving commercial city. 
Peshawar, near the entrance to the Khyber Pass, is vintage frontier, embellished now by millions of Afghan exiles who walk the streets selling carpets, or lay out tables of chunky Turkoman jewelry and fine woolens hand-knit by refugee women.
These three cities have three of Pakistan's four oldest hotels: Faletti's in Lahore, Flashman's in Pindi and Dean's in Peshawar. 
The fourth in the chain, now owned by the Government, which toys now and then with the idea of tearing them down, is the Cecil in the hill town of Murree, east of Islamabad.
Rawalpindi or Islamabad, Pakistan's new capital city only a few miles away, is the takeoff point for trips by road or air to the remote regions of Gilgit, Balistan and the Pakistani part of Kashmir. 
From here, the trip along the Silk Route to China can also begin. 
The Chinese Embassy in Islamabad issues the necessary travel documents in three to seven days, for a nominal fee of about $3.50.
For people who prefer to travel in a group, Pakistan Tours, with offices at Flashman's Hotel in Rawalpindi and at the Chinar Inn in Gilgit, offers 8-day and 15-day trips into and back from China across the 16,500-foot Khunjerab Pass. 
The tour costs about $70 a day, including all transportation, meals and accommodation, from Rawalpindi to China and back. 
Trips begin in mid-May with one a month minimum.
The tour operator has vans equipped with oxygen for high altitudes, tourism officials say. 
Privately hired cars may go only as far as the Chinese border. 
Further information is available from Pakistan Tours, 23-24 Flashman's Hotel, The Mall, Rawalpindi; telephone 65449 or 64811.
A trip through the Khunjerab, however, is not necessary to get a sense of the majesty of Pakistan's northern mountainous frontier. 
In good weather, travelers can fly to the towns of Skardu or Gilgit, or drive into the northern valleys, known for their good hiking and climbing terrain, fishing streams, clear air and solitude. 
By jeep, the trip to Gilgit can take between 12 and 20 hours; most car-rental companies recommend breaking the journey into two or more day trips. 
There are small inns and rest houses of varying quality along the way. 
Flying to Gilgit, however, is subsidized, and costs only about $12 from Pindi. 
This means the daily flights are often full. 
Buses also make the trip from Pindi for under $15.
The towns in Pakistan's northern territories are in high mountain valleys, Gilgit-Hunza at 4,770 feet and Skardu, to the east, at 7,500 feet. 
Skardu has the more dramatic scenery. 
Backed by some of the highest mountains in the world, the Skardu Valley has lakes, sand dunes and an old mountain fort. 
There are more than half a dozen approved hotels and lodges in Skardu.
From a base at Rawalpindi, a day trip can be made to the archeological sites of Taxila, most of them an hour or less away by car.
Taxila, at the heart of the Gandhara civilizations of the North-West Frontier, is a collection of several excavated sites that together document an extraordinary confluence of religions and cultures. 
There are Hellenistic influences - Buddha figures in Greekstyle robes, for example - as well as Bactrian, Scythian and Persian.
India's first Emperor, Chandragupta Maurya, was crowned at Taxila; here his grandson Ashoka later ruled as viceroy. 
During Ashoka's time, in the third century B.C., Taxila became a center of Buddhist learning and pilgrimage. 
Some of the finest of early Buddhist art has been found here, including the startling, skeletal Fasting Siddharta, often called the Gandhara Buddha, now on display in the Lahore Museum.
A visit to the Taxila sites takes a visitor into the hearts of poor, dusty Pakistani villages, a poignant contrast to the glories of the past, when the land was kinder to the people who lived here. 
One word of caution: villagers have become adept at reproducing Gandhara artifacts, which they offer to tourists as originals ''dug up over the hill.''
Government guides at the archeological sites say that no metal or pottery items are found these days, but that occasionally a coin will be genuinely old.
However, the reproductions of tiny bronze pots or jewelry are often so pleasant to look at that visitors buy them, once the price has been bargained down from antique to trinket level.
West and northwest of Rawalpindi lie more beautiful mountain valleys: Swat and, beyond that, Chitral. 
The capital of the Swat region, named for its river, is Saidu Sharif, the seat of the Kings of Swat, who ruled until 1969. 
Good small hotels begin here and dot the villages - Miandam, Bahrain and Kalam - to the north. 
Over these towns tower the mountains of the Hindu Kush. 
Across the border to the west is Afghanistan.
It is forever-unruly Afghanistan that has dominated the life of Pakistan's most fascinating city: Peshawar. 
Now the capital of the North-West Frontier Province - and the headquarters of seven Afghan resistance armies trying to overthrow the Soviet-backed Government in Kabul - Peshawar is a town full of energy and intrigue.
The bazaars hereabouts are legendary, so a traveler might be wise to look around ahead of time in other cities to get a working knowledge of fair prices, but then save the shopping for Peshawar. 
Here there are warrens of markets with copper and brass, woolens and leatherware. 
Afghan carpets - some with latter-day symbols like automatic weapons or Soviet tanks woven into them - and colorful Afghan dresses with trousers to match are sold in shops run by exiles.
There are beads and powder horns, camel bags and icons stolen from Russian soldiers who died across the border in a war that must have baffled them. 
Soviet officer's hats and decorations are also available, along with a smuggler's cornucopia of imported foods and luxury goods seen nowhere else in South Asia. 
Trekkers can stock up here on comforting home-town goods like real chocolate bars and mustard.
In the past, travelers who came to Peshawar from the east almost invariably took a day trip through the Khyber Pass and back. 
Lately, however, that trip has been off limits because of fighting around the Afghanistan-Pakistan border town of Torkham on the other side of the pass. 
Hotels in Peshawar keep in touch with local authorities, and can tell visitors whether the route, with its wild mountain scenery and fortified villages behind mud walls, is open or not.
Meanwhile, it is possible to drive west of Peshawar far enough to pause at the large Afghan refugee colonies to see first-hand the overwhelming human tragedy Pakistan has on its border.
When traveling in isolated valleys or through mountainous terrain, tourists should avoid being on lonely roads after sundown, when armed bandits sometimes stop and loot vehicles, particularly in regions near the Afghan border. 
Roads are also dangerous at night because of the mix of animals, unlighted farm wagons and speeding cars, trucks or buses, usually elaborately decorated. 
For both reasons, it is a good idea to settle down early in the day, and plan an evening around the hotel, whether in town or countryside.
Peshawar is not a dangerous city because of the Afghan war. 
But it is a city with spies, gunrunners and narcotics agents where weapons are abundant, demanding circumspection on the visitor's part. 
It is also the home of some of the most conservative Muslims in Pakistan or Afghanistan. 
Western women, who almost universally don Pakistani attire here, sometimes say they feel uncomfortable in Peshawar. 
But hundreds of them are working happily with more than three million refugees from Afghanistan, and have come to understand, as have their Western male counterparts, the ways of this barren frontier.
 
FOR REAL AND ARMCHAIR TRAVELERS
Because Pakistan has not been a major tourist destination, not many travel books have been written on the country. 
But those that are available are excellent, partly because they assume a certain unfamiliarity on the reader's part.
 
General
Pakistan: A Travel Survival Kit, by Jose Roleo Santiago (Lonely Planet Publications, Post Office Box 2001, Berkeley, Calif. 
94702; $7.95; about $12.50 in international hotel bookshops in Pakistan). 
Like its companion guides to other little-known countries, this Travel Survival Kit begins with ancient history and moves through almost every topic of interest - food, vocabulary, accommodations and so on - to descriptions of places and attractions detailed enough to help a traveler plan a tour.
A Traveler's Guide to Pakistan, by Hilary Adamson and Isobel Shaw (The Asian Study Group, Post Office Box 1552, Islamabad; about $6.95 in bookshops in Pakistan). 
A private project, thoroughly researched by two Westerners who lived in Pakistan for several years, this guide with its many hand-drawn maps covers nearly every corner of the country.
To the Frontier, by Geoffrey Moorhouse (Sceptre Books, Hodder & Stoughton; about $5.55 in Pakistan.) Here's a book to read for its initial insights into Pakistani daily life. 
Mr. Moorhouse, a skilled travel writer with a gifted eye for detail, describes his own first, solo encounter with Pakistan. 
No shopping or accommodation details here, except when part of the narrative. 
But there is enough atmosphere to make Pakistan memorable, even for those who may never visit it.
 
Trekking
Trekking in the Himalayas and Karakoram, by Hugh Swift (Hodder & Stoughton; no price given). 
Trekkers and climbers consider this work a classic, though the area it covers is large - Chitral to Bhutan. 
The book contains scholarly information on local wildlife, history and customs.
Trekkers Guide to Hunza, by Haqiqat Ali (published privately for sale in Pakistani bookshops at about $6.95). 
One of the first local efforts to fill the gap in details about some of the more remote valleys of northern Pakistan, this book was written by an experienced climber and guide born in Hunza. 
It includes realistic advice on the dangers of this isolated, high-altitude terrain.    -  B. 
C.
 
ACCOMMODATIONS FROM DESERT TO MOUNTAIN
In general, Pakistani hotels that tourists might choose have private baths and very often, in the north, fireplaces. 
Credit cards -especially American Express and Visa - are accepted in all big hotels. 
Traveler's checks are also used widely. 
Cash will be necessary in small lodges outside cities. 
For more information on accommodations and travel in Pakistan, write to the Pakistan Tourism Development Corporation, H-2, Street 61, F 7/4 Islamabad.
 
Karachi
Avari Towers (Fatimah Jinnah Road; telephone 525261). 
$88 single to $166 for suites. 
Now managed by Ramada Renaissance hotels.
Holiday Inn (Abdullah Haroom Road; 520111). 
$77 single to $166 for suites.
Pearl Continental (Club Road; 515021). 
$90 single to $277 for suites. 
Especially good shops and restaurants, plus a P.I.A. ticket office.
Karachi Sheraton (Club Road; 521021). 
$83 single to $138 suites. 
No-smoking and executive-services floors.
 
Quetta
Quetta Serena (Sharah-e-Jangoon; 70070). 
$40 single to $111 suites. 
A new hotel, and the only one of international standard in Quetta. 
Built to blend its with a traditional exterior and everything contemporary inside.
 
Lahore
Faletti's (3 Egerton Road; 303660). 
$20 single to $55 suites. 
Center of social life in colonial times. 
Now a more spartan place, with motel-style rooms set in nice grounds and a very ordinary dining room with a lot of plastic. 
But some restoration work is in progress.
Avari Lahore (87 Shahrah-e-Quaid-e-Azam; 69971). 
$99 single to $333 suites. 
Formerly the Lahore Hilton.
Pearl Continental (Shahrah-e-Quaid-e-Azam; 69931). 
$94 single to $205 suites. 
Both this hotel and the Avari Lahore are in an old residential and cantonment area near city parks and the zoo, a neighborhood where walking and jogging are possible.
 
Rawalpindi
Flashman's (The Mall; 64811). 
$20 single to $83 suites. 
A little down at heel. 
The public areas, around which bungalow-style rooms are grouped, are being rebuilt. 
The rooms are large, with a small sitting room area in most of the cottages, along with the bedroom and bath.
Pearl Continental (The Mall; 66011). 
$83 single to $250 suites. 
A wonderful breakfast buffet, and also buffet lunches and dinner in a newly redecorated and very pleasant Marco Polo restaurant.
 
Islamabad
Holiday Inn (Agha Khan Road; 826121). 
$81 single to $416 suites. 
Views of the Margalla Hills, and a good Pakistani restuarant along with a coffee shop that a lot of political people, journalists and others have made fashionable.
Islamabad Hotel (Civic Center; 827311). 
$50 single to $194 suites.
 
Gilgit
Serena Lodge (2330 or 2331). 
$23 single to $41 suites.
Chinar Inn (2562). 
$12.50 to $17. 
Run by the Pakistan Tourism Development Corporation. 
Both this and the Serena Lodge are comfortable hotels with mountain views.
 
Skardu
K-2 Motel (104). 
$12.50 to $17.
Shangri-La Tourist Resort (Rawalpindi 73006). 
$30 single to $88 suites. 
Unexpectedly luxurious.
 
Swat Valley
Swat Serena (Saidu Sharif; 4604). 
$23 single to $42 suites. 
A rambling hotel dating from the colonial era with pleasant lawns for tea in the sun, and an old-fashioned dining room. 
Guest rooms open on to verandas and, in most cases, garden views.
P.T.D.C. Motel (Miandam; 10 A). 
$12.50 to $17. 
Mountain views and fireplaces.
Bolan Hotel (Bahrain; 26). 
$4 to $12. 
Within walking distance of the long bazaar.
 
Peshawar
Dean's Hotel (3 Islamia Road; 79781). 
$22 single to $55 suites. 
A slow-paced place with old-fashioned service and a quiet atmosphere in a bustling town. 
Many rooms are really small suites.
Pearl Continental (Khyber Road; 76361). 
$63 single to $155 suites. 
The only real luxury hotel of international standard in Peshawar. 
On its own quiet grounds.    - B. 
C.
