
When foreign journalists asked Li Ruihuan three years ago about his prospects for promotion, he mischievously cited a Chinese proverb: ''Men dread fame as a pig dreads fattening, for both can be a prelude to slaughter.''
But these days, Mr. Li - now the youngest member of the six-member Standing Committee of the Politburo, the most powerful body in China -seems to be risking both prominence and political extinction. 
In a series of remarkable public speeches, he has positioned himself in recent months as the prime opponent of the hard-liners and of the ideological blizzard that envelops the country.
''The people are like water,'' Mr. Li told the official New China News Agency, in a clear warning to the hard-liners. 
''They can support a ship. 
Or they can sink it.''
A onetime carpenter, the 55-year-old Mr. Li (whose name is pronounced approximately lee ray-HWAHN) is stepping into the vacant position as leader of the faction that supports returning to the policies that preceded the military crackdown on the democracy movement in June 1989. 
Chinese officials say they believe that if the hard-liners are defeated in the continuing power struggle, Mr. Li will be the leading candidate to replace Li Peng as Prime Minister.
On the other hand, some Chinese believe that unless Li Ruihuan is more discreet, he is the one likely to be dismissed. 
Indeed, he is said to have told friends, ''I can always go home and become a carpenter again.''
Does He Have a Mentor?
The prime question among many diplomats and Chinese officials these days is whether Mr. Li is acting on his own or as the front man for a more powerful sponsor.
''He's very daring, for he's the only one challenging the hard-liners right now,'' said a Chinese Government official who greatly enjoys watching Mr. Li enter the fray.
''But I don't understand it,'' he went on. 
''Sometimes a flock of birds will push one in front to lead the way, and I hope that's what's happening. 
But I'm afraid he's alone, blindly flying this way and that, with no one behind him. 
In that case, he'll end up in a bad way.''
Some other officials say Mr. Li has the backing of Deng Xiaoping, the 85-year-old senior leader, and of Wan Li, the 73-year-old head of the National People's Congress.
Chinese officials say that another top Politburo member, Song Ping, recently met with Mr. Li and told him that some ''old comrades'' were unhappy with his comments. 
Mr. Li is said to have responded, ''Well, there is one 'old comrade' who approved everything I said.''
He was referring to Mr. Deng. While Mr. Li has not openly attacked the hard-liners, his speeches have a completely different tone from those of other leaders. 
In an implicit rejection of the repression and harsh language that has prevailed for more than a year, Mr. Li said last month, ''Making human relations tense is not the original intention of Marxism, nor is it inevitable under the socialist system.''
''We must respect people, understand them and care for them,'' Mr. Li told the staff of the People's Daily newspaper at a meeting in April. 
''Ideological and political work cannot be effective unless the people are receptive to it. 
How can you do your work if people run away as soon as they see you?''
 
Remaking Marxism
Mr. Li criticized Chinese propaganda for ''wavering from one extreme to another'' and said an ''urgent, formidable and gigantic project'' is to make Marxism more practical. 
On some occasions, he has seemed impatient with the army-sponsored campaign to glorify Lei Feng, the legendary soldier-hero of Maoist days.
''We should talk about things that people are interested in and things that can help people erase their worries,'' he added. 
''Our slogans should be practical. 
Anything not practical will eventually separate us from the people.''
In addition to his speeches, Mr. Li has taken other measures that distance himself from the hard-liners. 
When student protests broke out in April 1989 in the city of which he was then Mayor -Tianjin, the nation's third most important city after Beijing and Shanghai -Mr. 
Li neatly solved the problem by allowing university students free train tickets to the capital. 
Most of the students traveled to Beijing and became someone else's problem.
After being put in charge of ideology and propaganda last summer, Mr. Li took charge of the national campaign against ''bourgeois liberalization.''
Many intellectuals feared they would be the target, but Mr. Li deftly redirected the campaign into an assault on pornography.
When Mr. Li was promoted to the Politburo's Standing Committee a year ago, he was not generally expected to step to the front in the way he has. 
While he had achieved a reputation as a powerhouse who overwhelmed the bureaucracy and got things done, he was not known as a backer of democracy.
Indeed, Mr. Li was a fierce critic of the 1978-79 Democracy Wall movement, and in Tianjin he clamped down immediately on 1986-87 student demonstrations.
