
From images of life in rural Africa, the Middle East, Southeast Asia or large cities in North America, 2- to 12-year-old artists are guiding both the young and the old viewer to places they will probably never see.
The work of the young artists, who represent 29 countries, make up a traveling exhibition, "A Child's World," now at the Cork Gallery at Lincoln Center. 
The show, organized by the Children's Museum of the Arts, offers more than 100 drawings, paintings and self-portraits on themes like daily life, neighborhoods, cultural traditions and fantasy.
All the works share a common trait unique to children: innocence. 
"Kids tend to paint an idealized world; that is the beauty of children," said Laurie McGavin Bachmann, the public affairs director for the show.
As children who visit the show glimpse life in Pakistan, Tibet, China or Australia, they can listen to accompanying music at the touch of a button. 
For Lisa Lee, 12, of Flushing, Queens, who likes hard rock, it was an opportunity to hear Lebanese and Japanese music for the first time.
In "Chinese New Year," Lisa painted a festive carnival in her native Taiwan. 
"It reminds me that I am still Chinese," she said with pride. 
Lisa said all the works reinforce the importance of maintaining personal tradition and customs. 
She last visited her country seven years ago.
In "The Neighborhood Where I live," Adama Kandeh, also 12, offers a tour of a faraway village of huts in Sierra Leone where children climb on coconut trees and women carry water buckets on their heads.
While country scenes dominate, urban settings are well represented. 
Bianca Nieves, 9, of Nanuet, N.Y., created happy swimmers in "Orchard Beach"; Divya Awal, a 9-year-old native of India who now lives in Manhattan, drew a huge field of grass with tall buildings in the background, and Sarah Graves, 10, of North Adelaide, southern Australia, focused on environmental and industrial problems in "Dim City."
All the work is hung at child's height, along with mirrors and magnetized noses, eyes and mouths that allow young visitors to put portraits of their own on the wall. 
They can also hang their own spontaneous drawings, which will become part of the permanent collection of the Children Museum.
The exhibition also turns into a course in world geography when visitors, who each receive a "passport" with various activities on it, place miniature versions of the paintings on a world map. 
"Due to the Gulf war, the only nation they seem to recognize with ease is Saudi Arabia," said Kathleen Schneider, the museum's founder and executive director.
Most stops on the tour will also include a display of housing materials that children can identify, including reeds, bamboo, concrete, bricks and roof tiles.
"A Child's World" will be at the Cork Gallery in Avery Fisher Hall until Feb. 
18. Admission is free. 
Telephone: (212) 941-9198. 
The show will be in the Fifth Avenue Gallery in the Empire State Building March 1-April 30 and at the Museum of the City of New York from May 11 into September. 
The Children's Museum is also organizing other stopsfor the show, which opened three weeks ago at the A.I.R. 
Gallery in SoHo.
