
A university teacher described this scene in his home the other day: As the television announcer bragged about the economic gains since 1949, his father-in-law nodded approvingly and said: ''My, just look at that progress!''
That was when the teacher threw up his hands and protested: ''There's been no progress!
Just think what has happened in Japan in that time.''
Such exchanges seem to be repeated all over China these days, and they reflect what is emerging as a prime battleground in the struggle for the hearts of the Chinese people: the standard of comparison for judging the Communist Party.
The Government-controlled television and newspapers are full of accounts of the improvements since 1949 - the increases in grain output, railroad tracks, steel production and so on. 
The ''sick man of Asia'' is now an international power, the Government boasts.
By comparing life today to the poverty and chaos before ''liberation'' in 1949, the Communist Party comes off looking excellent, for it has accomplished a tremendous amount in its 41 years in power. 
But for many young people, all that is history. 
They note that their capitalist neighbors - particularly Taiwan, Hong Kong and Japan - have accomplished far more in the same period. 
Moreover, these countries are not only richer than China but have become more democratic and have also done more to raise standards of education and technology.
By that standard of comparison, the Communist Party looks miserable; Taiwan, for example, now has a per-capita income more than 25 times that of the mainland.
Thus, the way in which China's progress is assessed - compared to the past or compared to its neighbors - determines people's views of the Communist Party's performance. 
The Government, therefore, is ever more vigorously promoting its version of history, in which every aspect of the ''new China'' is contrasted to the poverty and lassitude that used to prevail. 
Even in playing host to the Asian Games a few weeks ago, the Government emphasized that such an event in Beijing showed how much China had progressed since 1949.
Yet there are signs that on this battleground, the Government is losing ground. 
The principal problem is that many young people dismiss the official news media with a shrug, but pay considerable attention to what they see around them. 
The propaganda about China's achievement as host to the Asian Games, for example, was perhaps outweighed by the tide of South Korean sports fans who arrived for the Games lugging video recorders and other luxuries that most Chinese only dream of.
''In the 1960's, it wasn't possible to reach a conclusion about whether socialism or capitalism worked better, and many Westerners favored socialism,'' a young Chinese economist said. 
''But now it's very clear which system works better.''
''The best comparisons,'' he added, ''are with East Germany and West Germany, North Korea and South Korea, and China and Taiwan.''
Just over three-quarters of China's population was born after the 1949 revolution, and such younger people are impatient with lectures about the horrors of life before then.
Government officials concede they have a problem, and that their own children sometimes ''do not understand the correct situation.''
But they say that more political training about the virtues of Communism will reverse the trend. 
Young people themselves overwhelmingly say that while ''political education'' was sometimes effective in the past, it has little effect today.
''The difference is that China has opened up,'' a businesswoman in her 20's said. 
''We used to look around and see that everybody else lived in dreadful, crowded housing, and so we figured we could put up with it, too. 
And we knew that we had it better than our parents' generation. 
But now we understand how backward we are. 
Sure, we've developed over the past 40 years, but so have other countries, and the gap is enormous. 
What are we to think?
What hope is there?''
