
Thanks to the Brooklyn-based Wonton Food company, China will soon have fortune cookies.
Until now the cookies, which cap off just about every meal served in most of America's 30,000 Chinese restaurants, have been unknown and gone untasted in China. 
Like hot dogs, pizza and more particularly, chop suey, they are essentially American concoctions.
But Wonton Foods, which produces a million fortune cookies a day in New York, has decided that the time is propitious to go east with the fortune cookie. 
"We just signed a joint venture agreement with the Guangzhou Municipal Foodstuffs Machinery Corporation to build and operate a fortune cookie plant," said Donald H. Lau, the company's vice president. 
He said he expected production to begin in about eight months.
He sounded as pleased as a man, who, having cracked open a cookie, found a message saying, "Greater success is in the days ahead," this being just the kind of thing you want to read when you are establishing a beachhead in a market of more than a billion cookie-eating people.
Mr. Lau said he did not believe that the fortunes needed to be passed by Government or party censors. 
"Those days are over," he said. 
Still, he noted, in terms of style, the Chinese fortunes are more elliptical than the American variety, which essentially foretell good health, growing wisdom, increasing riches, much love and ever greater sexiness in a straight-forward manner.
He offered a few of the Chinese fortunes picked at random: "True gold fears no fire," "Heaven never seals all exits," "The only way to catch a tiger cub is to go into the tiger's den" and "Constant grinding can turn an iron rod into a needle."
Asked whether turning rods into needles was good or bad, he replied, "I don't know."
 
'Fortunes on Floppy Disks'
Even before its entry into China, Wonton Foods had been moving boldly to reshape and dominate domestic fortune cookie production. 
Traditionally, the industry, centered here and in California, had a few large bakeries and several dozen tiny workshops where, typically, family members made cookies largely by hand.
"We have put all our fortunes on floppy disks," said Mr. Lau as he showed off an automated assembly line. 
"We were the first to offer chocolate fortune cookies on the East Coast and to sell cookies in retail outlets. 
We also do special jobs, customized messages for birthdays, anniversaries and sales promotions. 
We did the Democratic Convention and now are doing a two-million-cookie job to promote a new Chinese ginger liqueur."
The standard noncustomized fortunes have been collated from many lists. 
Some, Mr. Lau said, were acquired about 10 years ago when Wonton, branching into cookies from noodles, bought a Queens bakery from its elderly Japanese founders. 
Some have been sent in by customers, among them teachers who had assigned classes to compose lists of fortunes as writing exercises.
Mr. Lau took a few such examples from his briefcase. 
"You will never go to jail," one fifth-grade boy in Virginia had written. 
"You will find money on the couch where your father sits," wrote a girl from Maryland.
"I even wrote fortunes myself, but after about 500 I got burned out," said Mr. Lau, a former banker. 
All the fortunes the company uses are upbeat, but Mr. Lau said he had heard of a New England business calling itself the Unfortunate Fortune Cookie Company that offered dismal forebodings, presumably for misanthropes, masochists or what some might regard simply as realists. 
"I think they went out of business," he said.
In anticipation of starting up in Guangzhou, Wonton's partners in the booming south Chinese city have sent many hundreds of fortunes to Mr. Lau to be translated into English. 
The idea is to have each cookie contain a fortune printed on one side in Chinese and the other in English, because the first customers are expected to be hotels and restaurants in China and Hong Kong that cater to foreigners and overseas Chinese.
While it is generally accepted that the first fortune cookie was made in this century by Chinese immigrants to the United States, some writers have contended that the development here echoed an ancient event in Chinese history. 
This occurred in the 12th century, when, during a revolt against the Mongols, rebel monks passed conspiratorial plans in moon cakes. 
Moon cakes, however, look more like cinnamon buns than fortune cookies.
A more specific account, altogether ignoring any notion of a culinary subconscious, credits George Jung with inventing the fortune cookie at the Hong Kong Noodle Company, which he founded in Los Angeles in 1916. 
According to "Madam Chu's Chinese Cooking School," a book by Grace Zia Chu, Mr. Jung came up with the cookie either to cheer up customers depressed by World War I or to keep them amused while they waited for their orders.
Three years ago, an entrepreneur in Hong Kong began importing fortune cookies and selling them as luxury items in a chain of fancy delicatessens. 
They were advertised as "Genuine American Fortune Cookies."
