
The people of Taiwan might like to attach a huge outboard motor to the end of their island, rev it up, and move Taiwan several hundred miles farther away from the Chinese mainland.
That would reduce the risk of a Chinese attack and give Taiwan more options for deciding its future. 
But while physical relocation is impossible, there are signs that Taiwan is drifting politically and socially farther from the mainland.
The Nationalist Chinese Government here used to speak of "gloriously recovering the mainland," but it is now far from clear that Taiwan would take China back if it were offered.
Political candidates here issue furious denials when rivals accuse them of favoring rapid reunification. 
Even Taiwan's leaders seem to be trying to keep their options open by pushing reunification off into the distant future.
"We want eventual reunification, but not immediate reunification," said Ma Ying-jeou, vice-chairman of the Government's Mainland Affairs Council.
Jason C. Hu, the chief Government spokesman, seemed even more ambivalent when asked what Taiwan would do if the mainland Government collapsed tomorrow and the people of China asked the Nationalists to return. 
"That's an unfair question," he protested.
The stakes are enormous because Beijing repeatedly threatens to use its military to keep Taiwan from becoming an independent sovereign state.
The island of Taiwan lies just 100 miles off the Chinese mainland. 
For four decades it has been the bastion of the Nationalist forces that lost the Chinese civil war to the Communists.
These days, some dissidents want Taiwan to declare itself the independent Republic of Taiwan. 
But the opposition Democratic Progressive Party did unexpectedly poorly a year ago when it made independence a major issue, muting the calls for independence.
Paradoxically, at the same time there seems to be diminishing interest in reunification.
Tim T.Y. 
Ting, a poll taker in Taipei, said his most recent survey suggested that only about 15 percent of the public favors immediate independence. 
That figure has been fairly stable for years, he said. 
But another survey found for the first time that less than half the public favors eventual reunification, seeming to prefer the status quo.
"When people think about reunification, they think: 'What's in it for us?
You want to equalize incomes with the mainland?'
" said Chang Liang, president of Shearson Global Financial Services in Taipei.
Another businessman, one with close links to Government leaders, said: "We should go on telling Beijing that we want to reunify, even though in our hearts we don't mean it. 
As long as we don't give them a timetable -- and we won't -- then we can postpone the issue indefinitely."
Curiously, the diminishing enthusiasm for reunification comes as Taiwan is rapidly expanding its economic links with the mainland. 
Trade may reach $7 billion this year, up from $1 billion in 1986. 
One million Taiwanese visit the mainland each year.
Leaders in Beijing are anxious about Taiwan in part because the Nationalist refugees from mainland China who used to rule Taiwan are gradually being replaced by native Taiwanese. 
Legislative elections held last week may accelerate the process. 
The Nationalists did poorly, winning just 53 percent of the vote.
The new generation of Taiwan-born leaders, including President Lee Teng-hui, is often considered more sympathetic to eventual independence than the mainland emigres were.
President Lee insists that he favors reunification, but just a few days ago he raised eyebrows by seeming to back away from the expression "one China."
Mr. Lee said that Chiang Kai-shek had never referred to "one China" but simply to the "Republic of China," the official name of the Government here.
"You can see what Lee Teng-hui thinks in his heart," said Antonio C.N. 
Chiang, a magazine publisher in Taipei. 
"He wants to sustain the separation with the mainland, because that's the reality."
He added: "Reunification is the state religion here. 
But ordinary folks are atheists."
