
GOLDEN INCHES
The China Memoir of Grace Service.
Edited by John S. Service.
Illustrated. 346 pp. 
Berkeley:
University of California Press. 
$19.95.
The foreign Christian presence in China in the first 40 years of this century increasingly appears to have been an important contributing factor in the slow development of the Chinese revolution between 1911 and 1949. 
Some sense of this can be gathered from John Hersey's fine novel ''The Call.''
Yet that book and most others on the subject remain focused on the men who lived for their ''call.''
Grace Service's memoir, ''Golden Inches,'' helps us understand that often behind those men, making their work possible, were equally extraordinary women.
It is a wonderful, sad, moving memoir by an indomitable American who went to China with her husband. 
Inspired like so many others by the brilliant and charismatic John R. Mott of the Student Volunteer Movement, Bob Service and his wife arrived in China in 1905, before the end of the empire, before the beginning of the revolution. 
They lived there until 1934, 30 of the most turbulent years in Chinese history.
Service was a Y.M.C.A. secretary based in Sichuan, and, from the image presented here, he was saintly. 
Completely dedicated to the Y, he labored long and hard to build an indigenous self-help movement in China. 
Indeed, like many others, he came to feel that ''he had no place in America.''
Behind and beside him, and making his life possible, was his highly intelligent, reflective, well-read and artistic wife, a woman who was self-disciplined rather than overtly pious.
The point of view in the memoir remains hers; the book is only secondarily about successes and failures in bringing the Y's programs to China. 
The revolution itself is something that happens to her, and must be dealt with like a natural event. 
''Golden Inches'' is not a book to read for a new interpretation of the early stages of the Chinese revolution. 
Rather, it is about the support that men like Bob Service had to have in order to be able to carry out their vocation.
And what support it was - a kind of marriage that seems to have all but disappeared in our time. 
''I thought I had given you certainty when I brought you to China,'' Service remarked apologetically to his wife in 1934, after being ''demobilized'' by the Y.M.C.A. in response to economic pressures. 
Such a vision of ''certainty'' could only be that which a shared sense of vocation can bring. 
By the time the Services had reached Chengdu (by boat, up the Yangtze) in 1905, their first-born, an infant daughter, had died of dysentery and Bob had contracted a severe case of malaria; within a year, Grace had at least one miscarriage. 
They still knew no Chinese.
But the Services endured - through civil war, battles, disease, riots - because in a way almost unspoken, but nonetheless absolutely firm, they had each other. 
After one episode outside their compound wall, Grace Service remarked: ''We heard that there had been some 150 to 200 executions, but soon the whole episode was merely an incident in the course of daily life.''
The Services came to love China and drew strength from it. 
Their three sons were born in Sichuan.
If the Services tried to accept China as it presented itself to them, they had more trouble with other foreigners. 
Again and again there are telling passages about the standoffish, almost imperial attitudes of fundamentalist missionaries who put doctrine above love, in contrast to the attempts of the Y to develop a Chinese-based organization. 
It is interesting to note that the Protestant churches in China are currently trying to follow the pattern of development set by the Y. The Services were people equal to the turbulence of the times in which they lived. 
''Golden Inches'' not only gives many fascinating glimpses of historical events; more important, it shows us what it meant to live through those events and deal with them without rancor, resentment or facile anger and enthusiasm. 
It reads fluidly and plainly. 
Like most of her generation, Grace Service was not introspective, but her memoir is all the more powerful for not being so: it extends our concept of what can be ordinary.
John S. Service, a Foreign Service officer in China from 1933 until 1945 and one of the first United States Government officials to have understood the nature of the developing Chinese revolution, has expertly edited and annotated his mother's memoir. 
He has filled in necessary historical information, and he shows just enough filial rebellion in his footnotes to give the reader an added sense of the family.
