
About 45 African students who had been held against their will by the authorities in the eastern Chinese city of Nanjing for the last 10 days were released today. 
Most plan to leave China as soon as possible.
''We are damned in China,'' said M. T. Wills, a 25-year-old student from Zambia. 
''Definitely we're not safe here.''
Three students are still detained of the 130 Africans whom the police took to a Government guest house on Dec. 
26 after racial clashes in Nanjing. 
The three have been accused of injuring Chinese in a racial brawl on Dec. 
24 that touched off the unrest initially in Nanjing and since then in several other Chinese cities.
While China has invited some 1,500 Africans to study in China, most of them on scholarships much more generous than those awarded to Chinese students, many of the Africans interviewed tonight sounded bitter about their experience of the last two weeks.
''Even in South Africa, blacks are treated better than they are in China,'' said Abdul Sankoh, a 22-year-old engineering student from Sierra Leone. 
''At least there, innocent people are not tortured and shocked because they are black.''
#3 Chinese Also Reported Held In Beijing today, the Foreign Ministry again denied charges that the police had tortured the African students, and also announced that three Chinese were being held along with the Africans for their role in the initial fight that touched off the disturbances.
The racial confrontations in Nanjing, Wuhan, Beijing and Hangzhou have in some cases taken on a political character and have thereby presented the Government with the most serious challenge since student pro-democracy demonstrations were crushed two years ago.
In the eastern Chinese city of Hangzhou, African students appeared today to end a 10-day boycott of classes that began after their university telephone operator was said to have told callers the Africans had AIDS. 
The confrontatation appeared to be resolved by an agreement under which the university will write a letter certifying that they do not have AIDS and will provide them with a direct telephone line.
 
Nanjing Boycott Continues
But in Nanjing, African students interviewed by telephone said they would continue to boycott classes until the remaining Africans are released.
The Nanjing authorities have repaired the Africans' dormitory after crowds of Chinese attacked it on Dec. 
24 and again the next day, demanding that the Africans be punished for their role in a fight in which two Africans and 11 Chinese were hurt.
The official New China News Agency reported late tonight that the three Africans still detained have admitted to breaking the law. 
It said two of the students, Alpha Robinson of Gambia and Dossoumou Boni Lodovic of Benin, would be detained for 15 days. 
The third, Alex Dosoo, of Ghana, will apparently face criminal charges for what the authorities say was the beating of a university employee.
In Ghana, the official radio reported today that Ghanaian students in China may be recalled. 
Most African countries have been hesitant to criticize China's handling of the racial clashes, partly because of the historical friendship and assistance provided by China, and perhaps partly because China subsidizes many of the African embassies.
