
African students at a Beijing language institute began boycotting classes today to protest what they feel is racism in China, and interracial clashes were reported in another city after two weeks of racial unrest.
On Tuesday, about 2,000 Chinese students at the Beijing Languages Institute boycotted classes and held a march to protest what they said were attacks on Chinese women by African men. 
Most of the Chinese returned to classes today, but the institute's 500 African students began boycotting classes themselves to protest what they described as racist attitudes and policies.
The African students said they did not dare hold a demonstration in the current tense atmosphere, but that they would continue to boycott classes until the police released African students in the eastern city of Nanjing who have been charged with starting a Christmas Eve fight in which 11 Chinese were injured. 
That brawl touched off demonstrations in Nanjing that have spread to other cities.
 
Students Urged to Return
The president of Hehai University, the school in Nanjing where the troubles started called on the African students today to return to the institution. 
''We have made full preparations to welcome foreign students to return to school to study,'' Liang Ruiju, the official, was quoted by the official New China News Agency as saying.
About 40 or 50 of Hehai's African students remain locked up in a Government guest house outside Nanjing. 
The authorities will allow them to return to school but not go anywhere else. 
The students say they feel unsafe in Nanjing and want to leave.
Meanwhile, a dozen African students in the central Chinese city of Wuhan have been isolated after an attack on them Saturday by hundreds of Chinese students, according to reports reaching Beijing. 
The Associated Press also quoted sources in Wuhan as saying that a Sri Lankan student had been beaten up, apparently because of his dark skin.
Liu Wu, a Government spokesman in Wuhan, denied that any racial unrest had occurred. 
He said a child had broken a window and that a Sri Lankan student cut himself picking up the glass. 
The African students have not been isolated, he said, but are on a special holiday trip.
