
By meeting yesterday, Mikhail S. Gorbachev and Roh Tae Woo underscored an anachronism of cold-war history.
Since it was established after World War II, South Korea has had no formal diplomatic ties with the Soviet Union, and few unofficial contacts. 
The first Soviet tourist ship to dock in a South Korean port since World War II - the 13,000-ton Mikhail Sholokov - did not drop its gangplank until Sept. 
4, 1988, 43 years after Korea was partitioned into northern and southern halves by the victorious Allies.
Russia was interested in Korea as far back as the mid-19th century. 
Russian merchants traded there in lumber and metals. 
The Russian Orthodox church began sending missionaries to the peninsula.
The Japanese Influence
Japanese and Chinese competitors wanted similar access and exports, and the rivalries led to war - first between Japan and China in 1894 and 1895, then between the Russians and Japanese in 1904 and 1905. 
Japan won both times, and the Russian influence in Korea waned. 
Japan set up a protectorate over Korea and in 1910 annexed the country.
Several attempts by Korean nationalists to overthrow Japan's harsh rule were crushed. 
After World War I, a Korean Government in exile was established by Syngman Rhee in Shanghai.
Japanese investment led to major social and economic changes, particularly through the industrial development of the northern half of the country, which adjoined the Japanese industrial complex in Manchuria. 
The southern half remained mostly agricultural.
In World War II the Allies called for the restoration of an independent Korea ''in due course'' during the Cairo Conference in 1943. 
After the fighting stopped, the major powers divided Korea in two for occupation purposes, with Soviet forces in control north of the 38th parallel and American forces south of it.
 
Deadlock Between Superpowers
The details of unification and independence for Korea were left to the two superpowers. 
As the cold war broke out, the two sides soon deadlocked on the establishment of a provisional government and in 1947 sent the issue of Korea's future to the United Nations General Assembly, where a temporary commission was set up to schedule elections and establish a national government.
But the Soviet occupation authorities refused. 
Elections in the southern sector, with United Nations observers on duty, took place in 1948, and the Republic of Korea was established south of the 38th parallel. 
A separate Communist-controlled Government was set up in the north, which renamed itself the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
Soviet troops withdrew from the north at the end of 1948, and United States forces went home from the south in mid-1949, a few months before Secretary of State Dean Acheson outlined an American retrenchment in Asia with a Pacific ''defense perimeter'' that did not include Korea.
 
Invasion Leads to Korean War
But on June 25, 1950, North Korea invaded the south, and United States troops were sent back to the country, where they were joined by contingents from many other nations under the United Nations flag. 
After three years of fighting, the battle lines stabilized close to the frontiers before the war.
Under a 1953 truce agreement at Panmunjom a demilitarized zone was established near the 38th parallel.
Soviet-North Korean relations have had their own difficulties. 
After the Chinese-Soviet split of the early 1960's, President Kim Il Sung of North Korea tried to avoid complete identification with either side. 
But since the mid-1970's North Korea leaned more toward China. 
Mr. Kim visited Beijing in 1975, a year after he welcomed Hu Yaobang of the Chinese Communist leadership to Pyongyang.
 
North Korean Overtures
Soviet-North Korean trade declined by 10 percent between 1982 and 1983, and in 1984 Mr. Kim visited Moscow, for the first time in nearly 20 years, looking for economic aid.
During Mr. Kim's visit, Mr. Gorbachev's predecessor, Konstantin U. Chernenko, said that reunification of the two Koreas should be worked out peaceably. 
South Korean officials later said that North Korea had proposed secret talks on unification with the United States. 
But the Reagan Administration refused, insisting that such negotiations involve only the two Koreas.
With the 1988 Olympics in Seoul, the South Korean Government began trying to turn its economic boom to its political advantage. 
In part, this involved setting up diplomatic relations with countries in the Soviet bloc. 
So far, South Korea has opened embassies with all the Eastern European nations except East Germany and Albania.
The south's economic strength and its diplomatic successes have put it in a commanding position, said Gari Ledyard, a professor of Korean history at Columbia University and the director of the Center for Korean Research there. 
''They've already won, even if they can't agree on anything,'' he said. 
''Just the fact that a Korean president met with the Russian is a severe blow'' to the North Koreans.
Indeed, Professor Ledyard said, the meeting appears to have created a no-win situation for North Korea. 
''Presumably, their relationships and agreements with the Soviets will continue in force, just like ours do with China,'' he said, ''but the spirit's just not there anymore. 
There has been talk in South Korea about using Siberian development as a possible way for North and South Korea to cooperate, but it's something that South Korea would be able to dominate.''
