
No country prospered more during the cold war than Japan, and perhaps no country is more wistful for that era's comforting certainties. 
While the United States and Europe were preoccupied with throw weights and satellite photographs, Japan was able to focus almost entirely on building an economy that became the envy of the world, largely undistracted by, and often profiting from, the superpower rivalry.
For several years now the Japanese have known that those heady days were coming to an end. 
Nonetheless, the cold war's demise caught this country strangely ill prepared, forcing it to recast its dealings with its main ally, the United States, and break out of a four-decade stalemate in its diplomatic relations with its most powerful Asian neighbors.
Though still bound to be dominated by economic issues, the 1990's will also be a test of Japan's ability to overcome its reflexive isolationism, to become an independent political power without arousing those who are already deeply anxious about its economic might.
 
New Security Rationale Sought
For the United States, Japan's search raises a question that officials on both sides of the Pacific are just beginning to discuss publicly: What is the new rationale for a security alliance intended to give Japan protection in return for America's biggest, strongest Pacific outpost against Communism?
Though the Bush Administration insists that it remains deeply committed to a forward deployment here, especially as long as tensions remain on the Korean Peninsula, many here believe that it is only a matter of time before America's 56,000 troops here are reduced to a largely symbolic force.
"What we are concerned with is an America turning inward, politically and economically," said Takakazu Kuriyama, a former Deputy Foreign Minister and now Ambassador to the United States.
Others share his fear, not least because America's presence reassures Japan's neighbors.
 
Is Japan Next U.S. 
Rival?
But the prospect of a reduced American role in the Pacific is only part of what leaves the Japanese uneasy. 
In the Japanese press and on television it often seems the conventional wisdom that America has a psychological need for a rival, and that Japan is next in line. 
Such views may be more widely repeated than deeply held; polls show that while there is a deepening distrust and disillusionment with the United States, Japanese still regard America as their closest -- and perhaps only -- true friend in the world.
But it is a measure of Japan's insecurity on this point that books with titles like "The Coming War With Japan" are always much bigger sellers here than in the United States, and a recurrent theme in manga, the thick comic books read by millions of Japanese workers on the subways, is an American military once again at battle with Japanese forces.
Without question, such popular views have a subtle effect on the way Japanese view their own future relations with the rest of the world, making them feel that they are increasingly being cast out to fend for themselves. 
But some believe that such a change is overdue, that America's domination of Japanese security policy has delayed Japan's maturation as a truly independent state.
"In a sense we are politically in transition, from being dependent on U.S. policy to an independent status," said Saburo Okita, a former Foreign Minister. 
"But our politics have been so dependent that we still cannot make our own decisions."
Nothing has made that clearer than the two continuing debates that have seized Japan this year: whether to demand a permanent seat on the United Nations Security Council and whether to create a peacekeeping force that could be sent on United Nations missions, violating a taboo against "collective security" arrangements that dates to the end of World War II.
The Tokyo Government has not wanted to appear to be openly seeking the Security Council seat, even though countries with far less economic power sit there today. 
But there is also an underlying fear that Japan, if given a bully pulpit, may have little to say. 
"We might be ashamed to raise our hand," Seiki Nishihiro, a former Deputy Defense Minister, said during a recent conference.
 
Peacekeeping
Fear of Sending Troops Abroad
The debate over a peacekeeping force has been marked by ambivalence of another sort. 
Ever since the Persian Gulf war, the Government has tried to push through a bill that would create a lightly armed organization that could be sent out entirely under United Nations command. 
From the outside it appears innocuous. 
Yet twice the bill has been defeated, and Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa's tenure in office may depend on his ability to pass it in the next few months.
While few will say so explicitly, the debate over the peacekeeping bill seems to be motivated by a broader question: Does the Japanese public yet trust its Government enough to send the military abroad, without fear that it could once again veer toward the expansionist militarism that got the country into World War II?
Over the last year, it has become increasingly clear that the Japanese public does not share the political leadership's enthusiasm for post-cold-war self-assertiveness. 
In surveys, on television and just in conversation, many Japanese say that while they agree that Japan must find new ways to contribute to the world, they are deeply uncomfortable with the idea of breaking the taboos that have kept their military forces at home and focused the Government on economic development, not geopolitics.
Such questions are arising only now because for four decades Tokyo's foreign policy has followed Washington's so closely that Japan has developed few of the institutions needed to chart its own course -- a powerful foreign ministry, an independent intelligence network, a confident military. 
Unlike Germany, Japan in the postwar era never entered regional collective security arrangements, even with other American allies like South Korea.
As a result, many Japanese leaders concede that the country still finds itself almost paralyzed diplomatically. 
Though it has tried to help bring about a settlement in Cambodia, not long ago the Japanese who is running the United Nations peacekeeping operation there, Yasushi Akashi, accused his country of moving too slowly and helping too little in sending personnel and logistical assistance to the area. 
To get the peacekeeping bill through Parliament, the governing Liberal Democratic Party may have to agree to send no one for several years, presumably until after the Cambodia peacekeeping operation expires. 
Or the Government may bow to demands from the opposition that forces be sent on a case-by-case basis, meaning a parliamentary debate each time.
Such domestic deal-making may be the biggest impediment to Japan's broader international role. 
The constant factional struggle in the Liberal Democratic Party has led party leaders to talk about the direction of the country's foreign and security policy in only the vaguest of terms. 
Japan's neighbors say the clubby, often secretive ways that political decisions are made in Japan add to their distrust of a broader global role for the country.
"The prerequisite for taking a larger political role," said Gerald Hensley, the Defense Minister of New Zealand, "is whether they can clean up their own political system, thus commanding more international confidence. 
And they must learn to act more generously."
 
Security
Dependence on U.S. 
Begins to Crumble
When he commanded the American occupation of Japan, Gen. Douglas MacArthur described his vision of the country as a "Switzerland of the Pacific," a neutral nation that took no sides in the region's many conflicts. 
It was an image that still resonates deeply with many Japanese, who associate the country's 40-year territorial expansion -- first into Sakhalin and Korea, then into China and Southeast Asia -- with phenomenal destruction and crushing poverty.
General MacArthur's vision of neutrality was quickly jettisoned in reaction to the Communist takeover in China, the growing confrontation with the Soviet Union and the wars in Korea and Indochina. 
Soon a new bargain was struck: Japan would provide the United States with bases on Japanese soil in return for American protection. 
Though the security treaty was the subject of violent street protests in 1960, it has since come to be the fabric underlying Japanese foreign policy.
At America's urging, Japan used the prospect of invasion by the Soviet Union to justify the buildup its own military forces, reinterpreting its Constitution to allow defensive forces. 
As Japan geared up a military budget that now tops $30 billion a year, making it among the largest in the world, Japanese industry profited greatly, building ships and aircraft under American license and gaining considerable technology and manufacturing experience.
"In reality no one really believed there was much of a Soviet threat," a senior Japanese diplomat said recently. 
But it was a "convenient arrangement," he said.
It was particularly convenient for Japanese businessmen, who always enjoyed hearing the American Ambassador to Tokyo throughout the 1980's, Mike Mansfield, repeat that Japan and America had "the most important bilateral relationship in the world."
They knew it meant that the security relationship would almost always overshadow American concerns about economic competitiveness.
"When you read some of the history, it is incredible how much of Japan policy for 40 years centered around making sure that Japan didn't go to the other side, the side of military neutrality," said James Fallows, who is completing a book about Japan and Asia. 
"As a politically relevant fact, that only ended a year ago."
The first concrete evidence that the traditional thinking was crumbling came in 1989, when Congress objected to technology transfers to Japan for the co-development of a new fighter jet, called the FSX. 
That began a spiral of resentments that reached a zenith when Japan rejected requests that it provide personnel -- not necessarily military personnel -- in the gulf war.
To Washington that constituted evidence that the alliance was one-sided. 
"Japan lost a lot of supporters here," a senior American military official said several months ago.
 
U.S. Presence
New Threats Seen As Old Ones Ease
Critics of America's military presence here say the military is simply inventing missions to justify the presence, overstating threats and magnifying the power of potential rivals.
But whenever American military officials travel through the region, they insist that Japan has taken on renewed importance in the Pentagon's strategy, especially after the loss of Clark Air Base and Subic Bay Naval Station in the Philippines. 
Potential threats, they argue, are real and plentiful.
"Russia is still one," said Lieut. 
Gen. Richard E. Hawley, who commands all the American forces in Japan. 
"You don't see the same changes in the Russian military structure when you sit in Japan and look west as you do when you sit in Berlin and look east."
"China is a major power center," he continued, "and that alone is simple justification for continued U.S. presence in this part of the world."
Perhaps the most unpredictable threat of all, and the one cited most often these days, is North Korea. 
Its suspected efforts to build nuclear weapons have rattled Japan's leadership and become the focus of what may be the closest political cooperation between Tokyo and Washington in years, as the two try to convince North Korea that the price it must pay for economic aid and recognition is abandonment of its nuclear ambitions.
"To talk about an American decline of interest here is both wrong and dangerous," James R. Lilley, a former Ambassador to China and now Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, said during a recent Asian tour. 
"It gives potential predators a false sense of opportunity and an inducement to be aggressive."
"Let's not give Kim Jong Il any ideas," he said, referring to the heir-apparent in North Korea.
 
Militarism
Fear of Revival Of Adventurism
American and Japanese officials are more hesitant to talk about the other, rarely stated benefit of keeping American troops posted here: It reassures Asian nations that worry about a revived Japanese military.
But as the peacekeeping bill demonstrates, the concern seems overblown. 
There is virtually no detectable appetite for military adventurism in Tokyo, and little support, except from the Japanese right wing, for building anything other than purely defensive ability. 
Year after year, the Japanese military has been unable to win support for refueling planes or for small aircraft carriers, both of which Japanese fear would be viewed as potentially offensive weapons. 
Japan does not even have its own surveillance satellites, a source of considerable frustration in Tokyo since the North Korean nuclear scare began.
Most vocal in support of an American presence to keep a check on Japan are countries like Singapore, where this year schoolchildren were herded through an exhibit at the national museum with graphic images of Japanese atrocities during the occupation of the city 50 years ago. 
Singapore's Defense Minister, Yeo Ning Hong, said recently that should the United States gradually reduce its presence in the Pacific, "Japan may feel compelled to re-arm to safeguard its trade routes beyond the 1,000 nautical miles south of Tokyo," the current limit for Japanese forces.
That could prompt the Chinese and the Koreans, Mr. Yeo said, to "build up their respective armed forces to counter and contain any Japanese rearmament," setting off "a whole chain reaction of destabilization."
But the true concern about American withdrawal from the region involves a far more subtle form of Japanese influence. 
With newly built factories stretching from southern China to Indonesia, Japan is already the overwhelming economic power in the region. 
Japanese-style capitalism and Japanese work habits rival the Sony Walkman as Japan's most conspicuous export. 
The United States, in the view of many Southeast Asians, plays a critical if economically unrewarding role, assuring that Japan's influence stays on the factory floor.
"The more respectable argument is not that Japan will re-militarize in the absence of America but simply that if America pulls back, the Japanese will slowly move to fill the gap," said Mr. Hensley, the New Zealand Defense Minister. 
"Everyone will feel uncomfortable. 
Not because of memories of World War II -- most people are too young to remember it -- but because America and Great Britain, while they have made mistakes in Asia, have thought and acted globally. 
They pay into the system as well as take out. 
And so far, the Japanese have not paid in."
 
Old Disputes
New Relationships Are Elusive
In their dealings in Asia, the Japanese have also seemed oddly hamstrung by their older cold-war habits.
Many Tokyo officials say they are embarrassed that smaller nations like South Korea managed to break free of traditional anti-Communist restraints over the last two years, forming new relationships with Russia, China and even the hard-line Communist regime in North Korea. 
But Japan still seems locked in its old disputes.
Its longtime territorial dispute over four northern islands, taken by the Soviet Union in the last days of World War II, has virtually frozen any prospect of anything but grudging Japanese economic aid to the former Soviet republics. 
Relations with China and South Korea, always on a knife's edge, are once again being colored by new charges that Japan is ducking responsibility for war atrocities -- this time by deflecting demands that it compensate Korean and Chinese women who were forced to provide sex to Japanese troops. 
It now appears unlikely that Emperor Akihito will take a long-expected trip to China this year, the first ever by a Japanese emperor.
Not everyone is unhappy keeping the Japanese slightly off balance in Asia.
"No matter what kind of nice face they put on it, people are still suspicious as hell of the Japanese," said K. S. Sandhu, a Malaysian who heads the Institute of Southeast Asian Studies in Singapore. 
"The fact is that they are perfectionist about everything they do, and if they decide again to become influential politically or militarily, they will do it to a fine art."
The Japanese have their own complaints about the new era, and the chief one is that if an American comes to visit Japan these days, someone has to lock the treasury door. 
Though Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d chastised Japan last year for what he called its inability to break out of "checkbook diplomacy," Japanese say a check is all America really seems to want, whether the project is the liberation of Kuwait or the building of the superconducting supercollider in Texas. 
In each case, they complain, Japan is often excluded from the critical moments of decision.
Some fear that Japan is heading into a Faustian bargain, that a more assertive Japan will mean the abandonment of the postwar military restraints that have become the core of the country's self-image.
Many Japanese recognize, however, that their political re-engagement is now inevitable, the logical conclusion to a particularly mercantile phase of Japanese history.
"Since 1945, the whole country was directed to bringing a recovery to the Japanese economy," said Akio Tanii, the president of the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company, the world's largest consumer electronics company. 
"We have come to the point where we are not the student any longer. 
We have something to teach. 
The problem is we don't know where to start."
