
President Bush said today that he was willing to seek Security Council authority to create a United Nations security force in northern Iraq that would pave the way for the withdrawal of American and allied military forces from the Kurdish region.
The announcement came a day after the Secretary General of the United Nations, Javier Perez de Cuellar, indicated that his envoy in Baghdad was making progress in negotiating conditional Iraqi support for such a security force. 
The State Department spokesman, Richard A. Boucher, also said today, "There may be some preliminary agreement on some type of guard arrangements to be associated with the U.N. humanitarian effort."
A compromise on the security force issue that is acceptable to Washington and Baghdad could spare Mr. Bush a stalemate in northern Iraq, a development that could turn the humanitarian effort into a political liability at home.
Also, a compromise security force that won Iraq's approval would defuse a potentially bruising dispute between Mr. Bush and the Security Council, where the Soviet Union and China have expressed strong reservations against a United Nations military role in Iraq that is not approved by the Iraqi Government.
In a sign that Mr. Bush may be courting Security Council votes, the President also stated publicly today that he favored renewing China's most-favored-nation trade status, linking his decision to China's cooperation at the United Nations during the Persian Gulf conflict.
Last fall, when Mr. Bush needed critical Chinese and Soviet votes to authorize the use of force against Iraqi troops in Kuwait, the President broke his own ban on high-level visits by Chinese officials imposed after the Tiananmen Square crackdown.
The United Nations police force, if it is approved, would provide protection for the relief operation under way in the Kurdish security zone that stretches from Zakho on the Turkish border to the outskirts of Dohuk, a major Iraqi provincial capital. 
More than 8,000 American, British and French forces occupy the zone and thousands more are stationed in Turkey and the Eastern Mediterranean as a "quick reaction" force.
Responding to a question about the United Nations police force proposal, Mr. Bush told reporters on the South Lawn of the White House, "We're contemplating going to the United Nations on that to get further authority."
 
Compromise Possible
Mr. Bush added that, in his opinion, the authority to create such a police force has already been granted "under existing resolutions" of the United Nations that require Iraq to cooperate with humanitarian relief efforts.
But his public remarks indicated that Mr. Perez de Cuellar's negotiations with Baghdad may have produced a formula that the United States and its allies will be able to accept.
On Tuesday, Mr. Perez de Cuellar said that his special envoy, Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan, was negotiating approval from Iraqi officials to add an armed United Nations security force of 400 to 500 men to the United Nations relief workers already in northern Iraq.
A permanent reconciliation between the Kurds and the Iraqi Government is the subject of separate negotiations now headed by the Kurdish guerilla leader Massoud Barzani. 
Mr. Bush also said today that these talks "could offer some hope."
But Mr. Bush emphasized that until relations between the Kurds and the Iraqi Government are normalized, the United States will adhere to its security commitment. 
"I don't think we can entrust the fate of the Kurds to the word of Saddam Hussein."
At the State Department, Mr. Boucher said "we don't have the details" of the security force proposal that is emerging from the talks in Baghdad. 
"But we understand that discussion will continue this week between the U.N. and Iraqi authorities."
