
China launched a foreign telecommunications satellite tonight, setting off a national celebration to mark its entry into the international launching business.
As television viewers watched, a Chinese Long March 3 rocket carrying the American-made satellite blasted off from a launching pad in the central province of Sichuan. 
It is the first time that China has launched a foreign satellite.
The launching took place around 9:30 P.M. after being delayed for more than an hour and a half because of bad weather, officials said.
The launching of the satellite, Asiasat, built by the Hughes Aircraft Company and owned by a consortium based in Hong Kong, was made possible when President Bush temporarily waived a ban on weapons exports to China to allow the export of the satellite in February. 
The ban was imposed in June in response to China's military crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators in Beijing.
 
U.S. to Export 2 Others
Although President Bush said he was exercising the waiver for the sake of ''national interest,'' the move was viewed by many diplomats and politicians as a conciliatory gesture to Beijing. 
President Bush also cleared the way for the export of two other satellites manufactured by Hughes Aircraft that are to be launched on Chinese rockets over the next two years.
Asiasat has the capacity to relay television, telephone and facsimile signals to about 2.5 billion people in more than 30 Asian countries. 
Many live in remote areas with little access to telecommunications services.
A Chinese company, the China International Trust and Investment Corporation, is a partner in the consortium, but apparently has no control over the satellite's operations, which will be monitored from Hong Kong. 
Other partners are Cable and Wireless P.L.C. of Britain, and Hutchison Telecommunications Ltd. of Hong Kong.
It was the second time that the 2,732-pound satellite, formerly called Westar-6, was launched into space. 
On its first journey, it failed to reach orbit and was recovered by a United States space shuttle in 1984. 
Officials hope it will settle into orbit this time about 22,500 miles above the Earth.
China has successfully sent 26 of its own satellites into space, with one failure in 1974.
