
A report that 146 peasants from Yunnan Province on China's southwest border used dirty drug needles and infected themselves with the AIDS virus has sent shivers throughout China.
It was the first sign of a large incidence in China, where officials asserted previously that most AIDS cases involved foreigners. 
In addition to the discovery, announced in February, more than 100 other samples from Yunnan peasants have been sent to Beijing for additional testing to see whether they are infected with the virus, officials here said in interviews.
The more the Government investigates, the more cases the Government fears it will find, deflatingthe notion that China faces neither a drug problem nor an AIDS problem.
''The news was explosive,'' a Chinese official here said of the discovery of the AIDS virus. 
''We were shocked.''
 
Comparatively Tiny Number
So far the numbers are tiny compared with the tens of thousands of AIDS cases in Western countries, but they are a cause of great concern in China. 
China had previously reported that 41 foreigners and 7 Chinese carried the virus, of whom only 3 actually developed the disease. 
The latest confirmed findings brought China's total number of publicized cases to 194.
The spread of the virus here in Yunnan Province, in a temperate corner of China, points to what officials acknowledge is an increasingly severe problem of narcotics trafficking. 
Hard drugs like heroin are transported through China to the West from bordering countries like Burma, Thailand and Vietnam, the officials say.
Most of the drugs pass through China, rather than being consumed here. 
But a growing number of people are using the drugs, and the discovery that most of those with the AIDS virus are from ethnic minorities could affect the sometimes fragile relationship between the Government and some minorities.
''Those farmers have the impression that if you take drugs, they'll have pleasant illusions,'' said Wang Wenxin, a doctor of infectious diseases at the office for AIDS prevention and control here. 
''These people are poorly educated and relatively ignorant.''
 
Victims Used Heroin
The 146 cases were discovered after testing of peasants living in Ruili County, along the border with Myanmar, formerly Burma. 
Health officials say all the victims, including one woman and young men in their late teens, were infected with the AIDS virus when they injected heroin with shared needles.
Provincial oficials said that so far they had not linked any AIDS-related cases to foreigners or contaminated blood, and tests on 500 Kunming residents proved negative.
For China, the role of intravenous drug use in AIDS brings back painful memories of the nation's suffering in the last century and in the first half of this century because of widespread opium addiction. 
Many Chinese attributed the widespread opium dependency to the country's weakness as it fell victim to foreign invaders and domestic warlords. 
About 20 million people - nearly five percent of the population at that time - smoked opium, and a sizable portion of the cultivable land in China was used to grow poppies, according to Chen Cunyi, deputy director of the provincial public security division against drugs.
When they took control in 1949, the Communists virtually wiped out opium smoking, and for several decades China was considered a drug-free country. 
But Mr. Chen said drug activity had not only resurfaced but had also shifted from smoking opium to smuggling and intravenous use of heroin.
 
Heroin Seizures Double
Last year, the amount of heroin seized in Yunnan Province rose to almost 600 pounds from about 260 in 1988, while seizures of opium declined to about 300 pounds from 340 in 1988. 
The heroin seized, however, is highly concentrated, and one kilogram can be reformulated into 12 kilograms in Hong Kong.
Mr. Chen declined to estimate what portion of the drug traffic is intercepted, although some estimates have put it at 10 percent.
The discovery that narcotics use is leading to the spread of the AIDS virus has made the problem much more compelling in China, which has long been concerned about the disease.
In Chinese clinics most hypodermic needles are reused, although disposable needles are being introduced, and the hygiene and frequency of blood checks before transfusions is worse than in the West.
Chinese officials have therefore been very aware of the risks of AIDS, and so far they have focused their efforts on screening foreigners. 
All foreigners who live in China for a year or more must have an AIDS test, and even short-term tourists are sometimes asked questions intended to determine if they have AIDS.
 
Diplomatic Ties Involved
The border trade in drugs is a delicate matter for China because of its effect on diplomatic relations with China's neighbors. 
Mr. Chen insisted that the drugs came from the bordering countries, and that China was only a conduit because of its geographic position between the drug-producing areas and transportation hubs like Hong Kong.
''It is absolutely not grown here,'' Mr. Chen said. 
So far the China connection is not nearly as significant as other sources of the West's heroin - such as Latin America or other Asian transit points - even though officials here acknowledge that it is a growing problem.
The authorities have stepped up their efforts, spending about $1 million on narcotics control in Yunnan Province, but they acknowledge that it is not enough.
The public security staff has added 1,300 officers to combat the drug problem, but this is a fraction of the number believed necessary to monitor the porous, 2,500-mile southwestern border.
''It's impossible for us to station guards, one by one, along the border, because we don't have such manpower,'' Mr. Chen said.
