
James B. Stockdale, who ran as Ross Perot's Vice-Presidential candidate, said today that he is convinced that no American prisoners of war were left behind in North Vietnam when the United States pulled out its ground forces in 1973.
Mr. Stockdale, a former Naval aviator who was the highest-ranking American held by the Vietnamese at the Hoa Lo prison in Hanoi, told a Senate committee that American prisoners had set up an elaborate system to account for inmates in all prisons throughout North Vietnam.
When North Vietnam released 591 prisoners as part of the Paris peace accords, he said, all those who had been identified by the other prisoners were let go. 
"I have no evidence of anybody that was left intentionally or is alive," he added.
He stressed, however, that his knowledge related only to prisoners in North Vietnam, not those in Laos.
The retired admiral's testimony before the Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A. 
Affairs may help debunk persistent reports that Americans soldiers or aviators were left when the United States withdrew. 
Mr. Stockdale was the leader of Americans held at Hoa Lo, known as the "Hanoi Hilton."
Mr. Stockdale is given another measure of credibility because of his affiliation with Mr. Perot, one of the strongest advocates for missing American prisoners in Southeast Asia. 
His wife, Sybil Stockdale, was a founder of the National League of Families, the largest organization of family members of missing servicemen.
 
--------------------
China to Aid Search
BEIJING, Dec. 
3 (AP) -- China has agreed to receive a team that will investigate reports of American servicemen listed as missing or held prisoner in the Korean and Vietnam wars, Senator David L. Boren said today.
The Oklahoma Democrat said Chinese officials will allow investigators to visit sites in China where American pilots were reported to have crash-landed in the Vietnam War.
Washington has no evidence that any prisoners remain alive in China, said Mr. Boren, who is visiting China.
But intelligence informants have said American prisoners in the Korean War were taken to China. 
Beijing says that 21 American soldiers came at their own request and that two remain. 
One, identified as James Veneris, has taught English at a Chinese university.
