
TYPICAL AMERICAN
By Gish Jen.
296 pp. 
Boston:
Seymour Lawrence/Houghton Mifflin Company. 
$19.95.
Migration and mutation form a persistent, characterizing theme of our unsettling time. 
In her first novel, "Typical American," which explores the transformation of Chinese immigrants in the United States, Gish Jen has engaged this theme with distinction. 
More than that, she has given us "natives" (that is, the less recently settled) back to ourselves with a jolt of sharpened self-recognition.
"It's an American story," so the tale begins. 
"Before he was a thinker, or a doer, or an engineer, much less an imagineer like his self-made-millionaire friend Grover Ding, Ralph Chang was just a small boy in China, struggling to grow up his father's son."
The novel charts the progress of "Ralph" (an Americanization of Lai Fu -- "Come Fortune"), who leaves China in 1947, amid the "wreckage, and inflation, and moral collapse" that follow the war with Japan. 
Ralph's aim is to pursue engineering studies in New York.
He has six subsidiary goals, carefully listed. 
Two are resolutions to cultivate virtue and bring honor to his family. 
The succeeding four, culminating in a resolve to have nothing to do with girls, are abandoned without recall as Ralph comes to realize that he is alone, that he has journeyed "to the complete other side of the world."
It is during his first year abroad that Manchuria falls to Communist control -- the opening in a series of moves that will utterly transform China, sundering Ralph's link with his parents and ancestral traditions and leaving him unmoored, adrift in a new world.
Then, one day, Ralph is found slumped on a park bench, in the depths of despair. 
The finder is none other than Theresa, his long-lost older sister, who had emigrated before him. 
" 'Was miracle.'
This was Ralph's version of the story. 
'Miracle!'
" There's yet another miracle in store: Theresa happens to be rooming with a beautiful young Chinese woman named Helen, who is destined to become Ralph's wife. 
Together Ralph, Helen and Theresa set up housekeeping and, as they progress from permanent residents to citizens, each -- in his or her own way -- begins to undergo a sea change.
It is greed that most powerfully transforms Helen and Ralph. 
From their former playfully defensive recital of "typical American" characteristics ("typical American no-manners," "typical American no-morals," "typical American use-brute-force," "typical American wasteful") comes a new chant. 
Helen's is a litany of enraptured consumerism; Ralph's, of high-venture capitalism. 
Hers: "Double garage with separate entrance. 
Finished basement. 
Sliding glass doors. 
. . . breakfast nook with built-in benches. 
. . . wall unit. 
. . . extras galore."
His: "Got to spend money to make money. 
. . . What you can conceive, you can achieve. 
. . . The whole trick is. 
. . . Sky's the limit. 
. . . Can do, can do, can do!"
And, in time, as his own restaurant -- Ralph's Chicken Palace -- takes tangible shape, Ralph's dream of America as "every wish come true" seems to be realized.
I won't reveal what comes next, although no mere plot recital could possibly spoil the rest. 
No paraphrase could capture the intelligence of Gish Jen's prose, its epigrammatic sweep and swiftness. 
There's no pause, no underlining, no winking aside to the reader to signal how clever this is, how humorous that is. 
The author just keeps coming at you, line after stunning line. 
Even her incidental description seems new-minted -- purely functional, bone clean yet lustrous -- whether it's focused on the wilting of an elaborately curled hairdo in a discouraging social situation, or on children facing their first move, kissing the walls of their old apartment goodbye, or on death threatening one of the family members as "a man to sit at supper and never eat -- a man with his eye on everyone."
Here is Theresa, succumbing to the seduction of a pair of highly colored, voluptuously curved new shoes:
"These shoes had snagged her -- so vital, there in the store window, that they did not look like shoes so much as some highly adapted life form, mimicking shoes the way lizards mimicked desert rocks. 
Whereas the shoes she'd had on were plainly the real thing: worn out, dried up, cracking. 
Like their owner -- her reflection in the window was spindly and stiff, separated just this way, by a pane of glass, from some more vibrant world. 
At the center of her image, the red shoes had seemed to pulse, like her own true heart."
My only quarrel with this book is a backhanded tribute to its virtues, to the interest created in character and situation. 
There were times when I wanted to know more -- deeper and more -- moments when Helen and Ralph's capitulation to all-American greed seemed too easy, too headlong, verging on the simplicity of fable. 
This simplicity is clearly not wrong in itself, but it struck me as fundamentally at odds with the complexity, the multifaceted richness, of the novel as a whole.
Were there no contending forces?
No dim remembrance of Confucian harmonies or Buddhist detachment before Ralph's obsession gained full sway?
Wouldn't even passing reflection on the austerities of life under a Communist regime in China have raised a little point-counterpoint, exerted a chastening influence?
There were numerous references to church (Ralph, unconverted, attending with Theresa), rosaries, prayers, parochial school for the Chang children, yet not a word of admonition, not a whisper, concerning thralldom to material things. 
Was the church completely captive to culture, then?
It would seem so. 
Two perfunctory lines -- slogans, really -- from a homily ("Risk faith. 
Doubt doubt.") would suggest that the priest speaking was well attuned to typical American one-sound-bite attention spans. 
I wanted to know more.
It may be that this reader's lingerings and wonderings stem, in large part, from just plain reluctance to close the book on the Changs. 
For I came to care about all of them -- Theresa at first meeting, Ralph belatedly. 
And as the Changs seemed so hopelessly to drift apart, each one off in pursuit of some bright fragment of the American dream, I waited eagerly for them to return -- quan jia tuan yuan, the whole family together -- quite as if they had become my own family.
 
 
'I DREW ON WHAT I KNEW'
Gish Jen was once asked if the publishers of her first novel, "Typical American," had pressured her to change her name to something sounding less Chinese. 
"My real name is Lillian," she said, laughing, in a telephone interview from her home in Cambridge, Mass. 
She playfully adopted Gish -- as in the actress -- in high school. 
"It was part of becoming a writer," she said, "not becoming the person I was supposed to be."
That person was the dutiful daughter of Chinese immigrants, who expected her to get a practical job. 
Ms. Jen did attend business school briefly, and even took a typing test after marriage and house renovation had led her to put fiction aside. 
But before she became a secretary, Ms. Jen, an alumna of Harvard and the Iowa Writers' Workshop, successfully applied for a fellowship at Radcliffe's Bunting Institute. 
Her submission -- a story about the immigrant Changs -- grew into "Typical American."
"I drew on what I knew," she explained. 
"But even though I can see the elbows and knees and noses of people from my past, the relationship is like that between a dream and life. 
It's similar, but highly transformed."
Ms. Jen, who is 35 years old, once lived in Yonkers, where her family was called names and pelted with stones. 
But the experience, she said, did not define her childhood, and she refuses to emphasize it. 
In fact, the comedy of "Typical American" came most naturally. 
"I felt like a stereo with no bass," she said. 
"I had to learn to hit the low notes."
Although "Typical American" does include sadness, Ms. Jen still feels it is upbeat. 
"Not everyone has to be like Ralph," she said of her hero. 
"You can use the freedom of America differently."
When asked if she was working on a new book, Ms. Jen, who is now pregnant, replied simply: "I'm hatching."
-- LAUREL GRAEBER
