
In a plain stadium where a loudspeaker boomed out rousing Chinese folksongs, the United States women's soccer team defeated the German team tonight, 5-2, and won the right to take America into its first world championship soccer match.
Having reached the final of the first women's soccer championship, the United States team now has a chance to bring home a new trophy, and create a new image for American soccer.
"If we win this championship, I think the win will give us an international identity," said Anson Dorrance, coach of the United States women's team.
Dorrance, whose women's team garnered 49 goals to 0 for its five opponents during the qualifying matches for this tournament, said that while soccer is a very popular sport in the United States, "it's a sport with an inferiority complex. 
It's a sport most Americans feel is better played abroad."
But, he added, "The statement we're making is that we can play soccer in the United States."
 
Good Publicity for World Cup
Moreover, American soccer officials believe a championship women's team would focus attention and interest on the sport as the United States approaches 1994, the year it will be host to the World Cup soccer championship for men.
The championship match, which will be played Saturday in this sprawling, prosperous city in southern China, will pit the United States team against its archrival, Norway.
Norway has defeated the American team the last two times they were matched. 
In its semifinal game today, Norway beat Sweden by 4-1.
The United States women's team, which has played aggressive, entertaining, high-scoring soccer throughout the competition here, has "captured the attention of even the old stodgies here," said one soccer official, referring to some of the officials of FIFA, the organization governing world soccer, who are attending the event.
 
Making Up for Deficits
April Heinrichs of Littleton, Colo., the captain of the United States women's team, said that while the Americans might lack "the sophistication and the subtlety of the European players who grew up watching soccer on TV, we make up for that lack with speed, guts and determination."
Heinrichs, who is now head women's soccer coach at the University of Maryland, said that winning the world championship would be a watershed event for women's soccer in America.
"Females play soccer more than any other sport in America and I think this championship could draw attention to the sport, increase enrollment, sponsorship and audience interest," she said. 
"I think in four to eight years, soccer could dominate women's sports in America."
America's growing interest in soccer comes at a time when women's soccer is beginning to come into its own around the world, with 65 of the 165 countries involved in FIFA now sponsoring women's teams, officials said.
 
Sport Maturing in U.S.
The interest in soccer that began with boys and girls in America's suburbs and small towns in the mid-1970's is now maturing, bearing fruit in the form of the very players on the United States women's team here.
Carin Jennings, from Palos Verdes, Calif., said she had been playing soccer since she was 8 years old. 
Jennings scored three of the goals tonight against Germany, the defending European champion. 
Heinrichs scored the other two.
If they have impressed the other soccer teams and officials here, the 18 American players, aged 19 to 26, have also impressed the local Chinese.
Polite and smiling, the Chinese have asked the players for autographs, photographed them on the street and brought their families to the glitzy hotel where the American team is staying, ambling through the marble lobby hoping to catch a glimpse of some of the young women.
Corporations, government buildings and even a local meat market are decked out in huge red-and-white banners welcoming the international players in English and Chinese with the greeting, "Hail the 1st FIFA World Championship for Women's Football."
