
Retailers in bankruptcy?
A crumbling real estate market?
A global recession?
The problems might as well be happening on Mars, as far as Zhang Guoxi is concerned.
While gnarled old peasants slog barefoot behind water buffaloes in the rice paddies here, Mr. Zhang, apparently China's richest private businessman, has found a better way to make a living.
A balding 39-year-old who dropped out of school after the sixth grade, Mr. Zhang runs an international business empire based on furniture exports, property development and stock trading from his 10-story corporate headquarters, which juts above the paddies. 
From this remote country town he has emerged as an entrepreneur with assets worth tens of millions of dollars.
 
Defining the Limits
Mr. Zhang (whose full name is pronounced JAHNG gwaw-shee) is one of the best measures of how much capitalism the Communist authorities are prepared to tolerate in their drive for national prosperity. 
For 15 years, he has more or less defined the frontier of what can be tolerated, and despite the hardline oratory from Beijing in the last few years, he continues to thrive.
"Sure, I live very well," he said, grinning, when he was asked how many homes he owns. 
"Very well!"
After a pause, he added with a mischievous gleam in his eye: "So I should say, 'Long live Comrade Xiaoping!'
" The reference was to Deng Xiaoping, the 87-year-old paramount Chinese leader, who since January has led a new drive to carry out further capitalist-style changes in the economy.
In a society where peasants earn cash incomes of about $150 a year, Mr. Zhang is rich in a way that can scarcely be fathomed, rich in a way that the Rockefellers are rich. 
He sips Remy Martin cognac, and he has a chauffeur-driven car waiting for him in each city where he has an office. 
The state even provides him with his own police station of a dozen officers solely to protect his company and serve as his bodyguards.
Mr. Zhang may be leading the pack, but there are many other business tycoons emerging across China, capturing the spirit of the times. 
In the 1970's, many Chinese wanted to be revolutionary; today, they want to be rich. 
Most private businesses are only about a dozen years old, but they are expanding rapidly and branching across the nation and even the world. 
By the end of the century, China's private industrialists may be far more numerous and powerful than they are today.
"Deng Xiaoping has always said that China should let some people get rich first and let these people pull the economy along," said Christine Wong, an associate professor of economics at the University of California at Santa Cruz. 
"Now that Deng Xiaoping has reasserted his dominance in trying to formulate economic policy, I expect that things will look up for people like that."
Already the wealth and power that Mr. Zhang has gathered are jarring, partly because his base is not Beijing or Shanghai, but this small county seat of Yujiang in Jiangxi Province. 
Jiangxi is a poor, landlocked area that early in the century was a Communist guerrilla base. 
Most of the buildings around Yujiang are dilapidated brick homes with propaganda slogans proclaiming "Socialism is Good!" or calling on people to have just one child.
 
Touches of Modernity
Mr. Zhang's corporate headquarters rises abruptly from these surroundings, 10 stories of gleaming modernity with international direct dialing and fax service, in a sprawling compound that also includes a goldfish pond and two marble arches -- "I'm an artist, after all," he explained. 
His buildings have their own slogans, but they are not political: "Guard against fires!" the banners warn.
Financial success carries political risks in China, and for that reason Mr. Zhang prefers to refer to his enterprise not as "privately run" but as "people run."
But he does not dispute that his company is privately owned -- after all it is called the Guoxi Group, named after him -- and Government ministries have publicly referred to it as a private company.
Mr. Zhang is also discreet enough to dodge questions about his personal spending habits and about his net worth, but he finally acknowledges that $30 million or more might be a good estimate.
"More or less, more or less," he repeats, each time accenting the word "more."
 
Some Special Skills
Entrepreneurs in China often run into trouble with grasping officials, who arbitrarily impose huge taxes or who force the owner to sell to the Government. 
Mr. Zhang has had few such problems, and his methods offer a window into the skills that business tycoons need to succeed in China.
One of the most crucial skills is cultivation of Government and Communist Party officials, a task that the gregarious Mr. Zhang assumes with ease. 
He is a good friend of the provincial governor and of county officials, and he has contributed more than $1.5 million in recent years to local charities and public causes.
"He is a good party member and an excellent businessman," Gov. Wu Guanzheng said of Mr. Zhang at a recent public meeting. 
"For many years he has loved the party and the people, and done many good deeds."
The latest good deed -- and the purpose of the meeting -- was Mr. Zhang's contribution of $200,000 to endow a new Zhang Guoxi Education Foundation. 
Everything he contributes to seems to bear his name: the Zhang Guoxi Big Bridge is being completed to link Yujiang with the other side of a broad river.
"Boss, three cars can pass at a time on the bridge, no problem!"
Luo Genshen, the head of the construction team, says obsequiously as Mr. Zhang stands in the middle of the bridge and inspects the work. 
After asking a few questions, Mr. Zhang returns to his Nissan Cedrick to be chauffeured to his next spot on a round of inspections.
 
Providing Services
Mr. Zhang also helped pay to bring running water and international telephone service to Yujiang. 
In addition, he contributed the only other structures in Yujiang that rival his headquarters in height: a television relay tower to improve local reception and a seven-story science tower at the local school.
Perhaps because of the philanthropy, local officials regard Mr. Zhang as a great hero rather than an evil capitalist. 
"We hope that more Zhang Guoxis will emerge!"
The Jiangxi Daily News declared in a front-page headline. 
And local Communist Party officials have formally called on the entire community to "learn from Comrade Zhang Guoxi."
In some parts of China, including Beijing, Communist Party organizations have officially banned wealthy entrepreneurs from joining the party. 
But Mr. Zhang joined the party in 1972, long before he struck it rich, and he not only remains in the party but serves as party boss of his enterprise group, while also holding down the posts of chairman and general manager.
Zhang Guoxi's name means fruit of happiness, because at birth he was only a bit more than four pounds, the size of a small fruit. 
His mother died when he was 2, and after finishing elementary school he dropped out and began work as a carpenter. 
A few years later, in 1973, he sold his family home for $250 and used the money to start his company.
Initially, the company made carved wooden chests, when it was not fighting off criticisms and investigations by Communist Party ideologues who denounced it as the "tail of capitalism."
 
Recalling Rough Times
"I'm fine now, and people see me going abroad and praised in the papers, and so on," Mr. Zhang said soberly. 
"But back in 1973 to 1977, it was really rough and I was often hungry. 
If I told you about those years, you'd be in tears."
After Mr. Deng came to power in 1978, the company prospered and began to export the wooden chests and other carved furniture to Japan. 
Then it branched into the manufacture of gold-plated Buddhist altars, which in Japan sell for about $10,000 each.
As business grew, Mr. Zhang opened offices in three Chinese cities, as well as Japan, Hong Kong, Canada and Germany. 
The Guoxi Group became a general international trading company, with interests ranging from stock trading in Hong Kong to Chinese restaurants in Germany. 
The company is about to open a new trading office in Thailand and is building a nine-story hotel in the southern Chinese resort of Sanya.
