
Paul Q. Chow re members that when he first learned in school of the great flow of immigrants from Europe to America through Ellis Island, he went home and asked his mother where their people arrived in this country.
He recalls how she became upset and replied in a hushed tone: "Angel Island. 
Shhhhhh."
For a long time, the small boy believed there was a place called Angel Island Shhhhhh where 175,000 people of the ancient Pearl River villages were welcomed to the new land they called "Golden Mountain."
It would be many years before he learned about the immigration station on this island in San Francisco Bay that was not a reception center but rather a place of detention and potential deportation from 1910 to 1940. 
It was here that officials and immigrants played out a complex dance, tens of thousands of times: the officials charged with enforcing laws aimed at keeping most Chinese out, and the immigrants trying to circumvent those laws.
The immigration station was closed 50 years ago this month. 
Mr. Chow and other Americans of Chinese descent are trying to raise money to restore it as an important if painful history lesson. 
Their task is made more urgent by their wish to preserve hundreds of Chinese poems written on or carved into the walls of the men's barracks by anonymous authors expressing their anguish.
"The generation that went through it wants to forget it," said Mr. Chow, a 62-year-old retired worker with the state transportation department. 
"It's the first and second Chinese-American generations that says, 'This was shameful and you put my parents or grandparents through this and it should not be forgotten.'
"
The first wave of Chinese immigration occurred after the discovery of gold in California 141 years ago. 
Here they worked for 12 cents an hour laying the tracks of the Central Pacific Railroad and reworking the gold claims abandoned by white miners.
Dismissed from their jobs on completion of the transcontinental railway in 1869, they were bombed and lynched by people who blamed them for the high unemployment that followed the Civil War. 
The racist fury culminated in the passage of the Chinese Exclusion Act in 1882: the first law denying naturalization to members of a specific ethnic group.
But a window reopened when the fire that followed the 1906 San Francisco earthquake consumed records of the births and businesses of Chinese. 
Residents of Chinatown came forward to claim fictitious children in China and received documents that allowed whole villages of relatives and strangers, the "paper sons and daughters," to come to America.
But when they arrived at Angel Island, they were separated by sex and penned in into cramped barracks, then subjected to intense questioning. 
Some were kept here for a year or more, and stories, not confirmed by island records, say some hanged themselves rather than face deportation.
Mr. Chow's father arrived in 1922 with his own mother, who had been born in the United States but had lost her American citizenship because she married a Chinese national. 
They were detained on the island for six weeks and were freed after paying a bribe of $550, Mr. Chow said.
The 750-acre island became part of the state park system in 1965, and the immigration station was scheduled for demolition until a park ranger noticed the Chinese characters inscribed on the barracks walls. 
Asians pressed for preservation of the inscriptions, and the State Legislature created a study commission headed by Mr. Chow.
Other Asian-Americans have worked to keep the memories from dying. 
In 1980, 135 of the poems were translated and collected by Him Mark Lai, Genny Lim and Judy Yung in a book, "Island," and in 1988, Felicia Lowe made a documentary film, "Carved in Stone."
The poems show that some of the detainees considered returning to China. 
Others spoke philosophically of their detention. 
And there are rare sparks of anger. 
A poem signed "One From Taishan" reads:
It is unbearable to relate the stories accumulated on the island slopes.
Wait till the day I become successful and fulfill my wish!
I will not speak of love when I level the immigration station!
"We are happy with the idea of having money to restore it," said Gregory Picard, chief ranger for the Marin District of the State Department of Parks and Recreation, which administers the island. 
But with a $16 million projected shortage in their budget this fiscal year, "if money doesn't come from outside sources, it won't come at all," he said.
It is this reality that helped turn Mr. Chow into what he calls "the poor man's Lee Iacocca," attempting to raise $3 million to rehabilitate the station in a low-budget version of the Chrysler Corporation chairman's efforts on behalf of Ellis Island.
He is also driven by the memory of bringing his father to the station in 1975. 
He said his father, then 75 years old, entered the gutted men's barracks and walked immediately to the place where his bunk had been.
"It was the first time I ever saw my father cry and the first time I ever put my arms around him," Mr. Chow said.
