
Ancient Chinese bronzes, aglow with brilliant green patinas or polished to mirror brightness, are combined with less pristine vessels encrusted with mud or corrosion in a new exhibition at the China House Gallery, 125 East 65th Street. 
The unorthodox mix of the glorious and the gross can be seen in "Ancient Chinese Bronze Art: Casting the Precious Sacral Vessel," through June 15. 
The exhibition documents how bronzes were made between 2205 and 256 B.C. and how they are restored.
The show's emphasis on metal technology determined the selection of the 41 period bronzes lent by 21 collections in the United States. 
The surface decorations of the vessels range from minimal cord markings to bold mythological images, calligraphic symbols, malachite chips or inlays of copper wire.
To illustrate the casting processes developed in China 4,000 years ago, the Shanghai Museum sent facsimile molds, photographs showing metalworking techniques and reproductions of ancient bronzes. 
From other sources came fragments of original molds, several elaborately restored vessels and two forgeries.
"If you want to understand the evolution of these vessels and why they look the way they do, you have to understand how they are made," said the show's guest curator, W. Thomas Chase, who is head conservator of the Freer Gallery of Art and the Arthur M. Sackler Gallery of the Smithsonian Institution in Washington. 
An owl-shaped wine jug, described until 1982 as a work of the Song Dynasty (A.D. 960 to 1279) in the Shang style, was re-identified when the bronze it is made of was tested and found to be from the Shang Dynasty, which is 2,000 years earlier.
The chronological organization of the show reveals much about the evolution of bronzes. 
The first object, one of the earliest known such vessels, is a roughly crafted, three-legged pitcher, made between the 19th and 16th centuries B.C. The raised lines belting the waist were carved into a ceramic mold before it was filled with molten bronze. 
From the 13th century B.C. came a more gracefully shaped pitcher, its surface enhanced by masks and scrolls, its handsomely curved spout flanked by knobs and its tall tapered legs engagingly raked.
Knowing which comes first -- the vessel or its surface decoration -- may pique the curiosity of some people, but it is not necessary to enjoy these bronzes. 
A case in point is a remarkable narrow-necked flask with copper fretwork on the front and back. 
According to Mr. Chase, tests revealed that the fretwork was placed in the mold first and the vessel was then affixed by casting it to the wafer-thin sheets. 
"If you want to do things just by casting," Mr. Chase said, "this is amazingly elegant solution."
Several objects show varying degrees of corrosion. 
Mr. Chase suggests that the red splotches in the bright green patina of a large jar from the sixth or fifth century B.C. may have developed when acid was used to remove corrosion from the lacelike ribbons banding the surface. 
Whatever the cause, the color from the copper oxide heightens the delicacy of the decoration.
When deterioration is far advanced, it can be less pleasing, as is seen in a wide-mouthed Shang pot made between the 13th and 11th centuries B.C. This vessel is dull gray, and its surface, eaten away by time and the elements, is full of holes. 
In sharp contrast to the elaborate restorations probably made in China before World War II by a skillful artisan, the images on the unrestored half of the pot are fuzzy or totally erased. 
The piece was lent by the Art Museum at Princeton University, a gift from a collector who discovered the modern repairs only after he bought the vessel and had it X-rayed.
An even more audacious fabrication -- at least to Western eyes -- is a trumpet-shaped beaker, 85 percent of which is new. 
The forgery includes only five original fragments that form the base. 
The rest of the beaker, made of brass and lead, may date from the early 20th century.
"The reconstruction, most certainly done in China, shows the extent to which the Chinese will go to restore an ancient bronze," Mr. Chase said.
According to J. May Lee, director of the China House Gallery, the concept of museums is very new in China. 
"Displays are educational, and the Chinese want to show as many types of objects as possible," Ms. Lee said. 
"They use reconstructions and facsimiles side by side with unrestored works in their museums."
The gallery's exhibition was financed by the New York State Council on the Arts, the Asian Cultural Council, the Corning Foundation, Grumman International, the Henry Luce Foundation and the Starr Foundation. 
The paperback catalogue ($28) was written by Mr. Chase with Ms. Lee.
A vessel inlaid with malachite from the fourth century B.C. is among the ancient bronzes on display at the China House Gallery. 
(The University Museum, University of Pennsylvania/China Institute); a wine jug shaped like an owl, made between the 13th and 12th centuries B.C., in which the head serves as a removable lid. 
(Yale University Art Gallery/China Institute)
