
Landscapes, Greek gods or exotic Indian flowers - penned in black on white, white on black or brown on gold - cover virtually every inch of the surfaces of 87 chests, tables, game trays and boxes exhibited at Hyde Park Antiques, 836 Broadway (at 13th Street).
These delightful if excessively decorated objects are exhibited in ''Penwork: the Triumph of Line,'' a show on view through Nov. 
10 that is believed to be the first in New York on this esoteric subject. 
Most of the furnishings date from 1790 to 1830 and were made in England, Scotland, India or China. 
All but two - a Regency daybed in the Greek style with scrolled frame and downswept fluted legs, and a box delicately decorated with charioteers - are for sale.
The most lavishly decorated object in the show is a two-part Regency cabinet, a tour de force of the craft decorated with black ink on a white ground from its cornice to its striped ball feet. 
Dramatizing the doors of the upper cabinet are equestrian studies of Constantine and Charlemagne on rearing horses, heroic figures inspired by the marble statues of Bernini and Cornacchini in St. Peter's Basilica in Rome. 
The inside surfaces - doors, drawer fronts and pigeonholes - come alive with scenes from Homer's ''Iliad,'' inspired by John Flaxman's early-19th-century book illustrations. 
These and other mythological tales are elaborately framed with scrolling leaves and flowers.
''We bought that cabinet in England about a year and a half ago,'' said Bernard Karr, president of Hyde Park. 
''Then we went out looking.''
The search produced 11 more cabinets, 20 tables, 42 boxes, caddies and miniature chests, and 6 handscreens, gaming accessories and the daybed. 
The remainder of the show includes related works embellished with similar images or showing such other craft techniques as transfer printing on plates; an ivory-inlay on an Anglo-Indian table; lacquered decoration on a Chinese tea caddy and an ivory veneer on a miniature Indian bureau bookcase, its surface engravings filled with black lac (shellac).
Penwork - which imitates inlay and veneer in furnishings - proliferated in Britain from the late 18th century through the mid-19th century. 
It was a time when the middle classes developed a taste for the type of picturesque aristocratic furnishings that were fashionable in the great country houses of the period. 
Fanciful furniture covered with meticulously detailed images - especially of the ancient world - was executed in wood veneers, or inlays of marble, wood or metal. 
The subjects depicted were borrowed from every source imaginable - engravings, book illustrations, block-printed textiles and transfer-printed pottery.
The exact roots of the craft are unknown, said Patrick Broome, Hyde Park's director, who organized the exhibition and did the research for its catalogue ($10). 
Proceeds from the sale of the catalogue go to the Historic House Trust, a New York organization that maintains 15 historic houses in the Metropolitan area.
Helping further to document the sources of penwork is the example Mr. Broome found of a richly detailed neoclassical black-and-white 1730's panel, the top of a George II table. 
This panel, an 18th-century example of the ancient Roman technique called scagliola, was created with powdered and colored selenite, a gypsumlike material, applied to a gesso backing. 
The image was dried in high heat and polished.
Penwork, a craft that is far less costly and intricate, became popular 70 years later because it produced similar images if less impressive effects. 
The furniture and box surfaces were first covered with a coat of white lacquer or paint, on which black ink decoration was applied by quill pen. 
Sometimes the technique was reversed, using white ink on a black ground, or it was varied, using brown ink on unpainted wood surfaces that turned golden when shellac was applied. 
Shellac was also used as a finish on black-on-white pieces, darkening some white surfaces to pale yellow.
The most memorable examples are less fussy and more adventurous, using simpler and less predictable images. 
A rare set of trays and cups for the game of Loo, made about 1820, are enlivened with images of playing cards. 
A tea caddy in the shape of a sarcophagus is an amusing study that uses near-caricatures of neoclassical figures. 
Another excellent example is a low two-door Regency cabinet from about 1815, boldly decorated with stylized Indian flowers in white on a black ground that were probably borrowed from a textile. 
Oriental themes show up on other pieces of furniture, including a dome-topped table cabinet from about 1815, its top, doors, and sides decorated in chinoiserie - French-style Chinese figures.
Tables, the least interesting form, dominate as a category in this show, an indication of their popularity 175 years ago. 
Most were made to serve as work tables by day - there are drawers in most of them to store sewing supplies - and gaming tables at night. 
One depicts Saracens and Knights on the squares of its checkerboard-patterned top.
The items in the show range from $480 for a small box to $250,000 for the Regency two-part cabinet. 
The two-door cabinet is $40,000. 
While the finest examples of offbeat penwork furnishings have increased dramatically in price, more modest ones are still occasionally available at prices in the low four figures.
This was seen last weekend in Christie's auction of English furniture in which there were two pieces of penwork furniture. 
A fine Regency sideboard splashed with grotesques, Indian flowers and exotic beasts estimated to bring $30,000 to $40,000, was sold for $121,000 to an American dealer who was not identified. 
A Regency table on paw feet in the neoclassical taste - decorated with gods, goddesses, fruits and leafage, which was expected to sell for $5,000 to $7,000, was bought by Hyde Park for $4,400.
The design of this two-door Regency cabinet (c. 
1815) was probably inspired by an Indian textile.
