
Sir Percival David's 40-year pursuit of ceramics made from the Tang through Ching dynasties took him to Beijing several times in the 1920's and 30's. 
There he acquired extraordinary 10th- to 18th-century treasures installed for centuries in the palaces of China, some of which are on view in ''Imperial Taste: Chinese Ceramics From the Percival David Collection'' at the Virginia Museum of Fine Arts. 
The show of 56 items remains here through Dec. 
10 and will then travel to the Kimbell Art Museum in Fort Worth and the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston.
Sir Percival, an heir to the Sassoon textile and banking fortune, was born in 1892 in Bombay, where his family's mills were located. 
He studied at Bombay University and London University and settled in England, where he became totally immersed in studying and collecting Chinese art. 
In 1924 he traveled to Beijing to view the Imperial collection, much of which he found stored in boxes. 
At his suggestion, these works were uncrated and exhibited in a building he paid to have restored.
The show was a great success, and on Sir Percival's next visit, in 1927, he was named an adviser to the National Palace Museums. 
He also learned that art from the Imperial collection was up for sale. 
After complex negotiations, he acquired about 40 pieces, and he added to his holdings during several more trips in the 1930's. 
In 1952 he donated his collection, and its home, a 19th-century house on Gordon Square in Bloomsbury, to London University.
The exhibition here was organized by the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, where it opened last July, in collaboration with the Percival David Foundation. 
Money came from the National Endowment for the Arts and the Federal Council on the Arts and Humanities. 
Rosemary Scott, the curator of the Percival David Foundation, assembled the show and produced its splendid catalogue ($22.95). 
From the 1,500 objects in the collection she chose 56 ceramics, 31 of which were potted and painted for, or owned by, the princes of the realm.
''It is a very restricted but representative selection,'' said Elizabeth Jackson, the secretary-librarian of the foundation, in a telephone interview from her London office. 
''The exhibition spans the period of the collection and contains some of its finest pieces.''
Thinly potted Tang and Sung vessels are among the show's more exceptional works, in terms of both their form and their subtle decoration. 
A pale gray vase from the ninth century, incised from top to base with the mouths, scales, gills, fins and flipped tails of two fish that seem locked together like Siamese twins, is a marvel of understatement. 
The stark simplicity of a 10th-century spittoon, its flared cone top set on a ball base, is relieved by its silken gray-green glaze.
Several basins and bowls of the 12th and 13th centuries are surfaced with lacy white-on-white tracings of leaves, flowers and calligraphic images. 
One of the most exquisite objects in the show is a 13th-century narrow-necked pear-shape vase glazed icy blue., The crackles on its surface are evenly spaced like stripes. 
This was Sir Percival's favorite vessel and one of the most admired ceramics in the 1935 exhibition of Chinese art treasures he helped to organize. 
That show, sponsored by London's Royal Academy at Burlington House, included loans from China's Imperial collection.
Notable among the later works now on display are several boldly decorated outsize vessels. 
A 25-inch-tall temple vase of the Yuan Dynasty, dated 1351, is described in the catalogue as one of the most important blue and white porcelains in existence. 
From chrysanthemum scrolls at the top to peonies at the base, the vessel is lavishly decorated. 
Its handles are blue elephant heads, and its body is covered with soaring phoenixes and a dragon that sweeps around the vase enveloped in clouds.
A wilder white dragon decorates a robust blue Ming flask, one of very few vessels ornamented with this reverse decoration. 
A Ming turquoise wine jar the size of a soccer ball is decorated with a gilded copper collar and calligraphy aligned like a zipper below the neck. 
The 18th-century porcelain teapots, jars and dishes are more delicately decorated with birds and blossoms.
''Imperial provenance and Imperial association have become essential parts of the price structure in the market,'' said James J. Lally, a New York dealer in Oriental art. 
''It always was there, but now it has a renewed importance with the advent of Taiwanese and some Hong Kong collectors who share this taste. 
Any porcelain in the market today is worth significantly more if it has an Imperial reign mark.''
Imperial reign marks, designating ceramics made for the sovereigns of China, are scarce, but vessels known to have been in a palace collection and others of comparable refinement are commanding extraordinary prices at auction - especially in Sotheby's sales held over the last year in Hong Kong. 
On May 16, a Sung bowl with Imperial association once used by scholars to wash brushes was sold for $2.82 million, a record at auction for Chinese ceramics. 
The buyer was identified as a Chinese man living in Los Angeles.
Two 18th-century porcelain bowls, decorated with enamels by artisans at the Beijing palace workshops, brought $1 million each in different sales. 
One, a Kang-hsi vessel formerly in Sir Percival's collection that was sold in May, is glazed a bright pink and decorated with a sinuous branch. 
The other, a Chien-lung vessel auctioned a year ago, is painted with pink flowers and landscapes on a yellow ground.
Among the more robust items in the David collection, a turquoise wine jar the size of a soccer ball, from the Ming dynasty, 15th century
