
The exotic temple art of Bhutan - scrolls, embroideries, vessels and musical instruments - derives its forms from Indian and Middle Eastern artifacts and its surface decoration from Chinese art. 
The first exhibition in New York of such Buddhist material, ''Art From the Himalayan Kingdom of Bhutan, Land of the Thunder Dragon,'' is at Asia Society Galleries through June 17.
Bhutan, a kingdom of 1.2 million people, occupying an 18,000-square-mile area between China, India and Sikkim, no longer permits the public to visit its monasteries. 
This exhibition of some 70 items offers a rare opportunity to view these religious objects. 
The selection, from five monasteries and the National Museum in Paro, was made by Andrew J. Pekarik, the former director of Asia Society Galleries, and Dasho Rigzin Dorji, the secretary of Bhutan's Special Commission for Cultural Affairs. 
Mr. Dorji wrote the booklet accompanying the show, ''A Brief Religious, Cultural and Secular History of Bhutan'' ($8.95), as a historical guide to Bhutanese Buddhism, explaining its importance in everyday life.
Most of the objects shown are ritual vessels and implements. 
Water pourers with round bodies and narrow spouts are framed in a halo of peacock feathers. 
Rice containers, offering cups, vases, incense burners, daggers, scepters and cups are covered with meticulously detailed floral and scalloped decoration. 
One large 17th-century cup is made of a human skull.
One of the show's more compelling objects is a portable shrine about two feet tall, an 18th- or 19th-century miniature temple used by itinerant monks to explain Buddhist teaching. 
The surface of this carved and painted wood structure, decorated with copper panels, is strung with necklaces of coral beads and covered with small doors opening on other doors.
Equally ornate is the wood case of a water vessel painted with clouds, ocean waves and dragons, images more often seen embroidered on imperial robes or enameled on Chinese cloisonne vessels. 
Five 19th-century fire implements, decorated with silver skulls and some gilding, are among the most interesting objects in the show. 
The long, slender fork is extraordinary, embodying a dynamic view of death in the three blackened metal plumes that rise from a grinning silver skull.
Musical instruments are among the most important objects in Bhutan, where music is regarded as a heightened form of speech. 
The instruments displayed reveal signs of wear and are probably still used in the monasteries. 
Shimmering 18th-century bell-metal cymbals are virtually unadorned save for their colorful cloth-and-leather tabs and felt protectors. 
A pair of curved 17th-century horns, made of human thigh bones, are wrapped in undecorated sheets of gilded silver. 
There are 19th-century conch-shell trumpets used to call monks to prayer, mounted in gilded metalwork richly figured with dragons and flowers.
Decoration is minimal on most of these instruments, including a pair of 19th-century wooden oboes encased in silver and studded with bits of coral and turquoise, 19th-century horns of silver and gold, an 18th-century painted wood string instrument and a drum of unknown date made from a human skull.
A painted 25-foot-wide altar, which dominates a room set aside for meditation beyond the main body of the exhibition, was commissioned by the Bhutanese Government for the show. 
It is intended to simulate the visual and spiritual experience of Bhutanese worship, according to Mr. Pekarik, as is the presence in the galleries for several weeks of an artist painting thankas,large hanging scrolls of religious scenes.
When asked whether the spiritual meaning of the objects is more important than their artistic weight, Mr. Pekarik said, ''For us the ideas are at least as important as the objects themselves. 
I never thought these were objects that would dazzle the viewer through fine craftsmanship. 
Ideas and ways of living are more important than manual dexterity. 
I wanted to go beyond isolated objects left from previous species. 
I wanted them to be linked to real places, real people. 
We took them right off the altars where they were in use. 
I don't want this to be a disembodied esthetic experience.''
The exhibition, which is to travel to several cities in Japan, is sponsored by the National Endowment for the Arts, the New York State Council for the Arts, the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, the Starr Foundation of New York and several individuals.
Little of this material has found its way into the marketplace. 
''Bhutan has very strict export laws on its period religious art,'' said Moke Mokotoff, who specializes in Himalayan textiles and artifacts at his gallery, Mokotoff Asian Arts, 125 East 57th Street. 
''It has always been so, but until recently there was very little tourism. 
Now the Bhutanese Governmentis making it much more evident that these laws are in effect.''
The most unusual item on view at his shop is a turn-of-the-century painted papier mache mask, embellished with carved wooden skulls and yak hair covered with cloth, for $1,800. 
A Tibetan bronze 19th-century scepter similar to one in the exhibition is $1,600. 
A woven 19th-century textile panel, measuring 4 feet by 7 feet and worn as a dress, is $3,500.
