
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d arrived in Tokyo today at the start of a politically risky Asian tour likely to determine whether relations between China and the United States remain strained or can begin to recover in the aftermath of Beijing's violent crackdown on democracy advocates in 1989.
After stops in Japan and South Korea, Mr. Baker is to travel on Friday to Beijing in the highest-level visit by a Bush Administration official since the Tiananmen Square killings of June 1989. 
Although Mr. Baker's trip is going ahead as planned, President Bush last week responded to domestic political concerns by canceling a planned Asian tour beginning late this month.
Administration officials say that secret contacts between Washington and Beijing have assured Mr. Baker that he will not leave China empty-handed or embarrassed. 
But it is far from certain that members of Congress will be satisfied with what he extracts from the Chinese in the key areas of arms control, human rights and trade.
 
Solarz 'Uneasy'
"I am uneasy with this trip," said Representative Stephen J. Solarz, the Brooklyn Democrat who heads the House Foreign Affairs subcommittee on Asia, and a leader of efforts to punish China for the crackdown. 
"If Baker comes back and demonstrates that the trip was justified in the areas of our concern, fine. 
If he comes back as empty-handed as some others in the Administration before him, the trip will be rightly judged as not only a failure, but a mistake."
Mr. Solarz argued that if Mr. Baker "gives the present Chinese leadership gratuitous legitimacy" without getting anything substantial in return, the debate over the Administration's China policy will likely be rekindled. 
An unimpressive result might also give new impetus to efforts to strip China of "most-favored-nation" trading benefits, which the Administration renewed in June.
 
Movement Is Seen
An Administration expert involved in planning the trip said, "The Chinese have been doing some things -- not in the human rights area -- in a direction which we see as more positive than negative and we would like to encourage them to continue that movement.
"Look, everyone has mixed feelings about this trip," the official added. 
"I supported it because you cannot talk credibly about Asia, about Japan becoming a regional power, about the future security architecture in Asia and leave China unattended. 
It is too important. 
You avoid China at your peril."
Chinese leaders, the official said, "will want the maximum to give themselves face out of this visit. 
They will limit their cooperation in the absence of such meetings in order to get that. 
You go into it aware of that, and it is just a question of how you deal with it."
Bush Administration officials cite several areas where they contend the Chinese are moving in the right direction. 
The first is their agreement in principle to sign the treaty against the spread of nuclear weapons. 
Others include Beijing's limited cooperation on Middle East arms control -- which primarily involves not yet delivering missiles contracted for by Syria -- and its commitment in principle to join the Missile Technology Control Regime. 
Finally, on Sept. 
23, the Chinese agreed to begin talks on assuring Washington that it will not export to the United States goods produced by prison labor.
 
Cooperation With Iran
And then there are the areas where Washington will try to prevent further deterioration, like China's increasing nuclear cooperation of with Iran.
What Mr. Baker will apparently try to win from the Chinese is some sort of ironclad commitments not to sell nuclear technology to countries like Iran, Syria or Pakistan, nor any ballistic missiles. 
Even if the Chinese sign the treaty controlling missile technology, the question is how closely they will abide by it. 
The treaty against the spread of nuclear weapons is before the Chinese legislature and the Chinese authorities are saying it must be passed there first, although the regime could push it through any time.
"The Chinese are very good at appearing to make concessions and then not doing it," said a Congressional staff expert on China. 
"That is why the assurances have to be ironclad."
Because so many other issues have captured the headlines in recent years, American trade problems with China have been largely lost from view, but they are extremely serious. 
To control inflation in recent years the Chinese have clamped down tightly on imports, devalued their currency and erected import-license trade barriers to support their state-owned enterprises -- including those that depend on prison labor. 
This has led to diminished American exports to China and a trade defict in 1990 of about $10.5 billion.
 
Talks on Market Access
The United States is already engaged in negotiations with the Chinese over market access. 
Another yardstick for the success or failure of Mr. Baker's trip will be the extent to which it can speed up these negotiations.
The area where Congress will be most closely watching Mr. Baker's trip, however, will be in the field of human rights. 
Legislation that would strip China of its preferential trading status is now on hold in Congressional committees; whether the legislation is revived will depend in part on how many political prisoners the Chinese release amonng those arrested since the 1989 crackdown.
Amnesty International estimates that there are roughly 800 such political prisoners, and Congressional experts hope that half will be freed, including some prominent dissidents.
Before Mr. Baker visits Beijing, he will be making his inaugural stopover in Seoul, the South Korean capital.
The most pressing issue now on the Korean-American agenda, say American officials, is what can be done about quickening pace of North Korea's nuclear arms program. 
Some experts believe North Korea is only 6 to 12 months away from producing a bomb.
