
AT present count, there are 12 Asian-American artists showing in Rockland County, nine of them at the Rockland Center for the Arts in West Nyack (27 South Greenbush Road), the others at Blue Hill Cultural Plaza, in Pearl River (Orangeburg Road). 
Between them, the shows prove how unsatisfactory the term Asian-American is.
"Points of View," the West Nyack display, is kept inscrutable by its curator, Hanford Yang. 
His catalogue lists the participants under the headings of China, Japan and Korea but leaves the reader to deduce their ages from photographs (mid-20's to mid-30's) and their backgrounds from brief interviews.
In his statement, Professor Yang, who teaches architecture at the Pratt Institute and is a collector of art, says, "The spirit of Modern Art lies in its individualism," forgetting perhaps that individualism is borne as much of nurture as of nature. 
As far as the reviewer can tell, the artists of Chinese and Japanese descent have had more nurturing in the West than those from Korea.
Szeto Keung, for example, is what might be called a hardened individualist in that she feels nothing but disdain for art categories. 
Nevertheless, her two still lifes can reasonably be called trompe l'oeils. 
Though one of the backgrounds incorporates cloth collage, both are lightly impastoed to resemble dirty white walls and against them are taped objects casting shadows -- a feather hanging by a thong, a wilting pink rose.
Ching-Huang Chung, an artist who grew up in Taiwan and spent time in Paris, also prefers work that "challenges definitions" but he produces wall pieces that can be defined as assemblages. 
They combine stretches of ribbed white cloth made from tubes of rolled up webbing glued together, along with fragments of furniture veneer. 
In the better of the two, the wood is a jagged dark diagonal sandwiched between ribs that zigzag at the bottom right and run horizontally at top left.
Mr. Chung shows talent and skill but leaves the viewer wondering why, having taken so much trouble to transform the webbing, he leaves the wood loaded down by its functional past, including drawer handles.
Photographed in shades and a college sports cap, Tony Wong looks the epitome of cool. 
Yet his paintings are anything but. 
Two squarish fields of rhythmically applied impasto, each contains a tiny nude near the center. 
The one in "Bath" sits in a turquoise pool washing her hair; the other, in "Untitled," rockets over a dark jungle holding onto a tree as if it were a broomstick. 
These crusty little paintings are well done but what makes them stand out is a touch of Oriental puckishness -- a quality that may come from the Chinese folk art that the artist admires.
With the work of the Japanese-Americans, Aki Fujiyoshi, Margo Machida and Helen Oji, the exhibition reaches a kind of Post-Modernist climax. 
Ms. Fujiyoshi, who aspires, she says, to "structurelessness," leans a cement beam about eight feet tall against a wall, wedging seven pillows in between.
Her floor piece is a pair of stubby cement beams containing slots, through which is threaded white canvas. 
Taut at the top and puckered at the bottom, this "sail" keeps the beams splayed in a V. Ms. Fujiyoshi's theme seems to be the symbiosis of opposites -- soft and hard, tension and compression, ying and yang.
Leaving Hawaii for the chaos of New York City, Ms. Machida has had cause to reflect on the influences of her mother, her grandmother and Yukio Mishima, whose "Confessions of a Mask" she read at the age of 12. 
As an artist, Ms. Machida takes the fashionable stance of dismissing esthetics in favor of self-exploration.
Thus, she portrays herself first as Mishima -- two female heads, two torsos each pierced by an arrow, on four separate panels -- and then as Mishima imitating St. Sebastian. In this, a sexless nude with two faces, one in the right place, the other on the ground and both drawn in black on brown fabric, stands, arrow in belly, against a tree and beside a large rock. 
Painted as if by artificial light in black and red, livid yellow, gray and green, this is maudlin stuff but it certainly radiates conviction.
Another painter in search of roots, Ms. Oji may also be groping for something to express as well as the means of expressing it. 
One canvas involves the outlines of cups and saucers on a red and white checkerboard; another features cocktail glasses against black and green. 
A third is of ears inside squares of contrasting colors, all floating confusedly in gray space.
In the Korean division, Aeyung Park went to Germany with her family at the age of nine but received her training in New York City and spent two years working for Andy Warhol -- an experience that has left no visible mark. 
Ms. Park takes a Matissean view of art in wanting it to entertain and amuse as well as "to provoke passion and feelings."
As a sculptor, she believes in the truth-to-materials approach, whereby the nature of the material dictates the form of the object. 
Even so, her three carvings in various woods are similar in being "ladders" eight to nine feet tall and different only in their color and in the shapes of the rungs and apertures.
An artist with many styles, Mo Bahc shows here two images of a low table with Baroque legs. 
In "History," the table is piled high with Korean books in patterned boxes; in "Tradition," it supports one book open to pages of characters. 
The skill and perfectionism of the artist make it hard to determine when he is using fabric like grosgrain and brocade as a ground or collage and when he is applying paint. 
His dense patterns, muted colors and distorted perspective make for a tense atmosphere.
This is not at odds with the artist's discovery that emigration alienates him from his homeland and immigration from his adopted country. 
These are not problems solved by cultivating the self nor are they easily converted into art -- most of the clues in Mr. Bahc's images must be lost on Western viewers.
Yong Soon Min's disaffection is more political and, unlike Mr. Bahc, she makes it visually obvious. 
Her group portrait of nine Koreans, most of them in military garb, and one American soldier is a pencil or chalk drawing based on a photograph; stenciled at the bottom is the title, "American Friend."
In her statement, the artist contemplates the Western-style prosperity and its side effects the friendship bestowed on her country.
Its high and low points make the Rockland Center's a bumpy show as opposed to the one that flows so smoothly at Blue Hill. 
The two painters and one sculptor are in their 40's and 50's and were trained in Korea, but have long since settled here.
Yongjin Han, the sculptor, has shown extensively in Europe, Japan and Korea as well as in the United States. 
He is represented by stone carvings and bronzes, most of which are variations on a shape that resembles a bolster with corners or stuffed pasta or a log. 
Actually, the shape is not important for Mr. Han's main concern is with surfaces: chiselled, toothed and eggshell smooth and, in bronze, matte or polished. 
Though never more than four feet across or high, the works attract attention with their compressed tranquility, an effect enhanced by the sound of the waterfall in the gallery's greenhouse.
Kyu Nam Han and Boon Ja Choi, painters who appeared in a 1986 group show in Sparkill, are working with the same basic images. 
But the art of both seems richer and more assured than before.
Ms. Choi's works are all-over abstractions that read as landscapes -- tours de force of slivers drawn and painted on rice paper laid over canvas. 
In her introduction, Eleanor Heartney likens the shapes aptly to shards activated by electromagnetism. 
All colors are present, heightened sometimes by gold, but some images are predominantly blue and mauve, others brown, red and yellow.
Mr. Han's paintings are similarly obsessive, being expanses -- often vast -- of half-dollar sized disks compacted like fish eggs. 
Seen from a distance, these masses of flat eggs ebb and flow according to their colors, which run from dark blues and grays to pale pinks and yellows. 
Mr. Han pays homage to Mondrian by titling a squarish canvas "Manhattan Boogie Woogie," but the painting, a dark St. Andrew's cross of blues, grays and browns against a pinkish ground, commemorates Pointillism.
This show remains through May 30; the one at the Rockland Center through March 24. 
Both should be seen if only for the contrast they provide.
