
The Avenue of Eternal Peace, the main road through the capital, ends at the gate to one of the country's gargantuan state enterprises, a steel factory that employs 186,000 workers and sprawls from the edge of the city into the mountains and plains beyond.
It takes half an hour by train to go from one end to the other of the central factory of the Capital Iron and Steel Mill, where giant blast furnaces run 24 hours a day. 
Along the way, the main path splinters into the different parts of this mini-society: a park, a flower garden with a small zoo, a hospital, two colleges, a nursery, a kindergarten, and a farm that grows fish, poultry and vegetables for the factory workers.
In its conception, Capital Steel was the Communist antidote to a class society; it was an integrated community where people work for the state and the state supplies them with their every need, where men and women would be entitled to a job, a house, free health care and a few bowls of subsidized rice each day.
After 40 years of Communist Party rule, however, that dream has collapsed and the system has decayed into a giant labyrinth of mismanagement, an underclass in an emerging dual economy that pits the market mechanism against central planning.
 
A Two-Tier Economy
The import of capitalistic attitudes by private businesses and collectives has brought economic expansion and prosperity to southeast China's provinces, such as Guangdong, Fujian and Zhejiang. 
But China seems compelled to cling to the lagging state sector, and the growing economic inequalities between the two tiers of the economy are leading to political headaches for China's Communist leaders.
With orthodox ideology discredited throughout the country, China's state sector, still the largest part of the country's economy, is one of the most important Communist symbols left and it is slowly withering: some 40 percent of the state enterprises are losing money, stockpiles of unsold goods are mounting, and losses are growing daily.
Government-owned businesses continue to benefit from all sorts of preferential policies and the Government has agreed to lighten their tax burden, but even so, these enterprises are being pummeled by competition from private and collective enterprises, and these days many no longer pay their bills or their debts.
"They are the state's main source of income and the backbone of the socialist economy," Jiang Zemin, the Communist Party leader, said recently. 
"So whether we can revive them affects not only the stabilityI of the national economy, but also the status of the public ownership economy and the solidity of the entire socialist system."
 
The System's Pride Becomes Albatross
Because these enterprises are seen as the bulwark of Chinese Communism, the Chinese leadership is devoting enormous efforts to reviving them. 
Perhaps no issue is now attracting so much attention of top Government leaders, and they likely face no greater frustration than the chronic losses and inefficiencies of the state sector.
With a growing number of factories refusing to pay their debts, doing business in China requires a measure of imagination. 
One factory recently resorted to sending a team of elderly, sick and disabled workers to plead, snivel and cry for repayment of loans from another enterprise.
That did not work, so the factory then dispatched a group of women employees with their babies crying piteously for food, according to an account in an official Shanghai newspaper. 
The hope was that the enterprise that owed the money would fear that the wails of babies would bring bad luck and would promptly repay. 
But that did not work either. 
These days, nothing seems to work.
"There is no hope for the state enterprises, no way out," said a Chinese economist who has worked for the Government on these problems. 
The best hope, she said, is that the state sector will expire quietly.
But many Chinese believe that is unlikely, and the leaders themselves apparently are afraid to allow the enterprises to collapse. 
A few years ago, when economic reformers were in control, there was an effort to introduce Western-style bankruptcy and force out of business those enterprises that were inefficient.
But the architect of the bankruptcy program was imprisoned after the 1989 crackdown, and the Chinese leadership now seems caught in a painful dilemma: it cannot afford the mounting losses of the state sector, but it dares not close the factories for fear of unrest from laid-off workers.
State-owned companies have dominated Chinese industry and manufacturing for four decades, but their share of the economy dropped sharply after Deng Xiaoping began the economic restructuring of the 1980's. 
The state sector accounts for only about 53 percent of industrial production, and the figure is dropping steadily.
 
Private Sector To Outstrip Public
This year or next will be a milestone: for the first time in more than four decades of Communist Party rule, less than half of industrial output will come from state enterprises. 
The leaders are aghast, but they seem to have no alternative but to accept economic growth, whatever its source. 
If the private sector will provide revenue and jobs, they will apparently accept it.
When Prime Minister Li Peng was examining the problems at a state-run enterprise in Guangdong recently, he reportedly said, in a fit of exasperation, "Share-ownership is the only way out."
Mr. Li's offhand remarks were never published, and so they are unlikely to reflect a policy shift. 
Nevertheless, as passed around in economic circles, they suggest the despair and disillusionment with the state sector at the highest level of Government. 
State-owned banks are forced to lend more and more money to keep state enterprises afloat, but for many enterprises there is little prospect that the debts will be repaid.
"It's a cancer to the economy," said Han Qiaowen, chief editor of a journal in Shanghai on debt problems. 
"The system of credit is breaking down. 
People no longer respect the need for credit, and there is no way to control this. 
If you owe money, there is no punishment."
Nationally, unpaid debts among enterprises totaled some $56 billion at the end of June. 
The Government said in October that about $19 billion in debts had been repaid, but did not say whether the total amount had fallen or risen.
In fact, many enterprises may actually have the funds to repay their debts to suppliers or other creditors, but they simply choose not to. 
Instead, they spread their funds among various accounts at several banks so that authorities would have difficulty proving that could repay.
"Just because we don't repay our loans doesn't mean our enterprise is going broke," said Zhang Guangde, deputy director of the China Textile Machinery Manufacturing Works in Shanghai. 
His enterprise owes nearly $2 million to suppliers, but he said it is also owed about the same amount by customers.
 
Borrowers Win, Creditors Lose
Because there is no legal framework to enforce loan repayment, collecting loans has become one of the biggest headaches among factory managers. 
A popular saying these days among businessmen goes: "Lending money is like spilling water on the floor."
Another goes: "Those who owe money are bold and self-assured; those who want repayment must crawl on their knees and beg."
To be sure, not all state enterprises are in such bad shape. 
The state is still immensely proud of Capital Steel and a few other factories that are still held up as examples of the best of Communism. 
By official count, one third of state enterprises are making money, nearly 40 percent are losing money and the rest are approximately breaking even.
Most of China's Government is financed by the one-third of companies that are still turning a profit. 
Anywhere from 55 percent to 75 percent of an enterprise's profits currently go to the Government in the form of various kinds of taxes.
The profitable companies also have to subsidize the money-losing ones. 
Subsidies to unprofitable companies rose from $8.4 billion in 1988 to $10.9 billion in 1990, and may be even higher this year. 
One third of the Government's revenues, far more than is spent on either the military or education, goes to bail out these money-losing enterprises.
One reason why the enterprises perform so poorly is that their main role has been not so much insuring profits as insuring political stabilityII by looking out for workers. 
Enterprises almost never dismiss workers, wages move up with seniority no matter how slovenly or unproductive people are, and so work places often resemble nothing so much as tea parties. 
Meanwhile, the companies still are responsible for the cradle-to-grave services for each tea-drinker.
At the Shanghai No. 2 Cotton Mill, for instance, there is a payroll of 10,600 people -- of whom only 4,000 are engaged in production. 
About 2,500 more are engaged in non-production work, ranging from preparing Communist Party slogans for meetings to fixing the plumbing in worker housing. 
In addition, the factory must pay pensions and provide housing for 4,100 retired workers.
The factories are also facing new commercial pressures. 
Two years ago, the Government determined everything: the amount that the factory would produce, the sale price, and the price of the raw materials. 
But this year, the state said it would buy only half the factory output and supply only half of the raw materials.
The result is that the mill was forced to buy raw cotton at a high free- market price for the other half of its production. 
But there is an oversupply of cotton yarn, and the factory says it cannot get a reasonable price for the yarn that the state no longer buys. 
For a factory that never had to make its own decisions or worry about profits, this is a rude awakening.
Last year profits were $2.5 million on revenues of $27 million, which is considered strong by Chinese standards. 
But not all of these profits can go into renovating machinery. 
The factory pays $566 per year per worker and then on top of that, it must dig into its profits to pay for all sorts of subsidies and to purchase or build housing for its workers.
 
Diverting Profits To Worker Benefits
Managers at many state-owned factories aim not to maximize profits but to maximize incomes and benefits for their workers, the constituency that is perhaps most important to them. 
Regulators scrutinize corporate accounts to insure that they are reinvesting enough in equipment and not diverting funds to buy eggs or vacation trips or housing for workers, but the No. 2 Cotton Mill admits glumly that it is not able to provide much for employees these days.
"Most of the workers have to find their own housing," said Zheng Fangyou, a deputy director at the factory. 
"I can't say that we provide most of our workers housing."
Understanding the problems of money-losing enterprises is complicated by the fact that everyone is trying to conceal problems from everyone else. 
Factory managers hide problems from Government officials, and the officials hide difficulties from foreigners. 
Every request in various parts of China to interview officials of unprofitable or barely profitable state enterprises was turned down.
But Chinese newspapers have revealed some aspects of the problem. 
Recent reports suggest that many enterprises may have "hidden losses," either because they under-report losses or siphon off a portion of the earnings.
An investigation into the fiscal accounts of 257 enterprises in nine provinces and cities discovered that 202 of them had accumulated over the last four years hidden losses of $257 million, nearly twice the amount of losses they officially reported. 
The report, published earlier this month in the People's Daily, said the companies had overstated earnings, partly because costs, such as amortization, were not included and partly because of theft.
In the case of a shoe factory in Hebei Province, accountants discovered 5,000 pairs of shoes were missing, at a loss of $19,000. 
A cigarette factory in Jilin Province found 13,872 cartons had vanished.
Perhaps the best solution to the problems of the state enterprises, says a Western economist in Beijing, is for private and collective enterprises to continue to take over their role and share of production gradually. 
He explains, "Then these dinosaurs will simply fade away."
