
At a time when thousands of Hong Kong's elite are vying for Canadian passports and its oldest companies are registering in the Bahamas, something unexpected is happening. 
The Japanese, usually among the world's most cautious investors, are moving into town.
As the countdown continues to 1997, when Britain will return Hong Kong to China, money is rapidly flowing out of the colony. 
Economic growth this year, the Government said last week, has slowed to just above zero.
But this does not seem to bother the Japanese, who - though they acknowledge a glimmer of self-doubt - see a giant buying opportunity, a chance to build a bigger base camp for doing business in China a decade from now.
Filling a Vacuum
Though exact statistics are not available, by most estimates Japan invested about $2 billion here last year, a record. 
That brings its total investment to roughly $8 billion, more than that of the United States for the first time.
The result is that Japan now has, at least for the time being, power and prestige in Hong Kong on a scale not seen in 45 years. 
As native businesses and even a few remnants of British colonial power decamp, sped by memories of the Chinese Government's crackdown on the democracy movement in Tiananmen Square last June, Japan is filling the vacuum, a vacuum of both money and power.
Hong Kong's richest and most influential executives are still the Hong Kong Chinese. 
But today Japanese investors are courted and dined, primarily because their presence is seen as another insurance policy against China's intervention in the city's freewheeling and largely unregulated ways.
The British, by contrast, are viewed as lame ducks, powerless to enforce the guarantees they received from China when they agreed to cede control of the colony.
''Japan is China's biggest provider of foreign aid,'' one prominent Hong Kong executive said the other day. 
''We have to hope that China will see that it is not in its interest to anger the Japanese here.''
The Japanese, in turn, tend to view Western nations, particularly the United States, as hopelessly romantic about China, overly enthralled about the country in the 1980's and too quick to flee when the crackdown came.
Traditionally, Japanese and American businesses have regarded Hong Kong as not only a convenient regional trading center but also a steppingstone to China. 
From Hong Kong, they could commission manufacturing work on the mainland and test Beijing's hospitality to investment. 
When things turned sour on the mainland, they could retreat to Hong Kong. 
Now, with each passing month, the colony seems increasingly like an abundantly rich corner of an otherwise poor nation.
So, Japan's approach has been to build up steadily, assuming that liberals and hardliners will come and go but that all will discover the lure of Japanese capital. 
There are more than 50 Japanese banks here now, with effective veto power over big projects like the $16 billion airport the Hong Kong government is trying to build, and more than 30 Japanese securities firms.
''I think Japan has big confidence that after 1997, Beijing will understand that Hong Kong is special,'' said Hiroshi Zaizen, the chairman of the Mitsubishi Corporation's subsidiary here and one of the city's most influential Japanese executives.
 
Big Money to Be Made
While China is the main reason that Japanese companies come to Hong Kong, there is still big money to be made in the colony itself.
Most Japanese department stores have opened in the tourist centers here to serve Japanese tourists -usually selling them products at lower prices than they could find at the same department stores in Tokyo. 
But Japan's Yaohan Department Store Company has opened a giant store in a boom town in the New Territories - part of the colony that is near the mainland border - hoping to tap the market for the half-million Hong Kong workers who live in giant new apartment buildings in the area.
The Japanese confidence in Hong Kong's future is hardly ironclad. 
Japanese companies have for the most part avoided big real estate purchases, preferring more liquid investments. 
If disaster should strike, much of the money can be pulled out -much the same strategy Japan has pursued on the mainland. 
''On June 29, 1997, we can always press a button, I guess,'' Mr. Zaizen said.
Meanwhile, evidence mounts that Hong Kong's natives are already pressing that button. 
A recent study by the Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation showed that the transfer of capital abroad last year increased 10-fold, though no one knows what that figure means because Hong Kong does not measure capital inflows. 
Putting the best face on things, the Government said the figure was a measure of the health of the economy because it showed Hong Kong companies were investing abroad. 
The more common explanation is that people are leaving the country and taking their bank accounts with them.
 
Japan's 'Sky High' Investor
But then there are exceptions like Kazuo Wada, the owner of Yaohan. 
Mr. Wada surprised both Tokyo and Hong Kong when he decided last year to move his corporate empire here.
Earlier this month, in another symbol of the shifting power structurehere, Mr. Wada became the new owner of ''Sky High'' - a palace of turrets, a half acre of floor space and views of the South China Sea from all windows - perched atop ''the Peak,'' the striking hill that dominates Hong Kong Island. 
The sprawling villa had been built, at exorbitant cost, by Hongkong and Shanghai Banking, one of this city's oldest and richest institutions, as the official residence of its chairman.
But these are more conservative days for Hong Kong institutions, and so the bank company, after three unsuccessful tries, persuaded a reluctant Mr. Wada to buy the house for $11 million. 
His company said the purchase was mostly intended to cement good relations; Mr. Wada himself plans to live in modest accommodations.
''Perhaps it would make a nice guest house,'' said Yuji Sakuma, the managing director of Yaohan's Hong Kong operations.
 
The Social Whirl
The wedding of Mr. Wada's daughter a few months ago was viewed as an enormous social event in Hong Kong, and it was one example of how mightily Japan has risen in the social pecking order in Hong Kong.
Another was the creation of the Dynasty Club, an exclusive club intended to rival Hong Kong's legendary Jockey Club, a bastion of the British establishment. 
The wealthy Hong Kong Chinese who started the club asked three people to act as initial ''patrons'' to draw Hong Kong's rich and powerful. 
The three were the head of the New China News Agency - China's unofficial diplomatic representative - and the senior American and Japanese diplomats here.
The American official declined, but few here missed the symbolism of the fact that the British were not asked.
 
Some Deep Resentments
But if many people in Hong Kong are reassured by Japanese investment, not everyone is pleased. 
Resentments of World War II run deep, and the city still holds a ceremony each August to mark its liberation from the Japanese forces at the end of World War II, though attendance grows sparser every year.
''The businessmen need Japan, so it is convenient for most of the city to forget,'' said Jack Edwards, who heads a group of former prisoners of war who have mounted a campaign here to recall Japanese war crimes. 
Older Chinese often refer to the Japanese in derogatory terms, he said, ''and my generation doesn't like their arrival at all.''
He added, ''I guess it was inevitable.''
Today the Peninsula Hotel, once Japan's military headquarters here, swarms with Japanese tourists. 
Executives in the growing Japanese population here, estimated at 16,000, often leave their families in Hong Kong and spend the week across the Chinese border in Guangdong province, where companies like Sanyo have large factories.
 
Japanese View of the Risk
The risk of investing in Hong Kong is viewed by Japan as no worse than the risk of investing in China itself. 
And Japanese businesses say they are eager to do more, as soon as World Bank lending resumes and the Japanese Government releases $500 million in economic development assistance that has been withheld since Tiananmen Square.
The World Bank has put forward two loans to China for its board to approve on Tuesday. 
The United States has said it can support one of the loans - $300 million for tree planting to combat deforestation - because its meets basic human needs. 
But the United States is opposed to the other loan, $150 million to upgrade roads and inland waterways in Jiangsu province.
''We are still nervous,'' said Fumio Hashimoto, who heads the Bank of Tokyo office here. 
''No one would say that we have 100 percent confidence in the future of Hong Kong. 
But in the medium to long term, we know it is important.''
 
Plans for New Airport
Still, Japan is carefully picking and choosing in its investments. 
And it is in those choices that Japan's presence is likely to be felt most strikingly in coming years.
Plans for the new airport illustrate the tensions in the relationship. 
No one questions the need for a far larger airport. 
Hong Kong's enormous volume of air traffic is currently funneled through a single, short runway. 
The runway approach comes perilously close to one of Kowloon's densely packed neighborhoods - so close that passengers about to land can see families preparing dinner in nearby apartments.
So last year the Hong Kong government planned a giant airport to be built on an outer island and connected to Hong Kong by a long bridge. 
Roughly half the $16 billion cost is expected to be picked up by private investors. 
Japanese engineering and cement companies are eager for a piece of the action; so are companies like the Bechtel Group in the United States, which has been chosen to coordinate the project.
 
Need for China's Blessing
The problem is that the Hong Kong government barely consulted China before laying out details of the plan. 
The Chinese are suspicious that Hong Kong will use the airport to empty the colony's coffers before 1997. 
They have signaled general approval of the project, but not enthusiastically.
As a result, the Japanese banks -already burned by lending to hotels on the mainland that today have few guests and little way to pay back debt - say they will be very cautious. 
Recently, a senior Hong Kong government official went to Tokyo - the first such visit - to drum up support. 
He got smiles but few commitments. 
''We need the Chinese blessing,'' said Mr. Hashimoto of the Bank of Tokyo. 
''We still have no detailed studies, and the time is short.''
