
Two months ago a man named Zhang boarded a train with nearly $2,000 in life savings, disembarked more than 400 miles later at the nearest United States Consulate and plunked his money down as a contribution to helping American soldiers wounded in the Persian Gulf.
That would never have happened two years ago, when the embassy in Beijing was surrounded by armed Chinese soldiers and ordinary citizens did not dare linger by the compound, much less attend a banquet at the Ambassador's residence.The difference in atmosphere reflects how some things have changed in the two years that Ambassador James R. Lilley has been in Beijing. 
In recent weeks, Mr. Lilley, who retires as Ambassador on Friday, has been able to draw large crowds of Chinese to his farewell parties.
Mr. Lilley, a blunt-speaking China hand who has given brief news conferences in Chinese and who was an officer for 27 years at the Central Intelligence Agency, was instrumental in navigating Chinese-American relations out of a stormy period. 
He arrived weeks before the military crackdown on the democracy movement in 1989."He's tough and won't let the Chinese pull the wool over his eyes," an American diplomat said. 
"He knows how to negotiate with the Chinese. 
Relations would have been much worse without him."
But while the guns in front of the embassy have disappeared, relations are still tense. 
As the deadline approaches for determining whether to extend most-favored-nation trade status, negotiations between American and Chinese officials over human rights, weapons sales and trade have accentuated the strains in the relationship.
The embassy even refused to disclose Mr. Zhang's full name -- it is also returning the money to him -- for fear of getting him into trouble with the authorities, and today, the Foreign Ministry spokesman, Wu Jianmin, warned that China would not bow to foreigners.
"The Chinese side will never accept the attachments of various kinds of conditions to the extension of most-favored-nation treatment of China," Mr. Wu said at a news conference today. 
"Attempts to force the Chinese Government to change its policies by exerting pressure on it will lead nowhere."
Nonetheless, the China of the last two years was a China with which Mr. Lilley is intimately familiar, although he has faced an uphill battle since he arrived. 
Only days after he got to Beijing, he rode his bicycle on the streets to get first-hand knowledge of what was going on at the pro-democracy demonstrations on Tiananmen Square.After the crackdown, Mr. Lilley found himself a host to two of China's most prominent dissidents, Fang Lizhi and Li Shuxian, who had sought asylum at the embassy. 
Because of the secrecy surrounding the asylum, Mr. Lilley sometimes delivered meals personally to Mr. Fang and Ms. Li. The next year was consumed with negotiating the release of the two dissidents.
Mr. Lilley was born 63 years ago in the eastern Chinese city of Qingdao, and returned again to China to open the Central Intelligence Agency's station in Beijing in 1973. 
He also was here when George Bush came to open the diplomatic mission a year later. 
The two men, both of whom graduated from Yale University, became close associates, and their wives are also friends.
Mr. Lilley's close ties with the President have led many people to suggest that he is a candidate for Director of Central Intelligence. 
Other possible jobs are deputy national security adviser or Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian Affairs.
While Mr. Lilley's last tenure here lasted only two years, which has fanned rumors that he is being called home to take the Central Intelligence Agency job, his associates say that his post all along was to last only two years. 
Mr. Lilley declined to respond to questions about his next career move, and he declined to be interviewed for this article.
But he has hinted that he will not assume a high profile on China policy after he leaves on Friday. 
His successor in Beijing has not been named, but for a long time, it has been expected to be J. Stapleton Roy, who is executive secretary of the State Department.
