
For a country that has lately grown accustomed to the agony of defeat, the Asian Games under way here have been a rare joy. 
China has rebounded from its disappointing performance in the 1988 Olympics in Seoul, South Korea, to overwhelm nearly all comers and stack up an enormous number of gold medals.
When the Asiad ended today, save for a closing ceremony Sunday, China had won 183 of the 308 gold medals at stake. 
South Korea was a distant second, with 54, and Japan third, with 38.
China has stunned its competitors by winning even in events in which it has little experience. 
China took up boxing only three years ago - the sport was previously banned here - yet it managed to get six boxers into the finals and won one boxing gold.
China's performance is remarkable in that at the last Asian Games, held in Seoul in 1986, it barely edged out South Korea by a single gold medal to win first place in the tally. 
The Korean athletes were bolstered by a heavy haul in boxing medals, and that left an impression on China. 
It was a major reason why Beijing reversed its ban and began cultivating its own boxers.
 
More Than Sportsmanship
Beijing regards the Asian Games as being about far more than sportsmanship - as the last Sports Minister discovered when he was dismissed after the poor showing at the 1988 Olympics - and the hard-line leadership is exultant with the outcome since the games began Sept. 
22.
After a string of unremitting bad news for the Government - demonstrations, martial law, international ostracism, economic slump, as well as the disappointment in the Olympics - the leadership finally has something to crow about. 
The official newspapers are even suggesting that the victories underscore the virtue of socialism.
''What is our secret?'' asked the People's Daily, the Communist Party newspaper, in a front-page headline one day last week.
It answered the question: training has been merciless, and athletes have also been coached rigorously in ''ideological education.''
 
'A One-Man Show'
China has been preparing frantically for the Asian Games, which offered it an opportunity to win back international respect and domestic support after the 1989 crackdown against the democracy movement. 
The respect from competitors has been forthcoming, tinged with a certain amount of envy and incredulity at the Chinese success.
''It's incredible the way they're walking away with the whole show,'' grumbled a South Korean, one of an enormous contingent here to see the games. 
Yonhap, the South Korean news agency, reportedly declared: ''Interest has subsided as China has swept the gold medals and turned the Asiad into a one-man show.''
So far no single athlete has overwhelmed the public imagination with a string of gold medals, but several athletes have turned in outstanding performances and won national fame. 
On Thursday, a 14-year-old boy edged out the world champion to win a gold medal in platform diving with a stunning set of dives, which included a dive that earned one perfect mark of 10 and six scores of 9.5.
The boy, Sun Shuwei, had won a competition in Canada earlier this year, but Thursday's victory was his first in a major international competition. 
A backward 3 1/2-somersault dive helped clinch his victory over the current world champion, Xiong Ni, a 16-year-old who finished second to Greg Louganis at the 1988 Olympics.
 
No Single Star
Another star is 97-pound Xing Fen, the 17-year-old daughter of a farmer from southern China, who surpassed her own world record by lifting barbells of 209 pounds, more than twice her body weight.
Gao Min, a 20-year-old diver from Sichuan Province, won three gold medals despite insisting that her best performances will not come until the next Olympics, in Barcelona in 1992.
Another standout was Zhou Lingmei, a 22-year-old woman who won a gold medal and beat a six-year-old world record by clocking 1:13:899 in the one kilometer cycling time trial. 
The overall winner in the medals race was Shen Jianqiang, a 25-year-old swimmer who won five gold medals during the Asiad, but he is unlikely to do so well at Barcelona when faced with other powerful sprinters.
So far the games have gone smoothly, but they were marred by the crash of a hijacked plane Tuesday in the southern Chinese city of Canton. 
At least 127 people were killed, after the crew apparently refused to follow the hijacker's instructions to fly to Taiwan or Hong Kong. 
Instead, an attempt was made to land in Canton, and the hijacker is believed to have fought over the controls or perhaps set off a bomb when he realized he hd been tricked.
A foreign diplomat suggested that Chinese officials were aparently so concerned at foiling the hijacking and preserving the integrity of the games that they put the passengers at risk by trying to trick the hijacker.
