
As President Bush visits here this weekend, his lodgings will be testimony to China's growing interest in market economics.
China is waiving the $20,000-a-night charge for the elegant 24-bedroom villa where Mr. Bush will stay. 
But these days the historic Diaoyutai Guest House, a one-time imperial park where visiting dignitaries are housed in any one of 15 villas, is renting out its accommodations to tourists, business people and anyone else with hard currency.
Indeed, while Mr. Bush and about 35 other top officials will be given free lodging as state guests, the United States will have to pay for the scores of other guests in the official delegation who will stay here.
Protocol officers are still working out the lodging arrangements, including the bill, but even the least expensive rooms cost $140 a night. 
Many Chinese workers do not earn that much money in a month. 
#800 Years of Intrigue Diaoyutai Guest House, in short, has taken seriously the Communist Party's advice that business is honorable and that to get rich is glorious.
Throughout China, state institutions are searching for new ways to make money. 
The army is manufacturing televisions, schools are operating shoe factories on the side, and the Public Security Bureau is managing hotels.
In the last few years, Diaoyutai has proved that it can keep up with anyone in finding new sources of revenue. 
Indeed, the legendary guest house, with 800 years of history and intrigue, even turns a small profit these days in spite of the large number of official guests for whom it is obliged to provide free accommodation.
If Mr. Bush decides to swim in the Diaoyutai pool, for instance, he may find that a few other people have already paid for the privilege. 
A little more than a year ago, the Diaoyutai management began to offer corporate club memberships - $40,000 each - that allow two top corporate officers to use the accommodations indefinitely.
 
A Place to Relax
So far, 60 companies have signed up, including Occidental Petroleum Corporation, Johnson & Johnson, and AT&T, according to Sun Guotong, the deputy director general of Diaoyutai. 
The honorary members, who do not have to pay, include President Yang Shangkun and Prime Minister Li Peng.
''It's a place where leading businessmen and leading officials can relax together,'' said Mr. Sun, explaining the club's marketing strategy.
Since the early 1980's, the compound also has rented rooms out to what it reckons are high-class visitors. 
A potential guest cannot simply show up at the front door, because the armed guards at the gate turn away all cars whose license plates have not been cleared in advance. 
But bookings can be made in advance.
''High-level tourists can come here to stay,'' Mr. Sun said. 
''Just high-level people, and only on recommendations.''
But he acknowledged that anyone could book a room through a few select travel agencies.
The famous Yang Yuan restaurant, where Deng Xiaoping sometimes entertains visitors, is also open to bookings. 
It is not cheap. 
A banquet starts at $200 a person, and goes up to $400.
Diaoyutai, which means fishing terrace, is a former park with a history dating to the days in the 12th century when the emperor Zhang Zhong built an angling platform on a lake here.
Subsequent emperors also enjoyed the park, and the 200-year-old calligraphy of Emperor Qian Long is still preserved on one of the buildings.
In 1959, the Government built 15 villas on the 104-acre site to accommodate visiting dignitaries. 
In the Cultural Revolution from 1966 to 1976, Chairman Mao's wife, Jiang Qing, lived here and watched American movies while chaos raged outside.
In 1972, President Richard M. Nixon met Prime Minister Zhou Enlai in another of the villas.
 
Gorbachev Due in May
Mr. Bush will be staying at the best of the villas, refurbished only three years ago. 
Queen Elizabeth was the first guest after the refurbishment, and this year the villa is expected to accommodate not only the President but also the Soviet leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, who visits in May, and Prince Charles and Princess Diana, who are due in November.
A few people have rented out the villa, even at $20,000 a night, which comes with 40 attendants.
In its bid to serve the state by making money, Diaoyutai is even engaged in a joint venture with Hong Kong interests to build an outside hotel that will be called the Diaoyutai Hotel, to capitalize on the guest house's name.
The guest house has been frantically busy preparing for Mr. Bush.
''We hear he likes to swim,'' Mr. Sun said early this week. 
''We have the pool here, but we don't know what temperature he likes the water. 
We have asked them what temperature we should set the thermostat.''
