
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d warned China today that there would be "profound consequences" for Chinese-American relations if Beijing sold newly developed ballistic missiles to Syria and Pakistan.
China's arms exports have become a matter of controversy as Congress considers President Bush's proposal to renew Beijing's preferential trade status. 
Mr. Baker said the United States had no "evidence or any indication" that China had actually shipped surface-to-surface missiles to Syria, despite a recent press report suggesting that a deal was near completion.
He said the Bush Administration had also cautioned Beijing against sending sophisticated new missiles to Pakistan, asserting that this "would constitute grave threats to the region and could have bilateral consequences."
Mr. Baker did not elaborate further.
A group of Republican and Democratic senators is seeking concessions from the Administration in exchange for legislative support for President Bush's decision to renew trade privileges for China for another year.
 
Bitter Rift With Lawmakers
The White House and Congress are bitterly divided over how to handle relations with China. 
Many Republican and Democratic lawmakers are concerned that Mr. Bush has reacted too mildly to Beijing's crackdown on the democracy movement two years ago.
Mr. Bush prevailed last year in extending trade privileges to China, but he faces stronger opposition this year in both the House and the Senate. 
The renewal of China's trade status has become one of the most contentious foreign policy and trade issues facing Congress this summer.
At a meeting this morning with Mr. Baker and Brent Scowcroft, the national security adviser, Senator Bob Dole, Republican of Kansas, presented a proposed letter to Mr. Bush that was drafted by Senator Max S. Baucus of Montana and co-signed by three other Democratic senators.
The letter calls for five concessions from the Administration, a participant in the negotiations between the White House and Congress said. 
The biggest concession would be for the United States to end its opposition to Taiwan's immediate entry into the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
Such a move would infuriate China, Deputy Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger told a House panel today.
The letter also suggests that the Administration take legal steps to fight China's import barriers, insure that Chinese products made with prison labor are kept out of the United States market, block loans to China by multilateral agencies until the country's human rights record improves, and enter negotiations to curb the spread of ballistic missiles in the third world.
"My understanding is they are willing to make virtually all the concessions I've asked for in my letter," Senator Baucus, the chairman of the Senate's International Trade Subcommittee, said in an interview today.
 
Risking China's Anger
Several Administration officials, speaking on the condition of anonymity, said that no final deal had been struck. 
They said White House officials were divided on whether to risk China's anger by supporting Taiwan's application to GATT.
Senator Baucus said he had not decided whether he would support the renewal of China's so-called "most-favored-nation" status if the Administration refused to grant the concessions.
A Congressional resolution canceling the renewal of China's trade privileges is considered likely. 
To sustain a Presidential veto of such a resolution, Mr. Bush would need the votes of nearly a dozen Democratic senators led by Senator Baucus who strongly support free trade but are troubled by China's human rights record.
The participant in congressional negotiations with the Administration said that Senator Dole was asking other Republican senators to co-sign Senator Baucus's letter, which is to be released on Thursday.
Senator Baucus said that 8 to 12 Democratic senators and 25 to 30 Republican senators were likely to support the renewal of China's preferential trade status if the Administration granted the concessions.
Such a tally would not prevent the Senate from approving a resolution rejecting renewal of China's trade status, he said, but it would insure that a Presidential veto could not be overridden.
