
After several months of secret negotiations, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d announced tonight that he would visit China this month, a trip that is bound to revive the debate over the Bush Administration's stance toward the hard-line Beijing Government.
Mr. Baker will be the highest-level Bush Administration official to visit Beijing since the violent crackdown on democracy demonstrators at Tiananmen Square in June 1989. 
His announcement of the trip, in a news conference at the close of Middle East peace talks in Madrid, came only a few days after reports that China may be helping Iran develop a nuclear bomb.
Clearly aware that his trip will re-ignite the debate between the Admministration and Democrats in Congress over how tough the United States should be in dealing with Beijing, Mr. Baker immediately took the offensive.
"China has almost one fourth of all the people in the world," he said, echoing Mr. Bush's argument that China, no matter how repressive its domestic policies, is simply too big to ignore. 
"It has nuclear weapons, it has great influence in the region and it has immense economic potential."
 
Invokes Human Rights
Seeking to justify the timing of the trip, Mr. Baker said his mission was the only way of persuading Beijing to make changes in its arms control and human rights policies.
"We cannot make headway unless we discuss them," he said. 
"Ignoring them will not make the problems go away."
Mr. Baker's trip will also take him to Korea and Japan.
The Administration's policy toward China is widely believed to be governed by President Bush himself, who was the top-ranking American diplomat in Beijing in the mid-1970's.
It was Mr. Bush who dispatched thenational security adviser, Brent Scowcroft, on two secret trips to China in 1989, a decision that stirred wrath in Congress when the visits were disclosed late that year. 
Mr. Scowcroft made the first trip only a month after the killings of the -democracy demonstrators in Tiananmen Square.
In addition to China's poor human rights record, American critics have assailed its reported sales of ballistic missiles to the Middle East and growing trade surplus with the United States. 
Tensions in the trade relationship have increased with reports that China uses prison labor to make cheap exports.
Negotiations about the possibility of a Baker visit are believed to have been under way for months, with the United States seeking specific assurances from Beijing that some kind of formal agreement could be reached during the visit. 
Most expectations focus on arms control accords.
 
Signing Arms Pacts
During a visit in August by the Japanese Prime Minister, Toshiki Kaifu, China said it would sign the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty. 
During Mr. Baker's visit, it is possible that China will also declare its willingness to sign the Missile Technology Control Regime, an accord that curtails the transfer of medium-range missiles, or other agreements limiting the sale of conventional weapons.
Chinese leaders have pressed hard for a visit by Mr. Baker, who even journeyed to the tiny neighboring country of Mongolia in July without stopping in Beijing. 
China feels that Mr. Baker's visit would be an important propaganda victory, demonstrating China's continued importance in the new world order and Washington's willingness to work with its hard-line leadership to resolve the strains in their relationship.
While other foreign leaders are now regularly visiting Beijing -- albeit complaining each time about human rights violations -- Chinese officials have expressed frustration that ties with Washington are not improving. 
They argue that their relationship with Japan has been normalized and relations with Europe have "basically recovered" since the Tiananmen Square crackdown, and that only the United States has held back on repairing ties.
Aside from arms control, issues on Mr. Baker's agenda will presumably include trade and human rights. 
The Chinese now profess a willingness to discuss human rights in general, though they reject specific criticism as interference in their internal affairs. 
Mr. Baker may ask for assurances that certain dissidents or their family members will be allowed to travel to the United States.
