
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d joined a chorus of Western leaders today in denouncing China's execution of three men for their role in political demonstrations in Shanghai. 
But he said the Bush Administration was not planning any additional actions against Beijing ''at this time.''
''We deeply regret the fact that these executions have gone forward, notwithstanding appeals from the United States, appeals from the Federal Republic of Germany, and perhaps other countries, for clemency,'' Mr. Baker told reporters at a briefing at the White House. 
The briefing followed a meeting between President Bush and Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher of West Germany.
The United States, Mr. Baker added, ''is not contemplating any additional action at this time.''
''I ought to also say that there is an important relationship here which we should seek to preserve if we possibly can,'' Mr. Baker said.
 
Thatcher 'Utterly Appalled'
Reacting to the events in China today, Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of Britain said, according to Reuters, that she was ''utterly appalled'' by the executions, and said she and Prime Minister Bob Hawke of Australia were discussing possible sanctions against China.
The Associated Press reported that Foreign Minister Roland Dumas of France told the National Assembly in Paris: ''What is happening in China is atrocious. 
The totalitarian machine, in all its horror, is rolling. 
It turns what should be judicial decisions into veritable murders.''
The A.P. quoted a Dutch Foreign Ministry spokesman as saying the executions were expected to be discussed at next week's European Community summit meeting in Madrid.
As with many other decisions on China, the actions Tuesday to suspend high-level exchanges between American and Chinese officials and to postpone consideration of new loans to China by international financial institutions were made by the President and the Secretary of State, along with a tight circle of aides. 
It took not only many White House staff members by surprise but many in the State Department as well.
 
Events in China
While the move obviously had a heavy domestic political component, aimed to demonstrate that the Administration was not being indifferent to the suppression of pro-democracy demonstrators, it also seems to fit with the overall analytical framework with which Mr. Baker and Mr. Bush are understood to be operating.
A senior Administration official said President Bush and Mr. Baker are acting on the assumption that events in China will go through several stages in the coming years.
The official described the first stage, encompassing the present situation, this way: ''The Chinese leadership is entirely focused on their short-term survival. 
They determined that their basic system of authority was being challenged by the pro-democracy movement and they were ready to pay any price - both foreign and domestic - to preserve that system.''
The official said of this stage: ''There is nothing that the United States can do or say that will really influence the behavior of the Chinese leadership. 
They are motivated by basic impulses of survival.''
The moves the Administration took Tuesday were done with the full awareness that they would have no immediate restraining effect, officials said. 
Rather, they were aimed at the next stage in developments in China, when the authorities in Beijing consolidate their rule and try to restore the economic modernization program they were on before and then confront the full domestic and international price of their repression.
That includes the postponement of loans, the halt in military sales from the West, the decrease in Western investment in China, the falloff in tourism, international diplomatic isolation and, maybe most important, the passive resistance of their own people.
That passive resistance, as Administration officials see it, could take a variety of forms, from sabotaging of production in state-owned factories, to work stoppages, to decreases in productivity, to sporadic demonstrations.
