
Two days of talks between Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and China's top leaders have yielded none of the gestures on human rights, arms control and trade sought by Washington as requirements for improved relations with Beijing, a senior American official said today.
Mr. Baker, making the first public high-level visit to China by an American official since Beijing's violent crackdown on democracy advocates in 1989, has one more scheduled meeting with the Chinese Foreign Minister, Qian Qichen, on Sunday. 
The American official said Mr. Baker hoped that at this session the Chinese would be more forthcoming than they had been up to now.
 
A Last-Ditch Appeal
This evening's briefing by the State Department official seemed at times like a desperate, last-ditch appeal to the Chinese to respond before Mr. Baker departs with the kind of specific concessions he had anticipated in making the visit, which has already bestowed some much-sought legitimacy on the Chinese leadership. 
If Mr. Baker goes home empty-handed, the Bush Administration is likely to face growing domestic criticism of its China policy and greatly increased pressure in Congress for sanctions against Beijing.
"We cannot want an improved U.S.-China relationship more than the Chinese," the official said after today's six hours of meetings. 
"There are obviously certain things that need to transpire for that to move forward. 
For whatever reasons, if there is anything they have to say to the Secretary, it will be said tomorrow. 
They know when we are leaving, they know that we have that meeting tomorrow, and I think I will leave it right there."
The official said Mr. Baker came here expecting at least some firm commitments from China on human rights, missile proliferation and trade.
He was understood to be seeking the release of some of the 800 political prisoners rounded up by Beijing after the Tiananmen Square killings in 1989, a halt to the transfer of Chinese missiles and nuclear technology to Middle Eastern nations and an end to restrictive trade practices, which have created an American trade deficit with China of about $13 billion.
Up to now, the official said, Mr. Baker has received neither positive nor negative commitments from China in any of these areas.
Mr. Baker met today with China's Prime Minister, Li Peng; the Communist Party leader, Jiang Zemin; the Minister of Justice, Cai Cheng, and President Yang Shangkun.
The American official said that in the meetings Mr. Baker repeatedly emphasized to the Chinese that they had been asking him to come to Beijing for two years and that now he was here they would be making a big mistake to send him home with nothing to show for his politically risky trip.
The Chinese presented a somewhat different view of today's talks. 
The common theme running through their comments to the Secretary, judging from the briefing given by the Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman, was that the Chinese greatly value their ties with Washington and want them improved, but not on Washington's terms alone.
Each of the Chinese leaders emphasized to Mr. Baker that they would not respond to any pressure from Washington, that the United States had to learn to continue dealing face-to-face with China, despite differences in the relationship, and that Washington should appreciate more the strategic value of Chinese-American ties. 
If it did, some of the differences in the relationship could be more easily muted or overlooked.
For instance, President Yang was quoted by the official New China News Agency as having told Mr. Baker: "Some problems can be solved through discussions, while others need several rounds of discussion. 
Those which cannot be solved for the time being can be shelved. 
We call this 'seeking common ground while reserving difference.'
"
 
A Warning on Pressure
So long as both the United States and China can adopt such an approach, Mr. Yang continued, it will be easy to solve the problems between them. 
But he added that "the practice of exerting pressure can only lead to tension in the bilateral relations, and is of no use in solving problems, " the official press agency reported, that
The Chinese President went out of his way during his opening comments to Mr. Baker -- while American reporters were in the room -- to praise President Bush and talk about what good friends they were.
With Mr. Baker at his side, President Yang recalled that he first went to the United States at the invitation of Mr. Bush when he was Vice President.
"After our meeting, we had a long and pleasant talk," he said. 
"We didn't use diplomatic language. 
We talked about a lot of things about China. 
Actually, Mr. Bush asked me a lot of questions concerning China. 
Though we had a long talk, time was passing very quickly. 
Actually, we had this long talk on a boat, and when we finished the boat tour it was already very late. 
So Mr. Secretary, when you return to Washington, please convey my greetings to my friend Mr. Bush."
When the Foreign Ministry spokesman, Wu Jianmin, was asked whether Minister of Justice Cai responded to Mr. Baker's appeal for the release of imprisoned democracy advocates he responded brusquely, "Actions that the Chinese judicial organs will take are entirely something that the China side shall decide."
His remark seemed to suggest that if China did release some prisoners in response to Mr. Baker's appeal it would not be during this visit.
Another issue high on Mr. Baker's agenda is arms proliferation. 
China is believed to have provided help to the nuclear programs of Iran and Algeria, among other nations, raising concerns that it is helping third world countries develop nuclear weapons. 
Beijing is also believed to have pursued sales of medium-range missiles to Syria and Iran despite pledges not to sell such weapons in the Middle East.
What seemed to have distressed the American delegation was not only that Mr. Baker received no concrete commitments from the Chinese leaders, but also that the same was true for the experts he brought along. 
These went over the human rights, arms control and trade issues in detail with their Chinese counterparts.
When the senior American official was asked to characterize the talks that the Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights, Richard Schifter, and the Under Secretary of State for International Security Affairs, Reginald Bartholomew, held with their Chinese counterparts, she said curtly, "The only characterizations I would give is that they were meetings between experts."
The Chinese press omitted all references to Mr. Schifter's presence in the American delegation.
During Mr. Baker's talks with Prime Minister Li, the Chinese leader told the Secretary that while there were some problems between the United States and China, they could not be solved if the two sides did not sit down and talk "face to face," the Chinese press agency reported.
Mr. Li was quoted as adding: "China may share the same view with you on some questions and have different viewpoints on others, but this is very natural. 
The Chinese nation, with a history of more than 5,000 years, has a strong sense of national dignity. 
For more than 100 years we the Chinese people suffered very much from foreign aggression and humiliation, so we cherish so much our independence and sovereignty. 
We hope to see gradual restoration and improvement of the bilateral relations through contacts."
Jiang Zemin, General Secretary of the Communist Party, used his meeting with Mr. Baker to emphasize that "it is very abnormal and not in keeping with the interests of our two big countries that you don't have high-level contacts with us," the Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman said.
 
Nixon's Approach Recalled
Mr. Jiang explained to Mr. Baker that "the world is a colorful one which has various kinds of social systems, cultural heritages and ideologies, so it is dangerous to model such a colorful world on one form."
The Communist Party leader recalled fondly for Mr. Baker the approach to relations taken by former President Richard Nixon and former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger with Mao Zedong and Zhou Enlai, the late Chinese leaders. 
He seemed to be trying to encourage Mr. Baker to harken back to those days, when the United States and China supposedly did not seem to worry so much about questions of human rights, but focused on the global game of nations in which Washington viewed China as a critical counterweight to the Soviet Union.
Mr. Nixon and Mr. Mao, he said, "came to realize that the common interests count most for both sides."
Mr. Jiang concluded by telling Mr. Baker: "I remember two lines of an ancient Chinese poem. 
It says that if you want to have a longer vision you should move to a higher level. 
We should look further by moving to a higher point, and have our eyes on the future and in this way we should surely be able to restore Sino-American relations."
In all of his meetings today, Mr. Baker was never photographed shaking hands with any Chinese officials. 
Before each meeting, reporters and photographers were kept out of the room until after Mr. Baker and his Chinese hosts had greeted one another, and were ushered in only when the Chinese and American delegations were seated stiffly around the conference table.
Chinese officials told American reporters that Mr. Baker's delegation had requested such arrangements, although American officials denied this.
