
On a street where hardware, electronics and shoe stores competed for space 10 years ago, a gleaming new glass obelisk juts above the squat buildings. 
Each block, it seems, has a new type of tenant -- with sleek gray steel, polished brass and tinted windows suggesting an international financial center.
Seven banks crowd into just two blocks in the din and traffic of Main Street in downtown Flushing, Queens, and the incongruous glass obelisk will make eight. 
Wander down the side streets or nearby Roosevelt Avenue and Northern Boulevard and the number of banks multiplies to at least 35 -- American, Chinese, Korean, British, Indian, Pakistani and Colombian.
As thousands of immigrants, particularly Chinese and Koreans, have settled in Flushing in the last decade, the banks have followed, tailoring their strategies to serve the savings-minded workers and flourishing small businesses.
Many are branches of the big American banks, which continue to dominate business in Flushing. 
But small AsianAmerican banks, with headquarters in Flushing or Chinatown, also compete fiercely for customers, and the latest arrival is a branch of a large Taiwan-based bank.
The China Trust Bank -- the largest private bank in Taiwan, which has its American headquarters in lower Manhattan -- opened its doors four weeks ago in a temporary office that was once a vegetable stand at 40-36 Main Street. 
Just a few steps away are the Hong Kong-Shanghai Banking Corporation, Amerasia Bank and Golden City Bank, which will open soon in the new glass obelisk on Main Street. 
Across the street is Manufacturers Hanover, and a block away are Green Point Savings and Citibank. 
Around the corner is Asia Bank, the oldest Chinese-American bank in Flushing, which opened in 1984.
In its first two weeks, the China Trust branch took in $6 million from 400 depositors, said the manager, Frank Lin. 
"It's fantastic," Mr. Lin said of the new business, and a state banking official described the total as "pretty darn good."
China Trust officials say they expect business in Flushing to keep growing, and they are spending $13 million to build a new three-story office just down the street.
The banks have in part been lured by the booming businesses in the area, where scores of restaurants and flashy boutiques have helped transform Flushing into the fourth-largest retail center in New York City. 
Pauline Chu, a Community School Board member who is running for City Council, said there are 200 stores in a three-block area and 800 restaurants in the neighborhood. 
A new 175-room Sheraton hotel will open in November.
But business executives and state banking officials say another big reason for the influx of banks and capital is fear over the Chinese takeover of Hong Kong in 1997. 
Uncertainty over the future of the British colony has prompted a flight of people and money from Hong Kong and Taiwan into the area since the early 1980's.
"The scare over 1997 is definitely one of the factors," said Clare E. Sykes, a spokeswoman for the State Banking Department. 
"Flushing is a fast-growth, healthy area, a good bankable area. 
It is faster growing than Chinatown."
 
Separate From Chinatown
Ms. Chu said about 140,000 Chinese and Korean immigrants now live in the Flushing area, which had few Asian residents 10 years ago.
Many residents and business owners envision Flushing as a flourishing international community, separate from Chinatown in Manhattan and uniquely positioned between New York City, Long Island, New Jersey and Connecticut, said Ho Pei Lee, a developer and builder.
A study comparing banks in Chinatown and Flushing convinced China Trust Bank to open its new Main Street branch, Mr. Lin said. 
The 1990 study showed that deposits in 28 Chinatown banks totaled $3.24 billion, while deposits in 34 Flushing banks totaled $3.13 billion.
"We are going to surpass the money deposited in Chinatown," Mr. Lee said. 
"Flushing has a lot of potential for the future."
 
A Mix of Strategies
The study found that American banks still have the greatest share of deposits in the area, and many have tailored their banking strategies to the community. 
Automatic teller machines offer transactions in three languages, and Citibank has a special Asian Banking Center where Korean, Mandarin and Cantonese are spoken.
The much smaller Chinese-American banks, including Asia Bank, Amerasia, Great Eastern and others, held only 12 percent of the deposits in the 1990 study. 
But they have managed to survive and thrive in Flushing, where banking strategies are a mix of old world and new.
The Chinese and Korean immigrants, traditionally great savers, are often wary of outsiders. 
Many prefer to speak their native language with tellers and say they find a more personal touch -- and shorter lines -- at the Chinese-American and Korean banks.
"We have a lot of new blood here -- immigrants, money and investments," said Thomas Tai, president of the Flushing Chinese Business Association. 
"Chinese banks thrive because of their personal relationships. 
They pay attention to past records, reputations of friends and family from the original country."
Mr. Lin, the manager of the new China Trust branch, said his bank expected to attract many Taiwanese as well as immigrants from Hong Kong and mainland China familiar with the bank's reputation. 
It has a capital base 10 times that of local Chinese-American banks and therefore can compete directly with the American giants, Mr. Lin said. 
"Chinese people have a lot of savings," he said. 
"They will come to us because we are Chinese. 
Chinese people are traditionally shy. 
They won't talk to strangers."
 
Service and Interest Rates
China Bank also hopes to lure non-Asian customers, Mr. Lin said, with automatic teller machines and high rates on certificates of deposit. 
"We are here to compete against Citibank and Chase, not with the local Chinese community banks," he said.
Many market-wise depositors in Flushing keep accounts in both Asian and American banks, and shop around for the best deposit yields. 
Competition centers on the rates on certificates of deposit, with the Chinese banks generally offering higher rates than the American banks. 
Many of the banks have weekend hours, and some even offer free parking, a premium in traffic-jammed Flushing.
Joy Xu, 25 years old, arrived in the United States two years ago and banks at Asia Bank. 
"My uncle introduced me, and they speak Chinese," Ms. Xu said. 
"It's quick here, while in Citibank you have to wait a long time and they're always out to lunch."
Yeming Wang, 40, a Shanghai native, uses an American bank but has also kept an account at Asia Bank because, she said, the interest and the service is good and "they always give you a gift for Chinese New Year."
Some residents choose a bank because they know its reputation. 
"I feel better in two banks," said Alex Lee, 22, a construction worker. 
"One is Hong-Kong Shanghai, because I had it before in Hong Kong and I feel familiar with it."
 
