
In Tokyo, where Medina Dixon has been a popular professional basketball player for the past seven years, she must practice three hours a day, an endless but typically Japanese routine she could do without. 
Still, as the imported American star, she gets off easy.
"Everyone else has to practice six hours, three in the morning and three in the afternoon," she said.
That she is also an assistant coach for her team, Nippon Electric, makes no difference. 
Dixon sleeps in, and worries about practice after lunch.
On the United States women's Olympic team, there are no prima donnas, no special treatment, no exemptions from pressing and defending the basket as you would your wallet. 
With Dixon leading another all-out defensive assault with 5 of her team's 30 steals, and adding a team-high 19 points, Coach Theresa Grentz again demonstrated the truly unmatchable advantage she is holding here. 
As the United States women pursue a third straight gold medal, Grentz possesses the ability to look down her bench, like Chuck Daly, and know everyone there is as good as everyone on the court.
"That's how we selected this team, with that in mind," said Grentz after the United States wore down China and its 6-foot-8-inch, 273-pound center, Haixia Zheng, 93-67, to improve its record to 2-0.
The Chinese players could pass and shoot, and Haixia, a 25-year-old great wall from Zhengzhou who had her picture taken with Magic Johnson last week, could certainly take up space. 
As the 6-3, 165-pound Dixon said, "If I set a back pick on her, you wouldn't see me."
"She's not one to run up and down the floor," said Dixon.
Zheng, who scored 8 points and had 9 rebounds, spent most of her time looking at the backs of the United States players fast-breaking upcourt. 
The Chinese played well enough early on to lead, 18-12, and after a 22-2 United States explosion put them in a 14-point halftime hole, they mounted another charge within 54-50.
China might have been able to do some serious damage had its best player, Dongmei Zheng, who hit five 3-pointers in China's victory over Spain on Thursday, not inexplicably fouled out late in the first half.
Grentz has instructed her players to go as hard as they can on the press and the break, and expect that fresh troops will not be far behind. 
The result has been an outbreak of turnovers by the opposition, with the United States being credited for a total of 70 steals in its two games.
"I'm enjoying playing the defense, something that's unusual for me," Dixon said, admitting the star system practiced in Japan occasionally creates a jealousy problem.
That is one of the reasons why the upcoming season will be her last as a player in Japan. 
The Japanese players, she said, complained that the American stars make too much money, so the Americans will be banned for two years, and when they return, they will have a salary cap.
Out of respect for her fame and tenure, Dixon has been offered the head coaching job for the season after next, but she has not decided to accept it.
"I'd have to cut practice to three hours a day," she said. 
"I don't know how that would go over."
