
The men's 10-meter platform diving competition teetered today between moments of sublime perfection and frightening failure.
A disastrous plunge that will make the year's highlight films showed the possibility of what happens to a dive out of control from three stories up.
"It was definitely agony and it was definitely defeat," quipped an aching but intact Matt Scoggin of Austin, Tex.
In the standing, his dive was at the other end of the point spectrum from the spectacular closing attempt by the soon-to-be champion, 16-year-old Sun Shuwei of China. 
On Sun's final dive, trying to keep his first-place lead over Scott Donie of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., the Chinese diver refused to play it safe. 
He produced one of the highest scores in Olympic history -- four of the seven judges awarded him perfection, a 10.
Sun wound up with 677.310 points, scoring seven perfect 10's on his 10 dives, and finished comfortably ahead of Donie's 633.630. 
China ended up with three golds in the four men's and women's diving events. 
Donie's silver medal, meanwhile, gave the United States its third diving medal over all. 
Xiong Ni of China took the bronze.
"I've been diving great all my life, but no one's noticed," said Donie. 
It was an ironic statement, coming on a day when everyone noticed his teammate, who didn't dive great but who survived.
Scoggin's memorable Olympic moment came on Dive 7, a back 3 1/2 somersault tuck. 
Dives are scored in part by their degree of difficulty, and for Scoggin, this was his most demanding of the day with a difficulty of 3.3.
He stood ramrod straight, back to the water, outlined against the blue-gray Barcelona sky and the city's skyline, high above the outdoor pool atop Montjuic. 
Then Scoggin, at 28 the oldest diver in the competition, took off. 
If you looked up at him, you would have thought he was soaring over the city. 
The dive called for him to grab his knees and tuck them under his chest. 
He leaped backward off the board, somersaulted once, and reached for his knees with both hands. 
His right hand latched onto the right knee. 
But the left hand missed.
"It slipped," Scoggin said afterward. 
He started to spin like a broken helicopter, going sideways. 
The water was coming fast and he was out of control.
"I tried to find the water," he said.
 
Shadows Cause Problem
But there was another problem. 
The pool is laid out east to west, and the shadows of the late afternoon played havoc with some divers' perceptions. 
It was so dark on the water they couldn't tell which was the bottom of the pool and which was the water.
He hit the water on his back. 
The water splashed, the only tidal wave of the day.
"That was the worst hit I ever had," Scoggin said.
The crowd moaned, seemingly feeling his pain. 
Despite the sickeningly loud splatter, he didn't swallow any water and pulled himself out of the pool quickly.
"I started to run," he explained, "hoping to run off the pain."
He was taken to an emergency medical room, but released within a minute.
"It hurt for 20 or 30 seconds," he said. 
"I don't think I ever felt pain like that. 
Ever."
His coach, Mike Brown, a former Dartmouth diver, described Scoggin as "being in shock."
"It was like running into that wall over there," Brown said.
Scoggin was, essentially, out of the competition now. 
He had started the dive in sixth place, not far removed from medal contention. 
Instead, it was recorded as a "failed dive" -- the only one of the competition, and worth zero points.
Still, he returned.
"It never crossed my mind not to compete," he said. 
"I came here, I gave it a shot. 
All athletes know it can happen, that's why winning is so great -- you know you overcame danger."
His next dive was a forward 3 1/2 somersault pike. 
He mounted the platform to growing applause, took off, and completed the dive without a hitch, producing a decent score of mostly sevens.
How did he feel about going up again?
Did he want to get right there and do it?
"I could definitely wait," he said.
Despite his failed attempt, Scoggin beat out two divers and finished 10th.
"I'm happy that I don't have to do that again," said Scoggin, who is going to sell real estate and retire. 
"I don't have to do that dive again. 
Or any other dive."
Brown predicted that Scoggin's fall will make a lasting Olympic impression. 
"I think Matt will make the new 'Agony of Defeat' poster," he said.
