
When Lin Li of China hit the contact pad tonight in world-record time of 2 minutes 11.65 seconds in the 200-meter individual medley, the spin doctors went to work again.
United States coaches whispered in the corridors of the Bernat Picornell pool: The Chinese women have become too good, too fast, with three golds and three silvers in the five days of swimming competition. 
The rumors were fueled by the frustrated American women's swim team, and the implication, again, was that performance-enhancing drugs were involved.
"An East German coach came to China in 1986," said Zhang Xiong, the Chinese swim coach who was on the defensive again. 
"But I have been with Lin for 11 years, since she was a child taking her first steps. 
She has never trained with East German coaches. 
To go into such matters is meaningless."
Just to make certain that these matters remained meaningless, FINA, swimming's governing body, today changed in midstream its method for drug testing in Barcelona. 
Faced with too many questions about its random drug-screening procedures, FINA began testing all gold medalists. 
Previously, FINA tested only two of the top four finishers in each race, at random.
Lin's world record -- which broke an 11-year-old mark of 2:11.73 set by Ute Geweniger of East Germany -- was more than four seconds faster than her best entry time, nipping Summer Sanders of the United States by .26 seconds. 
It was an eye-opening improvement.
The Chinese also raised eyebrows with the team they entered in the 400 medley relay. 
China did not use its top swimmer, Zhuang Yong, to anchor the team. 
The Chinese said Zhuang, who won the 100-meter freestyle Sunday and was not tested afterward, was exhausted. 
The spin in the hallways was about more stringent testing.
In fairness to the Chinese swimmers, they have not tested positive for any performance-enhancing drugs. 
In the past, American swimmers have tested positive. 
In addition, the Americans had been predicting for weeks that the Chinese were ambushing everyone with their slow times, because the Chinese didn't need to post fast entry times at a national trial.
Sanders, her Olympic star fading a bit, won her second nongold medal (she took a bronze in the 400-meter individual medley Sunday) with her second successive best time, 2:11.91, and in the process broke Tracy Caulkins's American record of 2:12.64.
"I could have worked my turns harder, but not a lot better," Sanders said. 
"It's a bummer to come that close and be touched out. 
Silver is not losing, but a little of you has to be sad and angry when you are this close."
The American women left nothing to chance in the 400 medley relay, setting a world record of 4:02.54 to defeat the Germans. 
Jenny Thompson, who began much of the drug-testing frenzy with complaints after her defeat by Zhuang in the 100-meter freestyle, won her fourth medal by anchoring the team with a 54.47 final leg.
In second place were the Germans, with problems of their own. 
Harm Beyer, head of the unified German doping commission, resigned today, saying he "feels insulted" by criticism from Klaus Henter, president of the German Sports Federation. 
Dagmar Hase, a gold medalist in the 400-meter freestyle, has complained that East Germans are treated unfairly by the German doping commission.
Henter is backing up Hase, who wants to reopen the case of her teammate Astrid Strauss. 
Strauss was dropped from the German swim team because of charges she used performance-enhancing drugs.
