
If bicyclists are swerving even more than usual these days, if factory workers are nodding over the assembly lines, if Government officials are excusing themselves from evening banquets, the problems have less to do with the sultry weather than with collective pride at the leaps and plunges of a few pint-sized teen-agers 7,200 miles away.
Many Chinese, who can barely tell a shot-put from a discus, have been transfixed by the Olympics -- and that makes them insomniacs. 
Because of the seven-hour time difference from Barcelona, Spain, the live television coverage lasts well into the night, but many are alternately delighted and impatient to watch the triumphs of their Olympic athletes.
"It's about time we picked up some gold," said a shopkeeper in his 20's. 
"With 1.1 billion people, we should be winning all the golds. 
Hey, did you see Li Xiaosahuang?
Stunning. Absolutely beautiful."
Li Xiaosahuang, whose name translates as "Little Twin," earned a gold medal for the floor exercise in men's gymnastics. 
His twin brother, Li Dasahuang, or "Big Twin," also competed but did not win a medal.
 
15 Gold Medals
China has done much better than anybody expected in the Olympics, excelling in diving, swimming and gymnastics. 
It won only five gold medals in the 1988 Olympics in Seoul, but already it has earned 15 in the 1992 Games, including three of the four golds in diving.
In a nation that has been deeply divided politically in the last few years, the Olympics have provided a rare occasion when everyone from Communist Party bosses to student dissidents can join together and cheer China's performers. 
The nation's newest heartthrobs include Lu Li, the bright-eyed 15-year-old who earned a perfect 10 as she won the gold medal for uneven bars in gymnastic competition, and Fu Mingxia, the 13-year-old sensation who dominated in women's platform diving.
For three years, the Government has tried to find a way to unite the nation. 
It tried to win support with the Asian Games, which were held here in the fall of 1990, but those games annoyed many people who were forced to contribute money and labor for the preparations.
But the daily news from Barcelona of the rising medal count, which stood at 48 after today's events, has functioned as a nationalistic adhesive to rally the nation.
Whatever they think of their Government, many Chinese bristled at the way American journalists were reported to have treated the swimmer Qian Hong after she won the gold medal in the women's 100-meter butterfly. 
When Qian, 21 years old, was asked what her mother did, she replied "environmental sanitation."
As reported in the Chinese press, the American reporter pressed Qian with another question: "Does that mean she collects garbage?"
The room filled with raucous laughter and Qian ended up crying.
"Those American reporters really have no manners," the report said, a statement that was echoed in many conversations with Chinese about the Olympics.
 
Stir Over Steroid Issue
Allegations that Chinese athletes may be using steroids -- a charge that is not backed by any clear evidence and that the Government denies -- also have caused an uproar.
Chinese appear to be divided on the issue, with some convinced that their athletes have learned from Eastern European coaches how to take steroids. 
Some say that the athletes probably take Chinese herbal medicines to improve their performance.
One instance of the use of Chinese medicine was confirmed today in Barcelona when Wu Dan, a Chinese women's volleyball player, was banned after she tested positive for strychnine. 
The official New China News Agency said she had absorbed the strychnine in a Chinese medicine after she was feeling ill.
Wu's case, the first positive result after 1,080 tests, was a clear embarrassment for the Government. 
The news agency indicated that Wu took the medicine of her own volition, apparently without realizing that it contained a forbidden substance.
Official television and radio news programs did not report the test results this evening, and so Chinese were not aware of the violation. 
In any case, the positive test for strychnine does not shed light on whether Chinese athletes take steroids -- a suggestion that offends many people in Beijing.
"Are you kidding?" said a Chinese clothing salesman. 
"If it were discovered that Chinese athletes were really taking steroids, think of all the heads that would roll at the National Sports Commission. 
The Government definitely wouldn't let them take the stuff."
 
Wide TV Coverage
The Government has given the Games extensive publicity. 
For the last week, national television has broadcast about 19 hours a day of Olympic coverage.
By the end of the Olympics, China will have aired about 250 hours of Olympic programs. 
Replays of events in which Chinese athletes have won gold medals occur throughout the day, along with commentary and interviews of the athletes.
Companies, radio stations and newspapers have sponsored Olympic guessing games, with prizes that range from cars to televisions and refrigerators, and free trips to Hong Kong or Singapore.
To encourage athletes, the National Sports Commission will give about $14,000 to each winner of a gold medal, The China Youth Daily reported last week. 
The article added that companies, factories and other sponsors have also made contributions so that each gold medal winner could bring in about $37,000, or 95 times the annual salary of an average factory worker.
One company, Jianlibao, which makes a sports drink, said it would give a gold can, worth about $6,500, to each gold medalist. 
It had already prepared 30 cans of gold, partly in expectation that the Chinese women's volleyball team would win a gold medal. 
But the team lost to Brazil.
"The volleyball players were too proud and thought they would get the gold without having to try," said a private businessman, who said he stayed up regularly throughout the night to watch the live coverage.
The Government is hoping that its performance will enhance its chances to win the right to be host to the Summer Olympic Games in the year 2000. 
A Chinese sports official expressed the thought cautiously: "We hope the achievements of our athletes in Barcelona will leave a very deep impression on the decision-makers."
