
It is a lazy afternoon on the outskirts of China's capital, in the hills near the majestic tombs of the Ming emperors. 
Little breaks the stillness except occasional birdsong, a quiet conversation barely overheard and, every so often, the convulsions of a heavy machine gun sending tracer bullets slamming into a hillside a half-mile away, then ricocheting hundreds of feet in the air.
The gun's fierce bark grows quiet, but just as the ears stop ringing the harsh report of an AK-47 assault rifle shatters the calm.
"Too high."
Another shot rings out.
"Missed."
Everyone relaxes for a moment, soft sunlight leaving the dun-colored hills in a pleasant haze, when everything seems to jump two inches with the terrific kaboom! of a rocket-propelled antitank weapon exploding against a bluff a couple of hundred yards away.
"It's only 490 yuan if you want to try that, too," says the young businessman handing out weapons to the customers, noticing the stunned look on the face of the amateur AK-47 marksman.
 
An Average Business Day
No, this is not a training ground for some people's liberation front, but one of the faces of China's economic reform program, an average business day, in fact, at the China North International Shooting Range.
Anyone with a bit of cash willing to make the 38-mile trip to the northwest of the city center, on the road to the Great Wall, can relax over a mortar (150 yuan, or about $27, a round), light and heavy machine guns, a few pops with a mounted 14.5-millimeter antiaircraft gun or a number of sidearms available in a showroom bristling with armaments.
The firing range is more than just an unusual way to kill an afternoon; it is one of the more colorful means devised by the People's Liberation Army to transform its traditional assets into money-making enterprises, in keeping with China's national policy of turning to the markets rather than the central Government for future growth.
That policy has been particularly important to China's military, which is often referred to as a state within a state by experts. 
It has its own hospitals, factories, banks and markets. 
Since military strength was a national priority in the tense years of the cold war, the army generally has among the best installations in the country, giving it an edge in developing money-making enterprises today.
For instance, China has become a major arms exporter. 
It has sent its high-powered missiles and other heavy weapons to the Middle East, angering some Western governments.
According to David Shambaugh, a professor at the University of London and a specialist on the Chinese military, the army has also retooled some of its factories to produce consumer products, from electric fans to construction equipment and trucks. 
In addition, some military units are starting to charge local governments for civil engineering projects they once did free, like bridge building and flood-control work.
"There were explicit orders that the military was to diversify its revenues by getting involved in civilian production and other kinds of activities, and they've been doing it," Mr. Shambaugh said. 
"The story is that they are developing a more visible military industrial complex."
But one of the darker sides to these activities is that they have given the military far more money to spend with even less oversight, Mr. Shambaugh said. 
Few seem to know how much the army is earning or how it is using what is believed to be billions of dollars from these businesses.
"It's all off-budget revenue," Mr. Shambaugh said. 
"I couldn't give you an estimate on how much accrues to them. 
But it's got to be mammoth."
The China North International Shooting Range is a sign of what might be called the market's acceptance of some of these capitalist strategies -- and the political pragmatism of what has traditionally been one of the world's most politicized armies.
The customers shoot at black silhouetted targets -- or just hillsides with the serious weaponry -- without a single running dog capitalist target in sight. 
In fact, the area is conspicuous for its lack of political content, save for the odd comment by a visitor noting the irony of Western thrill seekers being offered potshots with weapons that once symbolized attempts to destroy capitalism.
The operation is bare bones, with a lounge to sip soft drinks next to the armory. 
It is doubtful the operators did any market analysis, but they seem to have focused on the things its audience really wants: a large area in back where the blasting is done and an array of weapons in front where the casually attired soldiers of fortune can take each other's pictures with rocket-propelled bombs and various guns hoisted on their shoulders.
Wang Gui Ying, the smiling round-faced technician who helps visitors choose their weapons, offers expert tips on the relative merits, for instance, of tracer bullets or hand-held versus mounted machine guns. 
She says that on weekends the range gets as many as several hundred visitors.
And these are not just foreigners; newly affluent Chinese, she says, are willing to pay to blast away with Chinese-made M-16's, Uzis and the other guns available. 
The range advertises on Chinese television, Ms. Wang said, sponsoring the weather report. 
There are a few limits on what children are permitted to shoot, but otherwise the market's invisible hand appears to be the guiding spirit.
On a recent afternoon a group of Japanese tourists who arrived in a bus leaned towards extremes; while some took turns firing the antitank bombs, the most expensive weapon offered, the rest stuck mostly to small handguns.
By the end of the day, after many of the visitors had posed out front with AK-47 assault rifles or other weapons, the haul was not bad. 
The Japanese group had paid about $500 for less than an hour's worth of teeth-jarring fun, leaving Ms. Wang wearing an infectious smile as she obliged a visitor by posing briefly with a shoulder-fired rocket launcher in the spreading coolness of a Beijing evening.
