
China announced today the release of 97 people who had been involved in last year's pro-democracy movement, including two student leaders, in a move that diplomats described as an attempt to ease domestic tensions and win favor in Western countries.
The announcement came two days after the anniversary of the crackdown on the democracy movement, and some diplomats said it reflected a mild reduction in tensions now that the Government does not have to worry about protests on the anniversaries of last year's key protest dates.
China said that 76 prisoners were released in Beijing, while 21 were released in Shanghai.
The action brought the total officially reported to have been released in the last six months to 881, but it is unclear how many remain behind bars.
 
Releases Last Month
In mid-May, when it released 211 prisoners, China said only 431 were still ''under investigation.''
After today's announcement, that would leave 334 people in detention, according to the Government figures.
Most Western diplomats say, however, that there are probably more than a few hundred being held, and some estimates run into the thousands. 
Partly because of the uncertainty about how many dissidents are still being held, diplomats interviewed were cautious about judging the significance of the releases.
''Whether it is a loosening remains to be seen, but it was a good gesture,'' said a foreign diplomat in Beijing. 
''This is something that they must have planned some time ago. 
They wanted to do it after June 4 passed.''
An Asian diplomat said that while China probably had carefully timed the releases, the fact that it waited until after June 4 indicated that China did not want to bow to pressure from Western countries.
 
'The Humanitarian Way'
''They are showing that they are releasing people as they finish the investigations,'' the Asian diplomat said, taking a more generous view than most Westerners. 
''It shows the inquiries are genuine, and that's the humanitarian way to do it.''
Among those released was Zhou Fengsuo, a 23-year-old student who ranked fifth on a wanted list of 21 student leaders publicized by the Government last June. 
Xiong Wei, a 24-year-old student who had ranked No. 20 on the list, was also released, according to the announcement by the official New China News Agency.
The release is one of the latest examples of mixed signals by the Chinese leadership. 
In recent days, China has detained a small number of students and dissidents who were speaking out against the Government. 
The security forces have also beaten foreign journalists and students as recently as this morning in the university district in the western part of Beijing.
The group released today apparently did not include three dissidents who were believed to have been detained last week. 
The three are Hou Dejian, a Taiwan folk singer, and two of his friends, Zhou Duo and Gao Xin, who had both been arrested after the June 1989 crackdown and subsequently released. 
All three were detained when they tried to publicize a petition calling for the release of political prisoners.
