
China's Foreign Minister called today for ''a new pattern'' in Chinese-American relations, characterized by mutual trust and apparently by a lack of American criticism of Beijing's human rights record.
Speaking at a rare news conference, the official, Qian Qichen, reproached members of the United States Congress who have criticized Chinese policy on Tibet or on family planning. 
He said members of Congress who commented on Tibet were ''very ill informed'' and ''strongly prejudiced,'' and he labeled Congressional investigation of China's family planning policy ''absurd.''
''If the United States population were five times its current size, it would be fairly easy for members of Congress to agree on China's family planning policy,'' Mr. Qian said.
Mr. Qian's comments reflected the increased strains in relations over the last month, principally on human rights. 
China has always been touchy about such matters, regarding criticisms as interference in its internal affairs. 
Lately it has been particularly sensitive, as its internal situation has grown more delicate with some people openly calling for greater democracy as well as for independence in Tibet.
 
Incident During Bush Visit
The strains began when President Bush visited China a month ago and invited Fang Lizhi, the astrophysicist and dissident, to a banquet. 
The police kept Mr. Fang and his wife from attending the banquet, and Mr. Bush expressed ''regret'' over the incident.
Early this month pro-independence rioting broke out in Tibet, and the United States Senate approved a resolution condemning China's use of violence in Tibet.
China has also long been sensitive about charges that it forces women to have abortions as a part of its family planning policy. 
It denies the accusations and says that in any case family planning is China's own concern and a necessity given its population pressures.
Mr. Qian said today that the Fang incident ''reflects the fact that there are some people in the United States who always support those who are dissatisfied with the Chinese Government.''
He added, ''Such petty conduct is not in the interest of the friendly relations of our two countries.''
Aside from calling for mutual trust, and criticizing what he said was interference in China's internal affairs, Mr. Qian did not specify what the ''new pattern'' in Chinese-American relations would consist of.
While Mr. Qian called on the United States to help improve relations between Washington and Beijing, he also suggested that there were some difficulties in Chinese-Soviet relations. 
Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, is scheduled to visit China in mid-May to mark the formal end of the three-decade split between the two countries.
Mr. Qian said the obstacles to improved Chinese-Soviet relations had been reduced but not yet eliminated. 
The remaining problem is the Vietnamese presence in Cambodia, and Mr. Qian suggested that the Soviet Union could do more to achieve a solution to that conflict.
The Cambodian conflict will be a key topic at the Chinese-Soviet summit meeting, Mr. Qian said.
