
In a bold protest against China's senior leader, Deng Xiaoping, students at Beijing University early this morning smashed nearly 100 glass bottles to mark the second anniversary of the military crackdown here on the democracy movement.
Shortly after midnight, students began clapping, cheering and throwing bottles outside three graduate dormitories where policemen were patrolling, a witness said. 
In Chinese, "xiao ping," meaning "little bottle," is a homonym for Mr. Deng's given name, and protesters often express their feelings about Mr. Deng by shattering bottles.
The protest came despite the large-scale presence of policemen and other security officers, and despite threats issued to students in recent days that they faced severe punishment if they tried to commemorate the anniversary of the 1989 crackdown. 
The authorities already had reportedly tried to gather up all the glass bottles in the area so that students could not break them.
 
Center of Student Demonstrations
Beijing University, the most famous in the country, was a center of the student demonstrations that ended with the Tiananmen Square crackdown on June 3-4, 1989. 
The university also has particular significance because many of the children of senior officials, including Mr. Deng's oldest son, have gone there.
China's best-known student leader, Wang Dan, who is serving a four-year prison sentence, was a history student at Beijing University.
On Monday night, at least 200 students had gathered outside the campus library. 
Some wore white, the color of mourning in China, and they started to sing songs, but were silenced by dozens of plainclothes policemen.
The bottle smashing appeared to be loosely organized, and no group took responsibility. 
It was difficult to tell how many students were involved, but the witness said at least several dozen took part. 
The protest lasted about two hours, but the police did not raid the dormitory and no arrests were reported.
 
A Protest Last Week
After a small protest last week, in which a banner was unfurled and leaflets distributed, the police waited for more than a day before raiding the dormitory. 
And a year ago, when Beijing University students also smashed bottles and sang protest songs, the security forces waited for several days before arresting an organizer, who is still in prison.
An organization called the Young China United Association took responsibility for last week's protest.
Although security has been dramatically increased around Tiananmen Square, around the university district and particularly near Beijing University, there appeared to be no clashes between students and the police.
In the last few days, teachers and staff members at Beijing University were reportedly summoned to meetings where they were told about several displays of student protest that had taken place recently.
