
A secret document prepared after a high-level meeting in Beijing this spring says the Chinese Communists intend to use the release of political prisoners as one of their few available ''cards'' to influence American policy toward China.
''We do not have many cards in hand'' for pressuring the United States, said the document, which was made available by Xu Lin, a Chinese diplomat who defected from the embassy in Washington last week. 
Among these few bargaining chips, it said, are ''the release of political prisoners,'' the resumption of the Fulbright Exchange program and the acceptance of Peace Corps volunteers in China. 
The latter two steps were agreed to in April.
''We should not make our positions public too quickly so that the U.S. 
Government will be kept in the dark,'' the document cautions.
Washington also has a major card in its hand, the document notes, with President Bush's having to decide whether to renew China's most-favored-nation status by June 3.
The reasoning behind the document may help explain China's announcement yesterday that it has released 211 people jailed for taking part in the democracy movement last year, including several of the leaders.
The document contains the conclusions of a special meeting called by the State Education Commission in Beijing in March on how to deal with China's 42,000 students in United States, most of whom it acknowledges have turned against the Communist Government. 
The document says it was prepared by He Dongchang, the deputy head of the commission, and was approved by Prime Minister Li Peng.
Among those taking part in the meeting were officials from the Foreign Ministry, the Communist Party propaganda department, the Ministry of Public Security and the Ministry of National Security as well as Chinese diplomats stationed in the United States.
The participants in the meeting paint a gloomy picture of the state of American-Chinese relations. 
''At present, the Sino-American relationship has plunged almost to the bottom, as low as it was after the 'June 4 event,' '' the document says, using a euphemism to refer to the killing of several hundred civilians by troops on June 4 in Beijing.
Washington, it notes, ''did not respond strongly to the lifting of martial law'' in Beijing in January. 
Moreover, the document says, the State Department's harshly worded report about the condition of human rights in China, released in February, ''brought new strains to bilateral relations.''
''We cannot expect that the relationship will improve in the near future,'' it said. 
Although Mr. Bush has come under heavy criticism in the United States for not pressing China harder after the military crackdown last year, the document says there is actually not that much difference between Mr. Bush and his opponents, who have called for tougher sanctions. 
''The two sides share the same intention, and the difference lies in the assessment of the situation,'' the document says.
But, it adds without elaboration, ''we can make use of the difference between the two sides.''
The document says the protests last spring were a ''disaster'' for China's universities, with only a third of the country's colleges not becoming involved in the democracy movement.
Another document also made available by Mr. Xu, the defecting diplomat, said the situation was even worse among Chinese students in the United States. 
According to this report, sent by the State Education Commission to the Chinese Embassy in Washington, 10 percent of China's students here ''actively participate in activities against our Government'' and 70 to 80 percent plan not to return to China.
In addition, the report says, ''there are about 100 core anti-Government activists'' who should not be allowed to return to China.
The first document says the embassy should adopt a ''life and death'' struggle against dissident Chinese students in the United States.
Mr. Xu, who is 33 years old, was a third secretary in the education section of the Chinese Embassy. 
He said at a news conference last week that he had defected after learning he was under suspicion and was to be sent home.
