
The Government today invited Chinese living abroad to return "to serve the construction of the motherland," but it also hinted that it might bar Chinese students from returning if they oppose Communism.
The issue has arisen because the authorities are refusing to allow Gong Xiaoxia, a Chinese student at Harvard University, to return to China for a visit. 
Ms. Gong, who has been critical of the Government, is waiting in Hong Kong, hoping that the Chinese Government will relent and allow her back.
Two weeks ago, the Chinese Government barred Dai Qing, a prominent journalist holding a fellowship at Harvard, from flying back to Beijing for the summer vacation. 
But a few days later -- after the June 4 anniversary of the 1989 Tiananmen crackdown -- the authorities reversed themselves and allowed Ms. Dai to return.
 
Fate of the Outspoken
In fact, thousands of Chinese have been allowed to return to China without difficulty after trips abroad, and there seems little chance that a loyalty test will be imposed. 
But Beijing might refuse to allow outspoken dissidents to return, forcing them into exile.
To be sure, many Chinese students would be delighted to stay in the United States. 
More worry about getting in trouble after returning to China than about the possibility of being turned back at the border, although that risk could concern those who have spouses or children in China.
Some 40,000 Chinese, including the children and grandchildren of many Chinese leaders, are studying in the United States. 
Many took part in demonstrations in June 1989 against the army crackdown on the Tiananmen Square democracy movement, and the Chinese Government reportedly has maintained files on militants and monitored their activities in America.
Wu Jianmin, the Foreign Ministry spokesman, said at a briefing today that he was unfamiliar with the details of Ms. Gong's case. 
But he added that the Government welcomed Chinese students abroad to return, notwithstanding the views they used to hold.
Mr. Wu was then asked whether the Government would allow the return of Chinese students who currently oppose the "four cardinal principles."
Those principles are socialism, the people's democratic dictatorship, leadership of the Communist Party, and Marxism, Leninism and Mao Zedong thought.
"Whatever their past political views," Mr. Wu responded, emphasizing the word past, "we welcome them back to serve the construction of the motherland. 
If you study these words, you will get the correct answer."
That response suggests that China could refuse to readmit students whose present views it finds offensive.
China has more students in the United States than does any other country, and their presence has often been a source of tension in the two countries' relations. 
Americans have been indignant at the reported harassment by Chinese Embassy officials of Chinese studying in the United States, while Beijing has been outraged that the United States has extended the students' visas to avoid forcing them to return to China.
In a sign of the Government's enthusiasm to lure students back, at least if they do not oppose Communism, the Government is drafting a new policy that will give important privileges and better jobs to Chinese who return from foreign universities.
The new measure will allow returned students to choose any job they wish. 
It nullifies the agreements that many of the students were obliged to sign promising that they would return to their previous employers.
As an extra lure, the returned students will be able to move with their families to any city they want, including Shenzhen, a special economic zone next to Hong Kong. 
Normally, residence permits for desirable cities -- like Beijing, Shanghai and Shenzhen -- are extremely difficult to obtain, and even if an outstanding scholar finds a job in a major city and obtains a residence permit, it may take years to get a residence permit for a spouse.
Since 1978, some 150,000 Chinese have left the country for study abroad. 
Only 50,000 have returned.
