
It was not drugs the peasant was selling under the cover of darkness, but something just as restricted, and he was very careful as he displayed his wares on a quiet street before dawn.
"Ming Dynasty," the peasant, a thin man in his 40's, nervously told a dealer, who was crouched down, scrutinizing the blue-and-white porcelain vases. 
If they really did date from the Ming Dynasty, which collapsed in 1644, then they were probably dug from a tomb and are barred from leaving the country.
Smuggling of antiques can be punishable by death in China, but such transactions are nonetheless very common. 
The Government estimates that 40,000 tombs were robbed in 1989 and 1990 alone, and gangs manage to smuggle out huge statues 1,000 years old or more.
Some smugglers show Western collectors photos -- even faxes -- of important pieces in Chinese museums, which often have poor security. 
If they receive an order, the smugglers steal them from the museum and whisk them secretly to a boat waiting somewhere along China's 11,000-mile coastline.
 
Joy and Heartache
Encouraged by China's push toward a market economy and by the piles of money they believe Chinese art fetches, smugglers have refined a business that is causing a mixture of joy and heartache on both sides of the Chinese border. 
Art-starved Western collectors -- even some large museums -- have been able to fill their yearning for a neolithic pot or a Song Dynasty ceramic, as Chinese smugglers fill their pockets with money.
But the Government is horrified that national treasures are being stolen. 
Archeologists and historians are also distraught that troves of information are being erased by rampant, careless excavation of tombs.
"A nation's antiquities are a nation's soul," said Kwang-Chih Chang, a professor of Chinese archeology at Harvard University. 
"Antiquities are destroyed every day all over the world by natural disasters, by floods, by construction. 
But when we can control the destruction, it behooves us to do so."
These days, the Government is fighting back harder than ever. 
In the last couple of years it nearly tripled the amount of money spent on protecting its relics. 
This year it coordinated a nationwide crackdown, bringing together museum officials, customs agents, police chiefs and even two Politburo members to publicize the crackdown.
A result is that the smuggling of antiques, especially first-rate ones, seems to have declined. 
In previous years, antiques shops in Hong Kong displayed shelves of glazed pottery, jades, bronzes, clay horse heads and silver objects. 
But now the shops look depleted.
Still, grave robbers and smugglers are clinging to work. 
Late in October in Shaanxi Province in northern China, where Chinese archeologists have discovered the tombs of 72 emperors and 1,240 royal families, a gang of robbers used explosives, searchlights and guns in digging up a tomb from the Tang Dynasty, which reigned from the seventh to 10th centuries.
This year thousands of villagers openly plundered a group of tombs in Shaanxi, Chinese press reports say. 
Tomb robbery has been especially severe in the provinces of Shaanxi, Henan, Gansu and Jiangsu, as well as in the city of Shanghai.
Museum robberies are also a problem, in part because the museums cannot afford adequate security systems. 
About four years ago, when Sotheby's was planning to auction an ancient bronze vessel, perhaps 3,000 years old, an art expert who had read the catalogue wrote to the Chinese authorities asking them to check whether the piece had been smuggled from China.
 
Beauty Comes First
The authorities discovered that the vessel had been stolen from a small county museum in Hubei Province and they had the photographs and documents to prove it. 
The owner returned the vessel to China, and the Chinese thief was caught and sentenced to death.
Local Chinese authorities are often much less concerned with preserving their culture than the central Government. 
Some prefer to have money instead of what they regard as old pieces of pottery that only clutter up warehouses.
James J. Lally, a Chinese art dealer based in New York, explained how a businessman was able to take six 16th-century Ming Dynasty stone sculptures out of China. 
What was remarkable was that these sculptures -- horses, rams and tigers -- were all life size.
Local officials evidently let him take the carvings across the border because they regarded them as little more than a pile of stones that farmers kept bumping into when they planted.
But the appetite for rare antiques means that the vigorous debate about how they reach the West is likely to persist among lovers of art. 
Archeologists are often outraged by the smuggling while dealers and collectors say that bronzes and statues that get out of China are often better preserved than those that remain, and that such pieces help arouse public awareness of Asian art.
"The way the art market regards works of art is first and foremost for their beauty," Mr. Lally said. 
"The hierarchy of what's important to know is sometimes the reverse for an art lover than it is for an archeologist."
