
A fault line rarely makes a cozy nesting spot, but for more than a year J. Stapleton Roy has occupied precisely the spot where the American and Chinese tectonic plates come grinding together.
As Ambassador to China, Mr. Roy is periodically scolded by the Foreign Ministry here because of disputes related to human rights, arms sales and other concerns. 
Chinese police guard the embassy, intimidating some Chinese from approaching, and security agents still sometimes follow American diplomats.
Diplomatic homes and most parts of the embassy are assumed to be bugged, while Chinese-dug tunnels run somewhere deep beneath the fenced embassy compound. 
A mysterious windowless building, said to be the C.I.A. station and communications center, looms over the embassy backyard as a constant reminder of the security concerns at the last American embassy in a hard-line Communist country.
Mr. Roy, a 57-year-old career diplomat and fluent Chinese speaker who was born in China as the son of missionaries, seems to relish his posting despite the official pressures.
 
Cycle Rides in the Capital
Each Sunday he escapes from the world of neckties and diplomacy by cycling through the back alleys of the capital, chatting informally with those Chinese he meets. 
While Mr. Roy owns a locally made Flying Pigeon, he mostly uses his 21-speed Peugeot to whizz by Beijing cyclists on their single-speed Phoenixes and Golden Lions.
But while Mr. Roy has proved adept at managing relations with China, these days the entire embassy seems a bit disquieted about a challenge from the other side of the Pacific: the prospect of Gov. Bill Clinton becoming President and adopting a tougher policy toward China.
"I have no expectations," Mr. Roy said when asked what would happen to him if Mr. Clinton wins. 
"I'm a career diplomat, and you serve at the pleasure of the President."
The problem is that ever since Chinese troops opened fire on pro-democracy protesters near Tiananmen Square in June 1989, United States policy toward China has been highly politicized. 
Mr. Roy and other embassy officials have been effective spokesmen for President Bush's policy of constructive engagement, rejecting economic sanctions as counterproductive, but if Mr. Clinton wins the embassy may have to switch course.
"There's no question that one of the major consequences of Tiananmen was the shattering of the bipartisan consensus in favor of improved relations with China," Mr. Roy acknowledged in a recent interview in his home, over coffee and brownies prepared by his household's six-member staff. 
But he also suggested that some consensus remained at a deeper level.
"While there have been disagreements on specific questions about how we should advance our human rights and other objectives in China, I don't think there has been a shattering of the understanding that China remains an important country."
Mr. Roy arrived in Beijing as Ambassador only in the summer of 1991, but in some ways he seems to have spent his life preparing for the post. 
His first memories are of Japanese bombs exploding near his home in Sichuan Province. 
And he grew up speaking the Sichuan dialect of Chinese with his playmates.
After passing most of his boyhood in China, Mr. Roy and his family were among the few Americans who remained in China for the first year after the Communist revolution in 1949. 
In the fervor after "liberation," Mr. Roy learned to sing a few Chinese songs, like "The East Is Red" and "We Workers Are Strong," that are not normally part of a diplomat's repertory.
The United States Embassy, with 161 American officers and staff members, is the largest foreign mission in China. 
Other Western diplomats and resident foreigners praise it for having an excellent staff and for cultivating specialists on various topics and regions. 
But they also sometimes criticize it for its rapid turnover of diplomats -- many stay only two years -- and for persisting in a cold war-style disapproval of close friendships with Chinese.
In a city where Chinese are far more likely to talk openly over a beer or a game of mah-jongg than in a formal meeting, diplomats from Australia and several European countries have a reputation for cultivating warmer friendships with Chinese than do the Americans. 
Indeed, at least two European diplomats are having romantic relationships with Chinese women, while American diplomats rarely shed even their neckties during meetings with Chinese.
"We encourage our officers to go out and make as broad contacts as they can," Mr. Roy said. 
"But because this is a Communist country, we discourage intimacy."
A reminder of the risks came in 1988, when an American diplomat fell in love with a Chinese women. 
State Security agents reportedly burst in with cameras when they were in bed together, and tried to blackmail the American into spying for them. 
He immediately reported the incident to the embassy's security officer and was quietly whisked out of China the next day.
For all the lingering tensions, there is far less hostility in the air now than in the summer of 1989, shortly after the Tiananmen crackdown. 
The previous Ambassador, James R. Lilley, was then hiding a famous dissident, Fang Lizhi, in the embassy's medical clinic, and Chinese troops with submachine guns patrolled outside the compound. 
Fearful that the troops would invade the compound, the embassy destroyed its confidential files to avoid the risk of their falling into Chinese hands.
Almost overnight the atmosphere in the embassy changed from considerable optimism to deep pessimism about China. 
Those diplomats who were present during the killings have long since left China, however, and now the mood has swung back to one of relative optimism.
