
China's leaders have pledged in a series of confidential documents that the Soviet upheavals will neither diminish China's commitment to Communism nor weaken its resolve to open the door wider to the outside world.
At least three classified documents are circulating at various levels in the Chinese Communist Party, outlining the leaders' response to the Soviet events, according to Chinese with access to high-level information. 
Two of the documents are based on advice from the paramount leader, Deng Xiaoping, that China must act prudently and avoid taking a belligerent stance against the collapse of Communism elsewhere.
One of the three items has been previously reported. 
It is Central Committee Document No. 4, which concludes that the Soviet Union has restored capitalism and that its mistake was that it chose the wrong successor to earlier hard-liners.
The second document, which is stamped "top secret" and has begun circulating to department heads in the central Government and party apparatus, is a revised version of a speech given in July by the Communist Party leader, Jiang Zemin. 
Mr. Jiang emphasizes that Communism has faced difficulties before and that it will overcome them, and that China will continue its open-door and reform policies.
To avoid the fate of the Soviet Union, Mr. Jiang says, China must adhere to three principles: Communist Party leadership of China, party control over the military and security forces, and disavowal of privatization in the economy.
"The private sector can be only a supplement to the state and collective sectors, and it can never predominate," Mr. Jiang states.
He also takes a dig at the United States, noting that American relief for the devastating flood in central China amounted to only $25,000, while the people of Hong Kong donated some $50 million. 
Mr. Jiang suggests that the United States knew through satellite information that the flood was a terrible catastrophe and hoped that it would lead to turmoil that would threaten the regime.
Instead, Mr. Jiang says, the Government has handled the relief effort extremely smoothly and has demonstrated the superiority of socialism. 
Under capitalism, many people would have starved to death or been left uncared for, he says.
While large sums have been raised within China, these have not all been voluntary. 
Some Chinese are grumbling that they are being told to give four or five new pieces of clothing to their work units to be forwarded to flood victims.
Mr. Jiang's speech also emphasizes that China's foreign policy will be flexible, encouraging warm relations with former Communist countries. 
The same point is made in the third of the documents now circulating, an analysis by Foreign Minister Qian Qichen.
 
Not Shocked by Soviet Shift
Mr. Qian's analysis, which is now being distributed to ministers and vice ministers in the central Government, asserts that the central leadership expected since February that the Soviet Union would go capitalist and so was not surprised by developments. 
It suggests that China's foreign policy will not be greatly affected by Soviet events.
But among Mr. Deng's recent comments now circulating among officials is this: "One cold war has ended; two others have begun."
There is no explanation of what the two new ones are, but presumably one is the ideological struggle between China and the West.
While officials are being told that China's open-door policy will open even wider, many are skeptical. 
The Chinese Academy of Social Sciences is trying to curtail travel by its scholars to the United States, saying there have been too many such trips recently, and some sensitive work units have called meetings in the last two weeks to warn employees to avoid all contacts with foreign journalists.
One Chinese who attended such a meeting said they were told that they would be punished if they were found to be in touch with foreign correspondents.
