
Faced with the threat of renewed protests in Tiananmen Square, the authorities sealed the area to the general public today while arranging for thousands of schoolchildren to sing and dance in the square.
Overseas dissidents had called on Chinese to mount a peaceful protest today by quietly gathering in large numbers on Tiananmen Square and walking around it. 
Word spread through Beijing in recent days about the planned protest, and students said posters were put up at two or more universities calling for people to take part.
Apparently in response, the authorities sealed off the square around dawn and kept ordinary people behind a line of policemen. 
But while the crowds of onlookers seemed a bit greater than normal, it was clearly not the large turnout that dissidents had hoped for.
In the evening, when the police reopened Tiananmen to the public, about 1,000 people strolled onto the square, but most appeared to be tourists from other parts of China rather than dissidents making a political point.
 
Protest Planned for Thursday
The failure of Beijing residents to turn out in large numbers for the quiet protest suggested that it would be difficult for the democracy underground to mount other protests this spring, in the delicate period that includes the first anniversaries of the democracy movement. 
The quiet protests on the square were supposed to take place not only today but also on Thursday - the traditional day when Chinese honor the dead - but it is not clear if the authorities plan to close Tiananmen Square on that day as well.
Chinese leaders appear to have been concerned about the risks of unrest. 
Not only were most Chinese work units ordered to advise employees to stay away from the square, but some university students were given special bus trips today to the Great Wall and other distant sites, and foreign tourists were also told to stay away from the area.
A wreath and a floral arrangement, presented at the Monument to the People's Heroes on Saturday by two elementary schools, were removed overnight. 
The authorities may have worried that other work units or individuals would send many wreaths to the square as a way of mourning those killed last June, when the army crushed the democracy movement.
The ostensible reason for closing the square today was to allow 5,000 elementary school pupils to parade there and sing and dance in celebration of tree-planting projects and to hail the Asian Games, which will be held in Beijing in September.
