
At one of Beijing's elite universities not long ago, students were subjected to another of a series of propaganda films intended to insure the reindoctrination of China's future leaders along the correct Communist road.
These same students had led ''the counterrevolutionary rebellion'' crushed so brutally in June, and they have since been subjected to steady, numbing sessions of political education.
The film that evening, ''Wei Wei Kunlun,'' which translates roughly as ''Towering Mountain,'' depicted China before the Communist takeover in 1949. 
A scene of a demonstration being violently broken up brought cheers because unlike the case in June no tanks were used.
Party officials asked the students why they had applauded. 
''Because it was such a good film,'' they said.
 
Common on the Campuses
Stories of quiet mockery of this sort are common on the campuses. 
The familiar slogan ''Only socialism can save China'' has been slightly altered to become, ''Only without socialism can China be saved.''
Freshmen at Beijing University have been sent off to Hebei Province for military and political training for a year; older students say that when the freshmen return they will practice ''peaceful evolution'' on them -the party catch phrase for the supposed capitalist strategy to undermine Chinese Communism through the introduction of alien cultural influences. 
One upperclassman, a party member, said, ''We will pass on to them their proper education in the four evils'' - excessive eating, drinking, gambling and promiscuity - and he seemed to be quite serious about the task.
The rapid changes in Eastern Europe, and especially the overthrow and execution of Nicolae Ceausescu, the Rumanian leader who was a longtime ally of the Chinese leadership, have brought a few daring gatherings and posters. 
Like the mockery, they are indicative of a lasting disgust and a resoluteness of spirit largely untouched by the ideological corset being tightened everywhere in intellectual and academic life.
But while the investigations are winding down and students and teachers await the party's judgments on punishment, there is wariness and mistrust everywhere and a general depression about the future that argues against any rapid re-emergence of the sort of demonstrations that electrified the world last spring.
 
A Sense of Caution
The unexpected death of a prominent figure like Deng Xiaoping or Zhao Ziyang, the party leader who lost his job after showing some sympathy with the June demonstrations, could create a pretext for students to gather and march, but few believe the leadership would react a second time with so much confusion and delay.
Students and teachers interviewed over the last three weeks described caution and lack of purpose. 
Among many students there is a self-imposed cap on political discussion and an aimless escapism. 
There are increasing experiments in casual sex and alcohol abuse. 
''We're watching trashy movies and reading trashy novels,'' one student said. 
''Sidney Sheldon is very popular now, and so is 'I'll Take Manhattan.'
''
Students speak of a sense of isolation from the larger society. 
''The campus is a very small world,'' one said. 
''It's like living in a cage, and you feel watched all the time.''
People are ''depressed and discouraged,'' she said. 
''Life seems meaningless now, and they are cynical. 
They feel bored. 
Life is boring if you're in school or out, boring if you have a boyfriend or not, boring if you work or not.''
Students still speak of politics to their closest friends, ''but that gets boring, too,'' the student said. 
''We don't disagree about anything. 
We all want change. 
But politics once again seems like empty talk.''
 
Something to Hide
The analogy of Rumania frightens the Government right now, another student said. 
''All the killing frightens us, too. 
We don't think the Chinese Army will crack so quickly as in Rumania, and many more could die.''
Most students, one said, had made less than fully forthcoming self-criticisms and protected their friends, and there is a feeling that many teachers and deans are also protecting students from the authorities. 
''But there are a lot of people who participated and have something to hide,'' he said. 
''So people don't trust one another. 
It is one of the biggest successes of the Government.''
Some students said many wanted either to go abroad or to make a lot of money and live an easy life. 
Everyone seems to be learning English and trying to pass the language examinations required to study abroad. 
But freshman are now judged too young to study abroad, and graduating students are told they must stay in China and work off their debt to society. 
''It's a way of keeping people here,'' a teacher said.
Teachers describe relatively open political discussion in the faculty rooms, but they are under strict orders not to discuss politics in class or with students. 
''The party tells us, 'If you have your own views, O.K., but don't pollute them,' '' a teacher said.
Another described a faculty meeting with the party secretary, who complained that while some students had informed on others, no teachers had done so, behavior that set a bad example. 
The party secretary was particularly outraged because he had received anonymous letters purporting to inform on him. 
''We felt he had no sense of shame,'' the teacher said. 
''Only the die-hard leftists or the careerists pursue this witch hunt.''
 
Caution Is Still Needed
One must nonetheless be careful, another teacher said. 
She was teaching a night class in English to adults who were behaving passively while she was trying to explain the prefix ''octo.''
''So I finally said: 'Why don't you talk?
You're as stubborn as octogenarians!'
''The class laughed, but the next day she was called in by the party secretary and asked why she had made fun of the party leadership, which is largely composed of elderly officials. 
''I said that it was in the textbook,'' she said, ''and that was that, but it worried me. 
Someone obviously made a report.''
Another teacher said that while he understood his students' anger and shared it, he tried to caution them that the situation could get worse, as it did in the 1950's and '60's.
''The students are impatient, of course, and want rapid change, and they have their own ideas. 
But I don't want them to get into trouble or waste their lives. 
We've all been inspired by a few demonstrations and by Rumania, but I tell them: 'Right now, your lives are more important. 
Don't throw them away.'
''
