
It is less verdant and spacious than Beijing University, and far more isolated and gloomy than Tiananmen Square: a guarded compound in the southwest part of the capital that may be the next home for many leaders of China's democracy movement.
Surrounded by 13-foot walls topped by an electric fence, Beijing No. 1 Prison is a gray and dilapidated compound built in 1908, in the dying days of the Ching Dynasty. 
Its cells have been home to thieves and rapists and political idealists, and it leaves its mark on all of them.
There are eight hours of political education a week, intended to make inmates acknowledge their guilt and inspire them to support the Communist Party and the Government.
''The political education is effective,'' said Wang Hehao, a 25-year-old man serving an 18-year sentence for killing a man in a fight. 
''Before we did not understand anything about the law, but now we know about the need to respect the law and society.''
 
Where Minds Are 'Cleansed'
Beijing No. 1 Prison is for felons who have been convicted and sentenced to terms of more than 10 years, and so far it has not received any prisoners from the democracy movement. 
But in the coming months, as those people are brought to trial, some will end up behind the jail's walls, left to struggle for self-respect and the faith of their ideals in a system that aims not only to isolate criminals but above all to cleanse their contaminated minds.
Wei Jingsheng, an electrician serving a 15-year sentence for leading the 1978-79 democracy movement, was kept in solitary confinement early in the decade before being transferred to a prison camp in the desolation of Qinghai Province, in western China. 
The official press says he has a bad attitude and refuses to repent.
Xu Wenli, another leader of the Democracy Wall movement of a decade ago, remains in a cell here. 
Prison officials do not much like to talk about him, although when asked about his ideological progress they say it is ''about average.''
 
Bleak and Austere
No one knows how many people have been detained or arrested throughout China in connection with this year's democracy movement. 
Most estimates by diplomats range from 10,000 to 20,000. 
Some people are released after several days of interrogation, but arrests continue.
A visit to the No. 1 Prison offered a window into the life that many dissidents can anticipate for the next decade or two. 
It presented glimpses of an existence that is bleak and austere, but perhaps not so harsh as might be imagined.
In part, this may be because No. 1 Prison is a model institution, in contrast with places like the Gongdelin Prison, in the north of Beijing, where the guards are said to torture inmates by manacling them so tightly that they are unable to use their hands for days afterward.
And there is Qincheng No. 1 Prison, in the northern suburbs, where some intellectuals are believed to be confined behind an arched entrance known as the Atheists' Gate to Hell.
Still less accessible are the labor camps in remote areas of the far west and far north. 
Two Chinese officials with access to high-level information say a senior leader has proposed that new labor camps be built in the areas along the border to accommodate large numbers of those deemed counterrevolutionaries.
 
Bunk Beds and Guitars
Xu Jizhuang, the lean, affable warden of Prison No. 1, led the tour of the prison, showing how a dozen inmates are packed into six bunk beds in a room the size of a large American bedroom - crowded, but not strikingly so by Chinese standards. 
Many prisoners have guitars, which they play in their free hour each evening or on their day off each week. 
A few have books: some political or inspirational, but also a few novels.
About 2,000 prisoners live here, including 100 women and 30 people serving sentences for counterrevolutionary offenses. 
Inmates work eight hours a day, six days a week, in two prison factories, making socks and plastic objects like sandals and lunch boxes. 
They are paid about $1 a month, and the state turns a $300,000 annual profit on the operation.
Mr. Xu said 5 percent of former inmates were arrested for new crimes in the three years after their release. 
He attributed the rate to political education, along with technical and academic training programs.
The prisoners are allowed some access to television news and newspapers, and they were aware of the democracy movement when it was happening. 
But if there was any thrill at seeing the anti-Government demonstrations, it is dead now.
 
'Stable Environment'
''During the unrest, we were very indignant,'' said Liu Xuewen, a 23-year-old man serving a 12-year sentence for robbery. 
''What we want most is a stable environment.''
Of course, Mr. Liu was speaking not only to a foreign reporter but also to a half-dozen prison officials eyeing him with apprehension. 
While the reporter selected Mr. Liu at random for the interview, it was hardly a realistic probing of his attitudes.
Mr. Liu and the other inmates interviewed in these circumstances expressed considerable enthusiasm for prison conditions, sometimes with such apparent sincerity that it seemed they might be reluctant to leave. 
But three former inmates interviewed independently confirmed that while the No. 1 Prison is hardly idyllic, it is bearable.
The worst aspect is the winters, they said, because the prison is not centrally heated and the small stoves never raise the temperature enough to be very comfortable. 
In addition, they noted that some political prisoners have been kept in isolation -even guards are not allowed to talk with them - and that this takes an enormous toll on the prisoner's well-being and sanity.
 
One Bath Each Week
Ordinary prisoners, who appeared relatively healthy and well fed, are usually allowed to receive mail and to write two letters a month. 
They bathe weekly and receive one family visit a month. 
Particularly well-behaved prisoners are even allowed outside to visit their families on the Chinese New Year, and 15 percent have their sentences reduced for good conduct. 
Some have their sentences lengthened for fighting or other misconduct.
Inmates and officials say that torture and fighting are rare in the No. 1 Prison, and that brutality or rape among inmates is much less common here than in the United States.
But the official press has indicated that torture and wrongful imprisonment do occur on a large scale in some parts of the country. 
China Legal News reported that in the first half of 1986, 949 people were known to have been detained illegally, and 140 of them were killed or injured by ''cruel and vile methods.''
