
In a sign of continuing diplomatic tensions, two Americans have been ordered to leave China, presumably because of their activities during the recent pro-democracy demonstrations, an American official here said today.
The two Americans, Mark Radicia, 25 years old, a teacher at Nankai University in Tianjin, and Helen Qubain, 21, a student at the same univesity, were given until the end of the month to leave, the official said.
The two are believed to have maintained close ties with pro-democracy demonstrators in Tianjin, a large industrial port in northeast China.
An official at Nankai University said in a brief telephone interview that the university was ordered by the Tianjin public security bureau to tell the two Americans to leave China. 
He gave no reasons for the order.
Peace Corps Program on Hold
An American official said Mr. Radicia, who is from Omaha, and Ms. Qubain, from Buena Vista, Va., were now in Beijing. 
They are expected to leave the country within the next day or two, the official said.
The expulsions bring to five the number of Americans ordered expelled from China since the violent crackdown on the protest movement more than three weeks ago. 
Three journalists have also been expelled.
The order to the two Americans to leave followed notification by China that it was putting off a Peace Corps program that had been due to start this fall with the arrival of 20 American teachers in Sichuan Province. 
A United States official said today that the Chinese had given no reason for postponing the program, which would have been the first of its kind in any Communist country. 
The program was agreed to in April.
The official said the Chinese move, which was announced by the China Education Association for International Exchange, a Government organization, did not mean that the program would not eventually go ahead.
''We're not reading anything retaliatory into it,'' the official said. 
''It's not by any means canceled.''
The indefinite postponement of the Peace Corps program, however, seemed almost certainly to be linked to Chinese irritation with the United States, both for imposing sanctions against China after the crushing of the protest movement and for providing shelter in the American Embassy here for China's best-known dissident, the astrophysicist Fang Lizhi.
 
Visa Requests Are Up
But in one sign that China is allowing some aspects of relations with the United States to continue, American officials reported today on a rapid rise in the number of visa seekers already holding newly required exit permits. 
The Government said after the crackdown that all Chinese would have to have exit permits issued by the Public Security Bureau before they would even be allowed to enter foreign embassies to apply for visas.
An American official said that on Monday 100 people came to the embassy seeking visas, compared with just a handful in previous days. 
The English-language China Daily reported today that 8,520 of the newly required permits have already been granted.
A Chinese here said that the permit can generally be obtained when an applicant furnishes the Public Security Bureau with a letter from his workplace testifying that he had no part in the recent demonstrations. 
#24 Killed in Train Blast The Chinese also announced today that 24 people died when dynamite exploded on a passenger train traveling near Shanghai late Monday night.
While the explosion seemed to be an act of sabotage, it was unclear whether it was related to the protest movement or to the sweeping repression that has followed it.
The explosion recalled an incident three weeks ago when a train in Shanghai ran into demonstrators who were blocking tracks to protest the crackdown in Beijing. 
Six people were killed in the incident, and some protesters, apparently angered by the failure of the train to stop, set fire to the train. 
China later announced that three ''ruffians'' were executed for setting the fire and for burning police motorcycles.
While that incident made it seem possible that the sabotage Monday night was an act of retaliation, diplomats here pointed out that acts of vandalism on trains, including the setting of explosions, were known to take place in the months before the outburst of protest. 
Moreover, even if the sabotage Monday night was an act of retaliation, it seems unlikely that such acts of terrorism will become widespread here.
''China is just not a very likely place for that sort of thing,'' a diplomat said, referring to the tight control and pervasive surveillance here.
A television report on the incident showed a gaping hole in the side of a green passenger train, which was making the trip from Hangzhou, a major tourist city about 100 miles southwest of Shanghai. 
It said 11 people were seriously wounded in the blast.
 
Draft of New Law Approved
As details of the blast were announced, China's State Council today approved the draft of a new law on rallies and demonstrations. 
The draft is in preparation for a meeting of the standing committee of the National People's Congress, China's parliament, which is due to meet on Thursday.
There were no details of the law, but it is widely expected to impose formal restrictions on the rights of Chinese to hold demonstrations.
The laws being drafted by the State Council, which is a kind of Government cabinet, have been under discussion for months. 
When the discussions began, many analysts were expecting the laws to expand citizens' rights. 
Since the protests, however, the mood has changed dramatically.
