
In a sign that Beijing is trying to crack down on freewheeling economic policies in the provinces, China today announced the dismissal of the Governor of the nation's most experimental economic region.
The official, Liang Xiang, the Governor of Hainan Province in southern China, is a close associate of the ousted Communist Party leader, Zhao Ziyang. 
Mr. Liang is the highest-ranking official to be purged in connection with the Government's recent campaign against corruption.
The former Mayor of Shenzhen, the bustling city adjacent to Hong Kong, Mr. Liang, 71 years old, is a symbol in China of economic restructuring. 
Like many local officials, he put his faith in capitalist-style incentives and foreign investment rather than Marxist orthodoxy.
Accused of Corruption
The Chinese authorities accused Mr. Liang of ''serious mistakes by abusing power for personal interests'' and said he allowed his wife and son to profit from illegal business dealings. 
Mr. Liang is also said to have close ties to Mr. Zhao's second son, who has repeatedly been criticized for corrupt commercial practices.
The announcement said that Mr. Liang was replaced by Liu Jianfeng, a deputy party secretary of Hainan and former deputy minister of the electronics industry. 
In a dispatch by the official New China News Agency, the 53-year-old Mr. Liu said that Hainan's policies of restructuring and opening to the outside world would not be changed and indeed would be ''stepped up.''
Some analysts say they believe the dismissal of Mr. Liang is part of a broader attempt by hard-liners to clamp down on local officials who were closely associated with Mr. Zhao's style of economic change.
''It ties in with the overall politics of China and the overall attitude toward south China,'' a foreign official in Canton said of the dismissal. 
In a telephone interview tonight, he said the new leadership ''is going to try, as every political movement does, to reinforce itself and cut down opponents.''
He said a test of how far the purge would go may be the treatment of the party leader of Hainan, Xu Shijie, who has also been a vigorous proponent of foreign investment and economic restructuring. 
Mr. Xu was quoted extensively this week in the People's Daily, suggesting he is not in political trouble for the moment.
 
Other Discharged Officials
The most recent senior Government official to be discharged was Wang Meng, the Minister of Culture, although there was some question about whether he had previously requested to step down. 
Mr. Wang was considered too lenient on ''bourgeois liberalism,'' an official code word for corrupt Western values.
Another important figure in economic policy making, Liu Hongru, the vice governor of the People's Bank of China and an alternate member of the Central Committee, was dismissed from his post at the bank.
Unlike Mr. Liang, Mr. Wang and Mr. Liu were not explicitly discharged in the campaign against corruption.
Mr. Liang developed a national reputation as Mayor of Shenzhen, which expanded rapidly in recent years and is one of the most capitalist Chinese cities, partly because of foreign investment. 
Mr. Liang has also held numerous senior posts in the Guangdong provincial party and government apparatus at a time when the province was undergoing some of its most dramatic economic transformations.
 
Symbol of Economic Goals
Formerly under the administrative arm of Guangdong, Hainan was declared a separate province in 1988, and Mr. Liang was named its first Governor. 
The entire province is a special economic zone, and Hainan is regarded as the least regulated region in China. 
While the area is not important in the national balance sheet, it is a symbol of the nation's drive toward a more market-oriented economy.
The announcement on national television this evening did not cite specific crimes of corruption committed by Mr. Liang, but it said he violated regulations when he allowed a local company to import cars. 
His son, the announcement said, profited enormously from the deal.
Unlike some Chinese officials, Mr. Liang did not have a reputation for corruption, although he was sometimes accused of nepotism. 
There was no indication that criminal proceedings would be started, but the announcement today said the case was still under investigation.
