
With "counterrevolutionaries" said to be afoot at home and abroad, the task of keeping China safe for Communism is giving new prestige to a Government ministry so mysterious that even its official address is phony.
Known as the State Security Ministry, it represents the acme of secrecy in an already secretive bureaucracy. 
While the ministry says it is situated in a compound next to Tiananmen Square, Chinese say its headquarters are really in a large walled compound in northwest Beijing.
The nation's spymaster, Jia Chunwang, who is Minister of State Security, is a 53-year-old English-speaking engineer who is said to be a great admirer of the Central Intelligence Agency. 
But even though Mr. Jia is associated with the liberal wing of the Communist Party that is now in disgrace, State Security is thriving as one of the main institutional beneficiaries of the military crackdown on dissent in 1989.
While the police and the army were stumbling over themselves during the Tiananmen student protests, State Security undercover agents kept up their intelligence work even during the height of the protests, even when they were detained by unsuspecting soldiers along with members of the groups they had infiltrated.
 
Improving Benefits
A memorandum went out in September 1989, three months after the Tiananmen crackdown, providing for improved benefits for the State Security staff, and the ministry has been riding high ever since. 
While the C.I.A. and the K.G.B. sometimes have to scrounge for enemies to justify their existence, State Security faces a target-rich environment since the Chinese Government believes that enemies are everywhere.
While State Security also sends spies abroad, its main task is to ferret out foreign spies in China as well as dissidents and counterrevolutionaries. 
Its staff runs in the many tens of thousands, posted in all major cities around the country, as it keeps an eye on political troublemakers, religious figures, applicants for travel abroad and foreigners, just about every kind of foreigner.
"Foreign diplomats are open spies," declares a Chinese book on espionage, intended for circulation only to specially approved people. 
"They have used a thousand means, including bribes and sex, to recruit agents, including more than 10 of our Government staff."
The book also suggests monitoring foreign journalists, scholars, business executives, overseas Chinese, tourists and even athletes. 
The book cites many examples, including an American woman who it says was a C.I.A. spy while teaching English in Beijing. 
The book asserts that she used sex to trap four Chinese into giving her 200 Government documents.
 
Seen as Humane
In running intelligence operations, Mr. Jia is supervised by Qiao Shi, a senior Politburo member who oversees the police and courts as well as spying. 
Mr. Qiao, who is 67 years old and has a daughter studying in the United States, is said by Chinese who have met him to be cool-headed, ambitious and affable, and artful in avoiding revealing his own stand.
Remarkably, State Security has a reputation in China as a generally humane and liberal organization, at least compared with the police and the army. 
State Security staff members, many of them graduates of the ministry's own university, the Institute of International Relations, tend to be younger and better educated than most Government officials and complain to friends just as much as anyone else about the Government, sometimes more so, because no one is watching them.
"It's not like it used to be, when police were assigned to State Security work," said a former Public Security official who worked for many years with State Security colleagues. 
"Now almost all State Security staff are college educated, and they're much sophisticated than the police."
The former Public Security official says, with just a trace of jealousy, that the State Security officials always got better equipment than the police. 
Typically there are several thousand State Security staff members in all the provinces, reading mail, listening to phone calls, monitoring dissidents and deciding whom to allow abroad, he said.
 
Diplomats as Spies
While many of China's spies abroad are from the military's intelligence agency, many also come from the State Security Ministry, principally pretending to be diplomats or journalists. 
In the mid-1980's, however, morale apparently suffered when Wu Xueqian, then Foreign Minister and now Deputy Prime Minister, tried to reduce the ranks of spies posing as Chinese diplomats.
State Security suffered another major blow in 1985 when one of its department directors defected to the United States, and apparently gave evidence that led to the arrest shortly afterward of a mole in the Central Intelligence Agency, Larry Wu-tai Chin. 
Mr. Chin committed suicide, and some Chinese say there was a strong resentment in State Security that Deng Xiaoping, the senior leader, did not push for a deal with the United States to get Mr. Chin released to China.
In any case, these days State Security has recovered its prestige and established new influence. 
It has triumphed in the bureaucratic wrangling over the Foreign Ministry and is widely believed to be expanding its spy networks abroad.
China's spies abroad are believed to focus on monitoring Chinese dissident groups, obtaining military technology and gathering intelligence about Taiwan. 
The counterintelligence work within China has always focused on rooting out spies for foreign countries or for Taiwan -- just this week China announced the arrest of five people for spying for Taiwan -- but lately has also sought to counter American bugging of Chinese communications.
 
Secret Phone Lines in Doubt
Staff members in army and Communist Party offices have been warned that Western countries have used high-tech equipment to intercept secret phone calls. 
In the 1980's China received Western help in replacing hard-wire telecommunications lines with microwave systems that are said to have facilitated American intelligence-gathering because they are easier to tap.
While it is difficult to judge, State Security leaves the impression of being the most efficient ministry in the Chinese capital. 
Most Government offices are lackadaisical even when they are not on tea breaks, but State Security manages on a moment's notice to rustle up teams to pursue correspondents even in the middle of a rainy night or, most startling of all, at dinnertime.
In 1988 State Security even trapped an American diplomat who was having a sexual relationship with a Chinese woman and tried to blackmail him into spying for China. 
Instead the diplomat immediately told embassy officials, who hustled him out of the country.
 
