
Musing bitterly over the recently televised spectacle of a woman who turned her own brother in to the police, a Chinese scholar reached into the treasury of ancient lore and came up with an old saying.
Roughly translated, the saying was ''For the sake of the great cause, destroy your loved ones.''
The expression - used in Imperial China to persuade people to inform on traitors - shows that the repression of the democracy movement, which has included, among other techniques, public exhortations to denounce students and other leaders, has its precedence in China's long history.
Indeed, it seems fair to ask whether the events in China of the last few weeks stem from the Chinese tradition itself, or whether they represent a new turning in this country's history. 
Is the harshness of the crackdown a product of 20th-century totalitarianism?
Or does it represent a continuation of this country's authoritarian tradition?
#2 Traditions in Conflict In many ways the protest movement and its violent repression can be seen as a re-enactment of an age-old conflict in this country. 
In the distant past, there were two enduring traditions.
One was legalism, whose great forebear was a Machiavellian practitioner named Li Si, a believer in the need to control the citizenry by an unsparingly harsh system of laws and punishments. 
The Communist rulers who sent the army against students and have already sentenced 11 workers to death for their involvement in the protests seem to be the inheritors of the legalist tradition.
On the other side were the humanist scholars, the Confucianists who, in principle at least, believed in government, not by laws and punishments, but by moral example and virtuous rule. 
There was also an escapist tradition in Taoist mysticism, which has been interpreted by some scholars as an effort to gain a spiritual liberation from the harshness of China's dictatorship.
The humanist tradition in China was not democratic. 
It accepted the right of the emperor to rule autocratically. 
But it placed a high value on the responsibilities of intellectuals to criticize the emperor when his rule became too harsh. 
It stressed the notion that the emperor could lose his moral right to rule - the mandate of heaven - if he were cruel or incompetent.
 
Humanists Rarely Win
The protesters who occupied Tiananmen Square in Beijing for a month before the crackdown in early June seemed to be saying to the Communist rulers that they had lost the mandate, in part because they were undemocratic - a relatively new and modern concept in China - and because they were mired in corruption. 
What was new was that the democracy movement was just that, a democracy movement, brandishing notions of human rights and free speech.
But the crushing of the students seems to echo a basic fact of Chinese history: the humanist tradition has rarely prevailed in specific conflicts with the emperor. 
The scholars, while retaining the respect and admiration of the people, have been buried alive, sent into exile and disgraced, their books burned and banned.
''What happened in the past few weeks was a democracy movement,'' a diplomat here said, ''but the student movement was also of a kind of rebellion that has happened many times in Chinese history before.''
A rebellion, the diplomat said, is not the kind of thing that can be accommodated by rulers of China; it must be suppressed.
''Authority figures should not and could not be challenged,'' John K. Fairbank, a senior historian of modern China, has written of the country's political tradition. 
''Criticism endangered authority and was therefore unacceptable,'' Mr. Fairbank said in his book ''The Great Chinese Revolution: 1800 to 1985.''
In suppressing this latest rebellion, China's Communist leaders have also reflected both tradition and novelty.
The almost nightly television scenes of arrested people, their arms held by two policemen and their heads forced downward in a kind of bow to the interrogators, seem - like the denunciations that have sometimes put them into that position -cruel both to Westerners and to the many Chinese who sympathize with them.
 
Punishment Old and New
But the treatment of the ''thugs,'' as many of those involved in the protest movement are being called, could also be seen as a variation on the traditional Chinese handling of criminals. 
A standard punishment in past centuries was to lock around the criminal's neck a wooden disk known as a kang. 
The device, which was heavy and painful to wear, exposed the criminal's face to public scorn and shame.
The Chinese police, in picturing arrested suspects on television held in a kind of airplane position, looking bruised and unkempt, their heads pushed downward, seemed to be trying to dehumanize them before the public in the way the kang did in past centuries.
But there is a clear difference, too. 
The kang was used on common criminals. 
Those being hauled before police interrogators in the continuing manhunt in China were participants in a movement demanding greater freedom. 
The effort to portray them as common ''thugs'' being advanced by an entirely modern campaign of incessant propaganda on television and in the newspapers seems to be drawn from 20th-century totalitarian practice.
The notion here is that any opposition to the Government is not just wrong; it is criminal, treasonous, counterrevolutionary, and those who led it deserve neither respect nor humane treatment.
