
China's top officials were believed to be meeting in secret today to resolve the nation's political crisis, but while there were many rumors in the capital there was no confirmation of an outcome.
All week there have been reports that the Politburo was meeting in an enlarged session, but the meeting today appeared to be a long-delayed plenum of the Central Committee. 
There was no official confirmation, but Chinese in a position to know described it as the fourth plenum of the 175-member Central Committee; the third plenum met last fall.
An Asian diplomat said that he had been told by Chinese that a large meeting was under way, but that he was unsure whether it was the Central Committee meeting, a party work conference that might precede the plenum or simply another enlarged session of the Politburo.
 
Search for 7 Intellectuals
The meeting appeared to have been called amid secrecy unusual since the end of the Maoist era even for the normally secretive Communist Party. 
One official said today that provincial governors and party leaders had been told that they could bring just one aide with them to Beijing, to prevent word from spreading too much.
As reports of the party meeting circulated, an all-points bulletin was obtained here today for seven prominent intellectuals who are accused of agitation during the recent democracy movement. 
Among the seven are one of China's best-known social scientists and one of its best-known businessmen.
While these seven appear to have escaped arrest so far, and at least one is reported to have escaped to Hong Kong, the television news reported extensively tonight on the arrest of a well-known literary scholar who was accused of being a ''black hand'' behind the democracy movement.
 
Changes at People's Daily
The all-points bulletin carried a Government seal, as well as photos of the seven intellectuals, and was almost certainly genuine. 
It was issued to top officials at security agencies and is to be posted at all airports, train stations, police stations and elsewhere, to help find and arrest the fugitives.
In another sign of the sweeping changes taking place in the corridors of power throughout the nation, People's Daily said today that its director and its editor had been changed ''for health reasons.''
The newspaper is published by the Communist Party and is by far the most important daily in the country, so the change in its leadership is a sign of the political transformation now taking place.
The new director is Gao Di, a Central Committee member who is believed to have links with Prime Minister Li Peng. 
The new editor is Shao Huaze, a military man who has ties to the family of President Yang Shangkun and is currently director of propaganda in the army's General Political Department.
''It brings one back to the Cultural Revolution, when army men were sent to run nearly everything,'' an American Government analyst said. 
''They belong to the same gang, which is now in control.''
The Asian diplomat said of the reported party meeting: ''Something is going on right now. 
None of the national or even local leaders were on television tonight, and that also is evidence that some kind of meeting is going on.''
One Chinese said the new Communist Party leader was Jiang Zemin, the Shanghai party leader. 
Mr. Jiang, a 63-year-old engineer who speaks English, Russian and Rumanian, has been mentioned as a possibility for the post of General Secretary, but the leading candidate has been Qiao Shi, a Politburo member in charge of internal security.
A Western diplomat said some associates of Mr. Qiao had indicated that he might not want the position, and if this is true it might make room for another person, like Mr. Jiang.
The new party leader would take the post of Zhao Ziyang, who has not been seen in more than five weeks and is believed to have been purged in a power struggle that began because he took a conciliatory attitude toward student demonstrators.
 
Prominent Political Scientist
Among the seven intellectuals cited in the all-points bulletin obtained today is Yan Jiaqi, one of China's most prominent political scientists and a scholar with many friends in the United States. 
Mr. Yan, who is 47, was one of China's most outspoken scholars and with his wife, Gao Gao, had written a study of the Cultural Revolution. 
Mr. Yan and Miss Gao are now reported to have escaped to Hong Kong, although this could not be confirmed.
Another is Wan Runnan, the 42-year-old head of the Stone Corporation, an extremely successful high-technology company in Beijing. 
Mr. Wan, a scientist who started the company with several colleagues, may be in trouble because a research foundation financed by his company was involved in an attempt to overturn martial law by calling an emergency session of the National People's Congress Standing Committee. 
The head of that research foundation, Cao Siyuan, has disappeared, and Mr. Cao's absence from the list suggests that he has already been arrested.
Chen Yizi, the head of the Government's Institute for Restructuring the Economy, is also on the list. 
Mr. Chen's institute attracted some of the nation's most able young economists and suggested many bold experiments with the economy. 
It was closely associated with Mr. Zhao, the party leader.
The others on the list include Bao Zunxin, a prominent historian in the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences; Su Xiaokang, a writer and film producer whose television series ''River Elegy'' prompted enormous controversy last year for its criticisms of traditional Chinese culture; Wang Juntao, an editor of the provocative Economics Weekly newspaper, and Chen Ziming, an economist at a Beijing research institute.
 
What Their Petition Said
Mr. Yan, Mr. Su and Mr. Wang signed a petition on May 19 that was one of the boldest to come out of the democracy movement. 
It read:
''We, as intellectuals, in the name of our personal integrity and all our moral rectitude, with our body and mind, with all our dignity as individuals, solemnly swear never to retreat in the quest for democracy pioneered by the students with their blood and lives, never under any pretext to disengage ourselves because of cowardice, never to allow again the humiliations of the past, never to sell out our moral integrity, never to submit ourselves to dictatorship, never to pledge allegiance to the last emperors of the China of the 80's.''
The television dwelled extensively tonight on another intellectual, Liu Xiaobo, a young literary scholar who was accused of being a behind-the-scenes manipulator of the student movement. 
Mr. Liu was not shown on television, but the announcer said he had been detained and was under investigation.
''He had been drafting an open letter to the students of China, to support and fan the students' movement,'' the television announcer said. 
''On April 27, he came back to Beijing from the United States, and he directly took part in and fanned the turmoil and the riot.''
Mr. Liu, who is said to have been arrested on June 6 when he went out for a bicycle ride, made no attempt to go in hiding after the military crackdown on June 4. 
Most of the others who are wanted are apparently in hiding, and some may have fled the country.
 
Fate of the 7 Is Unclear
It is not clear what will happen to Mr. Liu, or to the other well-known intellectuals if they are caught. 
Many diplomats and Chinese say they doubt that they would be executed, but few will rule out the possibility.
The Government also reported several other arrests today, but no new executions.
An official of the Shanghai foreign affairs office said in a telephone interview today that the three executions in Shanghai on Wednesday were not public, as earlier reported. 
The official said the condemned were shown to a crowd, and afterward taken to the execution ground, where they were shot without any spectators present.
In the shake-up at People's Daily, the newspaper would not say what had happened to its former director, Qian Liren, or to its former editor, Tan Wenrui. 
Both apparently lost their jobs because of the relatively independent path that the newspaper tried to pursue for a time in May, and perhaps because reporters of the newspaper were openly demonstrating for freedom of the press.
Mr. Gao, the new director, with overall responsibility for the newspaper, is a former party leader for Jilin Province in northeast China. 
Prime Minister Li worked in the province in the 1950's and 1960's and continues to have close connections there, so Mr. Gao is presumed to be an associate of his.
Mr. Shao, the new editor, is not so well known. 
As head of propaganda in the army's General Political Department, he is under Yang Baibing, the head of the department. 
Mr. Yang is the younger brother of President Yang, and that may explain his rise.
 
BUSH ASKS SENATORS FOR PATIENCE
WASHINGTON, June 23 (Special to The New York Times) - Under pressure from members of Congress to take sterner steps against China, President Bush asked leading senators today to show patience in assessing his actions in response to the suppression of the Chinese pro-democracy movement.
Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., Democrat of Delaware, said the President took the initiative in making the appeal at a White House meeting with six senators from each party that was called to discuss the Administration's policy toward Israel. 
At the meeting, Mr. Bush spoke of ''our unquestioned support'' for Israel, said Marlin Fitzwater, the White House spokesman.
Members of the senatorial delegation appeared to be generally sympathetic to the President's appeal. 
Mr. Bush has come under growing pressure in recent days from Congress to adopt harsher sanctions and more forceful language in responding to the wave of arrests and executions of pro-democracy demonstrators in China.
Up to now, the President has suspended all military sales to China, begun efforts to postpone more than $1 billion in international development loans to Beijing and banned high-level exchanges between American and Chinese officials. 
A move is under way in the House of Representatives to legislate additional economic sanctions.
Liu Guoping, the sister of a Chinese soldier killed by demonstrators during the pro-democracy protests, as she was presented with her brother's rifle in a ceremony broadcast on national television (Associated Press) (pg. 
4)
