
A few months ago, the authorities started noticing something very strange, scratched their heads and called in specialists who also scratched their heads but couldn't come up with an explanation to the mystery: why, all of a sudden, does China have so many flies?
No one seems to know the answer, but with the same Communist zeal that the Government hunts down "counterrevolutionaries," it has launched a grand campaign to wipe out flies.
"To build a 'City of No Flies' is a requirement of a highly civilized modern city," a senior official, Tie Ying, was quoted as saying recently in the official Beijing Daily. 
"It is a requirement of reform and openness and a means to push the economy to a higher stage."
China's leaders are calling on the masses to make greater contributions in the front against the flies, and the expression "City of No Flies" has become a rallying cry. 
Front-page news articles describe the latest battlegrounds of the fly war, the different tactics used and the successes in diluting the density of flies per room.
 
A Bid for the Olympics
A major reason for the campaign, which began in March, is to boost Beijing's chances of being host to the Olympics in 2000. 
The International Olympic Committee will decide on the location of the games next year, and the Chinese Government believes that if it stamps out flies -- in part by cleaning out hidden repositories of squalor and feculence -- it will be more likely to be chosen.
"Our goal is to create a city of no flies," said Gao Yukun, a senior health official in Beijing's Eastern District. 
"But we won't just kill flies. 
We want to create clean cities."
As part of the campaign, Beijing, which has a population of about 10 million people, purchased 130 tons of pesticides and held training courses to teach people the most advanced methods for eradicating flies.
Officials hold high-level meetings to discuss strategy and exchange status reports. 
Everyone is urged to study models of cleanliness, like the Foreign Ministry, which won praise from Beijing's Mayor, Chen Xitong.
 
Even in the Wonton Soup
Early in the summer, when the authorities sent their work teams into the dirty bowels of China's cities, they were alarmed to discover that flies were buzzing all over: in the gutter, in the toilet, in the dusty rooms, in the wonton soup.
"By June, we found that there were significantly more flies than before," said Zhang Xizeng, a senior health official in the Beijing Government. 
"It was this way all over the country. 
We don't know why."
The campaign bored deeper and the city held special "attack weeks," or cleaning festivals. 
Citizens posted banners bearing the slogan, "Mobilize the Masses to Build a City of No Flies," and distributed two million pamphlets to publicize the campaign.
Scores of children and elderly citizens joined special swat teams. 
They swatted flies, sprayed and sprinkled poison and cleaned out the garbage cans and bathing areas.
During one of the "attack weeks," the city distributed about 15 tons of pesticides, along with 200,000 fly swatters. 
In mid-July, after the first blitz, the density of flies had dropped 20 to 30 percent from the previous month. 
During another "attack week" in August, 1,000 teams of elderly people and young children hunted down flies, using 17,600 pounds of poison.
As in any major political campaign, citizens throughout the nation feel obliged to declare their support. 
Privately run restaurants post the slogans on the walls, hotels hang red banners and senior officials, like the Mayor, go on inspection tours.
A group of Beijing sixth-graders wrote a letter to Mayor Chen to propose that they use their summer vacations productively by swatting flies and cleaning up alleys filled with garbage.
To an outsider, Beijing does not seem to be particularly plagued by flies any more than, say, New Delhi or New York. 
But China is still trying to hold its cities to a tough standard for its showcases to the world: out of every 100 rooms, only one room is allowed to have two flies. 
In some parts of Beijing, the density was as high as 33 flies per room in June.
 
The Dry- Dish Test
Aside from taking aim at flies and rats, the campaign also promotes other ways of improving hygiene. 
Restaurants must pass a three-step dish-cleaning test that includes using water hot enough that it evaporates on the plates after rinsing. 
One joint-venture hotel, the Tianlun Dynasty Hotel, was fined about $735, partly for failing the dry-dish test.
Officials say that statistics on flies and rodents are difficult to collect. 
A few decades ago when the Government wanted to clean up the city by promoting campaigns against rats, it had citizens cut the tails off the rats they killed and mail them to the unit that collected the statistics. 
But then the Government discovered that children were picking up diseases from handling the dead rats.
Now, one of the rat tests consists of sprinkling piles of powder in several parts of a room, waiting 24 hours, then checking how many footprints there are. 
If two out of three piles have prints, then the room fails the permissible standard.
The campaign is producing some clear results. 
According to official statistics, the city of Beijing alone has cleaned up 26,000 dirty areas that bred flies and disposed of 270,000 tons of garbage that had been left on the streets or in vacant lots. 
Workers installed screens for 300 public toilets and cleaned 47,000 dustbins.
 
Dissent Even on This Issue
The Government knows it is up against extraordinary odds. 
When the weather is hot and damp and there is plenty of garbage for fly food, female flies can lay batches of 100 to 150 eggs every 18 days, according to Yang Jianmei, an entomologist at Beijing University.
Most citizens agree with the aims of the campaign and are fond of pointing out that even the United States and European countries still have flies. 
But for some people, the Government propaganda is nettlesome.
"A cleaner city is something that no one would normally oppose," said a young Chinese researcher. 
"But the Government turns everything into a political campaign. 
I don't like flies, but the way the Government forces you to kill flies, I'm almost tempted not to side with the Government."
