
Somewhere in the far west of China, nestled in the Himalayas, is a Shangri-La brimming with contentment and human rights -- or so say the Chinese newspapers these days.
It is Tibet, although it does not entirely resemble the Tibet that Western visitors describe. 
The Chinese newspapers are full of reports about progress there, as China on Wednesday celebrates the 40th anniversary of what it calls "the peaceful liberation of Tibet."
China is using the 40th anniversary celebrations to spread its own perspective on Tibet: that the "roof of the world" has always been part of China, that the life there has improved dramatically in 40 years of Communist rule, and that the overwhelming majority of Tibetans are delighted with socialism.
"Only after Tibet conducted democratic reforms did the masses truly become the masters and life become better with each passing day," People's Daily declared today at the top of the front page. 
"With life this good, the masses are very angry at the few people stll festering for Tibetan independence."
Li Tieying, a Politburo member, has arrived in the Tibetan capital of Lhasa to lead a delegation to attend the celebrations. 
Scores of Chinese journalists have also arrived in Lhasa, but no China-based foreign reporters have been allowed to visit Tibet for the festivities.
Duan Jin, a Foreign Ministry spokesman, explained that the Tibetan authorities were limited in their capacity to host foreign journalists, and that in any case Western reporters were not always fair in their coverage.
For the last few years, the Chinese Government has only rarely permitted foreign reporters to visit Tibet, apparently because the journalists invariably report that the population would prefer independence to the current regime. 
While diplomats and scholars are often skeptical of some of the assertions and criticisms made by the Dalai Lama, the exiled spiritual leader of the Tibetan people, his photo is everywhere in Tibet and there is little doubt that he is still revered and supported by virtually all Tibetans.
The nature of the celebrations on Wednesday has not been revealed, perhaps for security reasons. 
Separatist demonstrations, often led by Buddhist monks and nuns, have occurred regularly in Tibet for four years, and martial law was lifted in Lhasa only last May. 
Martial law was imposed in March 1989, after clashes that left at least 16 people dead.
"They must be taking a lot of precautions" to insure that there will be no unrest, said an Asian diplomat in Beijing. 
He noted that there have been reports that the army and police presence in Lhasa has been bolstered substantially in recent months.
A Tibetan court sentenced three Chinese, all members of the Han ethnic majority, to death last month for killing a Chinese soldier and stealing guns and ammunition. 
A Tibetan newspaper said the three planned to sell the weapons to "rioters and rebels in Lhasa."
The three men, who presumably have been executed by now, had attacked a government armory in late March, killing the guard and stealing 19 pistols and 869 bullets. 
The incident was a reminder that while the opposition to Chinese rule has been largely peaceful so far -- partly because it is backed by Buddhist monks who profess pacifism -- it is not impossible that protesters will increasingly turn to violence.
The celebrations on Thursday will mark the 40th anniversary of the signing of a 17-point agreement between the Communist Government and representatives of the Dalai Lama. 
Tibetan exiles say that the agreement, which concedes that Tibet is part of China, was achieved by threats and coercion. 
In any case, they say, Beijing has not abided by the promises in the agreement.
The topics of a seminar in Beijing on the 40th anniversary suggest the way that the commemorative activities are unfolding. 
Themes included "Tibet being an inseparable part of China" and "the great achievements made in Tibet in the last four decades since the region was peacefully liberated."
