
Like a thick carpet of snow, silence has settled over China. 
In muffled voices, among friends, some people still mock their leaders and dream of change, but despite the lifting of martial law last week they are quiet in public, or they are in jail.
Everyone except Hou Dejian. 
Seven months after violence erupted around him on Tiananmen Square, five months after he came out of hiding in the Australian Embassy in Beijing, Mr. Hou has decided that it is time to shatter the silence.
''I hate violence,'' Mr. Hou, one of China's best-known pop singers and songwriters, said in an interview in his apartment here. 
''I don't think it's good to take a gun and shoot Deng Xiaoping, or to use violence to overthrow the Li Peng Government. 
But I can't keep quiet. 
I want peaceful change in China, and I want to help that process.''
 
The Rumania Factor
''There has to be change,'' Mr. Hou added somberly. 
''Otherwise we will face what happened in Rumania.
''If nobody speaks out, and the economy deteriorates, and the Li Peng Government goes on treating the people as if they're enemies, then the people will be turned into the enemies of the Government. 
In Chinese, we have a saying: 'You force us to overthrow you.'
So now I'm telling the Li Peng Government, 'Don't force the people to overthrow you.'
''
In private, many young Chinese are bitterly critical of Mr. Deng, China's senior leader, and especially of Mr. Li, the Prime Minister. 
But what makes Mr. Hou unusual is that in the last few days he has decided that he is willing to voice criticism publicly, even to foreign journalists.
 
'I'm Prepared for This'
When a reporter asked him if it was really possible to quote him saying such things, he scarcely paused.
''I'm afraid to die, and I would hate to be imprisoned,'' he said. 
''But I'm prepared for this. 
I've made up my mind to make noise.''
A lean 33-year-old with an easy laugh, Mr. Hou has always been an iconoclast. 
A native of Taiwan, he defected to the Chinese mainland seven years ago, and his songs were promptly banned on Taiwan. 
His independent way of thinking wore out his hero's welcome from the Communist authorities, and these days his works are banned here - although they are again allowed on Taiwan.
In a song written during the democracy movement last spring, Mr. Hou referred to the oppressive political atmosphere and asked:
What is the weather today?
The sky drops lower and lower. 
Why is it stil not raining?
What is the weather today?
Tell us, how can we breathe?
 
Account of Tiananmen Events
On the night of June 3 and June 4, Mr. Hou was in the center of Tiananmen Square, in a hunger strike with three other intellectuals to galvanize opposition to martial law. 
When tens of thousands of army troops battled their way to Tiananmen Square, killing hundreds and wounding thousands of protesters along the way, Mr. Hou negotiated with the troops to allow the students in the center of the square to leave.
According to Mr. Hou's account, much of which is confirmed by others who were there, he and other protest leaders first appealed to those around the monument to give up anything that might be used as a weapon. 
After 20 minutes, one worker was finally persuaded to give up a machine gun with which he had planned to defend the square from troops. 
Mr. Hou said Liu Xiaobo, another hunger striker who now is in prison, smashed the gun to make it inoperable.
And so, at about 5 A.M. on June 4, the 3,000 students remaining in the center of Tiananmen Square marched out. 
Mr. Hou said that he was in the rear and did not see anyone remaining, but that a small number could have stayed without his necessarily seeing them.
 
Refuge With Australians
Two days later, Mr. Hou learned that his friend and fellow hunger striker, Mr. Liu, had been arrested. 
So Mr. Hou sought refuge in the Australian Embassy, and stayed for more than two months. 
He finally left after receiving a written guarantee that he would not be punished and that he would be allowed to travel freely to and from China.
Immediately after he left the embassy, Mr. Hou gave interviews to the official press in which he asserted that he had seen no one killed in Tiananmen Square. 
The interviews were used by the Chinese Government to back up its assertion that there had been no massacre in the square.
Some young Chinese felt betrayed after seeing those interviews, and there was speculation that Mr. Hou bought his freedom by backing the Government line. 
In his defense, Mr. Hou says that Communist officials told him he had to give the interviews, and that in any case he told the truth.
Shortly after June 4, there were reports of a massacre of thousands of students in the center of Tiananmen Square. 
Now those reports are widely though not universally discounted, partly because of the testimony of Mr. Hou and others who were there. 
The consensus is that while troops fired on crowds in many parts of Beijing, including the Avenue of Eternal Peace, at the north end of the square, and that hundreds were slain, there was little or no killing of those students gathered in the center of the square.
Mr. Hou says he has no idea whether anyone died in the center of Tiananmen Square. 
Asked about reports that students were killed shortly after leaving the square, he says he was told by a witness that 11 were killed several hundred yards to the west, as they tried to make their way home. 
What is important, he said, is not where people were killed but that they were killed at all.
 
Cannot Give Concerts
These days Mr. Hou is unable to give concerts or make records, and despite assurances from the authorities, he has been told to ''wait for a while'' before leaving China. 
So Mr. Hou spends his time with his music, singing blues and writing songs. 
In one written on June 3, just before the troops attacked, he says:
 
Everything can be changed.
Nothing is too far away.
Let's prick our ears like a dog,
And nobody can lie to us any more.
Let's pry open our eyes, and
Nobody can distort the truth again.
''Before June 4, I wasn't a dissident or protester,'' Mr. Hou said. 
''Now I'm training to become one.''
