
Of all the names being bandied about these days as potential prime ministers, one evokes a special tingle -- depending on your vantage point -- of either hope or horror.
Zhu Rongji, a former rightist who has spent more years in disgrace than in power, is the fastest-rising star in China's political firmament. 
But Mr. Zhu, a fluent English-speaker and aggressive advocate of economic change, faces a horrendous image problem within the party leadership: admirers abroad have affectionately dubbed him "China's Gorbachev."
This helps Mr. Zhu about as much as it would benefit President Bush for China's hard-liners to hail him as "America's Mao Zedong."
"You're not going to write a story saying how great Zhu Rongji is, are you?" a Chinese official who likes Mr. Zhu asked reproachfully. 
"Because whenever there's an article like that, he gets whacked politically."
 
Specter of Gorbachev
Vice President Wang Zhen, an acid-mouthed octogenarian who peppers his conversations with village expletives, is said to have warned colleagues last year that "there is a Gorbachev sleeping beside us."
Mr. Wang did not mention any names, but that's the kind of comment that would have Politburo members craning their necks to look at Mr. Zhu.
Still, the 63-year-old Mr. Zhu (whose name is pronounced joo rong jee) has managed to survive both the attacks and the compliments. 
In his spacious, air-conditioned second-floor office, just inside the north gate of China's park-like leadership compound of Zhongnanhai, Mr. Zhu has amassed prestige and authority along with the calligraphy that he hangs on the wall.
Named a Deputy Prime Minister last year, Mr. Zhu is one of several contenders hoping to replace Prime Minister Li Peng when his five-year term expires early next year. 
It is unclear, however, if the position will be vacant; Mr. Li is a skilled tactician who is fighting for a second term.
"Zhu Rongji is doing really well right now," said a family member of a top official. 
"But in China, the better things look for you, the worse your prospects really are. 
It's the bird in front of the flock that gets shot."
Some officials say the present fragile consensus at Beidaihe, the beach resort where China's elderly leaders are playing bridge and deciding the nation's future, is to allow Mr. Li to retain the post of Prime Minister. 
But they say that even according to this plan, Mr. Zhu would become first deputy prime minister in charge of the economy, so that he would be breathing down Mr. Li's neck.
"Even if Zhu Rongji isn't made Prime Minister, it may not matter so much," said a party member who has discussed policy with Mr. Zhu. "Because in any case, he'll be in charge of economic policy."
When summoned to Beijing last year from his previous post as Shanghai's Mayor, Mr. Zhu was given the task of unsnarling endless debt chains among state-owned companies. 
Partly because he was more successful than most people expected, he was named head of a new department called the Economic and Trade Office. 
It is emerging as a super-ministry with overall responsibility for managing the economy.
 
Nominal and Real Power
Officials say that a deal has been struck for Mr. Zhu to vault onto the Politburo's standing committee, the nation's top policy-making body. 
It is exceeded in authority only by the so-called sitting committee of octogenarians who are nominally retired but continue to hold ultimate power.
The key to Mr. Zhu's success is that Deng Xiaoping, the nation's 87-year-old senior leader, is acting as his campaign manager. 
Mr. Deng has gone out of his way to praise Mr. Zhu's understanding of economics.
Mr. Zhu is disliked not only by some hard-liners, however, but also by many midlevel and senior officials. 
They find him a terror to work for. 
Extremely demanding, Mr. Zhu scolds people publicly in a society where it is considered more polite to stab them in the back.
"Some comrades are kind of muddled, and even when you point out some problems they figure they're in the right," Mr. Zhu said in a recent confidential speech, defending his style. 
"Even their self-criticisms are superficial. 
So then you've got to criticize those laggards by name.
"I also encourage everyone to criticize me," Mr. Zhu added in the speech, parts of which appeared in a restricted-circulation publication for party officials. 
"A couple of times, the criticisms were pretty nasty, and they weren't entirely fair. 
But I listened. 
Whether or not the complaints are correct, it's good for them to let off steam."
Mr. Zhu still speaks Chinese with a trace of a Hunan Province accent, reflecting his childhood there, but he studied electrical engineering at Qinghua University in Beijing and has spent most of his life in the capital. 
He took up Mao's invitation in 1956 to offer the party constructive criticisms, and a year later he fell victim, along with others who spoke out, to the "anti-rightist campaign."
By a fluke he escaped with extremely lenient punishment: he was allowed to hold on to a job in the central Government, but in disgrace. 
In 1978, when Mr. Deng came to power, Mr. Zhu was rehabilitated and climbed onto the fast track.
 
An Embarrassing Encounter
While many Chinese believe that Mr. Zhu is different from other leaders, the last thing he wants is for this to be pointed out. 
When he once found himself seated beside an American correspondent at a dinner, he studied the reporter's name card and then asked accusingly, "Weren't you the one who wrote that article?"
The journalist asked if he meant an article that had appeared 10 months earlier, reporting that Chinese like Mr. Zhu much more than other leaders. 
"Yes, that article," Mr. Zhu said coolly, and he switched to English and quoted the headline word for word.
When the reporter acknowledged writing the article, Mr. Zhu paused for a moment in horror, and then pivoted. 
For the rest of the dinner he engaged in conversation exclusively with the person on his other side.
