
Hou Xiaotian's face brightens with an innocent grin as she weaves her bicycle through the traffic. 
But her girlish demeanor belies a life these days composed more of tears than smiles, more of prison than family, and of memories of a husband whom she is not scheduled to be reunited with again until the year 2002.
Ms. Hou, 28 years old, has become virtually the only person in Beijing now who dares to speak out for human rights to the foreign press. 
She assumed the role after her husband, Wang Juntao, was sentenced in February to 13 years in prison for his role in the Tiananmen Square democracy movement.
"Why am I doing this?" she asked. 
"If I can speak freely, if this can take place in China, then it shows that China is making progress. 
I am nudging the Government. 
This is an opportunity and I must not abandon it."
Since April, her husband has been confined alone in a small jail cell where he eats, sleeps, and uses a toilet, Ms. Hou said. 
A scholar of economics, with a passion for democracy, he can barely read because of the dim light. 
His family said he suffers from hepatitis B, a potentially fatal ailment of the liver.
 
Husband on Hunger Strike
Last week, Mr. Wang began a hunger strike as a protest against his treatment and in response to the authorities' decision not to allow Ms. Hou to visit him this month. 
Normally she is allowed one monthly visit for 30 minutes, but this month the session was cancelled -- apparently because the authorities were annoyed at Ms. Hou's contacts with foreign journalists.
For more than a year, Ms. Hou's battle has focused on improving prison conditions for her husband, and she has repeatedly approached various officials in different Government departments to solicit help. 
She brought cakes and gifts to the prison doorsteps on his birthday, their wedding anniversary and the new year, but both she and her gifts were turned away.
The setbacks, she said, have taken a toll on her emotional and physical health. 
Earlier this summer, she became weary and severely depressed, crying every day, and she spent more than a month in the hospital.
"They are really villains, trying to exploit the love a woman has for her husband to attain to their means," Ms. Hou said in an appeal printed earlier this year by a human rights organization. 
The authorities wanted to know what she had told foreign reporters, threatening to reject the presents she had brought for her husband, she said.
 
Served 5 Months in Prison
"I knew the life inside prisons because I had been inside one, and so I was very concerned about my husband," the appeal continued. 
"How dare they blackmail me using this relationship and my feelings. 
They are really not human beings at all."
Ms. Hou was jailed for five months until April 1990 in a jail cell separated from the outside world by eight layers of doors or gates. 
The authorities charged that she helped her husband attempt to escape the law in the months after the June 1989 crackdown. 
She insists, however, that she did not help him. 
But now she suggests that she wished she had.
"I was full of despair and thought I would never come out," Ms. Hou said of her time in prison. 
"I know what my husband must be going through. 
He must be losing his respect. 
I have wronged him. 
In jail I thought that if I got out, I would help my husband."
Mr. Wang is just as concerned about his wife. 
When he first decided in July to begin a hunger strike, he told his parents in confidence, but not Ms. Hou, for fear she could not bear the news. 
After his trial in February, he sent a letter to his lawyers and closed with a request that they look after his wife for him.
 
Allowed to Provide Medicine
"Please help me comfort Xiaotian," he urged in the letter, which was later published by newspapers in Hong Kong. 
"Let her calm down, not to get into any more trouble, not to break any law, especially not to become impolite to those who are handling my case. 
I still need her to help me in many things on the outside, so she must take care of herself."
For a long time, the authorities denied that Mr. Wang was ill, but finally in June, they admitted to his family that he had hepatitis and allowed them to bring him some medicine.
But the family has not been allowed to give him medicine regularly, and earlier this month the Government denied to a visiting United States Congressional delegation that Mr. Wang was sick. 
Mr. Wang apparently contracted hepatitis while he was being treated by injection for a toothache during his detention in Qincheng prison, family members said. 
In April, he was moved to Beijing No. 2 prison, as was another dissident, Chen Ziming, who was also sentenced to 13 years. 
The two men were detained in 1989, two years before their trial, and this period will count toward their jail terms.
"I speak about the most basic right of man, what God gave man -- even though I don't believe in God -- and I tell them that you must give back what man is born with," Ms. Hou said. 
"This is what I fight for."
 
'I Can Be Taken In Anytime'
She talks little about the shortcomings of socialism or of the need for freedom of the press and political reform, and says she believes that this may be one reason why the authorities have been relatively tolerant of her outspokenness. 
She is still concerned, however, that she could be detained or arrested at any moment, and one stark reminder of the risk came when Zhang Weiguo, a prominent journalist who spoke openly against the political system, was detained for three weeks this summer in Shanghai.
"I've been waiting for them to come get me," she said. 
"When Zhang Weiguo was detained, it made me realize what a thin tightrope I am walking on. 
I can be taken in anytime."
Eased out of her job in an employment center, she has no means of livelihood and no place to live. 
Instead, Ms. Hou, who has a graduate degree in psychology, moves from place to place, relying on handouts from friends who dare to help her as she continues to fight for her husband so that she can go on with her life.
"What I really want is a family, to be a housewife -- a virtuous wife and a good mother," Ms. Hou said. 
"I want a child, but now I can't have one."
