
Behind the armed guards at the grand main gate of the compound, beyond the cafeteria in a pleasant park-like setting, is a building that is identified as No. 5, but which might better be labeled as a battleground for the future of China.
It is the editorial office of People's Daily, the most important of the 1,459 newspapers published in China. 
In a nation where power struggles are constant and camouflaged, People's Daily functions for people here and abroad as a window - heavily frosted - into the minds of the Chinese leadership.
During the democracy movement in the spring of 1989, the walls of building No. 5 were plastered with posters in which many of the newspaper's 1,900 staff members endorsed the movement, and expressed embarrassment at the pablum they felt they were writing.
Now it seems that the battle for People's Daily has ended in a remarkable stalemate: The hard-liners have gained clear control of the newspaper, but many people no longer read it.
 
Mood at Paper Seen as Bleak
''It's so boring that I don't look at it anymore and neither do my friends,'' an economist in Beijing said. 
''We would rather read other papers, which at least contain some social news and crime news.''
The new publisher of People's Daily, Gao Di, a 63-year-old former provincial party secretary who lives in the same compound on Wanshou Road as Prime Minister Li Peng, declined to be interviewed. 
But other editors who spoke in officially arranged interviews asserted that stabilityI had returned to the newspaper.
''Last year the newspaper had some incorrect guidance, and we had to rectify our errors,'' said Zhang Yongwen, a senior editor. 
''Some people made mistakes. 
But with some political study they were able to improve their understanding and raise their consciousness. 
Some had unrealistic ideas. 
But once they had a proper understanding, they could return to work as normal.''
Other People's Daily reporters -interviewed privately in defiance of a ban on unauthorized contacts with foreign journalists - said the mood in the newspaper was bleak.
 
Promoting Hard-Liners' View
''Most people are quite depressed,'' said a reporter for the paper. 
''And there's little sense of hope that conditions will improve.''
But the reporter said that as the investigations and political study wind down, life is returning to a routine and that the new editor in chief, Shao Huaze, an army man, had proved to be more reasonable than some people had expected.
Under the newly arrived editorial team, including not only Mr. Gao and Mr. Shao but also a fresh deputy editor and deputy publisher, People's Daily has taken the lead in promoting the hard-liners' view that only Communism can save China. 
A typical front page carries articles about the activities of top leaders, along with a call for unity, a few items about improved economic performance, and perhaps an inspirational account about a model worker.
If gloom and frustration are the primary emotions in the People's Daily compound these days, it is not for the first time.
''There's only one thing that's accurate in People's Daily each day -the date,'' a former top editor once said to a group of friends, according to a Chinese who was there. 
And a poll in 1988 of 1,800 Chinese journalists found that only 1.1 percent thought that the public believed the press.
 
Role of 'Positive Propaganda'
One of the ways in which People's Daily has tried to build credibility is by soliciting letters to the editor. 
Each day the newspaper receives about 1,000 letters, and those are carefully scrutinized by a staff of 54 people for possible publication.
''Those letters we publish are those reflecting what people most care about and what people most want to read,'' said Li Youchun, the first vice director of the Masses Letters Department of People's Daily. 
Some of the published letters criticize traffic jams, pollution, rude clerks and other problems. 
But no attacks are permitted against Government policies.
''Criticism is an aspect of our jobs,'' said Wang Yongan, a deputy director of the Masses Letters Department. 
''But it's just a part. 
The main function is still positive propaganda.''
One problem for People's Daily is that the propaganda zigs and zags along with China's policies, and the newspaper's editors tend to be get in trouble at each twist. 
According to a book about People's Daily published last year, Chairman Mao Zedong warned the editor in chief in 1957 that in taking the job he should accept the risks of dismissal, expulsion from the party, divorce, imprisonment and even execution. 
So far no one has been executed, But Mr. Gao is the fourth publisher in the last seven years.
Because People's Daily is published by the Central Committee, the paper's editor and publisher have ministerial rank - along with perhaps 1,000 other current and former office holders in China - and the publisher in the past has been entitled to sit in on expanded meetings of the Politburo.
With a claimed circulation of 3.5 million, based overwhelmingly on subscriptions from offices rather than individuals, People's Daily is probably the most widely circulated newspaper in the country. 
The closest competitor is Reference News, a digest of positive news reports about China from abroad, which claims a circulation of 3.3 million. 
Because it has such a large circulation, People's Daily is able to charge foreign advertisers $40,000 for a full-page advertisement - insuring the newspaper a measure of prosperity.
''The People's Daily used to be very prestigious, and young journalists wanted to work there,'' said a reporter who turned down the chance to join People's Daily and now works for a rival newspaper. 
''Now smart young people would rather look elsewhere for jobs, because the People's Daily is absolutely inflexible. 
Rigor mortis is setting in.''
