
As a new round of civil war threatens Cambodia, diplomats here say China finds itself in the awkward position of wanting the Khmer Rouge troops it supports neither to win nor lose.
The Khmer Rouge, which brutally ruled the country from 1975 until the Vietnamese invasion in December 1978, is China's most dependable ally in the region, partly because no one else wants anything to do with the Khmer Rouge.
Yet Western and Asian diplomats say China would be alarmed if the Khmer Rouge enjoyed a major string of victories after the Vietnamese troop withdrawal under way. 
In part, the reason has to do with China's suppression of the democracy movement in June, which created a storm of outrage that has made Beijing reluctant to face a new barrage of international criticism for pushing the Khmer Rouge back toward power.
'Watching and Waiting'
China will continue to arm the Khmer Rouge, but may counsel it toward restraint on the battlefield, diplomats say. 
It is unclear how effective China's counsels would be, or how far China would go to avoid a Khmer Rouge victory, but the diplomats say there are signs of renewed flexibility in its Indochina policy as the principal arena of confrontation moves from the conference room to the front lines.
''China is waiting and watching,'' an Asian diplomat said. 
''This is the chance to test each faction on the battlefield.''
The diplomat and others interviewed said China's principal goal was not to secure a military victory, but to put sufficient pressure on the Vietnamese-backed Government in Cambodia that it will return to peace talks in about six months willing to make further compromises with the Khmer Rouge.
At the same time, specialists say, China will not allow relations with Vietnam to improve. 
Only when there is a settlement of the Cambodia issue will diplomatic and economic relations be normalized, the Chinese have told diplomats here.
China regards the future of Cambodia as a matter of paramount importance, partly because of a traditional hostility between China and Vietnam. 
With Vietnam enjoying support from the Soviet Union, China is alarmed at the possibility of its Soviet-backed rival forming a sphere of influence on its southern flank.
 
Skepticism of Vietnam Pullout
Reflecting the official line here, the Chinese press has been extremely skeptical over taking the Vietnamese troop withdrawal at face value. 
A report carried today by the official New China News Agency said that while ''several groups of Vietnamese troops'' rode to gathering points in army trucks, no tanks or heavy weapons were seen. 
The implication was that the tanks and tank crews were remaining behind.
On Thursday, China's Foreign Ministry spokesman said that Vietnam was not sincere in searching for a political settlement and was ''playing tricks'' on the international community by pretending to withdraw.
Early this year there was some sign of a diplomatic warming, when the Vietnamese Vice Foreign Minister came to Beijing twice for talks. 
But the Chinese Foreign Ministry concluded that the Vietnamese official was unwilling to compromise, and so it decided not to allow further such visits.
The distrust of Vietnam, coupled with the feeling that the Khmer Rouge is the most effective fighting force against Vietnam, seems to be the primary explanation for China's ties with the Khmer Rouge. 
The embarrassment about being associated with a group held responsible for more than a million deaths under its rule seems to have grown in recent years.
''They don't love the Khmer Rouge for itself,'' a Western diplomat said. 
''They love the fact that each dollar they put in Khmer Rouge hands produces a dead Vietnamese.''
 
No Reduction in Aid
Because ties to the Khmer Rouge are also based on its past friendship and loyalty to senior Chinese leaders, diplomats say, China's economic difficulties will not mean a reduction in aid to the Khmer Rouge and to the other two anti-Government factions: one led by Prince Norodom Sihanouk and the other by Son Sann, a former Prime Minister.
China has complained privately to some Asian diplomats that the Soviet Union is increasing its military assistance to the Hun Sen Government now in power in Cambodia, and so some diplomats expect that China could provide a matching increase in funds for the three Cambodian guerrilla factions.
Chinese officials earlier this month called in officials from Asian countries for a meeting on Cambodia, and some were struck by one sign of movement in China's position. 
A year ago, China was unhappy about some wording in a United Nations resolution that in an indirect swipe at the Khmer Rouge called for a ''nonreturn to the universally condemned policies and practices'' of the recent past. 
But in the meeting this month, China seemed content with such wording.
