
In a harsh rebuke to the growing enthusiasm here for more democracy, China on Sunday prevented the country's best-known dissident, Fang Lizhi, from attending a banquet to which he had been invited by President Bush.
Earlier in the day, China's top leaders told President Bush in the bluntest terms that the United States should not raise human rights issues in China. 
Their comments and the police action against Mr. Fang were not only an embarrassment for Mr. Bush, but a clear sign of the Communist Party's alarm at the growing calls for democracy.
The Chinese comments and action against Mr. Fang were surprising, partly because Mr. Bush had not raised human rights issues in his discussions Sunday, as he had been expected to.
The Communist Party General Secretary, Zhao Ziyang, himself raised the topic Sunday afternoon, sharply warning Mr. Bush that demands for democracy are a serious obstacle to economic change in China. 
The subject came up toward the end of their conversation, and Mr. Bush did not respond.
But on leaving China early this morning, President Bush told the ranking Chinese official present, Deputy Prime Minister Wu Xueqian, that he regretted that Mr. Fang had not been allowed to attend the dinner. 
A spokesman for the American Embassy in Beijing also said that Mr. Bush had asked Ambassador Winston Lord to follow up on the matter with the Chinese Foreign Ministry. 
The spokesman said that Mr. Lord would request a meeting to discuss the issue.
 
Harshest Comments Yet
In their discussions Sunday, Mr. Zhao told Mr. Bush that ''the fact that some elements in American society support people who are dissatisfied with the Chinese Government will not contribute to China's political stabilityI and reform, nor will it help China's friendship with the United States.
Mr. Zhao's statements, and milder statements in a similar vein by the senior leader Deng Xiaoping and Prime Minister Li Peng in their meetings with Mr. Bush, were by far the harshest official comments so far on the increasing demands here for democracy and for the release of political prisoners.
Together with the action against Mr. Fang, the comments reflected Chinese alarm not only at the speed with which the democracy movement has gained ground but also the support it has received in America from Congress, news organizations and citizens.
Mr. Fang, a 53-year-old astrophysicist who was expelled from the Communist Party two years ago because of his criticisms of Marxism and calls for democracy, was first stopped by the police several blocks from the Great Wall Sheraton Hotel, where Mr. Bush was hosting a Texas-style banquet for about 500 people. 
Mr. Fang was with his wife, Li Shuxian, a Communist Party member who is a bitter critic of the Government, and Perry Link, a prominent American scholar of Chinese language and literature, as well as Mr. Link's wife.
Mr. Link's driver was accused by the police of a traffic violation, and so they decided to walk the short distance to the hotel. 
Mr. Fang said the police there refused to allow them to enter the hotel, and told them they were not on the guest list. 
When they tried to take a taxi to the American Embassy, the taxi was immediately pulled over for a traffic violation as well.
 
Buses Told Not to Pick Them Up
The police also ordered buses not to pick them up, so the four of them walked for an hour and a half to the American Ambassador's residence, followed the entire way by teams of police on foot and in cars. 
Two Canadian diplomats found them in front of the residence and helped them contact American officials and reporters.
''This is a fresh example of the human rights violations in China,'' Mr. Fang said in an interview Sunday night.
Most of the guests at President Bush's banquet were Chinese officials, but at least two other dissidents were allowed to attend. 
Su Shaozhi, a Marxist theorist and open critic of the Government, said he had encountered no difficulties, nor had a dissident and playwright, Wu Zuguang.
Mr. Bush and the guests were unaware that Mr. Fang had been turned away. 
The White House spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, had earlier said that Mr. Bush probably would not meet with Mr. Fang at the banquet.
In addition to Mr. Zhao's comments, Mr. Deng and Prime Minister Li made remarks in a similar vein during their meetings with Mr. Bush. Mr. Deng told the President that China's economic modernization required a stable environment, and that without such stabilityI the achievements of the last few years would be lost.
 
'Cast a Shadow Over Relations'
Mr. Li also seemed to warn Mr. Bush against raising human rights questions. 
The spokesman said that Mr. Li had cautioned that a small number of Americans are trying to influence China's foreign policy and internal affairs. 
''If this comes from Government officials,'' Mr. Li added, ''this will cast a shadow over the good relations between the U.S. and China.''
The fact that the Chinese side released such remarks to reporters suggested that the comments were intended as a warning both to Chinese democracy advocates and to Americans who support them.
Mr. Zhao said that there were two extreme points of view in China: those who wish to retreat from change and those who ''call for the introduction of a multiparty political system and the parliamentary system of Western countries.''
Referring to the proponents of democracy, Mr. Zhao said:
''In practical terms, they do not promote reform; they provide a pretext for retreat from reform, and therefore stir up social disorder. 
They will block the way of reform. 
They will make the reform suffer setbacks or fail. 
This is very serious.''
Such comments were particularly unusual coming from Mr. Zhao, who in the past had been regarded as a patron of intellectuals and a supporter of a more tolerant political climate. 
But in the last six weeks, at the same time that the dissident movement has bloomed, some of Mr. Zhao's supporters have called for a ''new authoritarianism,'' which they say is necessary to provide a stable framework for economic development.
