
In what appears to be the last political trial related to the Tiananmen Square democracy movement, China sentenced an influential economist today to three years in prison for counterrevolutionary crimes and then released him for time served.
Wu Jiaxiang, a 37-year-old theorist who was detained on July 17, 1989, was allowed to return home this afternoon after his sentence was read out to a courtroom, a family member said. 
Mr. Wu was jailed for five weeks more than his official jail term, and one of the reasons appears to be that officials wanted to end the three-year series of Tiananmen political trials by allowing the last person tried to walk away from his sentencing a free man.
"This is the last trial," said John T. Kamm, an American businessman and human-rights campaigner who met this week with justice and police officials. 
"They wanted to close it with a release."
Officials told Mr. Kamm that all Chinese who were detained in connection with the Tiananmen Square democracy movement have now been tried and that a handful of other Chinese prisoners also have been released recently. 
But they evaded questions about what would happen if Chinese dissidents still wanted by the Government returned to China.
 
'Brain Trust' Member
Mr. Wu was a senior researcher at the Communist Party Central Committee General Office and was held in Qincheng Prison, where he was allowed to read but not write.
He was charged with counterrevolutionary incitement and propaganda. 
Mr. Wu did not actively take part in the protests, although he is believed to have been accused of writing a set of counterrevolutionary" slogans that were used in Tiananmen Square demonstrations.
A native of a remote village in Anhui Province, Mr. Wu grew up in the countryside. 
After the Cultural Revolution, he attended Beijing University and his career soared.
In the late 1980's, Mr. Wu became a member of the "brain trust" of young intellectuals surrounding the Communist Party leader, Zhao Ziyang. 
Mr. Wu wrote several important policy speeches and a book on the theory of Deng Xiaoping, China's senior leader. 
He was close to Gen. Wang Ruilin, Mr. Deng's chief of staff.
 
Reports of Breakdowns
But those contacts did not help him after his arrest.
"He's one of them," said a Chinese journalist. 
"And they think he betrayed them."
There have been reports that Mr. Wu also suffered from mental breakdowns, and the family member reached today suggested that Mr. Wu would need some rest to recuperate mentally from his ordeal.
"On the outside, he looked okay," said the family member, adding that he did not have a chance to speak much with Mr. Wu.
 
Steel Worker Reported Freed
A poet and prominent essayist, Mr. Wu was one of the original proponents of "new authoritarianism."
That theory held that Chinese required enlightened despotism, rather than Western-style democracy, to promote the growth of a healthy economic system and prepare for broader freedoms later on.
Mr. Wu was a close associate of Bao Tong, the former political secretary of the Politburo, who was sentenced last month to seven years in prison.
The Government also told Mr. Kamm that it had released Zhu Jianbin, a 37-year-old dissident who had been imprisoned for 11 years because of his involvement in the Democracy Spring movement that began in 1978. 
Mr. Zhu, a steel worker who edited a pro-democracy journal, The Bell Tolls, was detained in 1981 and virtually nothing has been heard of him since then.
Officials told Mr. Kamm that Mr. Zhu was tried and sentenced in April 1981 to six years in prison for counterrevolutionary incitement. 
They said he broke prison regulations when he assaulted someone in a brawl and then had his sentenced increased by "several years."
 
Prisoner's Wife Released
The authorities would not say when Mr. Zhu was released. 
They told Mr. Kamm that Mr. Zhu has returned to his home in Wuhan and now has a job.
Another dissident, Hou Xiaotian, said today that she had been released after four days of questioning about her plans to protest on behalf of her imprisoned husband. 
Ms. Hou said she was released late Sunday night but had been kept in a guest house rather than a prison and had been well treated.
Her husband, Wang Juntao, is serving a 13-year sentence for his role in the Tiananmen democracy movement. 
He began a hunger strike on Aug. 
11 to protest actions by authorities to block two suits he is filing against the court and a prison.
Ms. Hou said the authorities told her that her husband had lost about 22 pounds since he began his hunger strike, but that he was eating again on an irregular basis.
