
Lin Liangxi, a budding tycoon, saw his manufacturing venture collapse early this year after he tried to get a refund for three train tickets.
The clerk at the train station suspected that they were forged, and the police seized Mr. Lin and confirmed that the tickets were fakes. 
In Mr. Lin's hotel room, the authorities found 254 more fake tickets hidden in two packages of instant noodles.
That was just the beginning. 
China Daily, an official newspaper, reported that the police found that Mr. Lin had set up a ticket-making factory in his hometown, Wenzhou. 
The factory was stocked with a printing press, a paper-cutting machine and 1,200 pounds of the cardboard used to make tickets, which are almost always in short supply.
The episode underscores the point that the train-ticket industry, like most in China, is thriving and profitable. 
More fundamentally, the black market for train tickets offers a peek at the usually hidden underbelly of China: increasingly brazen entrepreneurs, growing webs of corruption and the state's decreasing power to do anything about it.
 
The Manchurian Scalper
The laws say ticket counterfeiting and scalping are illegal. 
But the scalpers, known as huang niu, or "yellow cows," openly solicit business at the Beijing train station.
"How many tickets do you want?" asked a short young man of about 25. 
"I can get you as many as you want. 
No problem."
He quoted a second-class sleeper to the southern city of Guangzhou at $90, compared with an official price of $27. 
"Just tell me when you want to go and how many tickets you want," the yellow cow urged, speaking Chinese with a Manchurian accent.
"The police won't interfere," he said. 
"We know the cops. 
They know us. 
In fact, they buy their tickets through me, too."
With China's hard-liners now in retreat, the Communist Party is aggressively trying to build what it calls a "socialist market economy."
Clearly the leaders do not approve of scalping, but in some ways the ticket industry is a perfect illustration of this emerging socialist market economy: the scalpers create their own market economy, they depend on the backdrop of socialist fixed prices to create shortages, and their efforts turn bribery into the lubricant for Communist-run capitalism.
 
Rail Travel Is Booming
"Cadres and crooks are all part of the same family," the father of a railway policeman explained to a friend the other day. 
He said his son gets a share of the scalping profits from the yellow cows he is supposed to arrest.
The yellow cows can earn thousands of dollars a year -- huge amounts in China -- because train tickets are scarce. 
With the economy booming at a growth rate of nearly 10 percent per year, far more Chinese than ever can afford to travel both for business and pleasure.
Traditionally in Communist countries, central planners kept up output of heavy industrial products like rail cars while neglecting consumer products. 
In China, on the other hand, the markets are exploding with sweaters and stuffed animals, while the stock of rail passenger cars increases by only about 5 percent each year -- much less than the demand.
A result is that it is often impossible for Chinese to get a train ticket anytime soon among major cities like Shanghai, Guangzhou and Beijing.
"When do you want to go to Beijing and how many tickets do you want?" asked a yellow cow in the central Chinese city of Hefei. 
The ticket office had just said that no seats were available, but the yellow cow -- a man in his late 20's, equipped with a beeper to stay in touch with his business contacts -- promised that all he needed to do was make a phone call.
Some of the scalpers get their tickets in the traditional way, by lining up, but many order them in bulk through friends in purchasing offices of large companies or Government ministries. 
Others bribe ticket sellers to get a bundle of tickets each month at the official price.
Still other yellow cows simply forge train tickets. 
As China has loosened up in recent years, it has become possible for crooks as well as entrepreneurs to buy printing equipment and travel around the country making sales.
"We're very concerned by this," said Jin Wanjian, an official in the Foreign Affairs Department of the Railways Ministry. 
But Mr. Jin said the authorities are cracking down on scalping, and he noted that in Beijing alone the police have detained 3,300 yellow cows so far this year.
Mr. Jin denied that scalpers have frequent links with the police or with official ticket sellers. 
He said that in any case the rail ministry is increasing its efforts to educate employees not to sell tickets on the sly, and that the Government is also considering raising ticket prices to reduce the shortages and put the yellow cows out of business.
Many of the yellow cows are organized into gangs, and they frequently diversify into a related growth industry: marketing blank receipts so that officials can pad their expense accounts. 
When one train ticket salesman was told that his prices were too steep, he offered to throw in a receipt so that the purchaser could claim the difference as a restaurant meal.
Outside the Xizhimen Train Ticket Booking Hall in northwest Beijing, a dozen street vendors openly sell hotel and restaurant receipts with the amounts left blank. 
A traveler on official business could, for example, stay at a $4-a-night hotel while turning in a receipt for a $20-a-night hotel.
To be sure, only a small proportion of officials appear to pad their expenses. 
But the brazenness of the yellow cows reinforces a deep popular outrage at the growing corruption, as well as the sense that the Government is losing control and that the police are on the take.
"If the cops come over, then we just run away," said a receipt vendor, a young man of about 25 in a gray sports jacket. 
"And even if they grab you, things can be worked out. 
If you're also selling cigarette lighters, maybe the policeman will grab five of them and say to you: 'I've confiscated four of your lighters, right?'
Then you say, 'Four, that's right,' even though you know he's got five. 
So instead of hauling you in, he returns four lighters, pockets one and lets you off."
