
China has summoned home its ambassadors for a meeting next week as the crackdown on dissent continues to evoke condemnations and sanctions abroad.
Western diplomats and Chinese officials overseas said the ambassadors were being summoned to a meeting here on July 7. 
The exact purpose of the meeting is unclear, but the newly reshuffled Chinese leadership may want to instruct its diplomatic corps on ways to respond to the worldwide criticism, aid cutoffs and embargoes on military sales that have followed the repression of the pro-democracy protest movement here this month.
The recall of the ambassadors coincides with a widening purge of intellectuals and officials loyal to the ousted party chief, Zhao Ziyang.
Report of Departures
The Foreign Ministry neither confirmed nor denied reports that ambassadors were being summoned home, but bureaus of The Associated Press in 10 countries, including the Philippines, Australia, Spain, West Germany, and Bahrain reported that Chinese ambassadors there had left for home or would soon leave.
Chinese officials in an Asian country and in Western Europe confirmed that all the country's ambassadors were being summoned back for a meeting, but they said the gathering was a routine annual event unrelated to the recent events here.
But diplomats here said that they could recall no such meeting taking place in the past. 
They said the move underlined the seriousness with which the leadership here views both the reaction abroad and the outbreak of the protest movement itself.
 
Similar Move in Late 1960's
Though analysts could only speculate on the attitudes toward the protest taken in China's embassies abroad, the recall of ambassadors may be a first step toward extending the purge into the diplomatic corps.
The only other time China summoned all of its ambassadors home was in the late 1960's, in the first years of the Cultural Revolution, when a major portion of the Chinese Government bureaucracy was dismissed and sent to labor in the countryside. 
Only one Ambassador, Huang Hua, the Ambassador to Egypt, returned to his post, while China remained diplomatically isolated from most of the world. 
Mr. Huang later became Foreign Minister.
Since the army's violent crackdown on June 3 and 4, some 20 Chinese diplomats abroad have requested political asylum, according to figures tabulated by The Associated Press here. 
One topic of discussion at the meeting next week may be the problem of defections.
In addition, the suppression of the protest movement has led other countries, particularly in the West, to undertake a variety of measures against China. 
On Tuesday the 12-nation European Community called for a suspension of World Bank loans to China and an embargo on military sales. 
Japan has also suspended talks on loan packages estimated to total more than $5 billion.
 
Action by Bush
The Bush Administration has also canceled military sales to China and has suspended high-level visits between Washington and Beijing.
The intense propaganda campaign that has been going on since the crackdown continued today with the public release of the text of a speech by China's paramount leader, Deng Xiaoping, that has been the subject of mandatory study in the country.
Mr. Deng's speech, which has become a kind of official justification for the army's crackdown on protesters, was read in its entirety on all the television news programs today and published in full in all the newspapers.
Mr. Deng gave his speech to the Military Affairs Commission five days after the army's bloody assault on pro-democracy protesters who had been encamped in Tiananmen Square. 
In it Mr. Deng congratulated the army for its suppression of the protest movement, but he also vowed that China's policies of economic reform and openness to the outside world would not change.
Even though Chinese news organizations for weeks have been urging everyone in the country to study Mr. Deng's ''important speech,'' today is the first time that it has been released to the public.
In the speech, Mr. Deng appeared to issue a kind of definition of the protest movement that has become the basis of the saturation-point propaganda campaign that has been waged ever since.
He called the student protest a ''counterrevolution rebellion'' whose actual aim was the overthrow of the socialist system and the Communist Party. 
And he called for greater ''ideological education'' and a resolute stand against ''bourgeois liberalization,'' China's code word for Western-style political ideas.
