
In the 10 years since China opened up to the world, most Chinese encountered enough Coca-Cola, television, disco dancing and sunglasses to make them blase about most exotic imports from the Occident - until Beijing opened an exhibition of nude art.
''Oh, I'm so embarrassed,'' stammered Chen Hong, a medical student, when a reporter asked her why she came to see the exhibition. 
Miss Chen blushed and hid her face with her hands while hastily adding, ''This is the first time I've seen this kind of thing.''
A mix of curiosity and prurience drew record crowds of 10,000 people a day for 18 days in a row to the exhibition at the Beijing Art Gallery. 
The exhibition, which closed today, was one of the most successful art shows ever held in the capital, and it seemed to reflect public interest not only in naked bodies but also in forms of culture arriving from the West.
Each visitor paid the equivalent of 60 cents admission, 10 times the normal ticket price in China and a sum equivalent to half a day's wage for most workers. 
The exhibition is scheduled to travel to the United States and Japan later this year.
 
Nude Art as Clash of Cultures
Crowds of men and women elbowed each other aside to get a closer look at the canvases. 
Some stood gaping at the most realistic and sensuous of the paintings; others hurried quickly by in horror. 
Most of the paintings were of women, and some were so realistic they seemed almost like photographs. 
Others were so abstract that it was difficult to discern the human figure.
China has almost no tradition of nude paintings, and over the centuries virtually the only curves in Chinese art have been those of the hills and waterfalls in traditional decorous landscapes. 
Human figures were sparse and small, and they were usually wise old men encased in traditional gowns.
Yet Chinese painting, like much of Chinese culture, is reeling from the encounters with sharply different Western artistic traditions. 
Chinese opera, calligraphy, story-telling and music all are grappling with the task of adaptation and survival in the presence of so much Western influence. 
The clash of cultures is rarely more visible than in the current craze for nude art.
While art schools have been using nude models for about the last five years, the resulting paintings have been shown publicly only for the last year. 
Shanghai, Tianjin and Guangzhou all held exhibitions of nude art last year, and Beijing's - with 120 canvases - is by far the largest held in China. 
At least three publishing houses have brought out books recently on nude art, and one theoretical work on the subject (illustrated) has become a best-seller.
 
Models' Fear of Ridicule
''This isn't just an artistic matter,'' said Ge Pengren, the artist who organized the exhibition. 
''This is a sociological phenomenon.''
Yet for all the evident public enthusiasm for such art, nudity remains a taboo in Chinese society. 
Though China lacks a Judeo-Christian tradition linking sex and nudity with immorality, it has a long Confucian tradition in which nudity is - if not immoral - at least highly improper and perhaps vulgar.
That prudishness, which some officials have publicly condemned as feudalistic, has led to some unexpected problems. 
The official press reported last year that a 19-year-old woman who worked as a nude model had been driven mad after relatives accused her of being no better than a prostitute. 
And the models depicted in the paintings on display in Beijing have protested bitterly that they will be ridiculed if friends or relatives recognize them.
Two of the models have hired lawyers and plan to sue the art gallery, an extraordinary move in a society where lawsuits are almost as scarce as nude paintings. 
The models complain that the painters should have made their faces unrecognizable, and they have already succeeded in having five paintings in the show exchanged. 
Many of the models apparently had been too embarrassed to tell family members, even their spouses, about their jobs.
 
At Least the Pay Is Good
China Youth News reported that one of the models was with her husband when the television news broadcast a segment about the exhibition. 
When the woman casually asked her husband what he would do if she happened to be a model, his answer came quickly: divorce.
Some of the models are demanding that the portraits should be shown only with the model's permission. 
Others say the paintings can be shown, but argue that the model is part owner of the painting and is entitled to a share of the ticket sales or proceeds from the sale of postcards or catalogs of the exhibition.
The artists say the models should have known that the paintings might be exhibited, and they note that they were paid what in China is an astronomical wage of about 65 cents an hour for modeling nude.
''That's more than a professor of art earns,'' said Meng Luding, a painter whose work is in the exhibition.
 
A Certain Chinese Flavor
Not only are the paintings of nudes, but the Western influence is also evident in the medium - they are all oil paintings or mixed media instead of traditional water colors - and in the composition. 
Most are not noticably different from American paintings.
''Except that the models are Chinese, these could be Western paintings,'' Mr. Ma said. 
But he added that he and the other painters do try to inject an undefinable Chinese character in the works.
Americans will have the chance to judge for themselves if there is a Chinese element in the paintings because the organizers are now arranging to take the paintings to Japan for a show and then to the United States. 
The paintings will be shown in Seattle, and Mr. Ge is now looking for other galleries in the United States.
It is not clear to what extent visitors to the show were seeking titillation instead of enlightenment, but artists said they thought both were important reasons for the show's success. 
Until recently, China had regarded all nudity as improper, and even partial nudity is banned in China's magazines and films. 
However, attitudes are changing, and a movie with a discreetly filmed sex scene was shown last month in southern Guangdong Province.
''As our society develops, it is natural to have this kind of show,'' said Chen Qun, a film student who came to see the exhibition. 
He paused and added, ''The more the better.''
