
Behind 15-foot walls in the center of the capital is a vast and lovely park called Zhongnanhai, which was once a playground of the emperors and their concubines and which today doubles as the Communist version of a Forbidden City and the most exclusive retirement home in the world.
Mao Zedong moved into a Ming Dynasty pavilion in Zhongnanhai on the triumph of the Communist Revolution in 1949. 
Ever since then, Zhongnanhai has been the headquarters of the Communist Party and Chinese Government, as well as the home of high leaders.
"It is the new Forbidden City," a Chinese woman said with a laugh the other day. 
The original Forbidden City, the residence of the emperors, is next door and is now a public museum visited by thousands of people every day.
Zhongnanhai (pronounced joong-nahn-high) is shrouded in secrecy. 
The aura of mystery is magnified by the periodic rumors of the sybaritic way of life that is supposedly enjoyed on the other side of the wall.
 
Charges of Hypocrisy
Because of their egalitarian language, Communist leaders are particularly vulnerable to charges of hypocrisy when they they begin to ride in limousines and drink from crystal glasses. 
Yet, as Milovan Djilas, the Yugoslav dissident, noted in a classic 1957 analysis, Communist governments tend to create their own privileged "new class" to replace the one swept aside. 
In China, resentment of the corruption and extravagance of this Communist "new class" helped prompt the democracy protests of 1989, and is a continuing source of popular indignation.
Yet a visit inside Zhongnanhai -- in the more relaxed days of early 1989, when it was possible for a foreign reporter to offer a senior official a ride and then drive him through the gate and drop him off inside -- suggests that it is not nearly so splendid as many people think.
Conversations with Chinese who have worked or lived inside, or who have visited the homes of leaders there, also suggest that Zhongnanhai is beautiful and comfortable but that the leaders' lives are not nearly as extravagant as those of top officials in many other countries.
"If a foreigner's home in Beijing ranks 7 on a scale of 10 for comfort and convenience, then the homes in Zhongnanhai rank about 3," said a Chinese who lived briefly inside the compound. 
"It's very spacious, but everything is old. 
You should see the kitchen: sure it's big, but there's nothing modern."
 
'It's Nothing Special'
Another Chinese official recalled his visit to a leader's home inside Zhongnanhai and said, "It's nothing special, just a lot of sofas and a bit more comfortable than average."
But he added with a laugh that he would gladly move inside.
To be sure, the homes have excellent cooks, air-conditioning -- which is banned for ordinary Chinese -- and satellite television. 
During the early morning hours of June 4, 1989, as army troops were firing on pro-democracy demonstrators outside, the family of at least one leader was glued to the television, watching Cable News Network as machine-gun fire reverberated outside.
Deng Xiaoping, China's senior leader, lives outside Zhongnanhai, but his circumstances suggest the oddities of the leadership's comfort level. 
Mr. Deng has a stable of vehicles, including a Mercedes-Benz 500 SEL and a bullet-proof Cadillac, but his home has hot water only briefly each morning and two evenings a week.
After hearing all the fanfare about Zhongnanhai, most visitors find on entering the main Western gate that the vista is almost disappointing. 
There are simply a series of dowdy red-brick and gray-brick buildings, with pleasant but not spectacular gardens and various maintenance men strolling around in old clothes.
Security is relatively light, but appears to have been tightened since the 1989 crackdown. 
Chinese tourists are no longer admitted to Mao's former residence, and meetings with Westerners are now often held at other sites instead of Zhongnanhai.
 
A Dormitory for Workers
About a dozen senior leaders live in Zhongnanhai, but the compound is no longer quite as exclusive as it used to be. 
In the Maoist period, virtually all top leaders lived inside except Lin Biao, the Defense Minister, and Jiang Qing, Mao's estranged wife. 
These days, in contrast, more than half the highest leaders, including Mr. Deng, Prime Minister Li Peng, and Vice President Wang Zhen, live outside the compound.
Those who live inside -- mostly along a narrow lane in the southwestern part of Zhongnanhai -- are predominantly retired leaders in their 70's or 80's.
To add to the ordinariness of Zhongnanhai, some cooks and nurses live with the leaders in their courtyard homes, and there is even a dormitory for young workers from the Communist Party General Office.
Some officials suggest that it is best to live outside Zhongnanhai because it has bad "fengshui" -- a traditional Chinese belief that some locations are plagued by bad spirits and ill fortune. 
Certainly Zhongnanhai has been the scene of much plotting and scheming and tragedy over the last century.
Chinese officials remember that the Emperor Guangxu, who was ousted in a coup in 1898, was confined to an island in South Lake in Zhongnanhai until he died, probably slain, a decade later.
"It brings bad luck," a midcareer Chinese official said. 
"I don't know why any leader would want to live in Zhongnanhai."
