
In a country where bold is bad, artists sometimes think more about diplomacy -- about tiptoeing on a thread of silk -- than they do about drawing. 
Ding Cong is such a diplomat: he is a consummate political cartoonist who never raises the topic of politics.
At a time when people are thrown in jail for openly criticizing the Government, Mr. Ding's black and white drawings stand out because they dare to satirize the leadership and the tensions in Chinese society. 
But these days, Mr. Ding has mastered tact and subtlety, a far cry from his younger days when he would paint scrolls streaming with flashy evil-doers, distorted and contorted, to portray his views of the Chinese Nationalists.
Like poetry, his drawings now often convey layers of meanings, but the most sensitive meaning is usually masked behind an image of everyday experience. 
For that reason, by American standards, Mr. Ding's cartoons are tame. 
They never explicitly portray any of China's current leaders. 
Instead, they sometimes draw on allusions, plucking out characters from way back in China's history to illustrate a point relevant to current events.
"He's a very slippery cartoonist," said a Chinese writer who is a fan of Mr. Ding's works. 
"How can the leaders catch him?
If they point to a cartoon and say, 'This is critical of the Government,' all he needs to ask is, 'Where is it critical?'
And he'd be right, because you can't pin his cartoons down."
 
A Difficult Social Climate
Mr. Ding's drawings often capture the alienation of intellectuals in society, or the chasm between the leadership and the people, or the system's corruption. 
Sometimes, the political zap is so veiled that a political explanation seems far-fetched, but Mr. Ding's background is rooted in politics and many of his cartoons have a bitter edge. 
To Mr. Ding, cartooning is wedded to politics.
"In China, all cartoons are political," Mr. Ding said with a loud, nervous laugh. 
"To be a cartoonist, if you want to satirize something, it's political."
And then with another laugh he added, "But because our social climate is not so good, there are not too many political cartoons these days."
In many ways, his demeanor and personality mirror his style of cartooning. 
Physically, the 74-year-old Mr. Ding is a plump, bubbly man whose features are bold and accentuated, like many of his cartoon characters. 
His manner of conversation -- winding and dodging around a point -- resembles his style of cartooning.
Part of the reason he is careful is simply that he wants to keep drawing. 
His cartoons have always contained critiques of society, often with severe consequences. 
After the Chinese-Japanese war broke out in 1937, Mr. Ding's cartoons so offended the Japanese that in 1938 he had to flee to Hong Kong. 
In 1945, Mr. Ding worked for an underground unit of the American armed forces based in the southern city of Kunming. 
He and his colleagues would sneak out at night, rip down posters put up by the Japanese troops, change them subtly so they poked fun at the Japanese, and then stick them up again.
 
10 Books of Cartoons
During the next couple of years, some of his most biting satire was aimed at the Chinese Nationalist regime of Chiang Kai-shek, and in 1947 he fled to Hong Kong once again to escape persecution. 
He returned to China to support the Communist revolution, but then in 1957 he was labeled a "rightist" and sent to the countryside to do manual labor. 
For the next 22 years, Mr. Ding did not draw a line.
Since 1979, when he was rehabilitated and allowed to draw again, Mr. Ding has published 10 books of cartoons. 
He has not been active in the democracy movement, but in early 1989, before the crackdown, he signed a petition calling for greater freedoms. 
He was not punished for this.
Even though Mr. Ding is probably the best-known cartoonist in China his drawings are rarely published in the official national newspapers. 
These days, Mr. Ding knows how far he can stretch a point before he must stop. 
But this is the hard part of his work, he says.
"It may take me only a few hours to draw, but days and days to think about what to draw," Mr. Ding said. 
"As soon as you look at a cartoon, one meaning jumps out at you immediately. 
But if you draw so that the real satire can be seen right away, ah, then you're finished."
Many ordinary people simply do not catch the underlying point of his cartoons. 
In a cartoon that appears completely nonpolitical, an obese woman is holding a picture of a young woman with a flowered dress. 
The woman is wearing an exact replica of the dress that her tailor just completed, but after looking at the slim shapeliness of the woman in the dress, she complains to him, "You didn't do it exactly according to the picture."
 
A Political Meaning
Mr. Ding, who published the sketch more than four years ago, says the cartoon has a political meaning as well. 
The obese woman can be thought of as the Government, slovenly and out of shape. 
No matter how many people it orders around to help dress it up, it cannot hide its bulges and mistakes.
A much more recent drawing portrays a string puppet in the image of a fierce general, Cao Cao, in the third century A.D. The cartoon derives its satire through interplay with an accompanying poem, "An Ode to a Puppet," which Mr. Ding did not write:
With pieces of string, it dances gracefully,
Yet, few people see through the small trick.
Black-haired, white-faced, it looks the image of Cao Cao
Without a soul behind the curtain, it's a good-for-nothing.
The crucial question is this: Does the puppet represent Prime Minister Li Peng, manipulated by China's octogenarian leaders?
Some intellectuals look at the cartoon and immediately say that it must be Prime Minister Li. 
Others take a look and are sure it does not refer to Mr. Li. Mr. Ding denies he had any intention of referring to the current leadership.
"I just drew a picture according to the poem," he said. 
"Where is it critical?"
