
A university professor sighed as he described the long self-criticism that he had written painstakingly in a small notebook and then read aloud to a critical audience of colleagues and Communist Party officials at a political meeting.
''I was humiliated, but I had to do it,'' said the professor, whose self-criticism detailed his involvement in the democracy movement this past spring.
Now, he says, he feels a deep loneliness, an emptiness that grows when he recalls the violent crackdown in June. 
To fight his depression and to cleanse away his anger, he is pouring his energy into teaching, nearly tripling his number of hours in the classroom, to 26 a week.
Throughout China, university students and teachers have returned to school, with the last of them - those from Beijing University, the most active in the protests - officially beginning classes this week. 
Teachers and students say they are profoundly changed by the events of the spring, but in the gloomier atmosphere, they are struggling to smooth over their pain so that they can get on with their lives.
 
A String of New Worries
Students are nervous about a new guideline that would require them to work for as much as seven years in China before they are allowed to study abroad. 
Their lives have also changed enormously this academic year, with new ideology sessions, new mandatory labor in the ''grass roots'' after graduation, and at some institutions a new requirement of military training.
At Beijing Normal University, a 21-year-old student, who lasted for seven days without food during a hunger strike this spring, said she was surprised how lightly the authorities had reprimanded her. 
All she had to do was write a 3,000- to 5,000-word essay on her ''reflections,'' a task that many of Beijing's university students were obliged to undertake.
''They must have categorized me as a follower,'' said the student, who was even selected to lead some of the recent political study sessions.
In her essay, she was extremely careful, writing that a ''collective consciousness'' moved her to take part in the hunger strike, and that once she began the hunger strike she felt she had a duty to her classmates to stay with it until the end.
 
Copying the Right Words
''I didn't know the posh language of the Government, so I copied it from the newspapers,'' she said. 
''I studied the papers and speeches for a week and then wrote it all down in one day.''
''Only socialism can save China,'' she said, and then laughed at the words she had copied in her essay.
She says she will never forget the spring, but now she rarely talks with her friends about the experience and she no longer asks about how the crackdown has affected others.
''We don't ask about other students,'' she said. 
''What good is asking?''
She says she believes that the authorities have been gentle to them simply because so many took part and the Government cannot throw them all in jail. 
This gives her hope.
''The future is bright,'' she said, quoting Mao. 
''But the path is crooked.''
 
Off to Military School
Students and teachers at Beijing University, historically a symbol of political protest, have been chastised more severely. 
The class of 748 freshman, down from about 2,000 last year, has been sent to a military academy in the nearby city of Shijiazhuang for one year of military training and political indoctrination. 
Some other schools this fall have offered a couple of weeks of military training; others have none at all.
Moreover, four of Beijing University's departments considered too liberal-minded for the Communist orthodoxy - history, philosophy, administration and international politics - have been closed to new students.
The school's returning students, like those elsewhere, are studying the speeches of China's senior leader, Deng Xiaoping, along with propaganda documents and videotapes on the ''quelling of the counterrevolutionary rebellion,'' as the democracy movement is called by the Government.
Rumors at the school about the numbers detained range from tens to more than 100, and some say a teacher was sentenced to 12 years in prison. 
For those who escaped jail, however, there is still intimidation, confession-writing and endless hours of questioning. 
And the school may add a note to their file, hurting their careers.
''They don't need to arrest you,'' a university teacher said. 
''They have so many other ways of influencing you: your work assignment, your salary, where you live. 
They don't need to put you in jail to control you.''
 
Keeping the Record Clean
Some students have turned to focusing on their careers once again, and so they are doing their best to avoid black marks on their records. 
But even good political records do not mean good jobs these days.
One of the greatest worries among young people now is a new policy that recent college graduates work for a year or two at the ''grass roots'' level before taking up good jobs in the cities. 
The most worrying aspect of the new policy is that the housing registration is transferred as well, so that many fear they will not be allowed to live in Beijing again if they make a political mistake.
The new policy is supposed to apply to all those who graduated from college beginning in 1985, but the emphasis has been on those who graduated this year.
 
Reluctance to Speak Out
At Beijing University, several groups refused to talk to a foreign journalist, whose reports could bring trouble to them. 
Others talked, but hesitantly, in low voices.
One angry student took the offensive in the conversation.
''I don't believe there really is free speech in the United States,'' he said. 
When asked if he would join demonstrations again, he paused for a long time.
''Definitely,'' he eventually responded. 
''But we can be patient. 
That's one virtue we Chinese have: endurance.''
His friend disagreed. 
''Endurance also has its shortcomings,'' he said. 
''We have endured, yes. 
But that's why China has never gotten very far.''
