
A class of 40 nervous students looked blankly at the teacher who had just asked a sample question on an English test, about the purchase of shoes from a catalogue. 
''Class, what is a catalogue?'' the teacher asked.
Several students squirmed in their seats, for none of those in the cold, damp classroom had ever heard of buying from a catalogue. 
Shoes were bought in shops, not catalogues. 
They shrugged, and hoped that the issue would not come up in a test of English as a foreign language.
They had signed up for this series of English classes to prepare for the test, which is required of foreign students by American universities. 
Many young intellectuals, thrown into a depression after the military suppression of the democracy movement in June, regard study abroad as the best escape hatch out of China.
The more the Chinese authorities attack the United States, the more many intellectuals perceive the political climate to be worsening, and the more fanatically they study English to try to get to the United States.
''We are all trying to get out,'' said a young Chinese man planning to study abroad. 
''There is little hope for us here.''
 
Pointless to Remain, They Say
It is not so much that they are afraid of being arrested; rather, they say they believe there is no point in remaining, for they will be given no opportunity to use their talents in China.
Paradoxically, the biggest obstacle for many is not permission from the Chinese authorities, at least for the moment, but American immigration law. 
The United States Embassy here is reluctant to give visas to those who cannot show a good reason why they must return, such as a spouse who is remaining behind, and so a large number of single men and women who have been accepted at universities abroad find that they are denied visas.
''I don't think I'll be able to go abroad because it's nearly impossible to get a U.S. visa,'' said a young Chinese woman who was taking a class to prepare for the English test.
Because of their passion for getting away, many Chinese with only an inkling of English are brushing up on their Americanisms. 
In Shanghai, novice English-speakers boldly walk up to foreigners and offer to be their guides, just for the sake of speaking English to a foreigner.
 
Some Use Connections
Those hoping to take the English test are not just from the universities. 
Technicians, physicists, philosophers and computer programmers are among the thousands flocking to English classes and standing in line to register for the test, which is given four times a year.
The next test date is in January, and some people lined up for two days to insure a spot on the registration list at one of about a dozen locations in the city.
Yet the authorities have already started to make it difficult for Chinese people to prepare for and take the test. 
Late in October, the authorities closed down the English Corner, an officially designated area in Purple Bamboo Park in Beijing where people could go to practice English. 
About 100 Chinese gathered in the English Corner last Sunday in defiance of the Government ban.
It has also been hard for Chinese who work in units that are being scrutinized because of the pro-democracy demonstrations this spring. 
Most Chinese must obtain permission and a letter of introduction from their work unit to register for the test, and some Chinese without connections say they have been denied that permission.
''This Government controls nearly every aspect of our lives, down to the very food we eat,'' said a young woman who, like many Chinese, lives in a dormitory and eats at a cafeteria run by her work unit. 
She also planned to take the English test, but was denied permission.
 
Rumors of a Rules Change
One Chinese worker infuriated officials when they found out he had used a letter of introduction written months before for an earlier test date to register for the January test.
The rush to study English has been fanned by rumors that the Government will change the regulations for studying abroad sometime next year.
Among the fears is that the Government will not allow Chinese people over 35 years old to go abroad for study, although they may make an overseas trip as part of a business delegation or other work. 
Others fear that the Government will not let students who have just graduated from college go overseas to study until they have worked in China for four to seven years.
 
A Fear of Rejection
Some Chinese are confident they will obtain passports, a process that sometimes can take as long as six months, but are concerned they will be rejected by foreign embassies.
But a United States Embassy official said the visa approval rate for study, now about 50 percent or higher, has remained essentially the same as it was before June. 
Moreover, the official said there had not been a noticeable drop in the number of passports issued, although many of the people applying for visas now had applied before June for their passports.
But figures for visas issued from April to September at the United States Embassy suggest that fewer lecturers and researchers have applied to go to the United States since June. 
The largest drop in applications was in the category of business travel.
''This category had grown 20 to 30 percent a year,'' the official said. 
''It's usually a barometer of the state of economic relations.''
