
Swept up in liberalization and a mood of relaxation until a few weeks ago, China suddenly seems more familiar to people who lived here or visited 10 or 20 years ago than to those who may have arrived recently.
It is not that China has returned to the days when the population was awakened at 6 A.M. by propaganda loudspeakers or when it was an offense, punished by a ''struggle'' meeting, to wrap garbage in a newspaper bearing a photograph of Mao.
But the repression sweeping China has brought back many once-common practices and controls - from the numbing repetition of a few authorized statements to a modest cult of personality.
The televised reports of trails of ''thugs'' who were said to have attacked troops during the crackdown two weeks ago illustrate the point.
 
'Open' Trials Now Closed
For a time, China made efforts to open up its criminal procedures. 
Trials were attended by foreign journalists and other observers. 
A system that for decades had been shrouded in secrecy emerged into the open.
But this week, when journalists asked the authorities if they could attend one of the ''open'' trials of people involved in the recent protest movement, they were told that it would be ''inconvenient at present.''
The near absolute management of information and the practice of conducting ostensibly public affairs behind closed doors are the sorts of practices that seemed to be falling into abeyance in the recent past.
To observe them again provides a shock of recognition to the Chinese and foreigners alike whose memories stretch back to the 1960's and 1970's, when China was not only far more secretive but also more closed in on itself than it has been in recent years.
''This is a place I recognize,'' an Italian journalist, absent from China for several years, said on his return after the crackdown two weeks ago. 
The journalist had read accounts of a country far different from the one he knew when he lived here in the early 1980's. 
It is, he said, far less different now.
''After these few relaxed years, these changes will have a deep psychological impact,'' one analyst said. 
''People will think that China is moving backward, no longer forward.''
 
Some Gains Still Stand
In fact, the backward move does not represent a wholesale reversion to the Maoist era when the very right to a private sphere of life went unrecognized. 
It is not yet forbidden in China to do things like listen to foreign radio broadcasts, play Beethoven, try to become wealthy or get married without the permission of the local party secretary.
The situation of the last two weeks is perhaps well represented by the anchorwoman on the evening news broadcast. 
She is chicly coiffed and dressed in a pink silk blouse, a style that would have been condemned as ''bourgeois'' in the worst of days past. 
But she presides over news broadcasts reminiscent of the saturation propaganda campaigns not known in this country for years.
In today's broadcast, for example, a coal worker from China's northeast was shown expressing his anger at those who conducted the ''counterrevolutionary disturbance'' in Beijing. 
The disturbance, he said, was aimed at ''overthrowing the Communist Party and the socialist system and at beating, smashing, looting, burning and killing.''
Two minutes later, the television anchorwoman read a statement by a local party leader. 
Word for word, right up to the ''beating, smashing, looting, burning and killing,'' the statement was the same.
 
End to Freewheeling Talks
The incident reminded some who first came to China in the early to mid-1970's that, in those days, practically all Chinese felt constrained in public to utter only a few correct phrases and little else - a stark contrast with the freewheeling discussions of recent years.
China specialists attribute some of the restorations of past practices to the current prominence of the group of aging revolutionary veterans who, in the face of the recent challenge to their authority, fell automatically back on older, familiar ways of doing things.
The ceaseless repetition of the same small number of phrases is, in this sense, a sign of the revival of another once-common technique that had fallen into abeyance in recent years, the use of a mass propaganda campaign to establish the leadership's authority.
The overall changes could be described as ones of mood and degree. 
Propaganda and sloganeering, Government secrecy and political intimidation, have never entirely ceased in China. 
But those with long memories here say the intensity of the present repression has not been reached since the moderate party faction, led by Deng Xiaoping, returned to power in the late 1970's.
 
Speech as Gospel
Analysts here, for example, say they cannot remember a time since the death of Mao and the arrest of his closest followers in the Gang of Four when the speech of a leader became the basis for a mass campaign.
But some remarks made by Mr. Deng to the Military Affairs Commission more than a week ago have not only got much publicity - even though Mr. Deng's actual words have not been released - but have become the objects of a national study campaign being promoted every day in the state-controlled news media.
The emerging pattern of political life also bears striking resemblances to a pattern that had virtually disappeared for more than a decade, that of a new unpredictability at the top.
One of the clear goals of Mr. Deng's leadership was to establish a kind of schedule of government, to run things according to clear rules. 
And so, since about 1983, key meetings of the party or of the National People's Congress, China's parliament, have been announced in advance and held on schedule.
 
Behind-the-Scenes Maneuvers
Now, for the first time in several years, the leadership seems likely to return to its older method, which was to hold meetings in secret and to announce them only later.
This week a scheduled meeting of the National People's Congress was postponed indefinitely. 
The assumption is that the leaders wanted to hold a meeting of the Central Committee before the congress. 
But while rumors have circulated for a week about a Central Committee meeting, there is no indication yet when or if it will be held.
The point is that after several years of apparent stabilityII, the leadership has returned to a pattern when behind-the-scenes maneuvers were so intense and difficult that it was impossible to keep schedules. 
Analysts say that the business of the party and the Government are likely to become, as they were in previous decades, enshrouded not only in secrecy but in uncertainty.
In this sense, one of the most conspicuous aspects of an earlier era to reappear is the spectacle of an aging leadership clinging to its power.
 
Comparing Deng With Mao
Some Chinese are quietly comparing the current period of Mr. Deng, who is 84 years old, to the last years of Mao, which were marked by an ever more intense personal tyranny.
The saturation campaign to advertise Mr. Deng's speech is the sort of thing that used to surround Mao's pronouncements. 
In a subtle but perhaps telling shift, Mr. Deng is being referred to as Chairman Deng - he is chairman of the Military Affairs Commission but not of the Communist Party.
To be sure, the modest cult of personality growing up around Mr. Deng falls far short of the mass adoration of Mao, during which his statue and picture were ubiquitous and his every word was given Delphic authority.
And yet, one of Mr. Deng's stated goals when he returned to power more than a decade ago was for the old leaders to step aside in favor of younger ones. 
Like Mao, however, Mr. Deng has destroyed the younger figures that he himself anointed.
 
'Love the Party'
In allowing a cult to grow up around himself now, Mr. Deng seems, in the view of analysts, to be returning to an effort to re-establish the authority and prestige of the party as the sole source of wisdom and legitimacy.
One result is the constant repetition of slogans that had almost disappeared. 
''Without the Communist Party, there would be no new China'' is one incessantly repeated lately. 
Another is ''Love the party, love the socialist motherland.''
In the last few years, particularly in speeches at party congresses, such slogans have been occasionally spoken, particularly by the veterans of Mr. Deng's generation, but they have not become parts of intense campaigns to build up the party's authority.
Since the mid-1980's, the party was something certainly to be obeyed; but the people have not for many years been called on to ''love'' it.
