
Former President Richard M. Nixon arrived today for a visit of about six days in which he will meet with top Chinese leaders, and although it is billed as an unofficial fact-finding trip, both the United States and China seem to hope that it will help smooth relations.
Mr. Nixon is regarded here as an ''old friend'' of China because his trip in 1972 led to the normalization of Chinese-American relations. 
He is by far the most prominent American to visit since Beijing's violent suppression of the democracy movement in June, and officials here say they hope that the trip will reduce the antagonisms that have roiled relations since then.
Mr. Nixon's staff said the former President had discussed his plans with President Bush. 
It said that after Mr. Nixon returns to the United States, he will give the White House a written assessment of the Chinese leaders, their policies and prospects for Chinese-American relations.
Sanctions imposed shortly after the crackdown prevent most high-level contacts between American officials and their Chinese counterparts, and for political reasons few American office-holders would be willing to be photographed shaking hands with those who planned the repression.
During the summer, some Americans said they hoped that Mr. Nixon's visit would lead to some breakthrough, such as an arrangement for the emigration of the dissident couple Fang Lizhi and Li Shuxian. 
Mr. Fang and Miss Li have taken refuge in the American Embassy here, and are certain to be arrested if they step outside.
Now, however, diplomats and Chinese officials doubt that Mr. Nixon will be able to resolve that problem. 
They say that the value of the visit lies in opening a new channel of communication between the two Governments, and in the possibility that Chinese officials will listen to his counsel.
Mr. Nixon is expected to meet with Deng Xiaoping, the senior leader; Jiang Zemin, the Communist Party leader; Prime Minister Li Peng, and other top officials.
''Sino-U.S. relations are at a crossroads,'' Foreign Minister Qian Qichen said tonight at a banquet for Mr. Nixon, according to the official New China News Agency. 
''We sincerely hope that the U.S. 
Government will weigh the pros and cons and take a forward-looking approach so that Sino-U.S. relations may return to the track of normal development at an early date.''
The agency said that during the banquet, Mr. Nixon described himself as a ''friend of China.''
It said he had expressed confidence in the growth of American-Chinese relations.
Mr. Nixon's former Secretary of State, Henry A. Kissinger, is expected to visit China beginning Nov. 
7, shortly after Mr. Nixon has left.
