
After banging his head against bureaucracies throughout this city, a Chinese graduate student prepared today to return to Texas, after failing to win any sympathy from the authorities in his mission to bring his jailed friend closer toward freedom.
Ge Xun, a student of experimental physics at Texas A & M University, waved an air ticket he obtained today for a Wednesday flight back to the United States. 
When Mr. Ge first arrived eight days ago on a quest for clemency for his friend, a democracy advocate, the authorities seemed so irritated that they did not provide documents he needed to be allowed to leave China.
But his ticket did not bring him any closer to influencing the case of his 32-year-old friend, Wang Juntao, one of the most prominent dissidents who has been detained for more than a year because of his role in the Tiananmen Square democracy movement. 
Last month, Mr. Wang was formally charged with counterrevolutionary crimes and sedition.
 
One-Way Ticket to Beijing
Mr. Ge read the news in the United States, and out of frustration and anxiety, he bought a one-way ticket to Beijing and traveled 9,000 miles to see what he could do to help his friend. 
The trip carried some risk, because Mr. Ge is a Chinese national who -- although he has lived in the United States for four years -- could be denied permission to leave China if he offended the authorities here.
As it turned out, Mr. Ge could not accomplish much. 
But Mr. Ge's tortuous trip points to the difficulties in gleaning any information at all about the trials and fate of dissidents jailed in connection with the Tiananmen demonstrations in June 1989. 
For eight days, Mr. Ge scoured the trial notices outside the courthouse and he pounded on the doors of the courts, the prosecutors offices and the public security bureau, hoping to find out where Mr. Wang's case stood.
He didn't find out a trial date, he didn't find out if the case would even be brought to trial, and he didn't find out if the trial, if held, would be open.
 
'A Tool of Punishment'
"The law has become a tool of punishment, a tool of revenge," Mr. Ge said in an interview.
The only thing Mr. Ge found was that Mr. Wang's case had not yet been brought to court. 
In one of his last nights, Mr. Ge met with his friend's wife, Hou Xiaotian, but she told him she didn't know anything.
Instead, she told him of her feelings of depression and of her uncertainty about trials that are expected soon. 
Ms. Hou said she had exchanged letters with her husband, but had not been allowed to see him.
"They are depressed," Mr. Ge described the wife and her friends. 
"They hurt in their hearts, but there is still a kind of hope that their family members can be treated fairly."
During his stay in Beijing, Mr. Ge refused to call on any of own his friends for fear of getting them in trouble. 
His family gave him a rather ambivalent welcome, for while they were delighted to see him -- it was the first time he had returned to China -- they were horrified at the attention he was attracting by talking to foreign reporters and at the risks he was taking. 
He saw his mother only three times, including the time she kicked him out of the house after reporters tried to interview them. 
Mr. Ge stayed in a hotel.
 
'For a Single Cause'
Mr. Ge also did not inquire in detail about other dissidents, who have also been formally charged recently and are expected to go on trial soon.
"I came back for one person, for a single case," said Mr. Ge, who met Wang Juntao when they worked together at a research center in the early 1980's. 
"I hope my visit helps change the way they look at Wang."
Mr. Ge had wanted to stay longer in Beijing, trying to help his friend, but his family here is pressing him to return to the United States and his wife in Texas is ill, so Mr. Ge says he is ready to return. 
He admits the trip was "very poorly planned," but he says he is glad he came, and he points out that his education in the United States gave him the strength to pursue his journey.
"There were two things I learned at A & M," he said. 
"Honesty and courage."
