
A secular age of faith appears to have collapsed in China, turning into a time of despair and doubt in which many people have no heroes and nothing to believe in.
When Chinese bare their souls to foreigners these days, they sometimes speak of a ''spiritual crisis'' that they blame for increases in petty crime, as well as for a disintegration of social values and cohesiveness.
This sense of emptiness and purposelessness has been on the rise in recent years, but many Chinese, interviewed in different parts of the country, say it has become particularly acute since the suppression of the democracy protests last June 3-4.
''We used to believe that Chairman Mao or Deng Xiaoping could solve our problems,'' said a disgruntled Communist Party official in Beijing. 
''But now we've lost hope. 
Now there's nothing for us to believe in.''
'We Feel an Emptiness'
In the central Chinese city of Chengdu, a young university teacher searched for a way to explain her malaise. 
''There's nothing left,'' she said. 
''We feel an emptiness.''
A university student in Beijing said some of his friends were turning to Christianity and Buddhism, as a new source of moral values.
''Without doubt there's a spiritual crisis in China,'' he said. 
''I don't have any friends who believe in Marxism now. 
Even my parents don't believe in Marx or Deng anymore. 
There's a vacuum.''
''This also existed in the 1980's,'' the student added. 
''But then we could live by our dreams. 
My friends and I dreamed of studying abroad, of working for joint venture companies, of going south to make more money. 
Since June 4, those dreams have died, and now we have nothing to live by.''
Not everyone is so melancholy, and many people continue to be absorbed by the challenges of daily life rather than by existential crises. 
For all the concern about the effects of nihilism on society, the impact so far has been confined mostly to petty vandalism, thievery, a relatively minor drug problem and an aggressive discourtesy.
 
Life Seems Grayer
China's family structure is intact, crime is low by Western standards, and people continue to marry, find jobs and go about their daily lives pretty much as ever. 
But the texture of life seems grayer, and gloomier, particularly in the cities.
In the countryside, where about three-fourths of Chinese live, peasants are usually more absorbed by fluctuations in weather than in politics, and in any case regarded Mao and Mr. Deng as rather remote deities. 
Moreover, while many peasants and workers have lost their faith in political leaders, they can still sound quite reverent when speaking of new consumer goods or ways to earn the money to buy them.
''These days we don't believe in political leaders,'' a worker in his mid-20's said. 
''But we still believe in something. 
The new god is money.''
Chinese say that just 25 years ago, almost all of their compatriots believed in Mao, and just a few years ago, there was overwhelming support for Mr. Deng. These days, it is difficult to find a young person who believes passionately in anything or anybody, and despair is more common than faith.
 
Disparaging a Legacy
The loss of faith has been complicated because it has not only discredited China's political leaders but also the value of the Chinese cultural legacy itself. 
Whatever their political beliefs, Chinese used to share a common pride in a 4,000-year-old heritage, but now more and more intellectuals worry that China's poverty and authoritarianism are rooted in the culture itself. 
They disparage their historical legacy and stress the need to turn to the West for help in modernizing China.
A university teacher in his 30's, who like many others is trying to find a way to the United States, described what to him is one of the most painful aspects of the present society: the obligation to take part in meetings where everyone is forced to profess beliefs they do not feel.
''In the West, if you lost faith in Christianity, you could still believe in yourself, or in existentialism, or in whatever you wanted to,'' the teacher said. 
''But here you are forced to say you believe in what you don't: in the party, and in the 'glorious crackdown.'
''
China was also swept by a great wave of disillusionment in the late 1970's, after the Cultural Revolution. 
But many Chinese, as well as foreign specialists, say the situation is worse now - partly because people see no way out of the nation's difficulties and because there is no obvious candidate to lead them to safety, as Mr. Deng seemed to do after his return to power in 1978.
 
Campaigns to Build Spirit
''I sense greater despair this year than in my 11 previous years of visiting China,'' said David L. Shambaugh, a China scholar from the University of London. 
''In the reform period, people at least had a sense of the future, for there was progress and social mobility. 
Now, most of those who benefited from the reforms are losing hope.''
The Chinese leadership seems to be aware of the malaise, for there have been a series of campaigns recently to build national spirit by emulating the legendary soldier Lei Feng, who died in 1962, and other Communist heroes. 
Those campaigns seem to be greeted with indifference by most of the population, and by resentment among intellectuals.
''It's very serious when people don't believe in anything,'' said a business executive in his 30's. 
''Even my friends who are foreign-trained intellectuals do nothing but play the game mah-jongg all day. 
It's disastrous for the long run, and the central leaders know it.''
