
LEGACIES
A Chinese Mosaic.
By Bette Bao Lord.
245 pp. 
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $19.95.
Above all other virtues, the Chinese treasure ren. 
Translated literally, ren simply means ''to endure.''
But as Bette Bao Lord explains in this stunning collection of oral histories, the Chinese ideogram is far more telling than the English definition: the character for ren is written by placing ''the cutting edge of a sword above a heart.''
Ren, the ability to survive the calculated cruelties and everyday betrayals of Chinese life as well as calamities such as last June's Tiananmen massacre, runs through these intimate accounts. 
Based on interviews and tape recordings Bette Lord made with Chinese men and women while her husband, Winston, served as the United States Ambassador in Beijing from 1985 to April 1989, ''Legacies'' is franker, more penetrating and infinitely sadder than most journalistic accounts of the brave and tragic uprising at Tiananmen Square.
Because the Shanghai-born Mrs. Lord is connected to China by threads of family, education and experience, she enjoyed unusual access to all levels of Chinese society. 
The salon she created at the American Embassy in those fleeting years when China's doors were wide open to the West drew scores of Chinese artists, writers, historians and other intellectuals. 
Many stayed after the disco dancing ended, befriended their hostess and spilled out their harrowing stories. 
Since returning to the United States last summer, just days before the crackdown, she has woven their stories together with her own reminiscences and somewhat more upbeat tales of her own vast clan. 
''Legacies,'' the work of an expert storyteller (Mrs. Lord is the author of three previous books, including a novel), is an assemblage of indelible portraits that get at the essence of what it means to be Chinese in our times, of what the Chinese Communist Party has bequeathed its people.
''How many riddles are there in one life?'' one of Mrs. Lord's troubled confidantes wrote in a poem. 
Plenty, judging from these stories.
Consider the young actress, alienated since the age of 7 from a father who was branded a ''rightist''; his political crimes dashed her hopes of attending a special school for the gifted and of joining the party. 
''I would not speak to him,'' she admits to Mrs. Lord. ''He would bring me candy and fruit. 
I refused to touch it. 
. . . So ashamed was I of my father that I wished he would leave and never come back.''
Eventually, he did just that. 
And it was only when she was sent to collect his ashes from the prison where he spent the Cultural Revolution that she realized that, instead of being a traitor, he was something of a hero. 
Although the official explanation was that he had committed suicide, a prison warden told her that her ''father's ears were torn off'' because he refused to inform on others.
The Cultural Revolution figures in many of these portraits, but Mrs. Lord makes it clear that Communist repression - and lunacy - preceded that traumatic decade. 
One former fiery revolutionary confides to Mrs. Lord that he first got into trouble as a volunteer during the land reform movement of 1950. 
In the small village he was administering, he couldn't find enough landlords to satisfy the 5 percent quota designated by the party for vilification. 
''I could not believe that the Party truly meant for me to name an arbitrary number of landlords,'' he recalls. 
His integrity earned him a long sentence in a prison camp where he was forced to play female roles in Chinese opera productions - and, as additional punishment, to grow his hair to shoulder length and wear ladies' costumes all day.
Not everyone in this book is a tragic figure. 
Bette Bao Lord, on an early visit to China, was astonished that her Uncle Jieu Jieu, an engineer who survived years of hard labor, somehow managed a cheerful, even carefree manner. 
''What makes you so different from the others?'' she asks him. 
''An unwashable brain,'' he boasts. 
Not only had he never accepted any of the shifting ideologies peddled by the party over the years but he had come to realize that he and other critics were ''truly indispensable'' to the regime. 
''Without people like me,'' he points out, ''the Party has no objects of struggle or excuses'' for its failures.
The writing in ''Legacies,'' devoid of sentimental pity, saves the book from becoming a catalogue of miseries, just as some internal mechanism spares many Chinese from deep depressions or other mental illnesses. 
Through the interviews and her own commentary, the author captures the texture of Chinese life: the endless gossip (Prime Minister Li Peng's unflattering nickname, she reveals, is ''Comrade No Talent''); the Chinese wariness of making new friends (''old ones were safe'' while ''new ones were risky''); the tendency for every dinner conversation to become ''a seminar on the state of the nation.''
Appalled though she is at the horror stories, Mrs. Lord confesses that she misses China every time she leaves. 
''Life there was difficult,'' she writes, ''but because this was true, everything seemed to matter more.''
Mrs. Lord's final days in Beijing coincided with the student occupation of Tiananmen Square, but she does not attempt to chronicle those events systematically. 
There is one engaging tale, however, of a prosaic marriage saved from collapse when the bored husband discovers, to his delight, that his dull homebody of a wife has been cooking for the students in the square. 
Mrs. Lord is a storyteller, not a political analyst. 
And yet the powerful voices she orchestrates here explain eloquently why ordinary Chinese, pushed throughout their lives to endure the unendurable, might stand up to a tank.
