
If the International Monetary Fund and its equally staid sister, the World Bank, can embrace former Soviet republics, what is to prevent the New York Stock Exchange from drawing a Chinese company to its capitalist bosom?
Nothing, apparently, except that Big Board officials say Brilliance China Automotive Holdings Ltd., a Bermuda-based holding company whose sole business is the manufacture and sale of mini-vans in China, is really based in Hong Kong.
The boundary dispute came to light yesterday after Brilliance China, the 37th-largest industrial enterprise in China, announced that it had filed a registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission covering the proposed sale of five million common shares at an anticipated initial offering price of $14 to $16 a share.
The Big Board, which already makes markets for 115 foreign companies from 22 countries, was eager to add China to its list. 
Unfortunately, it now acknowledges that this one does not quite qualify as Chinese.
 
 
Offices in Hong Kong
Company perquisites prevent it. 
It seems that the Shenyang Jinbei Passenger Vehicle Manufacturing Company, Brilliance China's sole holding, has its principal executive offices on the 65th floor of the sleek Bank of China Tower in downtown Hong Kong.
The fact that the bulk of the company's 51.375 employees and all of the manufacturing operations are in Shenyang, the capital of Liaoning Province in northeastern China, did not sway the Big Board.
"Domicile is established by where the company has its executive headquarters," said Ray Pellechia, a spokesman for the New York Stock Exchange.
Nevertheless, investors considering the purchase of Brilliance China shares should be well versed in movements in the value of Renminbis, the "people's currency," and not Hong Kong dollars. 
And they should know that Shenyang Jinbei, which has the Toyota Motor Company and the General Motors Corporation as joint-venture partners in some of its operations, now imports more than 95 percent of the components that make up its Deluxe Mini-bus, and that those imports are subject to a tariff of 120 percent.
In the share offering prospectus, the company says it intends to increase domestic component content to more than 60 percent by the end of 1994, thereby lowering import levies to 80 percent.
Even though Shenyang Jinbei was converted from a state-owned enterprise into a share-owned company in 1988, the first large-scale state-owned business to do so, the market the company caters to still qualifies as captive.
More than 75 percent of Brilliance China is owned by the Bank of China and the Chinese Financial Education Development Foundation, and Shenyang Jinbei sells almost 90 percent of its mini-buses to Government agencies or state-owned enterprises.
Last year Shenyang Jinbei produced more than 11,500 mini-buses, about 40 percent of all the 11-seat to 15-seat vehicles produced in China, and had net income of $8.4 million on sales of $114.4 million.
Shenyang Jinbei's Deluxe Mini-buses have a list price of $49,490, while its Standard Mini-buses sell for $7,802.
Production is expected to rise by nearly 35 percent this year, and sales and net income were up sharply in the first half of the year, according to the prospectus.
Through the end of June, Shenyang Jinbei had net income of just over $11 million on sales of $92.1 million.
 
 
Dividends Planned
In the prospectus, Brilliance China says it intends to transfer some of Shenyang Jinbei's earnings to shareholders by paying dividends of 8 cents a share, beginning in the first quarter.
Shenyang Jinbei intends to use the proceeds from its stock sale to buy additional production equipment, build warehouses and plants and upgrade the technical quality of its vehicle-component manufacturers.
Despite China's well-publicized and very real political problems, investment bankers said the economic outlook for the country was promising, and that demand for Shenyang Jinbei shares could be strong.
"I think there will be growing investor interest in China," Robert Hormats, vice chairman of Goldman Sachs International, said. 
"The prospects for growth are substantial, and the country has an enormous number of entrepreneurs who are looking for capital. 
The key to investing in China is to have a substantial amount of information on the companies in which you invest."
Investment bankers involved in the Shenyang Jinbei stock offering are counting on the information in the prospectus, as well as the Big Board listing, to provide comfort to investors who like to play in emerging markets.
Demand for the Shenyang Jinbei shares is likely to be particularly strong from mutual funds that one way or another offer investors an opportunity to invest in China.
The First Boston Corporation is acting as lead manager for the offering, with Merrill Lynch & Company and Salomon Brothers acting as co-lead managers.
