
At Public School 102 in Elmhurst, Queens, there are a lot of new students and nowhere to put them. 
A special projects class is held on the auditorium stage, while an English-as-a-second-language class is held behind it. 
The stage dressing room has been transformed into the school's resource room. 
Two students sit in front of a computer in a stairwell for a math lesson, as their teacher stands two steps above them.
"We use every bit of space," said Dale Dancis, the resource room teacher. 
"We'd use the ceiling if we could."
P.S. 102 is one of several schools in Elmhurst, Corona and Ridgewood spilling over with new students as immigrants from China to Colombia flock to Queens. 
On Wednesday, the Board of Education announced that its annual enrollment had leaped by nearly 18,000 students. 
Every school district in Queens was affected. 
District 24, which includes P.S. 
102, saw the greatest jump in the city: More than 1,200 unanticipated students enrolled during September.
 
'A Steady Increase'
These numbers were no surprise to schoolteachers and administrators in District 24, which has 27,000 students in kindergarten through eighth grade. 
"We have had a steady increase in immigrant population for several years now," said Carlos LeDee, the supervisor of bilingual and English-as-a-second-language programs for the district. 
The biggest increase, he said, is in Spanish-speaking students: from 9,335 in 1986-86 school year to 12,005 now. 
Chinese and Korean-speaking students are increasing as well, he said, along with children from Eastern Europe, Pakistan and Africa.
Mr. LeDee said that the district has made accommodations for the new foreign students, looking hard to fill vacancies for bilingual education and English-as-a-second-language teachers. 
"Of course we have Spanish bilingual teachers," he said. 
"But we've also had to find Korean bilingual teachers and Chinese bilingual teachers."
The diversity the immigrants bring to the schools is a source of pride to principals in the district. 
But they are worried that if the wave of immigration continues, their resources will be stretched to the breaking point, especially as the school system faces the prospect of huge budget cuts. 
They worry about teacher layoffs next year, about rising class sizes and about finding ever more bilingual and English-as-a-second-language teachers. 
Most of all, they worry about the lack of space and what it will do to their students.
Harvey Sherer, the principal of P.S. 
102, said he calculated that his 900 students have two-and-a-half square feet of space each -- just enough to bump elbows when they stand behind their desks to pledge allegiance to the flag. 
"Could you sit in a room like this all day?" he said, pointing to a third-grade classroom with 39 desks.
The teacher of the class, Elizabeth Jennings, said that she continually rearranges the desks to find the most room.
"No matter what," she said, "I have them bumping into each other."
To give the children breathing room, she said, she puts class materials in a corner near her desk so children can walk up and "stretch their legs."
"They also sign a sheet to go to the bathroom," she said, adding with a sigh, "It's a popular sheet."
P.S. 102 has 900 students in a space used four years ago by 650. 
In the school's minischool, where kindergarten and first grade are taught, English-as-a-second-language classes are held in vestibules. 
Mr. Sherer has asked the district to rent space in a parochial school on the same bus route. 
"If there are budget cuts, I don't think we'll get it," he said.
Many of P.S. 
102's new students were picked up from neighboring Public School 89, which dropped its fifth grade classes and began teaching only kindergarten through fourth grade four years ago so it could fit 1,400 students in its 48 classrooms. 
P.S. 102 picked up 150 of P.S. 
89's students, easing the pinch for P.S. 
89 just a bit.
District 24 broke ground last week on a new elementary school, and has begun installing modular classrooms at some buildings. 
P.S. 89 is expecting a new wing, but not until 1993.
"We have new students registering all year long," said Cleonice LoSecco, principal of P.S. 
89. "Just this morning, the office was full of parents waiting to register."
P.S. 89, a turn-of-the-century four-story structure built to hold 900 students, has turned every available inch into classroom space. 
Assistant principals' offices are classrooms. 
Teachers' lounges are classrooms. 
The gym holds three classes: a second- , third- and fourth-grade class, where three teachers hold group and individual lessons.
The classrooms look like United Nations postcards; there are 35 languages spoken and the students -- mostly Asian, Latin American, East Indian and African -- share their native foods at an international festival each May.
There is a lot of sharing at P.S. 
89. There are five doubled kindergarten classes, with 42 or more students in each, three doubled first-grade classes and one doubled second-grade class.
Virginia Quinones teaches 42 bilingual Spanish kindergarteners with another teacher and two paraprofessionals.
"The hardest part is just moving around the room," she said. 
"On nice days, we take them outside and give them lessons out there. 
Today we made pinwheels and walked around the building, giving them a lesson on wind."
