
President Virgilio Barco Vargas of Colombia called on the United States and other nations today to curb the demand for drugs and to cut other assistance that he said the countries were giving to drug producers in the third world.
As speeches at the United Nations General Assembly continued for the fifth day, the Colombian President outlined a plan for his war on drug trafficking that emphasizes the role of drug-consuming nations.
Describing President Bush's national drug-control strategy as a step in the right direction, Mr. Barco echoed the statements of others from drug-producing nations, calling on the United States to do more to restrict demand for drugs.
''Every tactic and every weapon in the war against narcotics pales into significance compared with the need to reduce demand,'' he said, speaking in Spanish. 
''Those who consume cocaine are contributing to the assassination of my people by the criminal drug cartels.''
Receives Standing Ovation
The Colombian President, who received the first standing ovation at this year's General Assembly, called for tighter controls on the manufacture and sale of chemicals used in cocaine production, which, he said, ''come mainly from North America and Europe.''
He also called for limits on the sale of arms to drug traffickers, steps to curb the foreign mercenaries who help Colombian traffickers and an end to the laundering of drug profits through the Western banking system.
''Somehow our sense of justice is warped when a poor farmer who feeds his family by growing coca is seen as the greater villain than the wealthy international banker who illegally transfers millions of dollars of drug money that finances terrorist acts against innocent people,'' he said.
Mr. Barco's suggestions reflect a widespread feeling among third world countries that produce the ingredients for cocaine and other hard drugs. 
The fact that his Government is engaged in a violent struggle against Columbia's powerful drug cartels gives him moral authority to argue the third world's viewpoint, diplomats say.
 
Chinese Criticizes West
As the 44th session of the General Assembly ended its first week today, the Chinese Foreign Minister, Qian Qichen, criticized Western nations he did not identify for accusing China of human rights violations in its suppression of the democracy movement in June.
''The overwhelming majority of the countries of the world have expressed their understanding of this action by our Government,'' he said.
He addressed the Assembly on the day Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar received a detailed report, entitled ''Massacre in Beijing,'' that sets out charges against the Chinese authorities from the International League for Human Rights, a New York-based watchdog group.
Mr. Qian joined the foreign ministers of the other four nations with permanent Security Council seats - Britain, France, the Soviet Union and the United States - at the five nations' traditional working lunch with the Secretary General today.
Those at the lunch discussed United Nations efforts to resolve regional conflicts around the world. 
In a statement, they reaffirmed support for the Secretary General's attempts to settle these disputes as well as for current Arab mediation efforts in Lebanon.
 
Address by Mubarak
Speaking of other developments in the Middle East, President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt said in his speech to the Assembly that ''conditions are now favorable'' for opening a Palestinian-Israeli dialogue without conditions. 
Such a dialogue, he said, would seek to eliminate conflict in the region once and for all ''on the basis of applying the principle of territory for peace, and attaining co-existence and cooperation among all peoples of the region.''
Mr. Mubarak, who also spoke as chairman of the Organization of African Unity, denounced the existing ''imbalances in the international economic order,'' and said he had been given a mandate by the African leaders to press for an international conference on the debt question.
''The problem for many third world countries, especially the African countries, is no longer one of growth and development, but rather one of survival in the literal sense of the word,'' the Egyptian President said.
Other speakers at the Assembly session today were Foreign Ministers Oskar Fischer of East Germany, Maj. Gen. Ike Nwachukwu of Nigeria, Gerard Collins of Ireland, Sheik Mohammed bin Mubarak al-Khalifa of Bahrain, Air Chief Marshal Siddhi Savetsila of Thailand, Jacques Poos of Luxembourg, Ali Akbar Velayati of Iran, and Ali Ahmed Sahlul of the Sudan. 
Also speaking was Josevata Kamikamica, Minister for Finance and Economic Planning of Fiji.
