
The hottest cassettes in China these days are underground copies of a speech on agriculture by a Politburo member addressing the Central Communist Party School for senior officials.
Bootleg videos and cassettes of the speech are in demand because of a tongue-in-cheek proposal by Tian Jiyun, a reform-minded Deputy Prime Minister, that the Government set up special zones in which hard-line officials could live according to their orthodox Marxist principles.
"Couldn't you establish a special economic zone for leftists?" he suggests in his Shandong Province accent. 
"Salaries would be low, prices of goods would be low, you would rely on coupons, you would have to stand on line to buy everything and suffer everything else that goes along with leftism."
Mr. Tian then describes how the zone could compete with southern China's current special economic zones that have adopted capitalist-style management techniques. 
Those zones, like Shenzhen, are the most prosperous parts of the country, and millions of Chinese try to get permission to move there. 
In contrast, the "leftist" zone would be open to anyone.
"If we actually set up a place to do this, would anybody want to go?"
Mr. Tian asks. 
There are peals of laughter in the audience.
 
Deng Rival May Be Target
Mr. Tian does not name any leftist, but many of those listening to the tapes volunteer names of people like Chun Yun, a conservative central planner who is the rival of Deng Xiaoping, China's senior leader. 
Another person whom Mr. Tian persumably had in mind is Deng Liqun, a hard-liner active in ideology and propaganda decisions.
The speech was never publicized in the official Chinese press, but it was apparently given about a month ago. 
A video recording was made officially, and that was apparently then copied unofficially -- perhaps with the backing of senior officials trying to discredit the hard-liners.
Mr. Tian's address is the first time recently that any Politburo member has made a humorous speech, at least intentionally, and it suggests that reformers may be taking a new tack in the political struggles within the leadership. 
While Mr. Tian's comments are viewed as daring attacks on the hard-liners, they fit in with a campaign that Mr. Deng began in January to accelerate economic change.
Mr. Deng declared that China must be wary of rightists but that the main danger comes from leftists.
In Communist parlance, "rightism" means sympathies for democracy and Western-style capitalism. 
"Leftism" means a Maoist-style preference for waging class struggle and maintaining a centrally-planned economy.
 
Reports Are Exaggerated
Word about the tapes is spreading even faster than the copies themselves, and accounts of Mr. Tian's speech are becoming exaggerated with various ideas that he never mentioned.
Some people, for instance, say Mr. Tian called for a prohibition on residents of the leftist zones from being allowed to send their children abroad. 
That strikes an immediate chord with many Chinese, for it is common for some of the most anti-Western Chinese leaders to send their children to the United States for graduate study.
While Mr. Tian never said these things, he certainly makes a mockery of Communism as it existed in the 1960's and 1970's, when life was full of shortages and it was difficult to find a restaurant open after dark.
"We would all talk beforehand about what we needed to buy with our meat coupons," Mr. Tian, who interspersed his comments with a few earthy phrases, recalled. 
"Then the next day, we'd all run to the stores to get in line, no matter what line, only to find out that there wasn't anything there that we wanted. 
We'd just back away and run up to get into another line."
Some say that such a strong message would certainly have been backed in advance by a top leader, possibly Mr. Deng himself and at least by Qiao Shi, the Politburo member in charge of security and the president of the Central Party School.
"Someone certainly is putting him up to it," said a Chinese who circulates among top officials. 
"He wouldn't have the courage to say all that otherwise."
