
Politics, happily, has far less impact on international bridge than it used to. 
Fifteen years ago, countries competing in a world championship were required to agree in advance that they would play all opponents. 
Some teams that were under government order not to play South Africa, say, or Israel or Taiwan arrived anyway but found ingenious excuses for defaulting. 
"Out buying rice" was the explanation of a Thai official for the absence of a player one night.
The recent decision of the International Olympic Committee to readmit South Africa led the World Bridge Federation to do the same at its meetings in Yokohama, Japan, a month ago. 
The officials had previously said that they would follow the lead of the Olympic movement. 
This means that South African players are almost certain to compete, for the first time since 1980, in the 1992 World Team Olympiad in Salsomaggiore, Italy.
But whether teams from India, Pakistan and other countries holding strong anti-apartheid positions will actually sit down to play South Africa is far from clear. 
The world body, following precedent, is sure to divide the teams into several groups and keep incompatible countries apart.
In Yokohama, with 16 teams competing in both the Bermuda Bowl for open teams and the Venice Cup for women's teams, a complete round robin could have been organized, since neither South Africa nor Israel was involved. 
That method would have been preferred by many, but the teams were divided into two groups, playing a double round robin. 
That introduced an element of luck, since one section can prove to be stronger than the other.
About a decade ago the problem of Taiwan was settled, for bridge purposes, when that island agreed to give up calling itself the Republic of China in tournaments. 
Instead of Taiwan, it is now listed in international bridge events as Chinese Taipei, the equivalent, perhaps, of describing the United States as American Washington.
China and Chinese Taipei met head-to-head in the quarterfinal of the Venice Cup, their first clash in a world event. 
China trailed early but pulled ahead in the closing stages to win by 52 imps. 
The margin would have been bigger if a Chinese player had guessed correctly on the diagramed deal.
North and South for China were Gu Ling and Zhang Yalan, who have long been the cornerstone of the Chinese women's team. 
They climbed rather optimistically to six clubs, in which the declarer has problems in both clubs and hearts. 
South may reason that if the heart queen does not fall eventually, she may be able to maneuver a heart ruff in the dummy after discarding a heart on the second round of diamonds.
If you ignore the presence of the eight, the club combination in the North-South hands represents a theoretical problem. 
There are four reasonable ways to play: cash the ace and lead to the queen; cash the ace and duck the next time if East plays low; lead to the queen and if it loses, finesse the 10; lead to the queen and if it loses, play the ace at the next opportunity. 
These all offer about a 50 percent chance of making three tricks and losing one.
In practice South led to the ace, continued with the three, and was at the crossroads when East played the nine. 
South was now guessing about the trump suit. 
She needed to find West with exactly one of the two missing honors, and the king and jack were equally likely. 
She guessed to play low and lost 11 imps as a result, instead of gaining that number. 
In the replay the opposing North-South rested in game.
In the context of the hand, the play of the queen was indicated. 
If it won, South would then have been able to maneuver to discard a heart if necessary from the dummy and establish that suit with a ruff. 
But that would not have been possible if the ducking play had succeeded. 
It is better, in general, to leave the opponents with a winning trump than a losing trump.
China later recovered from this blow, won the match and eventually took the bronze medal for placing third in the Venice Cup.
