
A month ago, for a variety of reasons, China briefly became the capital of the international bridge scene. 
Two weeks of activity began with the Far East Championships in Canton.
The home country won the titles in three divisions, Open, Women and Junior, but the members of the Chinese Open Team suffered a disappointment: although they were overall winners, they did not win the right to compete in the Bermuda Bowl in Yokohama, Japan, in October. 
Australia and New Zealand regularly compete in the Far East contests, but because they are from another zone, their results do not count in qualifying for world championships.
Hong Kong, which did badly against the South Pacific countries and finished fourth, won the top spot when the Far East countries were ranked and will go to Yokohama. 
Nevertheless, China will be represented by its women's team in Japan and by its junior team in Ann Arbor, Mich., for the World Junior Championships in August.
After the Far East Championships, many of the competitors moved to Beijing where they took part in the Epson Worldwide Bridge Contest on June 7. 
They were among the 1,400 players in the Great Hall of the People.
As in previous years, the bridge enthusiasts in the Chinese leadership took part: Wan Li, chairman of the National People's Congress; Wu Wenying, Minister of Textiles; Ding Guanjen, a member of the Politburo; Qian Jiwei, Minister of Defense, and Liu Zhongyi, Minister of Agriculture. 
As he has for several years, Deng Xiaoping, the country's leader, played in a private Epson game.
In a separate event June 8 and 9, an American squad was among those invited to play in the International Friendship Teams. 
The winners were the Shanghai "Poker" team, named for the playing-card manufacturer that sponsored them rather than for a different card game.
Earlier, during the Far East event in Canton, Wan Li not only presented the trophies to the Far East champions, but received one himself from Ernesto D'Orsi of Brazil, the president of the World Bridge Federation. 
The award was for finishing second in a field of 87,000 in the 1990 Epson Contest, a remarkable feat for an octogenarian.
After receiving his award, Wan called for a table to be set up and settled down to a social game. 
On the diagramed deal, as South, he was using the Precision System, which has been popular with Chinese players ever since it was invented a quarter-century ago by Charles C. Wei, a Chinese-American shipbuilder in New York City. 
Kathie Wei, his widow, was sitting in the North seat as the chairman's partner.
In a pair game, it is likely that many North-South partnerships would arrive in four hearts. 
That would be in serious jeopardy after a spade lead, although it can be made, double-dummy, by winning with the ace, cashing two top hearts and leading the diamond queen: a diamond trick is established in the South hand to take care of the potential spade loser.
But North-South avoided this trap. 
After the strong one-club opening, a one-diamond response would have been negative. 
South therefore bid two diamonds, showing length in the suit and positive values. 
After both players had rebid their long suits, a series of cue-bids led to the good contract of six diamonds.
The success of the slam depends primarily on the trump suit. 
Viewing this suit in the abstract, there are five possible approaches aimed at avoiding the loss of two trump tricks: Cash the ace and continue; lead the queen for a finesse and if it loses, cash the ace; lead the queen for a finesse, and if it loses finesse again; lead to the queen, and if it loses to the king, cash the ace; lead to the queen, and if it loses, finesse for the jack.
The obvious play, which most players would adopt, is to cash the ace. 
That succeeeds 65 percent of the time, but it is the worst plan. 
Leading to the queen, with a decision to be made later about the jack, is about 6 percent better than cashing the ace. 
But 5 percent better still, because it deals with four trumps in the East hand, is to lead the queen from the dummy, again with a jack problem if West has the king.
In practice, however, the five options dwindled to two. 
An opening club lead went to dummy's ace, and South threw one of his remaining clubs on the heart ace. 
He then ruffed a low heart, ruffed a club and reached the moment of truth.
Leading to the diamond ace would still have been wrong, but by a smaller margin. 
Since South cannot deal with K-J-5-4 in the East hand, his advantage in running the queen is only 6 percent, not 11 percent. 
Nobody could calculate that at the table, but South made that play, which was right in both theory and practice.
This may have been the product of good intuition, but it is quite possible that South detected a slight hesitation on his right when the queen was led from the dummy and the four appeared. 
In any event the slam was now safe, for the heart king was available in dummy to take care of the potential spade loser.
Wan had bid and played well to make his slam. 
As an Epson silver medalist, he is the only top government figure around the world to own 10 World Bridge Federation master points, a large step on the road to becoming a world master.
