Nobody outside the People's Republic of China, and perhaps nobody inside it either, has a clear notion of the number of bridge players there. 
All that is certain is that since the Cultural Revolution the number has grown geometrically, and in a few years there are likely to be more Chinese players than there are American. 
A game that is both intellectual and social, and requires little equipment, is ideally suited to the world's most populous country.
It is probable that the World Team Championships will be played in Beijing in 1995, by which time the best Chinese players, now just below the world's best, may have closed the gap. 
And it is certain that the Far East Championships, which are a step on the road to world honors this year, will begin in Canton on May 22.
Many of the players in Canton will continue to Beijing, where they will play in two events. 
The first is the Epson World Pairs on June 7, in which some 90,000 players are likely to play in clubs in about 90 countries. 
Among the participants will be Deng Xiaoping, who will play privately. 
Several other members of the Chinese hierarchy will play in a public game: Wan Lie, Chairman of the People's Congress and runner-up in the 1990 Epson worldwide; Ngapoi Ngawang Jigme, Vice-Chairman of the People's Congress and head of Chinese-Tibetan Development, and Wu Shaazu, Chairman of Chinese All-Sports and the man who lit the flame at the Asian Games last fall.
The second event will be an international invitational team contest with competing squads from China, the United States and many parts of the Far East. 
One of the teams will be most unusual, for it will consist of six players of Chinese origin but very different backgrounds. 
Two are members of the senior political hierarchy: Deng Tu Fong, who is Deng Xiaoping's quadruplegic son and heads the Chinese Commission for the Handicapped, will play with Politburo Member Ding Guan Gen; Kathie Wei of Houston, Tex.,who just missed winning her fourth world title in the 1990 world championships, will partner Helen Sun Utegaard of Carmichael, Calif., and, most interestingly, Nie Wei Pin of Beijing, the World Champion at the board game of Go, will play with Dr. C.S. Shen, an astrophysicist and Dean of Ching Hua University in Taiwan who has twice come close to winning world bridge titles. 
The idea that a player from Taiwan would play in Beijing as a teammate of top officials of the People's Republic would have been unthinkable a decade ago: Bridge helps to heal old wounds.
Training for their trip, Wei and Utegaard competed three weeks ago in a regional tournament in Nashville, Tenn. and won three titles. 
En route to victory in the Knockout Teams, they had to recover from a 35-imp half-time deficit in their quarterfinal match, and were aided by the diagramed deal.
Wei understandably insists that her partners play the famous Precision System invented by her late husband, Charles Wei. 
As North, when the strong artificial one-club bid was overcalled with one heart, she doubled. 
In her style of Precision this showed either 5-8 high-card points, or a stronger hand sans a heart stopper.
South's pass of two hearts was forcing by agreement, and the bidding could have come to an end in three diamonds. 
But the partnership pushed on to four spades, conscious of the deficit in the match. 
West led a low heart, a surprising choice that did not affect the issue, and Utegaard captured East's queen with the ace. 
She then proceeded to judge the play very well.
A heart was ruffed, and the spade jack was led for a successful finesse. 
South guessed right in diamonds by finessing the ten, and ruffed another heart. 
The spade finesse was repeated, and if both defenders had followed, South would have made 12 tricks. 
As it was, East still had the guarded king, and was eventually able to ruff a diamond when South reverted to that suit. 
South could please herself whether she overruffed or discarded: Either way she could make her 10 tricks.
This was a gain of 9 imps, for in the replay East-West played in three hearts, failing by one trick. 
And that helped the Wei-Utegaard team to win the match by 8.
