
The British Foreign Secretary wound up a four-day visit here today, saying Hong Kong wanted to see the pace of democratic changes quickened as the colony moves toward its return to Chinese control in 1997.
The Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd, said that if London and Beijing could not agree on reforms here, Britain would proceed on its own.
While the visit produced no concrete announcements on changes, Mr. Hurd said Britain would announce within weeks how many seats in the largely appointed 60-member Hong Kong legislature it would open to direct elections.
He said the number would be considerably more than the 10 Britain had suggested in its original reform proposal two years ago, a number that had been widely criticized from the beginning as too few.
Chinese 'More Suspicious'
He also repeated his assessment that ''the first prize'' would be a political arrangement that would continue after the Chinese takeover. 
But he said if that were not possible, if Britain could not reach agreement with the Chinese, ''then we have to take our own decisions'' on reforms and their pace up until 1997.
He acknowledged that since the military crackdown on the democracy movement in Beijing last June the Chinese leaders ''have been difficult because they feel somewhat defensive.''
He added, ''They are more suspicious than before.''
But Mr. Hurd insisted there was also a ''powerful Chinese incentive'' to integrate Hong Kong successfully under the ''one country, two systems'' formula.
The new Foreign Secretary, who once wrote a novel about the Chinese takeover of Hong Kong that he said had a happy ending, has been visiting the territory at a time when confidence in its future is critically low, with many of the most successful residents lining up to emigrate to avoid life under the Chinese Communists. 
Many have criticized the British for their failure to set up a strong, functioning democracy before the Chinese take control.
 
A Liberal's Complaint
Mr. Hurd said he had come to Hong Kong to ''assess opinions here'' on reforms. 
Most politicians who met with him politely described the discussions as useful.
But Martin Lee, an outspoken liberal legislator, said it had been months since Hong Kong people, repelled by the killings in Beijing on June 4, began to demand more democracy and ''the British Government is still listening without doing anything.''
A wide range of Hong Kong politicians and pressure groups now support a political plan that calls for 20 directly elected seats next year and 30 seats -half of the legislature - directly elected by 1997.
But China, which controls the drafting of the Basic Law that will govern Hong Kong after 1997, has said it wants only 18 directly elected seats by 1997. 
Currently, members of the legislature are appointed by the colonial government or elected by constituency groups such as lawyers and social workers.
 
Advice From Beijing
A conservative pressure group of Hong Kong entrepreneurs, who returned today from a meeting with top Chinese officials, including Prime Minister Li Peng, said they had been told that Hong Kong must proceed cautiously and only gradually increase the ratio of directly elected members.
Vincent Lo, the businessman who headed the delegation, said senior officials in Beijing had told them that ''to increase gradually will help Hong Kong's stabilityI and prosperity, and avoid having the radicals make use of the situation.''
At a news conference at the end of his trip today, Mr. Hurd also reaffirmed Britain's intention of continuing the forced repatriation of Vietnamese boat people screened out as non-refugees.
Robert Van Leeuwen, the head of the Hong Kong office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, which monitors the screening process, said he shared the concern of Amnesty International and other relief agencies that the screening procedures were dangerously flawed.
 
'We Don't Have the Resourcs'
In the process, immigration officers interview boat people to determine if they are ''genuine'' refugees fleeing religious or political persecution. 
Asked if the United Nations monitoring program was an effective safeguard and could prevent genuine refugees from being sent back, Mr. Van Leeuwen said, ''No, we don't have the resources to provide a safety net.''
He added, ''We are not able to insure, with confidence, that people who might be mandatorily repatriated in the future might not be refugees, that there might not be refugees among them.''
