
In an outpouring of fear and anger unusual for this British colony, crowds jeered Sir Geoffrey Howe, the British Foreign Secretary, when he arrived today on a visit intended to restore Hong Kong's confidence in its future.
''To turn over six million people to a Communist Government after the massacre in Beijing is despicable as well as dishonorable,'' said K. T. Poon, an advertising executive, addressing one of the groups of demonstrators. 
Other protesters lining the streets outside Kai Tak Airport booed and shouted ''Shame!'' as Sir Geoffrey was driven by in a Rolls-Royce.
In a brief statement on his arrival, Sir Geoffrey said, ''You have no stauncher friend than Britain.''
But the Foreign Secretary offered no details on what steps Britain might take to insure political and economic freedoms in Hong Kong after the territory's scheduled reversion to China in 1997. 
He also said nothing about the widespread demand here that Britain provide an ''insurance policy'' for Hong Kong by allowing the 3.25 million Chinese who are British citizens the right to live in Britain after 1997.
'Hong Kong Has No Future'
When he refused to answer reporters' questions on the subject, he was loudly booed in a sign of how emotional people have become since the Communists' repression of the pro-democracy movement in China last month.
This evening, after a crowd of 15,000 protesters marched past the Governor's residence where Sir Geoffrey is staying during his three-day visit, a group of about 400 people sat down in front of the main entrance and refused to leave, despite the pleas of the rally's organizers and the police.
''If Britain doesn't help, Hong Kong has no future,'' said Jennifer Leung, a 26-year-old secretary, explaining why she was taking part in the sit-in. 
''Before the Tiananmen massacre, I had no interest in politics, like most of my friends, but now I think we have to let the British know what they are doing.''
Under the agreement to return the colony to Chinese rule, China promised Hong Kong autonomy for 50 years to practice capitalism. 
But the agreement is now widely viewed here as just a scrap of paper. 
Under it, for example, China's National People's Congress would have the right to amend or interpret laws affecting Hong Kong and the right to declare martial law, as it theoretically does in China. 
But when martial law was imposed in Beijing, it was done by a group of Communist Party elders. 
The congress was ignored.
 
Earlier, 600,000 Marched
The demonstrations today were far smaller than ones earlier this month, including a march of 600,000 people through Hong Kong's central business district to mourn the victims in Beijing. 
Leaders of several of the new political groups that have sprung up here in the last few weeks said they believed that some people were afraid their activities would be monitored by the Communists while others had become convinced London would not help.
''There were rumors that Chinese spies would take pictures and my family urged me not to participate,'' said Miss Leung.
Anger at Britain was heightened by a parliamentary report issued Friday in London that rejected giving Hong Kong's British citizens the right to live in Britain. 
It is a right they had, as colonial subjects, until it was stripped away by Parliament in the 1960's.
Rosanna Tam, a member of the Legislative Council, said the report ''will probably go down as one of the most dishonorable statements ever made about Hong Kong.''
Dame Lydia Dunn, the senior member of the Executive Council, which serves as a cabinet for the British-appointed Governor, said she feared that Hong Kong would now become ''ungovernable.''
''I fear that without assurances of a home of last resort, this community will lose its will and there will be a loss of talent'' as qualified people increasingly emigrate, she said.
 
'The Issue is Right or Wrong'
Many people here believe that Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and Parliament are unwilling to restore the right for Hong Kong's people to live in Britain because they fear a mass migration of Chinese and are racially prejudiced. 
One protester's sign today alluded to this. 
''The issue is right or wrong, not white or Wong,'' it said.
Privately, British officials here acknowledge they made a major miscalculation in trusting that China was on its way to becoming a stable country no longer subject to periodic upheavals and that the Communists understood Hong Kong's economic importance to them enough so that Beijing would avoid upsetting the territory's confidence. 
''I confused my hopes with analysis,'' said a senior official who helped negotiate the 1984 reversion agreement with China.
Fear about what will happen in 1997 led 46,000 people to emigrate last year, many of them the highly trained professionals Hong Kong most needs, like factory managers, police officers, teachers and accountants. 
Since the killings in Beijing, the number wanting to leave has skyrocketed.
An American banker said that of the 150 Chinese working in his company, every single one has been to see him over the past month about leaving, including his driver and his messengers. 
''We can't keep operating in Hong Kong if this goes on,'' he said. 
He is now looking at Singapore as an alternative location.
