
The controversy surrounding Britain's refusal to allow holders of British passports in Hong Kong to settle here has fed a long-running debate over this nation's policies toward immigrants.
Since the Communist repression of the pro-democracy movement in China last month, London has reaffirmed several times its decision not to give Hong Kong's 3.25 million Chinese who hold British passports the right to live in Britain after the colony's scheduled reversion to China in 1997.
Sir Geoffrey Howe, British Foreign Secretary repeated this last week. 
He told the House of Commons that the Government would be as ''generous as possible'' in admitting people from the colony but that a commitment to take in all of them was ''impossible.''
''It would be wrong to raise expectations we could not possibly meet,'' Sir Geoffrey said, adding that the authorities were working on a plan to admit some people from both the private and public sectors on the basis of the value of their service to Hong Kong, as well as their connections with Britain.
Both Conservative politicians and their Labor opponents have supported the Government's decision. 
But The Sunday Times, in a recent editorial, accused the authorities of not standing by the colony's people.
''To most British politicians, Hong Kong is a place out of sight, out of mind,'' the newspaper said. 
''On both sides of the House their attitude is, at best, clouded by ignorance; at worst, warped by racism.''
Opinion polls suggest that the public is divided over the immigration issue.
Under the headline ''No!
No!
No!''
The Sun, a national tabloid, published a survey recently that indicated that 65 percent were against a mass immigration of people from Hong Kong.
A Gallup Poll published last month in The Daily Telegraph, just after the Chinese Army crushed the pro-democracy protest, showed that the crackdown had not changed attitudes on giving the colony's people the right to settle here.
The poll indicated that 42 percent of Britons favored extending the right, 46 percent opposed it and the rest were undecided. 
When Gallup asked the same question in November 1983, it got almost identical results.
Behind the statistics is the reality of Britain today. 
In the early 1950's, the nation had 35,000 nonwhite residents, compared with 2.5 million today out of a total population of 57 million.
Huge waves of immigrants, many of whom were encouraged to settle here to fill the lowest paying jobs, arrived in the 1950's and 60's from Africa, India, Pakistan and the West Indies.
They settled in a class-oriented country that had previously known the newcomers only as colonial subjects. 
Sociologists say Britain remains socially and politically uncomfortable as a nation of diverse cultures and cannot easily contemplate a commitment to accept a new influx of immigrants.
Government figures show that a total of about 49,000 immigrants were allowed to settle in Britain last year and, in the last four years, fewer than 1,000 a year were allowed in from Hong Kong.
Critics of the Government position say it should undertake research before embarking on its stated course of asking the rest of the world to help Hong Kong residents in the event that the colony's people are forced to flee.
Paddy Ashdown, leader of the Social and Liberal Democrats, has condemned the political consensus over the Hong Kong issue. 
In a letter to The Independent newspaper, Mr. Ashdown said Mrs. Thatcher had added to the impression that concessions to Hong Kong would greatly strain the nation by giving Parliament a ''savagely simple'' answer to a question about the hardships that families faced when immigration regulations caused them to be separated.
''Her case, she said, rested on the fact that we are already admitting 40-50,000 immigrants per year and could not absorb any more,'' Mr. Ashdown wrote. 
''In other words, issues of justice and morality are overruled by the numbers game.
''This fawning before unstated popular prejudice does no credit to our leading politicians. 
It may not in itself be racist - but it feeds off and adds to the already dangerous level of racism within our society.''
