
Britain and China today made public the texts of secret diplomatic exchanges between them on the subject of Hong Kong elections, each side trying to prove it was in the right in a bitter dispute over political changes in this British colony before it reverts to China in 1997.
Beijing asserted that the documents exchanged between the countries' foreign ministers and other diplomats showed that a confidential deal had been reached on key elements in the next legislative election here in 1995. 
But Hong Kong's Governor, Christopher Patten, who has proposed a series of changes to broaden the voter base of the 1995 elections, said the 50-page exchange proved just the opposite -- that no deal had been made.
The exchange was first mentioned publicly last Friday by a Chinese official who, in the course of a stinging attack on Mr. Patten's plans, asserted that there were documents to show that Britain had secretly agreed to model Hong Kong's last colonial elections on China's restrictive post-1997 electoral blueprint for Hong Kong.
"In view of the allegations that were made, there was no choice but for me to make these documents public," Mr. Patten told reporters today, "because I don't want anybody in Hong Kong to think that deals are being done behind their back."
A top aide to the governor said Britain had told China that the documents would be released, and Beijing then published the same exchanges.
China's official New China News Agency said in an accompanying report that the intention was to "enable the public to know the truth about the understanding reached by the Chinese and British sides" on Hong Kong's political development.
The letters, exchanged in 1990 before China and Britain had completed the Basic Law -- the blueprint for governing Hong Kong after it reverts to Chinese control -- show London and Beijing attempting to negotiate plans for legislative elections before and after the takeover that would "converge" for a smooth transition. 
In the end, the negotiators agreed to study some key proposals in more detail and the exchange appears inconclusive.
In 1984, when Britain agreed to return Hong Kong to China, it also promised that it would expand democracy in Hong Kong during its final years here.
China has been pressing Britain to make the last Hong Kong legislative election held under British auspices conform to the complicated and effectively controlled post-1997 election process China has devised for Hong Kong.
Since Mr. Patten first announced his political proposals earlier this month, furious Chinese officials have kept up a stream of attacks on both the proposals and the governor himself. 
During a visit to Beijing last week, Mr. Patten was snubbed by top Chinese officials, meeting only with the head of the Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office, and briefly with the Foreign Minister.
Mr. Patten said his proposals were an attempt to increase democratic participation without contradicting the Basic Law, which sets out elections for the 60-seat legislature that include directly elected seats, seats elected by interest groups, and 10 members elected by an Election Committee.
Mr. Patten's proposals would give virtually everyone in the workplace a direct vote for an interest-group seat and would place directly elected municipal officials on the 1995 Election Committee. 
But China's 1997 blueprint outlines an Election Committee to be made up of 800 prominent people appointed by Beijing, a Hong Kong government official said.
The letters show that at one point, while pressing for more directly elected seats in both legislatures, the British Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd, agreed in principle that the Electoral Committee in 1995 would conform to the 1997 model. 
But Britain had put forward five principles for fair elections and Mr. Hurd pressed China to agree to those as well and enshrine them in the Basic Law.
"In the end, the negotiations broke off because China wouldn't agree to more directly elected seats, and the Basic Law was published without our five principles," said a government official. 
"There's no agreement here."
