
Prime Minister John Major of Britain said today that relations between Britain and China were generally back to normal, but he also emphasized that in two days of talks with Chinese leaders he had pressed for improvements on human rights.
While the focus of his trip was to discuss Hong Kong matters, Mr. Major also sought the release of a number of political prisoners. 
When he raised the topic of human rights, however, he seemed to receive a mild rebuke from Prime Minister Li Peng.
Mr. Major, the first Western European leader to visit China since the army crackdown on the democracy movement two years ago, signed an accord that will govern the construction of Hong Kong's new airport. 
The two sides also issued a joint communique on matters relating to Hong Kong.
Mr. Major, who has been criticized for coming to China to meet the leaders of the hard-line Communist Government, described his discussions on human rights with Chinese leaders as "free, frank and forthright."
 
Tibet Situation Raised
He said he mentioned individual rights cases, including four detainees from Hong Kong and several prisoners singled out to him by Amnesty International, the human rights organization.
"I raised the situation in Tibet, I raised the treatment of religious believers in Tibet and elsewhere, and I raised the detention of people in China for expressing the freedom of expression, predominantly student demonstrators," Mr. Major said at a news conference tonight. 
"I asked Prime Minister Li Peng to take a personal interest in all these cases."
"Our discussions today are not the end of the matter," he added later. 
"I intend to follow the matter up."
Mr. Major also mentioned a letter he had received from an opposition party member urging him to raise human rights in his talks with Chinese leaders. 
Mr. Major said he had used this to illustrate to Chinese leaders that the concern for human rights in China cut across party lines in Britain.
Mr. Li seemed to reproach Mr. Major for scolding China on human rights matters.
 
'China Was Humiliated'
"I also received a letter, from a Chinese historian," Mr. Li said, according to the Foreign Ministry spokesman, Wu Jianmin. 
"He reminded me not to forget that for more than 100 years, China was bullied and humiliated. 
For 100 years, foreign powers totally disregarded the human rights of the Chinese people."
"China and Britain have different social systems, and their value systems, ideologies and historical traditions are different," Mr. Li said, according to a paraphrase by the Foreign Ministry spokesman. 
"So, regarding the problem of human rights, the two sides definitely will have differences here and there. 
This is natural. 
However, the two sides can exchange opinions on this and can enhance mutual understanding."
Mr. Major appeared cautious when characterizing relations between the two nations, and the Chinese side seemed similarly vague. 
In contrast, when Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu of Japan came to China last month, the Chinese side said Chinese-Japanese relations had been restored to normal.
Today, the Foreign Ministry spokesman, Mr. Wu, said, "Prime Minister Major's visit marks the resumption and development of relations between China and Britain."
 
A Qualified Normalization
In his remarks tonight, Mr. Major said, "There is a general normalization of relations."
He qualified his statement, however, by emphasizing that while the day-to-day contacts between the two countries were essentially normal, Britain still regarded the issue of political and human rights in China as important.
"Because normal commercial and political traffic continues, does not mean we have withdrawn our concerns or that we cease to express our concerns either about past events that caused such a rupture in our relationship in 1989 or the human rights or arms sales problems that have been the subject of frequent discussions between our two countries," he said.
Earlier today, in a tour of the Forbidden City, Mr. Major attempted an impromptu walkabout to meet ordinary Chinese people, but he barely shook a hand before guards ushered him back and the Chinese people aside.
