
San Francisco and Charleston, S.C., radio and television stations won Peabody Awards on Thursday for their coverage of two natural disasters: the earthquake in the San Francisco Bay area last October and the hurricane that swept the Carolinas and the Caribbean last September.
CBS Radio News and Cable News Network were also honored for their reporting of the student uprising in China.
The annual awards for distinguished broadcasting were announced by the University of Georgia College of Journalism and Mass Communication. 
The 27 recipients will be presented with the awards on April 3 in Atlanta.
The winners were selected from 812 entries submitted by radio and television stations and networks around the world. 
A 15-member national advisory board judged the entries.
The 50-year-old awards are named for George Foster Peabody, a Columbus, Ga., native who became a banker and philanthropist in New York.
Here are the winners:
 
KCBS-AM, San Francisco, for ''Earthquake '89.''
 
CBS Radio, New York, for ''China in Crisis,'' for coverage of the extraordinary events in China.
 
National Public Radio, Washington, for Scott Simon's Radio Essays, presented on ''Weekend Edition Saturday.''
 
The Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, Toronto, for ''Lost Innocence: The Children of World War II,'' ''a recollection of the horror of war as seen through the eyes of youth.''
 
D. Roberts, independent producer, American Public Radio's ''Soundprint'' series, for ''Mei Mei: A Daughter's Song.''
 
Texaco Inc. and the Metropolitan Opera Association, honoring a half-century of continuous Saturday afternoon radio broadcasts, the longest continuing sponsorship of a national program in broadcasting history.
 
WCSC-TV, Charleston, S.C., for providing a ''lifeline for viewers deprived of water, communications and other essential services'' after Hurricane Hugo.
 
KGO-TV, San Francisco, for public service after the 1989 earthquake, when it served as an information clearinghouse.
 
KING-TV, Seattle, for ''Project Home Team,'' an examination of the problems of the working poor.
 
KRON-TV, San Francisco, for ''I Want to Go Home,'' an account of the plight of homeless children in San Francisco.
 
Cable News Network, Atlanta, for coverage of the China crisis.
 
Central Independent Television, London, for ''Cambodia Year 10,'' an examination of ''the plight of the nation from the Pol Pot regime to its tenuous present.''
 
MTV, New York, for ''Decade,'' a look at the 1980's through the eyes of music performers and news subjects. 
.
 
CBS and Motown-Pangaea Productions, in association with Quintex Entertainment, for the television mini-series ''Lonesome Dove.''
 
ABC and the Black-Marlens Company, in association with New World Television, for ''The Wonder Years.''
 
ABC and Sacret, in association with Warner Brothers Television, for ''China Beach: Vets,'' an episode that recounted the experience of American nurses in Vietnam.
 
ABC, Lou Rudolph Films, Motown Productions and Allarcom and Fries Entertainment for the mini-series ''Small Sacrifices.''
 
Beyond International Group, Sydney, Australia, for ''The Great Wall of Iron,'' a behind-the-scenes examination of the Chinese People's Liberation Army.
 
HBO, New York, for ''Common Threads: Stories From the Quilt.''
 
KCNC-TV, Denver, for ''Yellowstone: Four Seasons After Fire.''
 
Public Affairs Television, New York, for ''The Public Mind,'' Bill Moyers's critical look at public opinion formation and how the media affects basic social institutions.
 
WLOX-TV, Biloxi, Miss., for ''Did They Die in Vain?'' an examination of Mississippi's progress in race relations during the last 25 years.
 
Film News Now - the American Documentary, New York, for ''Who Killed Vincent Chin?,'' an examination of a murder in Detroit.
 
Children's Television Workshop, New York, for ''Sesame Street'' and for what the judges described as ''two decades of innovative and effective education through the medium of television.''
 
NBC News, New York, for ''NBC News Special: To Be an American,'' and Tom Brokaw.
 
David Brinkley of ABC-TV, a personal award ''attesting to the exceptional contributions he has made to broadcasting during his tenure as one of this country's richest treasures.''
 
J. Leonard Reinsch, a pioneer in broadcasting, cable and political communication, ''for a lifetime of outstanding service to his chosen profession.''
