
After the Chinese Army shot down pro-democracy demonstrators in Beijing two years ago, I. M. Pei, the Chinese-American architect, found himself besieged with calls from people wanting to know how Chinese-Americans felt about the crackdown. 
So, too, did other leading Chinese-Americans, including the cellist Yo-Yo Ma.
Mr. Pei and Mr. Ma were not sure how to react. 
And they were concerned that the China experts who were quoted on television and in newspapers were not Chinese-Americans.
"There was no organization to turn to," Mr. Pei said. 
"There isn't any spokesman for Chinese-Americans.
"That seemed a pity," he added.
So Mr. Pei, Mr. Ma and Shirley Young, vice president of General Motors for consumer market development, began putting together a group of distinguished Chinese-Americans, called the Committee of 100, to try to represent Chinese-Americans the way lobbying organizations for other minority groups have long done.
The committee, which recently held a national meeting in San Francisco, is finishing the work on its operating rules and membership list.
 
Well-Known Members
Among its other well-known members are Bette Bao Lord, the novelist, David Henry Hwang, the playwright, T. D. Lee, a professor of physics and Nobel laureate at Columbia University, and Chang-Lin Tien, the chancellor of the University of California at Berkeley.
The formation of the Committee of 100 is seen by some Chinese-Americans as an important breakthrough, because Chinese have historically avoided politics in the United States and have not organized outside the family structure. 
Also, the Chinese community in the United States was long riven by bitter disputes between backers of the Chinese Nationalists and those of the Communists, as well as divided among immigrants who came from Hong Kong, Taiwan or different parts of the mainland.
The establishment of the committee also comes at a time when Asian-Americans have emerged as the fastest-growing minority in the country, with the population up 107 percent in the last decade to a total of 7.3 million, according to the Census Bureau. 
And Chinese-Americans, who numbered 1.6 million in the 1990 census, make up the largest single block of Asian-Americans.
In California, Asian-Americans constitute 10 percent of the population, surpassing the number of blacks. 
Although the state has two United States Representatives who are Japanese-American, Norman Y. Mineta and Robert T. Matsui, there is no Asian-American in the California State Assembly or Senate.
 
Effort on Elections
This disparity between Asians' numbers in the population and their lack of political clout has given impetus to a quiet effort in California to elect more Asian-Americans.
In San Francisco this year, Tom Hsieh, an architect born in Beijing, is one of four candidates for Mayor. 
In Monterey Park, a Los Angeles suburb whose population is 57 percent Asian, a former Mayor, Judy Chu, is leading a campaign to create a seat that could be won by an Asian in the current reapportionment of the State Legislature.
And in Los Angeles, Michael Woo, a member of the City Council, is being touted as a possible successor to Mayor Tom Bradley.
Each candidate has benefitted from major financial support from Chinese-Americans around the country; many of them are newly affluent business executives or professionals.
 
Vow to Be Nonpolitical
But it is unclear how active the Committee of 100 will be in supporting Asian-American political candidates. 
Nor is it certain whether it will play a critical role in relations between the United States and China, as other lobbying organizations for some ethnic and racial groups do.
Within the newly formed group, there is disagreement about the role it should have, as well as disagreement on individual political issues.
Mr. Pei, who came to the United States to study at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1935, insisted in an interview that the committee would be "absolutely nonpolitical."
Referring to the debate over President Bush's decision to extend most-favored-nation trade status to China again this year, he said, "We will not take a position on issues like M.F.N."
Mr. Bush has been criticized by liberals and conservatives in Congress who wanted the trade status issue used to pressure China to improve human rights and curb foreign arms sales.
Instead, Mr. Pei said, the members of the committee would offer themselves as a resource for Chinese-Americans in this country and, if needed, as a go-between for either the United States or Chinese Government.
 
Chinese Government 'Suspicious'
"The Chinese Government is very suspicious of Chinese-Americans," Mr. Pei said. 
"They think our views are warped, that we are no longer Chinese. 
But they know about the Committee of 100, so I like to think they will come to us. 
In fact, I'm sure they will."
As an example of the committee's potential influence , the United States Ambassador to China, James Lilley, and the Chinese Ambassador to this country, Zhu Qizhen, spoke at the organization's meeting in San Francisco in March.
The committee's lack of a clear-cut agenda has prompted some criticism. 
Asian Week, a San Francisco-based newspaper for Asian-Americans, compared the group to "a high school student without a date, all dressed up with no place to go."
The committee's founders "have yet to articulate a clear purpose for the organization or its methods for accomplishing its goals," Asian Week said.
Mr. Hsieh, the candidate for Mayor of San Francisco, said of the committee: "I don't think they know where they are going yet. 
I think they should be more assertive, more active. 
Without that, it just becomes an academic approach."
Mr. Pei acknowledged that the committee may have a problem in not being more politically committed. 
"Maybe that makes it difficult for us to be really effective," he said. 
"Is it possible to generate enthusiasm without a cause?
All we know is, we are here, and we are Chinese-Americans."
Mr. Ma said there had been "some passionate talk from some people" in the group about taking stands on issues like M.F.N., China's role in Tibet and Beijing's human rights record. 
For now, Mr. Ma said, the committee as a whole would not take policy positions. 
But if another crisis like the crackdown on the demonstrators should erupt, "then we would act quickly."
Correction
Because of an editing error, An article on June 22 about a new organization of Chinese-Americans gave an incorrect name in some editions for a Chinese-born candidate for mayor in San Francisco. 
He is Tom Hsieh.
