
U Sein Win came to Washington last week to remind the Bush Administration that his popularly elected Government in Myanmar, formerly Burma, remains powerless because of a military dictatorship that is building an alarming weapons arsenal with the help of China.
A year and a half after winning a sweeping majority, Mr. Sein Win's provisional Government is still barred from power by the State Law and Order Restoration Council, which has hounded, imprisoned or driven underground many of its victorious candidates.
 
Seeking Sanctions
"There is only one superpower left in the world," Mr. Sein Win said in an interview on Saturday. 
"We want the United States to use its influence to get other nations to cut links with the military regime and impose sanctions."
That China is heavily arming the law and order council, known by its acronym Slorc, has caused concern in other Asian nations, particularly India, said David I. Steinberg, a Georgetown University Asian specialist who has written several books on Myanmar. 
Mr. Steinberg said Beijing has sold $1.2 billion in arms, aircraft and patrol boats to Myanmar since 1988.
So far Mr. Sein Win has not been able to get an appointment with anyone at the White House, though he has been welcomed by members of Congress and had a meeting with one State Department official.
Mr. Sein Win is the Prime Minister of the National Coalition Government of the Union of Burma, an administration-in-waiting operating from rebel-held territory near the Thai border, trying with scant resources to get the attention of the democratic world. 
A 48-year-old mathematics professor educated in Hamburg, Germany, Mr. Sein Win has been more successful in gaining support in Europe, where the European Parliament has pledged help and the Swedish Government has sponsored a resolution on the restoration of rights in Myanmar to be considered in the next week or two by the United Nations General Assembly.
 
'Uneducated Criminals'
Mr. Sein Win, who has the backing of several ethnic rebel groups long opposed to military governments in Myanmar, is the cousin of Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the leader of the national democracy movement and the winner of the 1991 Nobel Peace Prize. 
Their fathers, the independence leader Aung San and his brother Ba Win, died together in an assassination in 1947. 
Mrs. Suu Kyi is under house arrest in Yangon, the capital city formerly known as Rangoon.
The provisional Government rejects as illegitimate both new spellings, Yangon and Myanmar, because they were imposed without a popular referendum, and pledges to restore the old names. 
Myanmar, Mr. Sein Win said, is an adjective meaning "Burmese" in the Burman language, and therefore not correct grammatical usage. 
He said that the country of 40 million people was being run by "uneducated criminals."
Mr. Sein Win fled to Manerplaw, in an ethnic Karen enclave of Myanmar, in October 1990 as the Slorc's forces under Gen. Saw Maung were closing in on leaders of the democracy movement. 
With Mrs. Suu Kyi in detention, he is acting as a stand-in until she is free to contest a by-election. 
She was barred from the May 1990 election.
"With democracy restored, Aung San Suu Kyi will lead the country, she will lead the Government," said Mr. Sein Win, who won his seat by an overwhelming majority in the birthplace of Myanmar's strongman for nearly 30 years, Gen. U Ne Win. 
Most Burmese believe that General Ne Win, 82, is still in charge behind the scenes.
 
'Great Concern in India'
Mr. Sein Win and other exiles are asking that the democratic world not only help in installing the Government the people elected, but also pay attention to the Slorc Government's militarization, which could soon pose a regional threat.
Professor Steinberg said in an interview Saturday that after the collapse of the Chinese-backed Communist Party of Burma insurgency and the improvement of relations with Beijing, Slorc has bought about a dozen F-6 jet fighters, six Hainan-class patrol boats, armored vehicles and a variety of guns. 
He said that the military Government was spending from a quarter to half its national budget on weapons, in a country that has been impoverished by 30 years of dictatorship.
"There is great concern in India about this," Mr. Steinberg said. 
"India is very interested in making sure that Burma is not too much in the Chinese camp because it would be outflanked on its northeast frontier."
He said the Chinese were also making substantial inroads into the Burmese economy, challenging Thailand in supplying cheap consumer goods and in the lucrative smuggling trade in timber, gems and narcotics. 
The Thai military, now Thailand after a February coup, is one of the main beneficiaries of commerce with Myanmar, legal or illegal. 
The two armies have had very close relations.
Pakistan and Bangladesh, friendly to China and wary of Indian intentions in Myanmar, are also becoming military suppliers to Slorc. 
South Korea and Singapore are also reported to be trading in strategic materials. 
The Association of Southeast Asian Nations, to which Singapore and Thailand belong, has refused to be drawn into criticism of the military Government.
