
President Bush opened a public relations campaign today to avert his first Congressional veto override, making public a report on the steps his Administration has taken to extend the stays in the United States of Chinese students who fear persecution in their homeland.
The steps were outlined in a letter to Mr. Bush from Attorney General Dick Thornburgh. 
They were instituted in December under an executive order issued by Mr. Bush after he vetoed a law that would have instituted many of the same measures. 
They include a waiver of some foreign residency requirements, and automatic employment eligibility. 
Mr. Bush said the law interfered with his Presidential powers.
The override vote is seen as the first major test of Congressional support for Mr. Bush's China policy after two missions to Beijing by Brent Scowcroft, the national security adviser, and Lawrence S. Eagleburger, the Deputy Secretary of State. 
Congressional Republicans and Democrats alike have criticized Mr. Bush's decision to ease some of the sanctions he imposed against China after the crackdown on dissent there in June.
The actions listed by Mr. Thornburgh in the letter, which was written on Jan. 
16, were largely made public when Mr. Bush ordered Mr. Thornburgh to take them. 
Thus, the letter's release today during a trip to Georgia and Florida was primarily a public relations effort directed at what could be one of the first actions taken by Congress in the 1990 session: a vote to override the veto.
 
Override Is Called Likely
Top Republican lawmakers, including Representative Newt Gingrich, the House Republican whip, have already warned the White House that an override is a virtual certainty. 
Mr. Gingrich predicted that the ''vast majority'' of Republicans would vote to negate Mr. Bush's veto.
Marlin Fitzwater, Mr. Bush's spokesman, today declined to speculate on the chances of upholding the veto. 
''We will work to sustain it,'' he said.
Senator George J. Mitchell, the majority leader, said in Washington today that his party was ready to do battle on the Administration's China policy, which he called ''inconsistent with American ideals.''
 
Five Steps Taken
In his letter to Mr. Bush, Mr. Thornburgh said the Justice Department had taken five steps in response to the executive order, including these:
* It provided an ''irrevocable waiver'' valid through Jan. 
1, 1994, of foreign residency requirements for Chinese nationals who were in the United States as of Dec. 
1, 1989.
* It authorized all Chinese citizens in the United States as of last June 5 to work.
* It ordered that deportation proceedings not be held against Chinese citizens whose visas have expired. 
Such people will simply be notified that their visas were no longer valid.
* It has written draft regulations to give special consideration to refugee applications from Chinese citizens who have expressed ''fear of persecution related to family planning policies of forced abortion or sterilization.''
