
Marking the first anniversary of the Chinese Government's killing of protesters at Tiananmen Square, President Bush expressed concern today about China's lack of progress in restoring human rights.
In a statement that tempered criticism with praise for China's strides toward change during the 1980's, Mr. Bush said he hoped Chinese leaders would seek inspiration from the emerging democracies in Eastern Europe and Central America.
''I remain deeply concerned by the lack of respect for internationally recognized human rights in China today and urge a rapid return to the more positive course set before Tiananmen occurred,'' he said.
 
Carefully Worded Statement
Mr. Bush appeared to go out of his way to avoid language that might be offensive to Beijing or jeopardize the conciliatory policy that he adopted last year, a policy criticized by many in Congress as not forceful enough.
The President has said repeatedly that the best way to effect change in China is through private diplomacy.
He referred to last year's violence in Tiananmen Square as the ''brutal suppression of peaceful demonstrators,'' but made no specific mention of the arrests and executions that followed. 
Nor did he suggest that the United States would alter its policies toward China if Beijing's conduct did not improve.
''The world will continue to watch in the years ahead with the hope that China will turn decisively away from repression and toward the path of reform,'' he said. 
''The American people and Government - who value good relations with the Chinese people and Government - stand ready to develop this relationship as China resumes that path.''
President Bush's remarks came as exiled leaders of the student movement gathered here tonight to mark the killings with a candlelight vigil in front of the Chinese Embassy. 
On Sunday, an estimated 1,000 demonstrators, most of them Chinese students, turned out for a rally on the steps of the Capitol.
 
Democratic Leader Critical
White House officials had indicated early today that Mr. Bush would be issuing a statement on China, but the Senate's Democratic majority leader, George J. Mitchell, criticized the President several hours before it was made public, accusing Mr. Bush of having ignored the anniversary and of helping China's rulers to rewrite history.
The Maine Democrat repeated his opposition to Mr. Bush's decision to renew normal trading status for the Beijing Government, but he declined to predict whether the Senate could muster the votes to block it.
Earlier in the day, Chai Ling, the 24-year-old Beijing University student who was a leader of the pro-democracy demonstrators, told reporters that the Bush Administration's policies have harmed the democracy movement in her country. 
She urged the United States to put pressure on China to halt human-rights abuses.
Ms. Chai, who has been living in France, is meeting with members of Congress this week and has requested a meeting with President Bush.
The State Department spokeswoman, Margaret D. Tutwiler, said today that the United States had protested to the Chinese Government about the beating and harassment of several journalists covering the anniversary in Beijing on Sunday.
 
Message From Organized Labor
The American labor movement joined with a leader of China's democracy movement yesterday to mark the first anniversary of the crackdown in Tiananmen Square by delivering a letter of protest to the Chinese Mission to the United Nations.
The letter, from Lane Kirkland, president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., was taken to the mission by Lu Jing-hua, a spokeswoman for protesters before the crackdown.
There was no answer at the door of the mission, at 155 West 66th St., when Ms. Lu and supporters from the International Ladies Garment Workers' Union appeared at the door.
