
Handing President Bush a major defeat, the House of Representatives today overwhelmingly reaffirmed legislation protecting Chinese students in the United States from deportation. 
The Senate is expected to vote on Thursday, and the outcome is too close to predict.
The Administration's setback in the House came in the form of a 390-to-25 vote to override the President's veto of a bill allowing Chinese students to remain in the United States, with 145 House Republicans joining 245 Democrats. 
Only 25 Republicans and no Democrats sided with the President.
When he vetoed the bill Nov. 
30, the President argued that he could protect the Chinese students with the same effectiveness as the legislation through administrative measures that would be less offensive to the Beijing authorities.
Extensive Lobbying Effort
The vote marked a direct, but not unexpected, repudiation by the House of Mr. Bush's handling of relations with China, despite what has probably been the most extensive lobbying effort by the White House on any foreign policy issue since Mr. Bush was elected.
At a news conference this morning, Mr. Bush acknowledged that he was ''a little late'' in trying to block a two-thirds majority of House members from lining up against him and that he was focusing his energies on trying to prevent a similar majority in the Senate. 
If a two-thirds majority there also votes to reject the veto, the bill will become law.
In today's floor debate, Congressmen repeatedly criticized the President's decision to send two top aides on two secret missions to Beijing, despite his public claim to have banned all high-level exchanges, and his willingness to ease many sanctions on Beijing in the absence of any significant improvement in human rights. 
They said these steps caused them to lose confidence in Mr. Bush's judgment on China and convinced them that a different approach must be mandated by legislation.
''Make no mistake about it, this vote is a referendum on human rights that will be heard around the world,'' said William S. Broomfield of Michigan, who is the ranking Republican member of the House Foreign Affairs Committee. 
''I appreciate the difficulties President Bush finds himself in. 
America cannot always choose the foreign leaders it has to deal with. 
Yes, we should deal with the Chinese Government. 
However, let's do it on our terms. 
America should be remembered for providing a launching pad for Chinese leadership of the future and not for providing crutches for its tyrants of the past.''
The President had breakfast this morning with a group of Republican Senators in an effort to convince them that he has fully protected all 40,000 Chinese students who want to remain through administrative measures he implemented through the Immigration and Naturalization Service. 
Therefore, he argued, the legislation was both unnecessary and provocative.
Opening his news conference this morning, the President warned that Congress ''will have only itself to blame'' if it overrides his veto, because, he added, the authorities in Beijing have threatened to stop all Chinese students from coming to the United States if the bill is passed.
 
Called a Question of Pride
The President did not explain, though, why the Chinese would retaliate for the legislation and not for what the President ordered, if his executive orders were identical to the legislation. 
The only explanation, say many Congressmen, is that the Chinese know that a law cannot be easily changed, while an executive order can be reversed or amended by the stroke of the President's pen.
An Administration official said it was a question of pride. 
The Chinese, he said, can live with a ''quiet'' administrative order but not an open, and embarrassing, repudiation by Congress.
Mr. Bush said today that immediately after the crackdown on democracy demonstrators in Tiananmen Square last June, ''I moved to protect the Chinese students in this country.''
''Not one was sent back,'' he said. 
''They were safe then, and they are safe now, and they will be safe in the future. 
If I signed the bill, the students would still be safe, but China would retaliate and cut off future student exchanges. 
I want to keep contact. 
I do not want isolation.''
Since the Bush Administration imposed sanctions on China in the wake of the killings in Tiananmen Square last June, Beijing has allowed more than 7,000 Chinese students to come to the United States. 
There are currently about 40,000 Chinese students in this country, 32,000 of them holding visas that would require them to return to China before applying to change their American visa status.
 
Congress Not Impressed
Most members of Congress simply were not impressed by Mr. Bush's argument. 
They countered that if the Beijing leaders want to punish themselves and their country by stopping all Chinese students from benefiting from an education in the United States, they can go right ahead.
Speaking in the House debate before the vote, Stephen J. Solarz, the New York Democrat who heads the House Asia subcommittee, argued: ''If the President can send some of the highest foreign policy officials in his Administration to Beijing at the same time as he is telling the American people that he has suspended all high-level contacts then he simply cannot be relied upon not to rescind the executive order at some time in the future.''
Judging from the vigor with which Democratic House members denounced the President's approach in the floor debate, they relished not only repudiating his China policies, but also delivering him a political blow at the very start of the Congressional new year. 
Their rather assertive start to the second session of the 101st Congress seemed to signal that despite the President's soaring approval ratings, Democrats would not shrink from challenging his policies on a broad front.
 
Defense of Administration
Republican House members who voted with the President cited this, and other arguments, in trying to defend the Administration in the floor debate. 
Lamar S. Smith, Republican of Texas, said: ''I think the real question here is if the students are protected, what is the rush to override the veto of the President?
It sounds rather suspiciously that the bash President Bush brigades are on the prowl.''
Robert H. Michel of Illinois, the House Minority Leader, said: ''President Bush knows China as well, if not better, than any member of this House. 
He knows their people. 
He knows their special traits and he must be given the room to make the foreign policy moves he feels are in the long range best interest of our country.'
According to The New York Times/CBS News Poll, the American public is about evenly divided on the question of the proper approach to dealing with China. 
Asked on the weekend of Jan. 
13-15 whether it was more important to criticize the way China suppresses human rights, as the Congress seems to favor, or to avoid criticism in order to maintain good relations with China, 42 percent favored outspoken criticism, while 46 percent said their priority was maintaining good relations. 
The survey questioned 1,557 Americans by telephone and had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus 3 percentage points.
Trying to sway Senate Republicans this morning, Mr. Bush said the Chinese authorities have permitted Peace Corps volunteers to work in China, have accredited a correspondent from the Voice Of America and muted hostile propaganda against Americans.
