
President Bush has ordered a wide-ranging investigation into Chinese import barriers that could lead to punitive duties on imports from China, Administration officials said today.
Scheduled for announcement on Thursday, the President's decision reflected a broad consensus among Federal agencies that China is discriminating against American products and shows no willingness to change its policies, they said.
But the decision reflects not only international trade strategy but also domestic political maneuvering.
The Administration waged a fierce political battle this summer to win the renewal of China's most-favored-nation trade status. 
Part of the price it paid for the support of seven Democratic senators from farm states was a commitment to start an investigation if China did not change its policies soon.
The investigation ordered today would look at four ways in which Administration officials believe that China unfairly restricts imports. 
They are import quotas and outright bans on some products; complex import licensing requirements; highly specific technical standards that only match domestically produced goods; and a refusal to publish rules so that American businessmen can avoid legal pitfalls.
Administration officials contend that these import barriers are a major reason why China will accumulate an estimated $12 billion trade surplus with the United States this year, exporting more than $3 worth of goods to the United States for every dollar worth of imports. 
Chinese exports to the United States have soared while American exports to China fell slightly last year.
The Chinese Ambassador, Zhu Qizhen, said at a news conference this summer that weak Chinese imports of American goods reflected a slowdown in the Chinese economy, and not discrimination against American exports.
China is one of the largest foreign markets for American grain and agricultural pesticides, and senators from states producing these products were under pressure from constituents to vote against legislation this summer that either would have canceled the preferential trade status immediately or made any renewal next year subject to a wide range of conditions, such as an improved human rights record.
China threatened to retaliate against American exports if either measure passed, and Administration officials said President Bush would veto any legislation that did not call for an unconditional renewal.
The Senate voted 55 to 45 to impose conditions, failing to reach the two-thirds majority required to override a veto. 
The House passed similar legislation by slightly more than a two-thirds margin. 
Neither house has moved to iron out differences between the bills.
A resolution to cancel the trade status entirely passed the House by a narrow margin and was never put to a vote in the Senate.
In a letter on July 19 to Senator Max Baucus, Democrat of Montana, one of the seven farm state Senators who supported the Administration on this issue, President Bush wrote that if talks with Chinese officials in mid-August "fail to produce Chinese commitments to take substantial measures to improve market access," the Administration would take action.
The talks in August made no progress, but American trade officials gave China until the end of September to outline a new negotiating stance.
The delay infuriated Mr. Baucus, and he threatened last month to withdraw his support of Mr. Bush's position.
China gave the American Embassy in Beijing a response on Sept. 
30, but Administration officials concluded that it represented no change.
Senators who voted in favor of the Administration's position in July have been put in an awkward position by a Customs Service order last Friday impounding shipments of wrenches and steel pipes from China, pending an investigation into whether they were made by prison labor.
The order followed testimony to a Congressional panel on Sept. 
23 by Harry Wu, a former Chinese prisoner who said he returned to China this summer with false credentials and signed deals with prisons to ship these and other products to the United States.
