
President Bush said today that he would issue an executive proclamation to formalize and broaden the measures he ordered late last year to help Chinese students extend their stays in the United States.
The move, announced at a convention of newspaper editors, came in response to criticism from members of Congress and others who said Mr. Bush had failed to issue the proclamation as he promised to do after vetoing a bill to protect the Chinese students.
''I think that will certainly convince people, those that might be skeptical, that I have every intention of keeping my word,'' Mr. Bush said in a question-and-answer session with members of the American Society of Newspaper Editors.
After vetoing the bill on Chinese students in December, Mr. Bush said he was issuing an executive order to make it easier for students fearing persecution by the Beijing Government to remain in the United States. 
An executive order is a formal document that is printed in the Federal Register and has the force of law.
Called 'Technical Matter'
Mr. Bush and his staff repeatedly said afterward that he had issued the order. 
But in fact the President only issued an ''executive directive,'' which does not carry the power of law and can be amended or revoked without public notice.
Mr. Bush said today that the difference was ''a technical matter.''
''But I did say 'executive order,' so this will formalize it in an official executive order fashion,'' he said.
Mr. Bush's measures to protect Chinese students were taken in response to the nationwide crackdown on dissent in their homeland last year that ended with the violent suppression of demonstrations in Tiananmen Square in June.
In vetoing the legislation on Chinese students, Mr. Bush said the law infringed on his executive powers. 
He also suggested that it would interfere with his efforts to improve relations with Beijing, a policy that spawned a storm of protest on Capitol Hill after the disclosure of two secret missions by top American officials to China.
The White House said the executive order would probably be issued next week.
 
Expands Previous Action
Mr. Bush said it would expand his previous actions on behalf of Chinese students in these two ways:
* It will extend until Jan. 
1, 1994, an order that the Justice Department suspend all deportation proceedings against Chinese students. 
The earlier directive ran only through June 5.
* It will waive a regulation under which Chinese students whose passports have expired or have been revoked by Beijing are barred from changing their legal status in the United States. 
The waiver would allow a student to change his status to temporary worker, for example.
Mr. Bush also said the executive order would include these provisions of his earlier, less formal, instructions to the Justice Department:
* An ''irrevocable waiver'' of foreign residency requirements for Chinese nationals who were in the United States as of Dec. 
1, 1989. 
The waiver would be valid through Jan. 
1, 1994.
* A work authorization for all Chinese citizens in the United States as of June 5, 1989.
* Special consideration to refugee applications from Chinese citizens who have expressed ''fear of persecution related to family planning policies of forced abortion or sterilization.''
An aide to Representative Nancy Pelosi, the California Democrat who sponsored the Chinese students' relief bill vetoed by Mr. Bush, said Mr. Bush's promise to issue the executive order ''is precisely what we've asked the President to do.''
But the aide expressed concern that some provisions applied only to Chinese citizens who were in the United States as of last June, which would not include students who took part in the Tiananmen Square demonstrations early that month.
 
FULBRIGHT EXCHANGE TO RESUME
BEIJING, April 6 (AP) - China has agreed to resume the Fulbright scholar exchange program with the United States, but on a smaller scale, a United States Embassy official said today.
China canceled the 1989-90 program in August in anger over United States criticism of the military suppression of the student-led democracy movement.
The embassy official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said a formal agreement was reached on Wednesday for the 1990-91 academic year. 
Sixteen American professors will come to China, and 16 Chinese scholars will do advanced research at American universities, he said.
