
As he returned home facing a battle with Congress over his nomination for Defense Secretary, President Bush asserted tonight that his trip to Asia had ''underscored for me what can be achieved through a strong and bipartisan working relationship between the White House and Congress.''
Reading from a prepared statement after he emerged from Air Force One at Andrews Air Force Base at 6:30 P.M., the President tried to accentuate the positive about a trip that he feared had been overshadowed by the furor at home over his Defense Secretary-designate, John G. Tower.
Looking rested and alert after a nap on the plane, the President called his five-day visit to Japan, China and South Korea ''productive and rewarding'' and said it was ''a trip that underscores that America is and will remain a Pacific power.''
''Of course, differences remain and work is yet to be done, opening foreign markets to U.S. competition, continuing to encourage the growth of democracy and human rights, strengthening our alliances,'' he said. 
''But common ground was found.''
The President said he was ''anxious'' to brief the Congressional leadership about the details of his trip. 
''If common ground can be found halfway around the world,'' he said, ''surely it can be found at home among men and women of common purpose.''
Mr. Bush said there had been ''important symbols'' in his visit and he said he returned to America ''pleased with the progress made toward mutually beneficial relationships with our allies and friends.''
Mr. Bush did not mention the dispute over Fang Lizhi, an astrophysicist and human rights campaigner who is China's best known dissident. 
The Beijing Government was put out that Mr. Bush had invited Dr. Fang to his Texas-style dinner and stopped the dissident from attending. 
Instead, the President gave a paean tonight to democracy and international cooperation.
''For these four days of intensive discussions, I return with one especially vivid impression,'' he said in his statement. 
''The world looks to America for leadership not just because we're militarily strong, not just because we have the world's largest economy, but because the ideas we have championed are now dominant: freedom and democracy, openness and the prosperity that derives from individual inititative in the free marketplace.''
 
'Caution and Realism'
He said that he talked with Chinese leaders he had known 15 years ago when he was the United States envoy to China. 
''And it is clear from my trip that China approaches its thaw with the Soviets with caution and realism. 
We agreed that the Soviets must be judged not by their rhetoric but by their actions, such as whether the Soviet Union actually draws down its military forces alongside its military border and persists in encouraging Vietnam to completely withdraw from Cambodia.''
Mr. Bush said that he and the Chinese leaders had also agreed ''that after Cambodia has achieved its genuine end to Vietnam's occupation, free elections should be held under a coalition government led by Prince Sihanouk, with whom I met in Beijing.''
''The United States,'' the President said, ''remains committed to a result that precludes a return to power by the Khmer Rouge and the Chinese leaders appreciate our concern and are willing to work toward a peaceful coalition.''
Mr. Bush said he saw ''democracy and economic liberty work'' in Korea, adding, ''Thirty years ago, such progress was unimaginable.''
 
KOREANS GIVE TEPID GREETING
SEOUL, South Korea, Feb. 
27 (Special to The New York Times) - On the last day of his brief trip to East Asia, President Bush received a tepid greeting today and warnings of growing anti-Americanism from South Korea's political leadership.
His six-hour visit here touched off a series of small protests around the country. 
About 19,000 riot police officers patrolled Seoul's streets.
The President traveled around Seoul by helicopter, visiting President Roh Tae Woo at the Blue House, then meeting opposition leaders and addressing the National Assembly.
As the President's helicopter flew overhead to the Blue House, President Roh's residence, about 25 protesters were carried away. 
Among them was Kim Keun Tae, a prominent South Korean opposition leader. 
It was unclear tonight whether Mr. Kim had been released; there was no answer at his home in Seoul.
In the meeting with opposition leaders, Kim Dae Jung, head of the Party for Peace and Democracy, cited pressure to open Korean markets to American farm products as a factor in the rise in anti-American sentiment, according to briefings provided later by National Assembly officials.
