
President Bush's order to suspend American military sales to China has created fears of new layoffs at the largest employer on Long Island, the Grumman Corporation.
Of the $600 million in equipment and technology China has purchased, Grumman is involved in the largest transaction: a program worth as much as $502 million to modernize the electronic systems on Chinese F-8 fighter jets.
If Mr. Bush's decision to suspend deliveries to China halts development of the equipment at the company's headquarters here, about 250 of the company's 19,300 employees on the Island could face layoffs, company officials said.
'Business as Usual'
''We don't know what the impact is going to be, so until the Air Force tells us to cease and desist, it's business as usual,'' said Robert P. Harwood, a spokesman for Grumman, which is developing the equipment under the supervision of the United States Air Force. 
The first deliveries are not scheduled until 1991.
''I'm not aware of any stop-work order,'' said a Defense Department spokesman, Lieut. 
Col. Keith Schneider. 
''The details and specifics of various contractual and legal aspects are being looked into.''
Grumman is already reeling from the Pentagon's decision to eliminate funds in the 1990 military budget for three planes that the company builds for the Navy: the F-14 fighter, the A-6 bomber and the EA-6B electronic-jamming plane. 
Company officials said the cuts would result in the elimination of nearly 10,000 jobs here, on top of 2,500 that have already been cut largely because of the A-6 cancellation.
 
Lobbying Hard
Grumman officials and Long Island's Congressional delegation are lobbying hard to restore funds for the planes.
If design work on the F-8 electronics is delayed, Mr. Harwood said Grumman would try to place workers elsewhere in the company but it could not make any assurances. 
''Obviously, there are no jobs begging at Grumman,'' he said.
In 1987, Grumman won a $245 million contract to develop upgraded electronics - including computers and radar gauges - for the F-8, a Chinese-built version of the Soviet MIG-21. 
If work on a prototype here is successful, the Chinese would order as many as 55 of the electronics systems, bringing the total value of the contract to $502 million. 
The systems would be delivered between 1991 and 1993 and installed in China, Mr. Harwood said.
Company officials and defense industry analysts said the F-8 was a relatively small contract compared with Grumman's annual sales of $3.6 billion, but it represented a potentially lucrative growth market.
The Pentagon said other contracts affected by sanctions include a large-caliber ammunition program, for $28.8 million, with the Mason & Hanger-Silas Mason Company of Burlington, Iowa, and Hamilton Technology Inc. of Lancaster, Pa.; the fire-finder radar program, a half-completed $62.5 million project with the Hughes Aircraft Corporation, Fullerton, Calif., and the MK-46 torpedo program, a partly complete contract with the Honeywell Corporation of Minneapolis for $8.5 million.
