
President Bush vetoed legislation today that would have put conditions on the renewal of China's favorable trade access to the United States market, contending that changes in China's arms proliferation and human rights record would be best accomplished through diplomatic pressure.
The House is likely to override the veto, possibly as early as next week, members of Congress and aides said. 
But unless new disclosures of missile exports or human rights abuses further damage China's image, the Senate is likely to fall several votes short of the needed two-thirds majority when it votes this spring, they said.
President Bush has a perfect record of 25 vetoes without an override.
Mr. Bush said today that limiting China's trade privileges risked weakening its ties to the West and encouraging repression. 
"Anyone familiar with recent Chinese history can attest that the most brutal and protracted periods of repression took place precisely when China turned inward, against the world," he said in a statement.
But Democrats were generally critical of the veto. 
"It follows a line of bad decisions in U.S.-China policy, from sending high-level officials to Beijing to toast the leaders of China shortly after they massacred students in Tiananmen Square to the recent decision to meet with Premier Li Peng in New York," Senator Lloyd Bentsen, Democrat of Texas, said in a statement.
President Bush and Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d held a frosty meeting on Jan. 
31 with Mr. Li, who refused to promise any changes in China's human rights policies.
The bill would require the President to certify improvement in China's record on human rights, trade disputes and arms proliferation as a condition for the annual renewal in June of China's most-favored-nation trade status.
The Administration has been losing votes on China in the House by ever-widening margins. 
Representatives passed the current version of the legislation 409 to 29 on Nov. 
26.
President Bush has relied instead on Senate Republicans and farm-state Democrats to prevent bills restricting Chinese exports from becoming law. 
The Senate voted 59 to 39 Thursday to send the bill to the President, with five Democrats supporting him and 10 Republicans in opposition.
Farm-state Democrats, led by Senator Max S. Baucus, the Montana Democrat who heads the Senate Subcommittee on International Trade, have expressed concern that restricting China's exports may cause retaliation against American exports. 
China is one of the nation's largest export markets for grain and pays promptly.
Mr. Baucus said today that he expected the President's veto to be sustained in the Senate. 
"I frankly don't think many votes will change," he said. 
"It's a done deal."
But support for the President has been slowly eroding in the Senate after continuing trade disputes and further disclosures about Chinese exports of missile technology to the Middle East. 
The Senate passed nearly identical legislation last summer, 55 to 44.
The Administration's defeat on Thursday would have been even worse if two Democratic Presidential candidates, Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa and Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, had not missed the vote because they were out of town. 
Spokeswomen said both supported the bill and, if in town, would vote to override the veto.
