
President Bush moved today to reassure President Mikhail S. Gorbachev that he was eager to schedule the next superpower summit meeting and appeared to signal that he was looking favorably on a Soviet request for $1.5 billon in agricultural credits.
Speaking to reporters in a 20-minute impromptu news conference at the 18th hole of the Cape Arundel Golf Club here, Mr. Bush also defended his decision to extend China's trading status unconditionally for a year.
But he acknowledged that he was "starting perhaps a little behind" in his effort to persuade Congress not to approve any of five pending measures that would link the trading rights to China's human rights policies.
 
Delay on Summit Meeting
The next Soviet-American summit meeting is supposed to be held by the end of June, under an agreement reached this year when the talks were delayed at Washington's request. 
But agreement on a date has been delayed by Soviet-American disputes over the carrying out of the treaty reducing nonnuclear arms in Europe that was signed last year and over a proposed treaty that would cut stockpiles of long-range nuclear weapons.
After a 20-minute telephone conversation with Mr. Gorbachev on Monday, Mr. Bush said today that the remaining differences over the conventional arms accord, which focus on how many armored combat vehicles the Soviet Union may keep on active duty in the European part of its territory, were "now very narrow."
And he said he expected the long-delayed summit meeting to take place "sooner rather than later."
But Mr. Bush said he still could not offer a prospective date for the talks, and he said he could report no real "breakthrough" on the remaining arms control disputes.
Rather, Mr. Bush, who sought out the pool of reporters watching him play golf to make his remarks, seemed primarily interested in offering a public repetition of the assurances that he said he had offered Mr. Gorbachev in private about the improving state of Soviet-American ties after the chill that seemed to settle into the relationship last fall.
 
Moscow Seeks Economic Ties
Soviet officials have made it clear in private that they are very eager to schedule the summit meeting and to move forward on the two countries' efforts to expand their economic ties, which Moscow sees as the foundation of its financial relationship with the industrial democracies, American officials said.
"I want to go to Moscow, and I've said that, and I don't know that the Soviets have believed this all along, because there's speculation in our papers that we're pulling away," Mr. Bush said. 
"So I had an opportunity to tell him that we're not moving away from him or the Soviet Union, that we want to do what's right."
But at the same time, Mr. Bush said he still had not made up his mind about extending significant financial aid to the Soviet Union, or about whether Mr. Gorbachev should be invited to the July meeting in London of the Group of Seven industrial democracies, as the Soviet leader has requested.
Mr. Bush also said he had made no final decision on the Soviet request for $1.5 billion in additional agricultural credits. 
He did not object when a reporter suggested that he seemed to be leaning toward granting the credits, but said: "I'm looking at it in terms of overall reforms and wanting to see the credits, if granted, help. 
Not just alleviate hunger, but be used perhaps to help in their whole agricultural system."
 
Soviet Delegation to Visit
Mr. Bush said he would base his decisions on these issues in part on discussions this week between American officials and a Soviet delegation headed by Yevgeny M. Primakov, an adviser to Mr. Gorbachev, and Grigory A. Yavlinsky, a prominent Soviet economist.
Administration officials have said that Mr. Bush believes it is still too early to include Mr. Gorbachev in the London meeting, but there is some support among the other countries in the group -- Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Canada and Japan -- for inviting Mr. Gorbachev to a meeting in London outside the formal conference.
In Tokyo today, Prime Minister Brian Mulroney of Canada and Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu of Japan said at a joint news conference that they would not object to such a proposal.
On Monday, in a commencement speech at Yale University, Mr. Bush announced that he would extend China's "most favored nation" status, which guarantees the best available tariff rates, for another year. 
The announcement drew immediate criticism from lawmakers, including Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine, the majority leader.
On Wednesday, Mr. Bush will give the commencement address at the Air Force Academy in Colorado Springs. 
Marlin Fitzwater, his spokesman, said Mr. Bush would unveil "a new initiative for combating the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, beginning in the Middle East."
Mr. Fitzwater provided no details, but Administration officials have said they have prepared a plan that would bar Israel from producing material for nuclear weapons, require Arab nations to give up their chemical weapons, ban ballistic missiles with ranges of more than 90 miles and require the five permament members of the United Nations Security Council to notify each other of sales of conventional arms to the region.
Besides the obstacles posed by regional politics to any arms control proposal for the Middle East, China also appears to be a problem for the Bush Administration in its efforts to limit the spread of weapons of mass destruction. 
The United States has accused the Chinese of selling missile technology to Pakistan, and Beijing also has supplied Silkworm anti-ship missiles to Iran.
 
--------------------
China Praises Bush on Trade
BEIJING, May 28 (Special to The New York Times) -- The Government indirectly thanked President Bush today for his recommendation to extend China's trade privileges.
The Government also offered a subdued criticism of Mr. Bush's decision to impose new restrictions on the sale of missile technology to China. 
It expressed regret at the new sanctions, which were imposed partly because of concerns about Chinese arms sales to third-world countries.
But the most important decision was the recommendation to continue "most favored nation" trade benefits without any conditions. 
"This is a realistic and wise decision for which the Chinese Government would like to express its appreciation," the Foreign Ministry said in a statement.
