
While foreign companies welcome the lifting of martial law in the capital, the action is unlikely to have an immediate effect on their commercial or investment activities here, officials of a dozen companies said today.
The foreign business executives in interviews described the lifting of martial law, effective today, as a necessary condition for a better business climate. 
But they added that except for improving the prospects for the tourism industry, the move would be largely cosmetic and symbolic.
''The Chinese can, of course, put soldiers at will overnight back where they were before, and we all know that,'' said an American businessman who asked not to be identified. 
''The same problems remain whether or not they move a few people dressed up in fancy uniforms from one particular, visible location to one that is not so visible.''
Deteriorating Economy
For most companies, the dominant concerns are the result of China's deteriorating economy: tight credit, reduced demand and shortages of raw materials and foreign exchange.
''A lot of people were experiencing problems well before June 4 due to recentralization and a credit squeeze,'' said Matthew D. Bersani, an associate at the Beijing office of the American law firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison. 
''None of those problems go away, even if Sino-American relations were perfect.''
The tourism industry stands to gain the most from the lifing of martial law, which was imposed in certain areas of the capital on May 20, and hoteliers say the change will allow tour operators to offer more travel packages without insurance restrictions. 
Many insurance companies either raised their prices or were reluctant to give insurance for companies offering tours to China as long as martial law was in effect.
The cold winter has been a particularly bleak one for the tourism industry, and some hotel managers say they believe this year's tourist season, which begins in March, will start slowly.
 
Unlike a Faucet
''You can't just say there is no more martial law, and then have everyone willing to come to China,'' said Gerhard R.E. 
Schmidt, general manager at the Palace Hotel, which he said is currently operating at 50 percent occupancy. 
''It's not like a faucet you can switch on and off.''
Many companies hope for a softening of tensions between China and the United States, Japan and other Western countries. 
Once bilateral relations improve, their logic goes, Government lending will follow, paving the way for more trade and better business opportunities, greater confidence, and then more commercial lending and investment.
American businesses still say they are looking to the resumption of lending by the World Bank, and particularly the Japanese Government, for a stimulus to their commercial activity. 
In some cases, such loans are expected to provide the financing for a number of big-ticket imports that companies in China say they cannot afford without outside financing.
For the World Bank, the lifting of martial law will not directly lead to a change in its lending policy, but there will probably be an indirect effect if the action substantially improves the view of China taken by the World Bank's pivotal shareholders, like the United States.
 
Change Is Needed
Commercial banks, however, will not necessarily jump into the market once the World Bank resumes lending. 
Foreign bankers say a great deal more substantive change is needed before the capital market for China resumes its former scale and vibrancy.
For a lending market to re-emerge, a sizable number of banks must be willing to share the risk of underwriting or participating in China loan syndications, and at least some of the preconditions for this are that the World Bank and the Japanese Government resume their lending programs.
''Lifting martial law is a small step in the right direction,'' said an American banker in Beijing. 
''The World Bank loans being re-established is a little bit of a bigger step in that direction, and an official position by the Japanese banks toward China is another pretty big step in that direction.
''When there is a large enough universe of banks that are prepared to go back to China and take China risk, then we can do our business.''
