
A Chinese worker circled a small pavilion tucked among the sleepy hills here, and when the guard wasn't looking, he stole a peek at the red-tile roof of a mansion that for the next month may be the most important building in China.
Under the roof of the mansion, which is surrounded by trees, Deng Xiaoping, China's senior leader, is taking counsel on whom to promote and dismiss, and on how to redefine the Communist road.
Each summer, when the political heat follows the mercury upward, China's leaders retire to this seaside resort to debate the nation's future alongside the sand and salty water of the Bohai Gulf. 
Although their movements are never announced, Chinese say that Mr. Deng arrived in mid-July and that most of his associates have joined him to occupy the adjacent mansions on the hillside.
"That's where it's all happening," a foreign diplomat said, referring to Beidaihe (pronounced bay-dye-huh).
 
The Place for Negotiating
In a nation where the most important decisions are made not by a parliament or even a politburo but by consensus among a handful of old men, Beidaihe is usually the forum where the bargaining takes place and an agreement is thrashed out.
This year the Beidaihe meeting will be even more important than normal. 
Even the winds off the sea have an unusual whistle to them.
The party elders will have to determine the new roster of leaders and set the agenda for the 14th Communist Party Congress, which meets this fall to select a new Central Committee. 
A party congress takes place only once in about every five years to set the nation's direction and pace.
Many Chinese intellectuals expect the congress to legitimize a bold program for liberalization. 
Even Chen Yun, the elderly hard-liner who is Mr. Deng's most powerful rival, recently endorsed special economic zones and other new methods for economic reform.
 
Many Changes Are Expected
"We expect a lot of changes at the 14th Party Congress," a university lecturer said. 
"Next year will be much more open than this year."
Another urgency probably nags at Mr. Deng these days: his mortality. 
Three of his close revolutionary colleagues have died this year, so Mr. Deng, who is 87 years old, must be anxious to complete the task of deciding on succession.
"Deng is in a tough spot," a Chinese journalist said. 
"It all requires a delicate balance, to accommodate all the different groups and factions. 
And all this is being sorted out at Beidaihe."
Those holding formal positions often commute to Beijing for meetings, but most of the octogenarians remain in Beidaihe in the July and August heat. 
Since they have arrived, Beidaihe has gushed with gossip about who has come and who has not come, who will step aside and who will step ahead.
The fate of Prime Minister Li Peng may well be determined in Beidaihe this summer. 
Mr. Li's five-year term expires early next year, and there are whispers that Mr. Deng would like to move him aside into a less powerful post, like the largely ceremonial position of the presidency. 
Mr. Chen and other hard-liners are unlikely to agree to that without a tussle.
Mr. Chen, who apparently rarely comes to Beidaihe, may retire at the party congress from his job as chairman of the Central Advisory Commission, which Mr. Deng has been trying to dissolve for years.
Mr. Deng is believed to have arrived in mid-July, followed a few days later by Yang Shangkun, China's President, and then Prime Minister Li.
Bo Yibo, another elderly leader, and Wan Li, Mr. Deng's bridge partner and chairman of China's legislature, are also believed to be here.
 
Tight Security for Deng
"Deng came on a special train with three cars," said a local driver who has been inside Mr. Deng's compound. 
"He rode in the middle car, and army men were in the front and the rear ones. 
When he arrived, none of us were allowed to be at the station. 
They shooed away the buses and the taxis."
Tight restrictions are imposed when leaders come to town, and Mercedes-Benzes snake through the tree-lined streets in the hills. 
The police have set up checkpoints around town, and at night they sometimes refuse to allow cars to pass.
One minibus was stopped three times in the middle of the night and told to take a detour to its destination, said a Chinese business executive who was in the bus. 
The policemen beamed a searchlight at the bus, searched the luggage of the passengers and asked if anyone had knives.
Mr. Deng stays in Lianfengshan Park in Mao Zedong's old house, part of a compound of villas where several elderly leaders stay. 
The Deng villa was apparently renovated a few years ago, said a Chinese who visited the compound.
 
Summer Brings Life
Two town workers said separately that Mr. Deng's children spend most of their time on a large red-and-pink brick estate built into the cliffs of the Jinshan peninsula, where the streets wind through patches of pruned poplars and red roses.
Beidaihe sleeps in the winter and then booms all summer. 
Yellow-sand beaches are crowded these days with screaming children, old cadres and young couples who come in droves under the guidance, and expense accounts, of their Government ministries.
Almost all Government departments operate resorts here for employees. 
Along the beach are the State Council Resort, the Beijing Old Cadres Sanitarium, the Public Security Resort and the People's Daily Resort. 
Beidaihe, a town of 50,000, also has local bureaus of the New China News Agency and The Guangming Daily.
Some of the buildings are high-ceilinged colonial houses built by foreigners early in this century, while others are modern round-windowed compounds partly hidden behind high hedges. 
Brown-eyed Susans peer out of flower gardens and darkened windows appear through tufts of trees.
Nobody knows what happens inside.
