
After a two-year freeze on the process of opening China's state-controlled economy to market forces, a growing number of Chinese economic officials are openly calling for a wave of changes, arguing that without further liberalization China's march toward development may reverse.
For several months, China's leaders have acknowledged a need to ease the austerity measures imposed in the fall of 1988 to battle soaring inflation. 
Now, momentum is building for more basic changes, like those of the early 1980's, when China was a leader among Communist countries in experimenting with market-oriented policies to revitalize its state-run economy.
''In China, without real reform, the economic situation will become hopeless,'' Ren Junyin, deputy director of planning at the nation's central bank, the People's Bank of China, said in an interview in Beijing. 
''It is only a matter of time and the conditions before we undertake serious reform.''
No Changes in Policy
Chinese officials and some Western experts say the tolerance being shown for opening the market of economic ideas suggests some easing of the tense political climate that has existed since tanks were sent into Tiananmen Square in Beijing last June to crush the democracy movement. 
They add that it also shows some acknowledgement of the depth of the current problems on the part of the leadership.
Finance Minister Wang Bingqian has described the economic situation as fairly grim, and Prime Minister Li Peng recently acknowledged that the economy was fragile. 
Still, the leadership has produced no changes in policy in response to the calls for change.
Dwight H. Perkins, a China expert at Harvard University who recently con-ducted research with the State Planning Commission in Beijing, said: ''I don't think there's any real commitment for reform now. 
What I see is lots of ad hoc thinking about administrative intervention in the economy, but no real plan. 
Most of the people at the top have no real understanding or confidence in how markets work.''
Yet the calls for change have grown louder.
Zheng Hongqing, head of an important Government research center, was quoted on the front page of The China Daily newspaper last week, saying the Government has too much control over bloated state enterprises. 
He proposed a shareholding system for companies and the introduction of competition among banks.
In fact, China's first organized stock exchange is scheduled to open near here in Shenzhen within a few months. 
It will be closely watched as a sign of how tolerant the authorities will be.
Other proposals being floated are the creation of a national stock market, an easing of price controls and an opening of banks that make loans based on the prospect of getting repaid rather than on Government policy. 
Even with such ideas being widely circulated, China's current leadership is still expressing its suspicions about market-oriented changes, making the prospects for fundamental change uncertain.
Li Guixian, president of the People's Bank, recently told a financial conference in Shenyong, in northeast China, that banks ''are supposed to provide lending mainly in light of the state policies rather than for profit.''
 
Alert to Conspiracy
And a broadside was recently issued by Communist Party officials insisting that China would maintain its vigilance against ''peaceful evolution,'' code words here for what is believed to be an American conspiracy to transform the Communist planned system into a capitalist system.
The mood was expressed well by Rong Yiren, one of Chinese Communism's best-known capitalists. 
Mr. Rong is chairman of the China International Trust and Investment Corporation, known as Citic, a multifaceted Government-owned merchant bank in Beijing born of the open-door policies a decade ago. 
Citic has survived by deftly sensing and conforming to the prevailing winds.
''My view is that we should adopt a very gradual, stable reform policy that does not proceed hastily,'' Mr. Rong said, seated in his modern office under a picture of himself with Deng Xiaoping, China's senior leader.
 
Expression of Disapproval
Nonetheless, it does not appear that the debate or the pressure for change will be halted. 
''China's economy is too large to be run efficiently on the basis of commands from the center,'' the World Bank said in a recent report. 
In blunt language the report stated the case for pushing ahead with liberalization, saying disapprovingly that China's leadership seemed to believe that ''problems encountered in the course of reform,'' like inflation, could be fixed by resorting to the same inflexible mechanism ''responsible for the distortions the reform was designed to correct.''
Nicholas R. Lardy, an expert on the Chinese economy at the University of Washington, observed: ''They are at a critical point. 
The underlying economy is much softer than most of the figures suggest.''
The profits of state-owned enterprises plummeted 60 percent in the first half of the year, cutting even further into state revenues already depleted by heavy Government price subsidies. 
Industry is suffering from nagging shortages of basic commodities like energy and water because state-fixed prices are too low and promote inefficiency, economists say. 
And there could be an even more severe slowdown in foreign investment, which has tumbled 22 percent this year.
 
Enormous Changes
Before the economic liberalization ground to a halt two years ago, enormous changes had been wrought. 
Farmers were freed to grow more of what they wanted and to sell in more open markets; some central Government functions were taken on by the provinces; the economy was opened to a limited amount of foreign investment and trade, and the seeds of a real banking system were sown.
The changes put China far ahead of most Communist countries in liberalizing its economy, and they brought a large measure of prosperity to the countryside.
The region around Canton was a major beneficiary of the reforms. 
Farmers' incomes rose, and a flood of investment from Hong Kong caused a boom in factory and hotel construction. 
The region then suffered as the austerity measures and renewed emphasis on state control forced thousands of newly formed small businesses to close.
 
Some Positive Economic Signs
''This is like rowing a boat upstream,'' said Gao Xiqing, a graduate of the Duke University School of Law who is the general counsel of a new body trying to establish China's first formal stock exchange in Beijing. 
''You can't stand still. 
You have to go ahead or you go backwards.''
There are some positive economic signs, like vibrant exports this year. 
Inflation has fallen to about 3 percent. 
After a recession last year and earlier in 1990, industrial activity perked up modestly in the last two months. 
Urban store shelves are filled, and streets are lined with merchants sitting atop hillocks of watermelons, as city dwellers enjoy a bumper harvest.
After negative growth in the first months of this year, the Government has reported that the economy had an annual growth rate of 1.6 percent in the first half, compared with the first half of 1989. 
In the crucial area of industrial production, growth at state-owned enterprises rose 2.7 percent, less than half the 5.6 percent growth rate at more freely operated collectively run enterprises and a fraction of the 54.3 percent growth rate of foreign-financed ventures in China.
 
Experts' Recommendations
To put the whole economy on a more stable growth path, the experts advocate a number of changes:
* Creating broader markets for determining prices. 
To avoid jolting consumers too harshly, the World Bank and others have proposed phasing in market-determined prices.
* Permitting a greater element of private ownership. 
To many, this step is the most important and the one that seems to be the slowest in moving ahead.
* Freeing the financial system so that banks make their lending decisions on the basis of their likelihood of getting repaid.
''It boils down to a political question of what you can sell the people,'' said Mr. Lardy of the University of Washington.''There has to be some pain before they can really move ahead.''
