
A new round of talks on Cambodia begins here on Monday, with at least limited success already insured for their Japanese hosts who have stepping gingerly into regional peacemaking for the first time.
The leaders of all four rival Cambodian factions will attend and all of them have already initialed a memorandum, including a symbolic cease-fire agreement, worked out by the Defense Minister of Thailand, Gen. Chavalit Yongchaiyudh.
While American officials are said to want a stronger document, one calling for a comprehensive settlement and providing a greater monitoring and administrative role for the United Nations, Washington will applaud anything that looks like an agreement.
The memorandum, according to Thai officials and Western and Asian diplomats, calls for an immediate cease-fire, military ''self-restraint'' and a cessation of foreign military aid, though without effective monitoring. 
That lack will render it largely symbolic. 
In any case, the rainy season has already imposed a sort of cease-fire.
A Transitional Council
The agreement also calls for the formation of a Supreme National Council made up of six representatives from each of the two rival governments. 
The council would serve as the repository of Cambodian sovereignty until a new government is formed, presumably after a final settlement and elections.
By itself, the agreement will do little to end the war in Cambodia but, unless derailed here, it will represent the first agreed understanding among all the four factions. 
And it does resolve a few vexing issues.
Prime Minister Hun Sen of Cambodia, whose Government was installed by Vietnam when it drove the Khmer Rouge out of Cambodia in January 1979, is opposed by an uneasy, three-part coalition: the Khmer Rouge guerrillas, who are supported and armed by China, and two non-Communist factions, headed by Prince Norodom Sihanouk and a former Sihanouk Prime Minister, Son Sann, backed by China and the United States.
 
Sihanouk and Hun Sen to Sign
While all four factions are represented here and separately initialed General Chavalit's memorandum, Japanese officials say it will be signed by Mr. Hun Sen and Prince Sihanouk as leaders of the two rival governments.
That fact itself, combined with equal representation for the two sides on the Supreme National Council, represents a concession on the part of China and the Khmer Rouge, which have long insisted on equal representation for all four factions.
Vietnam and Mr. Hun Sen have opposed equal treatment for the Khmer Rouge, which was responsible for the deaths of more than a million Cambodians between April 1975 and December 1978, when Vietnam invaded Cambodia. 
But Hanoi and Phnom Penh have agreed that the Khmer Rouge can participate on the Council as members of the opposition coalition headed by Prince Sihanouk.
The Thais have long been pushing for a step-by-step settlement to Cambodia, beginning with a cease-fire, an approach criticized by Washington, which fears it favors Mr. Hun Sen.
The Japanese have been pushing quietly for a diplomatic role on Cambodia, in part as a sign of their postwar stature and influence. 
They are also expected to pay the bulk of the costs.
Thai officials say that Tokyo urged them to invite Japan to play host to this meeting. 
The Thais, whose boom is largely dependent on Japanese investment and aid, were happy to oblige, at the same time co-opting the Japanese.
But this meeting might not have happened without progress in other forums concerned with Cambodia. 
The five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council - Britain, China, France, the Soviet Union and the United States - have been meeting regularly on Cambodia. 
Also, China has opened talks with Vietnam, after a long period of inaction, on the level of Deputy Foreign Ministers.
Dinh Ngo Liem of Vietnam met his Chinese counterpart, Xu Dunxin, in Beijing in early May. 
Another meeting is scheduled. 
Western and Asian diplomats suggest that the new flexibility on the part of Mr. Hun Sen and the Khmer Rouge stems from these meetings.
