
Today also marked the first meeting of an official American representative, John Monjo, Ambassador to Indonesia, with Hun Sen, the Prime Minister of the Vietamese-installed Government in Cambodia. 
Washington announced last week that it would begin direct talks with Phnom Penh, a dialogue that was begun last week at the ambassadorial level in Vientiane, Laos.
Mr. Hun Sen, speaking after a 40-minute meeting with Mr. Monjo, said that he accepted the United Nations plan as ''the framework for a comprehenive solution.''
He said that the plan, which calls for thousands of administrators under United Nations auspices leading to new elections in Cambodia, had to be elaborated upon in negotiations, a fact also emphasized by Mr. Alatas and the French co-chairman, Edwige Avice, a Deputy Foreign Minister, in their formal opening remarks.
But Mr. Hun Sen said he was now optimistic that the talks here, which quickly broke into meetings of the co-chairmen with the individual factions, would have a successful outcome.
He said the meeting with Mr. Monjo was a very good and important one. 
''It is a first meeting but very valuable,'' he said. 
''We have the same intention, the same understanding with the Americans.''
Mr. Monjo said only he brought ''no special messages - just exchanging views.''
The United Nations plan has already been accepted by the three-party opposition coalition fighting Mr. Hun Sen's Vietnamese-installed Government. 
The coalition, led by Prince Norodom Sihanouk, is made up of his followers, those of another non-Communist, former Prime Minister Son Sann, and the Communist Khmer Rouge, during whose rule, from 1975 to 1979, more than one million Cambodians died by execution and famine. 
Vietnam invaded the country and installed a pro-Hanoi, anti-Khmer Rouge Government in 1979.
Khieu Samphan, the Khmer Rouge representative and vice president of the anti-Government coalition, said today that he was also optimistic. 
''Peace is closer than ever,'' he said. 
He had ''no reservations'' about the United Nations plan. 
The plan would establish a national governing council, under United Nations supervision, to administer the country. 
The United Nations would also set up and monitor free elections, and sending a military force as peacekeepers. 
The four factions must negotiate the details of the plan, and it is expected that there will be disagreements.
Khieu Samphan's comments were echoed by Prince Norodom Ranariddh, Prince Sihanouk's son and representative here.
 
Sihanouk's Status Unclear
But the status of Prince Sihanouk, who said in a statement Saturday that he was too ill to come here and who was communicating with Jakarta by fax, remained unclear, adding a note of uncertainty.
Senior Western and Asian diplomats said today that the Chinese Prime Minister, Li Peng, had urged Prince Sihanouk to come here, but that the Prince refused at the last minute, because he was offended by some remarks of Mr. Hun Sen.
The diplomats said that Prince Sihanouk and the Chinese Deputy Foreign Minister, Qi Huaiyuan, then had a long and bitter discussion, which ended with the Prince saying that he was packing his bags to go to his second home, in Pyongyang, North Korea.
China has been the main sponsor of all the opposition factions and the sole sponsor of the Khmer Rouge. 
Prince Sihanouk is provided a home in the old French Legation building in Beijing.
 
A Break From Diplomacy
Prince Sihanouk remained today in Beijing. 
But in a hallway interview, Prince Ranariddh said that his father had decided to take ''a five- or six-month break'' from diplomacy because of his health, and would issue a statement to that effect today in Beijing. 
No statement was issued, however, and some diplomats suggested that if this meeting turns out to be a success, Prince Sihanouk may yet arrive.
Although Prince Sihanouk has said in the past that he would not serve as chairman of an interim national leadership, the Supreme National Council, he is now said to want the position.
In a statement Saturday, Prince Sihanouk said the coalition would accept a council made up of six members from the coalition and six from Phnom Penh, as Mr. Hun Sen has demanded. 
The Khmer Rouge had been demanding that all four factions have an equal number of seats, giving the coalition three-quarters of the seats.
In his statement, the Prince said the council could elect a chairman as a 13th member. 
But Mr. Hun Sen is said by diplomats to be insisting that Prince Sihanouk, if he is to take part in the council, be one of the 12.
 
A Demand for Consensus
Diplomats said, however, that Mr. Hun Sen is willing to accept Prince Sihanouk's demand that the council operate by consensus, rather than by majority voting.
Still, Prince Sihanouk has been reluctant to allow himself to be put on the same footing with Mr. Hun Sen, only 39 years old, whom he has called ''a Vietnamese valet.''
Mr. Alatas, appearing buoyant after a process in which he has been so intimately involved, said that the bilateral meetings would continue Monday ''to start talking about forming the Supreme National Council,'' a necessary first step for peace.
After getting the factions' commitment to the United Nations framework, he said the main priority of the meeting will be to ''finalize the process of the formation'' of the Supreme National Council, including ''its nature, composition, functions and related aspects.''
If that could be accomplished here, senior Asian diplomats said, the peace talks might then return to Paris, where a formal international conference on Cambodia broke up in disarray in August 1989.
The talks here are taking place under the aegis of that conference. 
''If nothing else goes wrong, which it probably will,'' one Asian diplomat said, the conference could be reconvened in late October.
The United Nations plan envisages the Supreme National Council taking Cambodia's seat in the United Nations in the upcoming General Assembly. 
It would then cede to a special United Nations authority the right to ''supervise or control'' the five key ministries of state - foreign affairs, interior, finance, defense and information.
The United Nations authority would in this way insure the neutrality of the Government in the year or so before new elections can be organized and held.
Diplomats say the five permanent members foresee the appointment of United Nations officials at the top levels of the ministries, working through Cambodian bureaucrats of both rival administrations. 
If the Council agrees on particular decisions, the United Nations would go along. 
If not, the United Nations officials would decide.
''But how does Hun Sen understand 'supervise or control'?'' an Asian diplomat said. 
This was the thorny sort of issue still to be worked out, he said.
The United Nations would also be responsible for monitoring a cease-fire and the cessation of external aid to the combatants, for disarming the rival armies and repatriating the 300,000 or so Cambodians displaced after the Vietnamese invasion.
Phnom Penh is reluctant to cede too much control to the United Nations, but it may do so if it does not mean the dismantling of the administration that is now in place. 
Cambodian officials say dismantling would allow the Khmer Rouge to intensify the war, but some admit it would also undermine the Government's chances in an election.
Mr. Hun Sen has worries, too, that the Khmer Rouge will take advantage of a cease-fire and continue its war for power by political as well as military means. 
The Khmer Rouge might not hand in all its arms to the United Nations, for instance, or tell many of its fighters to go underground rather than group themselves in cantonments for disarming, as the United Nations plan suggests.
 
The U.N. Plan For Cambodia
 
These are the major requirements of the United Nations peace plan under which the Vietnamese-backed Cambodian Government would share power with three guerrilla groups it has been fighting for 11 years.
 
U.N. administration of the Cambodian Government until elections are held.
  U.N. supervision of disarmament of rival factions.
 
U.N. supervision of elections.
 
Human rights guarantees.
 
International guarantees regarding the neutrality of a restructured Cambodia.
