
Five days a week during the academic year, Andrea Li boards the No. 1 bus at the steps of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's main building for a 15-minute ride to Harvard University, where she is studying Chinese.
Like 16 of her M.I.T. classmates, Miss Li, a senior from Stony Brook, L.I., who is majoring in brain and cognitive sciences, must take Chinese at Harvard because M.I.T., where students of Asian heritage account for 19.3 percent of the student body, does not offer the language. 
Four other M.I.T. students studied Chinese at Wellesley College last fall, making the 45-minute commute four times weekly.
But that situation may change, perhaps as soon as this fall.
Last month, M.I.T. applied to the Chiang Ching-kuo Foundation in Taiwan for a three-year, $300,000 grant to establish a Chinese language program at M.I.T., said David L. Lundberg, director of development for the School of Humanities and Social Sciences.
 
Satisfying Language Needs
The newly established, private foundation has an endowment of $100 million. 
Its function, Mr. Lundberg said, is to give grants ''exclusively to Americans to promote Chinese culture and things related to Chinese culture in America.''
Should M.I.T. be awarded the grant, the language classes would satisfy the needs of many, from students who want to talk to relatives in their native tongue, to others with a general interest in Asian cultures, to others who may find knowledge of Chinese useful in business. 
Mr. Lundberg expects a reply within two months.
For Miss Li, whose parents were born in Hong Kong and speak Cantonese at home, she wanted to study Chinese to learn about the culture.
''Since I am Chinese, I feel the need to be familiar with the language,'' she said. 
''There are a lot of people in my position, brought up understanding Chinese, but not fluent.''
 
Survey of Student Interest
Yet most like her do not have time to commute, said the vice president of the Chinese Students Club, Min-yuan Tung, a senior in the department of electrical engineering and computer science, from St. Clairesville, Ohio.
The club, representing a group that makes up the larger part of M.I.T.'s 800 Asian undergraduates, distributed surveys to several hundred students during the first week of December, asking about their interests in studying Chinese. 
One club member, Rebecca Kao, a senior from Framingham, Mass., who is majoring in electrical engineering and computer science, said the survey results indicated that a large number of students would be interested in studying Chinese if classes were taught at M.I.T.
''Our long-range goal,'' Mr. Lundberg said, ''is to establish an area studies program for Asia.''
''We've got lots of bits and pieces,'' he said. 
''But a big gap is that we don't teach the Chinese language.''
M.I.T. offered courses in Chinese from 1976 to 1980 jointly with Wellesley, but the program was discontinued after a disagreement. 
Several M.I.T. groups, including the Chinese Students Club and the Asian Working Group, have since sought the reinstatement of the Chinese classes.
The Asian Working Group is made up of faculty members like Richard J. Samuels, who directs the M.I.T. 
Japan science and technology program, and Tunney Lee, head of M.I.T.'s urban studies and planning department, who are interested in promoting awareness of Asian cultures and values.
Last fall, the Chinese Students Club members met with various administration officials, including Ann F. Friedlaender, the dean of the School of Humanities and Social Sciences. 
As acting head of the foreign languages and literature section, Mrs. Friedlaender would be responsible for the establishment of the Chinese classes.
''Institutionally, if you were to ask anyone if Chinese should be taught at M.I.T., the answer would overwhelmingly be, 'yes.'
'' she said. 
''But M.I.T. is in a budget deficit. 
In that situation there is a reluctance to start new programs.''
If M.I.T. receives financing from the Chiang Ching-kuo Foundation, it may take up to a year for the institute to find and hire faculty members to teach the courses, Mrs. Friedlaender said. 
In that case, M.I.T. may accept help from Wellesley College's Chinese department, which would provide instructors until M.I.T. hires permanent ones.
Miss Li, whose parents speak Cantonese, said she wanted to study Chinese to learn about the culture. 
(The New York Times/Rick Friedman)
