
Finding human teeth marks on a million-year-old elephant ankle made waiting a lifetime to dig in China worthwhile for an anthropology professor at the University of California at Berkeley.
A team of American and Chinese anthropologists led by Emeritus Prof. Desmond Clark -- who in 1981 in Ethopia was a co-discoverer of some of the oldest human remains found to date -- recently received the first grant for non-Chinese to conduct excavations in China since before World War II.
Professor Clark said team members in China are examining a pile of old broken bones and stones that were discovered this summer in the Nihewan Basin, northwest of Beijing, hoping to find clues of how early hominids lived.
"It was difficult during the Cultural Revolution for foreigners to research in China," Professor Clark said. 
"We could look at the site with our Chinese colleagues but could not participate in excavations. 
This is truly exciting and has finally happened."
 
A Find After Days of Sifting
The Chinese-American team began excavations and surveys in July, a month after its permit was issued.
After four days of sifting through fine-grained sands, a team member uncovered an ankle bone belonging to an elephant dating from more than a million years ago, said Dennis Etler, a Berkeley anthropology graduate student from Lakewood, N.J.
Human teeth and cut marks on the bone indicated that humans, not large mammals like as hyenas, had been gnawing on the bones, Professor Clark said.
The cut marks could have been caused by sharp-edged rocks or flakes, many of which were found alongside the bones, Mr. Etler said. 
"These flakes were possibly used as tools to scrape loose the meat," he said.
But finding beautifully fashioned tools or the remains of early humans -- million-year-old hominid fossils have already been discovered -- is not what the team is after. 
"We not only want to establish early presence of homo erectus, but we want to figure out how they behaved," said Kathy Schick, an archeology professor at the University of Indiana at Bloomington who is on the China team.
 
Techniques New to Chinese
In addition to the excavations, Frank Brown, a team member and geology professor at the University of Utah, taught seminars for Chinese scientists.
Modern excavation and survey techniques introduced by the American scientists were new to the Chinese scientists, Professor Clark said. 
"Because the Chinese Government forbade foreigners from excavating, the Chinese were not exposed to these modern techniques now used internationally by archeologists."
Professor Clark's Chinese counterpart on the team, Jui Lanpo, pressured the Government to ease its restrictions, Mr. Etler said. 
(Mr. Lanpo was working on the excavation site when the 450,000-year-old remains of Peking Man, the first hominid remains found in China, were unearthed in the 1920's.)
Lifting the ban, however, has reciprocal advantages, Professor Clark said in a recent interview. 
Until now, foreigners have not had the opportunity to dig in undisturbed sites like the Nihewan Basin.
 
Educating Chinese Scientists
As part of the effort to educate the younger Chinese scientists in the group, Professor Schick arranged for two of them to work this semester at the University of Indiana as research scholars. 
In June 1992 Professor Clark is scheduled to teach for a semester at Beijing University.
The $60,000-a-year a year project, financed by the Henry Luce Foundation in New York, will resume in April and continue over the next three summers.
The 15 team members include scientists from the Chinese Academy's Institute of Vertebrate Paleontology and Paleoanthropology in Beijing and Nicholas Toth, an anthropology professor at the University of Indiana at Bloomington.
