
When Juliet Cheng was called in to Newington Children's Hospital in July, she thought it was for a final consultation about the health of her 7-year-old daughter, who suffers from severe juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, before they returned to China for medical treatment there.
Instead, a security man and social workers charged her with neglect and placed her daughter, Shirley, into temporary state custody.
The allegation of neglect rests with Ms. Cheng's refusal to agree to surgery for her daughter's legs. 
Without it, the hospital says, Shirley will never be able to walk. 
But Ms. Cheng, who was born in China and is a naturalized United States citizen, says she does not trust American doctors. 
She wants to return to her native country to try other, more traditional and familiar, options first, like physical therapy and herbal medicine.
A juvenile court judge has authorized surgery on the child's hips, knees and ankles, but the procedure has been twice scheduled and postponed as Ms. Cheng's lawyer, George Athanson, takes the case through state and Federal courts. 
He is seeking a full hearing, with testimony by Asian as well as Western physicians.
The case is now in Federal District Court in Hartford, where Judge T. Emmet Clarie is deciding whether it is a Federal matter and, if so, whether to grant a temporary restraining order. 
''If he grants the order,'' Mr. Athanson said, ''we'll have a full hearing on a preliminary injunction, and then we'll bring in the doctors.''
Ms. Cheng, 39, moved to this country in 1980. 
She has a mother and a sister living in the Poughkeepsie, N.Y., area, where she lived until moving to Newington for her daughter's treatment. 
She is separated from her husband, whom she met in the United States.
Although the case recalls medical confrontations over the rights of parents to withhold treatment from their children, this incident deals with what Ms Cheng and her lawyer say is the right of a parent to choose a particular form of treatment.
Ms. Cheng says she is not opposed to medical intervention and has consented to physical therapy, the use of casts and anti-inflammatory medication prescribed by specialists including her physician, Dr. Lawrence Zemel. 
Newington doctors, for their part, have permitted Ms. Cheng to continue to administer Chinese medication and to have her daughter treated by a practitioner of homeopathic medicine.
 
Agency Is Said to Be Insensitive
The dispute comes at a time when the State Department of Children and Youth Services, which has temporary custody of Shirley Cheng, has been criticized for what people have called a series of inadequacies and is being rebuked in hearings throughout the state. 
A three-member panel is hearing testimony in a class action suit that the Connecticut Civil Liberties Union brought nine months ago on behalf of nine children.
At a hearing in the class action suit, Carolyn Richter, a lawyer for Connecticut Legal Services, offered examples Wednesday night of what she said were the agency's overbearing and insensitive operations. 
After the hearing, she said the Cheng case ''is an example of the medical establishment deciding they have the truth of the matter and totally disparaging alternate forms of medicine.''
Ms. Cheng ''only wants to try other options first,'' Ms. Richter said. 
''What is outrageous is that powerful people, the institutions and the doctors, are throwing away a brand of medicine practiced by two-thirds of the world. 
That's cavalier.''
''If there is still time, as we understand it, the state should not have stepped in,'' Ms. Richter said. 
She was referring to testimony that Dr. Zemel was said to have given in juvenile court, where proceedings are closed to the public, that the operation need not take place for two years. 
Mr. Athanson said he had a transcript of Dr. Zemel's testimony to that effect.
 
Hospital's View
Mr. Athanson also argued that ''Western medicine has made great advances, but we don't harbor all medical knowledge in the world. 
Some of the things that have been used in China for thousands of years may be helpful here.''
Dr. Zemel, a specialist in pediatric rheumatology, has declined to discuss the case or to respond to the statement that Mr. Athanson said he made in closed court, but Dr. Julius Landwirth, vice president for medical affairs at Newington, spoke for him and for the hospital.
''When Shirley was referred to us, she was absolutely crippled,'' Dr. Landwirth said. 
He said that physical therapy and medication had proved unsuccessful ''because her joints were so contracted, so frozen, that it was impossible to straighten them out using the usual procedures.''
''The problem arises when the only opportunity to prevent this child from living with a lifelong crippling condition is being denied her,'' he said. 
''It is then appropriate, when either a life-threatening condition or a condition with lifelong crippling implications exists, that a physician and an institution need to raise the question of possible medical neglect.''
''It's not up to us to decide that,'' he said. 
''It's up to the child protection agency and the court to answer that question.''
Dr. Landwirth also asserted that it was ''not the same as saying we have a culture gap because the child has been receiving care with nontraditional medicines in addition to the traditional ones.
 
Best Interests of the Child
''Nor is it an issue of physicians and the hospital overriding the rights of a mother to make decisions. 
The question is, given a serious lifelong irreversible handicapping condition that will preclude this child from ever getting out of a wheelchair and with treatment available to relieve that condition, does a parent have a right to deny that or is that denial a form of medical neglect.''
He said the surgery would relieve the tightness around the girl's joints. 
''We don't really go into the joints; it's a matter of releasing the tension on the ligaments and tendons that surround the joint. 
They are all tightened up and shortened; they need to be released and lengthened.''
A spokesman for the Department of Children and Youth Services, Tom Moriarty, said, ''What the Newington doctors and we are saying, and the courts have so far agreed, is that what the mother wants to do is not in the best interests of the child.''
Ms. Cheng, who visits her daughter twice a day, said: ''Shirley is very upset in the hospital. 
Every time she sees me she asks me to take her out of her chair. 
She doesn't want to do the surgery. 
I just want her back so we can return to China.''
