
The floors creak, the stools sway, and a peasant mother soothes a baby tired from the two-hour trek they have taken to this dilapidated house-church. 
But the congregation sits rapt as the Rev. Lin Xiangao bellows out his sermon on Elijah.
This cramped two-story tenement is Pastor Lin's home as well as an illegal church. 
Every week, 700 to 1,000 Chinese workers, peasants and students file through a narrow lane and climb the steep and dark stairway to join one of a dozen services or prayer meetings.
Because of his religious beliefs, Pastor Lin, a frail 66-year-old with sparkling eyes, has been jailed twice, for a total of more than 21 years. 
His wife and mother died while he was doing prison labor.
But even in prison camp in the Cultural Revolution, while hooking up rail cars in a coal mine in Shanxi Province, Mr. Lin dared to preach to his fellow convicts.
"I've been in prison twice," said Mr. Lin, a Baptist pastor who also goes by the English name of Samuel Lamb. 
"I'm ready for a third time."
 
Number of Conflicts Grows
China officially says it has 5 million Protestants and 3.5 million Catholics, and it generally allows them to worship freely if they follow certain guidelines and support the Government. 
Many other Chinese profess Christianity but want to have nothing to do with the officially established church. 
As a result, there has been a growing number of conflicts over the last two years.
On one side are the religious leaders who believe that church and state should be separated. 
On the other side is a Government that fears the spread of a belief that it cannot control and that might challenge Communism.
Pastors like Mr. Lin who are practicing without Government approval have been drawn into a long battle with the authorities. 
The United States State Department estimated in its report on human rights that as many as 50 Christian leaders in China had been detained or imprisoned by the end of last year.
While there are no figures on the underground church, various reports in China have suggested that both the Protestant and Catholic followings have been growing steadily, and some estimates put the real number of adherents at many times the official number.
"The Government doesn't like our church because we preach according to the Bible, including the second coming of Christ, and they don't," Mr. Lin said. 
"Our faith is controlled by God, not by man, especially not by nonbelievers. 
As a civilian, I am controlled by the Government. 
But my faith is controlled by God."
Many senior religious officials in China are Communist Party members and are therefore not allowed to belong to any religious congregation. 
While they say they sympathize with religious men, they cannot understand why people like Mr. Lin will not abide by Government rules.
"Why must he practice his own religion when there are already so many places for him to go here in China?" said Liu Wenyan, director of religious affairs in Guangdong Province, of which Canton is the capital. 
"We just can't allow this kind of citizen. 
But we aren't arresting him."
The Government insists that Mr. Lin register with the official church organization, the Three-Self Patriotic Movement Committee, which is China's independent church and which is founded on the principles of self-governing, self-supporting and self-propagating. 
Officials have offered him a nice, large church, which would allow him to expand his following. 
They also detained him briefly in February 1990, and have interrogated him nearly a dozen times in in the last two years.
Mr. Lin responds that registering would give the Government too much control over what he can preach. 
He says the regulations in the official church are too restrictive and sometimes relate Communism to the church. 
Moreover, he says, they would dictate how long his sermons should be and what topics he should avoid discussing. 
Mr. Lin sometimes preaches for two hours at a time.
 
Prejudiced, Officials Say
But officials say Mr. Lin is prejudiced against the Government, and this presumably makes them uneasy about his sermons. 
They add that Mr. Lin is a bit crazy.
"There is something wrong with his thinking," said Mr. Liu, who says he has never met Mr. Lin. "When some followers get sick, he tells them not to go to a doctor."
Indeed, Mr. Lin preaches that he has been cured of illness by God and not by medicine. 
He says that one of his most striking memories from childhood is his recovery from an illness when doctors predicted he would not survive. 
He was cured, he says, when his father, also a Baptist pastor, gathered family and friends together to pray through the night for him.
Nonetheless, Mr. Lin has a solid following, and each week people crowd into his tiny quarters to listen to his sermons or come for a chat, a baptism or some religious advice. 
He has followers who visit from Hong Kong, and even Billy Graham stopped by Mr. Lin's church three years ago. 
Wealthy visitors have made contributions to Mr. Lin's church, including a sound system.
 
'I Preached to Them'
In the past, Mr. Lin used Bibles supplied by a Hong Kong churchgoer, but last year the authorities confiscated all his religious texts, hymn books and other materials. 
Now he uses Bibles furnished by the Three-Self Movement, which he says are complete versions of the Bible.
Each time there is a crackdown on religion, he says, he expects to be harassed. 
One time he was asked whether he took part in the Tiananmen democracy movement and he said he had not. 
On another occasion, he was asked whether there was truly a resurrection of Christ.
"They asked me, 'Is there a real God?' and I preached to them," Mr. Lin said. 
"They asked me, 'Was Jesus really resurrected?' and I preached to them again."
