
Worried by layoffs and rising prices, many Chinese workers seem increasingly disenchanted by the capitalist-style changes taking hold in shops and factory floors around the country.
As a result, for the first time since China began liberalizing its economy more than a dozen years ago, many ordinary citizens seem to be no longer agents of change but obstacles to it. 
Workers in several cities have attacked factory directors who have tried to introduce market-oriented changes, and there are growing reports of strikes and acts of sabotage.
Those incidents suggest that opposition to fundamental change is increasingly coming not only from octogenarian Communist hard-liners but also from many ordinary blue-collar workers.
 
Fear and Fury?
Similar tensions have erupted throughout the former Communist bloc. 
While China has been able to avoid deep social upheavals associated with "shock therapy" in other countries, the experience here suggests that even a gradual weaning away from central planning can lead to widespread fear and sometimes fury.
"There's enormous frustration out there with the reforms," a Chinese economic official said. 
"The leaders are running scared."
What alarms the leadership is cases like that of Huang Chuanying, a bank director whom the official Chinese press hailed as "a daring reformer."
Mr. Huang tried to curb the Maoist-style labor practices that have crippled state-owned enterprises all over China, and he began dismissing bank employees considered incompetent and unproductive.
One dismissed staff member, Cao Weihua, responded by firebombing Mr. Huang's house, severely wounding Mr. Huang, his wife and their two children. 
Mr. Cao was sentenced to death recently, but the incident seemed to reflect a broad concern among many Chinese that while a market economy may be more prosperous and efficient than a Communist one, it may also be less cozy.
The contrast is profound with the mood in most of the last dozen years, when ordinary Chinese were ardent backers of change. 
In those years, they often took the initiative and pushed liberalization more quickly than the Politburo intended.
"Reform used to be very easy and rewarding," a Chinese journalist said. 
"In the 1980's, it meant dividing up the land, and starting up free markets, and opening new businesses, and everybody loved it."
But in the 1990's, the agenda is different. 
While virtually all Chinese endorse "reform" as a general slogan, many workers worry about what it will mean: higher rents, rising rice prices, and destroying the "iron rice bowl" system that guarantees workers stable employment and steady incomes.
 
The Changing Rice Bowl
According to a folk ditty now making the rounds among workers: Before liberation, we had a clay rice bowl. 
Then Chairman Mao gave us an iron rice bowl. 
Deng Xiaoping poked a hole in it. 
Since reform, we've had a porcelain rice bowl.
"A porcelain rice bowl looks rather elegant," a manual laborer in her 40's explained dryly. 
"But it's no more sturdy than one made of clay."
A 26-year-old woman who works in a factory said that when she was in the university, she believed that most Chinese wanted more economic liberalization. 
But now she figures that aside from intellectuals, many people are against fundamental changes.
"We need housing reform and price reform, but nobody wants them," she said. 
"Who wants to pay more?
I figure that in my factory, 80 percent of the workers believe in the iron rice bowl system."
That may well be exaggeration, for most workers interviewed seem to be not so much hostile to change as worried by it. 
And while some are openly opposed, there also is a significant proportion that favors dog-eat-dog capitalism and believes that economic liberalization should be speeded up.
 
Weaning From Subsidies
Many of the problems arose because China's leaders have finally taken Western advice and moved to impose a market discipline on state-owned enterprises, one-third of which lose money. 
Exasperated by continuing inefficiency in those enterprises, China's leadership has waged a campaign since last year to wean factories from subsidies and expose them to market pressures.
As a result, a few factories began to dismiss workers considered unproductive, a practice that almost never occurred in the past. 
There is also talk of layoffs to trim the 26 percent overstaffing that the Government admits exists in state enterprises.
While many Chinese, particularly the university educated, say that such changes are essential, blue-collar workers are less enthusiastic. 
For the first time, a significant sector of the population, though probably not a majority, seems to be siding with Communist hard-liners in discouraging rapid market-style changes.
Early this year, a laid-off driver at a toothpaste factory drove his truck over his boss, a pioneering manager who had shaken up his factory by adopting Western-style management practices. 
The central Government suggested that the factory manager be hailed as a "martyr" for reform, but the factory workers refused to nominate the manager for the honor, said the official who related the incident.
In another case, reported in the official press, a 27-year-old factory worker was sentenced several weeks ago to 15 years in prison for shooting at his boss at a factory in Shanxi Province. 
The worker, who failed to wound the manager, had been dismissed last year.
 
Machinery Smashed
Factories in Xian, Tianjin and Dalian were reportedly also disrupted by angry workers, and in some cases machinery was smashed. 
After a watch factory in Tianjin temporarily laid off 2,400 workers early this year, rumors of suicides, sabotage and military intervention rapidly spread throughout Beijing. 
The official Economic Daily recently denied the allegations, and said the factory had retooled and reopened, providing jobs for all but 300 of the previous workers.
"The Government's talking about smashing our iron rice bowls, and making us pay for our own medical care," said a 29-year-old worker in Beijing. 
"Companies are even beginning to lay off workers!
Of course folks are angry."
To be sure, apprehension of market-style changes is common around the world, from Russians who fear rising bread prices to New Yorkers who worry about lifting controls on rent.
"We're very different from the former Soviet Union," said a Chinese Government economist who has studied former Communist economies. 
"We already have a foundation of a market, and people can get jobs on their own if they have to. 
The changes may not be pleasant, but we can take it. 
But in Russia, there's no real market to speak of, the economy is shrinking, and all the changes have been introduced very abruptly."
Han Dongfang, an independent labor organizer who was released a year ago after serving two years in prison, argues that the Government is caught in a dilemma.
"To raise living standards, the Government needs to go ahead with economic reform," Mr. Han said. 
"But reform will involve trampling on the rights of workers, and a lot of people won't be very happy about it. 
These contradictions will grow in the next few years."
