
The signs of fear are everywhere in Hong Kong, economists, bankers and brokers say, from the Chinese women crowding into little shops to buy small bars of gold, to the thousands of residents patiently lining up in the hot June sun for immigration forms from the Canadian, Australian or American consulates.
''In one day, our bank received $25 million in new business, most of it attributable to the China situation,'' said one foreign banker. 
Another Western banker estimated total new business at $5 million.
From the bustling Chinese street stalls of Mong Kok to the glittering skyscrapers of the central business district, the British colony of Hong Kong has become anxious and edgy because its future is so closely tied to the repressive Chinese regime just across the border.
In the last few weeks, as the tumultuous events in China have moved from a student rebellion to a military crackdown, overseas investment and property brokers have reported a surge in requests from residents who want to get their money off the island.
 
Sharp Stock Market Decline
One measure of the disquiet is the decline in the Hong Kong Stock Market since May 18, the last stable trading day before the Chinese turmoil. 
The Hang Seng Index at that market has fallen by 922.47 points, or 28 percent, to 2,355.10, in that period. 
Brokers say that most small investors here have been dumping stocks, and that foreigners have also been selling.
One broker said, ''Unless they like gambling in a casino, locals won't put money back in the market in the near future.''
Foreign banks also report increased business from Hong Kong Chinese who want to open offshore accounts.
''There are no statistics on this subject, just vague estimates and gut feelings about what is happening,'' said one American banker. 
''And my feeling is money is moving. 
But we're talking about personal accounts of wealthy Chinese,'' not pullouts by major businesses. 
Investment capital, he said, ''isn't that mobile, and it takes more time to detect movement there.''
 
'Money Is Moving'
Just how much capital is fleeing Hong Kong is anyone's guess. 
The Government, celebrated for its laissez-faire approach to business, places virtually no controls on the movement of money into and out of Hong Kong, and banks here respect secrecy laws that rival those of Switzerland.
Robert Broadfoot, a consultant, said, ''Much of the direct investment capital here now will stay because it is tied up in big projects, but I think new capital investments will slow down. 
Business money will be looking for overseas opportunities, hotels in Canada or the United States, that kind of thing.''
He added, ''I think foreign institutional investors will be liquidating their stock holdings here with each slight rise in the stock market.''
Hong Kong reverts to Chinese control in 1997, and as China continues its violent repression, residents here are losing faith that officials in Beijing will abide by their pledges to leave the colony's economic and political freedoms intact. 
Moreover, half of the 5.7 million residents here are Chinese immigrants who fled the violence and persecution of the Communists in the 1950's and 1960's, many losing homes and profitable businesses.
Stephen Yu, vice president and branch manager of the National Bank of Canada, said the recent repression in China had made some of his depositors so edgy that ''they insisted we redomicile their deposits, even though these were Canadian dollar accounts in our bank.''
He added, ''We are a branch of the main bank, not even a subsidiary, but they wanted that money moved offshore because they were so worried the Chinese Army might march in and seize it here.''
 
Outflow Started in '84
Since 1984, when Britain agreed to return Hong Kong, businesses here have been moving large blocks of their capital overseas, but offsetting that move have been investments in Hong Kong by ompanies, which are anticipating trade and business opportunities in China.
''While substantial capital has been leaving Hong Kong, that outflow has been balanced by an inflow of foreign money from Japan, Europe, the United States, and I am not certain now that that balance will continue,'' said Miron Mushkat, director of economic research at Baring Securities. 
''In light of the events in China, I think the outflow is intensifying, and I think there is a chance the inflow will diminish.''
''There is a lot of panicky conversion going on now among wealthy Chinese, and while some of that will taper off when there is stabilityI, even negative stabilityI in China, it won't stop,'' he added.
Mr. Broadfoot, who is managing director of Political and Economic Risk Consultancy Ltd., said he thought the Chinese were ''liquefying all their assets now - stocks, houses, cars.''
He added: ''They are putting their deposits in offshore accounts, making significant movements into gold. 
They are poised for flight, but I don't think it has really started yet.''
Alex Fung, manager of the investment department of the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, said that in the last few weeks, the Hong Kong Chinese had been moving ''a substantial amount'' of money, transferring it out of the colony through offshore accounts, bond purchases or other short-term foreign investments.
 
'Confirmed the Worst Fears'
''The events in China have confirmed the very worst fears of many Hong Kong people, and if they were even thinking of leaving or sending their money out, their decision is now definite,'' said Mark Michelson, vice president of Business International Asia/Pacific, a consulting firm.
Another Hong Kong banker said a number of local Chinese were so fretful that ''they have been breaking into fixed-deposit accounts and accepting the penalties.''
He added, ''They want to move their money right now, because they are very uncertain about the future.''
Last year, the Government estimated conservatively that 45,000 people emigrated from Hong Kong, taking their assets with them. 
Most went to Canada, Australia or the United States. 
And experts expect those numbers to be even more dramatic now.
Richard Grams, a manager of overseas investment and migration, said: ''Calls about emigrating have increased fourfold. 
Yesterday alone, we received 273 phone calls or visits from people interested in emigrating.''
He added: ''The people who leave Hong Kong take with them substantial amounts of money, plus their own business expertise and skills.''
And residents who once thought they had time to make more money in Hong Kong before they left, ''now want out as soon as possible, and they want their money out too,'' Mr. Grams said.
