
Americans may have missed it, but they are engaged in a bitter and deceitful conspiracy of sabotage and infiltration called "peaceful evolution," aimed at subjugating the Chinese people under the horrors of capitalism and imperialism.
That, in any case, is the view presented by the Chinese leaders to their people. 
The harsh language does not usually appear in China's English-language publications, which still maintain a smiling face to the outside world. 
But in the Chinese-language news media, the alarms are shrill, vehement and growing.
The accusation that the United States is masterminding a plot to transform China by "peaceful evolution" into a capitalist country was first made in the 1950's, not entirely without foundation. 
That theme disappeared for most of the 1980's. 
It re-emerged after the crackdown on the democracy movement two years ago, and the alarms are increasingly xenophobic in tone and are frequently used to justify repressive policies.
"We must stand firm, regardless of the ways in which hostile forces at home and abroad subvert, infiltrate and sabotage us," Vice President Wang Zhen declared in a recent speech to young people. 
He added that if all Chinese rally together, "we can surely defeat the criminal designs of domestic and foreign hostile forces as well as peaceful evolution."
 
Western 'Power Politics' Seen
Li Zhun, an official in the Communist Party Propaganda Department, declared in a commentary in the People's Daily: "With the dramatic changes in the international situation, Western hostile forces have not only accelerated the pace of peaceful evolution against socialist states, but have increasingly regarded China as the main stumbling block to their pursuit of power politics and defeat of socialism."
The People's Liberation Army daily advised its soldiers last month that "the international hostile forces have stepped up their strategy of peaceful evolution against China."
"They know that the People's Army represents an immense obstacle to their strategy of peaceful evolution," the paper said, "so they make the army a key target of infiltration and try to pry the army away from the party's leadership."
Chinese articles have said that the United States defined peaceful evolution as a strategy in the late 1940's. 
They cite statements from Secretary of State John Foster Dulles in the 1950's about hope for "evolutionary change" in Communist countries as future generations take over.
 
Diplomat's View
"Of course we want to see a peaceful evolution in China," a Western diplomat in Beijing said when asked about the campaign. 
"But it's not a Government conspiracy."
Still, from the point of view of Chinese hard-liners, it is extremely useful to assert the existence of an American conspiracy intended to overthrow the Communist Party.
Such a conspiracy gives them a better excuse to crack down on the democracy campaigners. 
Already, the Chinese press sometimes describes the 1989 democracy movement, which was crushed at Tiananmen Square, as the result of foreign subversion rather than domestic discontent.
Hard-liners have also used the nationalist call to resist peaceful evolution as the basis for tough, neo-Maoist policies in a variety of areas.
Hard-liners in the army, for instance, are using the peaceful-evolution argument to justify more political training. 
Those in the Culture Ministry are using the threat to justify tighter control over literature and the arts.
 
Another 'Great Wall'
University leaders in Beijing were summoned recently to a meeting and told to step up controls on students as a way of "establishing a Great Wall against peaceful evolution."
Li Ximing, the hard-line Communist Party leader in Beijing, is circulating a report about peaceful evolution that also uses it to justify tighter controls, officials say.
A newspaper in Hubei Province even reported that Western capitalist countries have held many meetings "to study new methods in effecting the peaceful evolution of socialist countries," and that cultural exchanges and academic discussions are among the tactics used. 
Such assertions can be used to place further limits on Chinese students going abroad to study.
Some Chinese, particularly older people in the provinces, seem to believe the accusations. 
But the great majority with whom the topic came up in recent months seemed uninterested, or else ridiculed the warnings and suggested that peaceful evolution was China's greatest hope.
"Nobody pays any attention to issues like peaceful evolution," a mid-level official from Gansu province said. 
"People just want to live a better life. 
And anyway, what's so bad about peaceful evolution?
At least it's peaceful, which is more than you can say for the massacre in 1989."
