
When China specialists think about how Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union can reorganize their economies, they tend to agree on one point: transforming socialist countries into market competitors will be a far more complex and painful task than is often acknowledged.
The Chinese experience is relevant, diplomats and academics say, because China generally has a richer and more successful experience in economic liberalization than its socialist brethren. 
While political changes, symbolized by the Russian word glasnost, lag here, few experts dispute that China has the upper hand in the economic restructuring known as perestroika.
''If Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union do as well in the next 10 years as China has in the last 10 years, they will have done extremely well,'' said Gregory Chow, an economist at Princeton University.
Even after a dozen years of economic change, China is still grappling with some Herculean problems. 
But its achievements are also Herculean: until 1989, China's real growth rates averaged nearly 10 percent a year, among the highest in the world; shops and free markets are as bountiful as the Soviet Union's are bare; lavish joint-venture hotels and international direct-dial telephones are found in major cities; agriculture has been de-collectivized, and the state sector's share of industry has fallen to about 60 percent.
 
Successes and Mistakes
Thomas M. H. Chan, an economist at the Hong Kong Baptist College, observed, ''China may not be a solution for Eastern Europe, because it still has to find a solution for its own problems, but its examples of successes and its mistakes may be useful for the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe.''
Mr. Chan noted that one of the main engines of China's economic growth in the last decade has been the township and village enterprises that have sprouted in coastal areas. 
More flexible and tuned to the markets rather than state-run behemoths, these small factories produce goods ranging from sweaters to plastic flowers. 
Mr. Chan suggested that Eastern Europe might study such enterprises to see if they could increase production there as well.
One area in which China has been most successful is in cultivating exports and integrating itself into the world economy. 
Nicholas Lardy, a China scholar at the University of Washington, said the Soviet Union should note China's relatively realistic valuation of the yuan and its use of currency swap markets to allocate $8 billion in foreign exchange last year.
For some economists, there is another lesson in the Chinese experience: national leaders should resist advice to free prices immediately. 
While these experts agree that irrational prices are a major burden for the economy, they suggest that decontrolling prices overnight will hurt the public and turn them against the entire liberalization program.
 
A Crucial Lesson
''The most important lesson of the Chinese experience is that price reform is not essential to reform,'' a Government economist said. 
''The most essential reform is that of the fundamental economic system, of ownership and management.''
Hua Sheng, a Chinese economist now studying at Oxford University, put it more strongly, ''It seems to me that to start with price reform is a very stupid idea, because the Government will become very unpopular.''
Mr. Hua noted that the Soviet Union had to back off earlier this year from a radical proposal to free prices, just as China had to retreat in the summer of 1988 from a plan to decontrol prices.
That 1988 proposal in China was followed by waves of panic buying and a steep rise in inflation. 
It also marked a watershed, for since then some urban residents have been soured on the whole idea of economic restructuring, and the Chinese leadership has been reluctant to push much further with any major initiative for economic change.
Delaying price decontrols is not a universal prescription, and there is still a camp of Chinese and foreign economists who believe that price liberalization is an essential starting point. 
They say that the chaos that began in the summer of 1988 in China was a result not of price decontrols but of an easy monetary policy. 
Without a prompt if painful adjustment to rational prices, they say, there is no way out of the economic quagmire.
 
An Impossible Task
Mr. Hua, who left China for Oxford early last year, said that the task that he and other economists faced in socialist countries, to combine public ownership with a market mechanism, was virtually impossible to complete satisfactorily.
''For the Soviet Union, the most important lesson is that public ownership doesn't work,'' Mr. Hua said. 
''If you want to carry out reform seriously, you have to carry out ownership reform, and denationalize industry on a large scale.''
Mr. Hua urged governments to sell off state factories and other assets to reduce their budget deficits and raise funds. 
He said those funds could then be used to sweeten the process and soothe the pain when prices were freed.
