
When Wang Xingzhou's wife threatened to divorce him, he ran down the block to the street committee. 
Soon a team of elderly women filed into his tiny apartment and showered his wife with a dozen reasons why the couple should stay together.
Their foreheads wrinkled with concern, the women offered to buy winter coal for the wife whenever the husband had to be out of town. 
They pleaded that, for the sake of the three children, the couple not separate.
"They always help out whenever there is a conflict," said Mr. Wang, a construction worker. 
"Unfortunately, the street committee couldn't solve this problem and we got divorced."
In cities all over China, street committees, quasi-governmental, quasi-civilian groups that sprang up after the Communist revolution in 1949, are the central Government's nimble tentacles, winding around corners, climbing up stairwells and peering into people's homes and private lives. 
The street committees have become the main link between the leaders and ordinary people.
 
Many Functions
Sniffing and snooping, these energetic busybodies -- often retired men and women who work as volunteers -- poke into all kinds of family disputes and tussles between neighbors. 
In some cities, residents snidely refer to them as the "xiaojiao zhenjidui," or tiny-footed inspection teams, after the old women with bound feet who were originally on the street committees' staffs.
At times these committees function as therapist, at times as utility company, at times as patrol unit, always trying to prod, scold, nudge and push the Government's policies down to the masses.
For instance, street committees are instrumental in carrying out China's family planning policies, and on the walls of street committee offices hang charts describing the child-bearing profile of the neigborhood: how many women are taking contraceptives, what kind of contraceptives they take, who has had an abortion and how many women must be monitored for family planning.
If a woman is pregnant, then the street committee also keeps track, trying to insure that the newborn will be the first and only child of the family. 
If the mother becomes pregnant a second time, the street committee will notify the woman's work unit in case it does not already know.
"We don't force them to have only one child," said Luo Ping, the director of a street committee here in Changsha, in Hunan Province in southern China. 
"We do ideological work and sometimes go to their house to spread our views."
 
Food Coupons Distributed
Ms. Luo heads the street committee in Wang Jiazhou, a tree-lined neighborhood of new apartment buildings in Changsha. 
Some 700 families live in the area monitored by the street committee, which has Ms. Luo as its only paid employee and 12 other core members. 
In addition, a network of representatives lives in each building.
Like other street committees throughout China, this one distributes grain and food coupons every month to the residents, and sometimes it works closely with Government departments, like the Health Department, when it needs to notify children's parents of a vaccination schedule.
Street committees also help take care of hygiene, running water and public security. 
In Wang Jiazhou, the patrol guards work in teams of two or three, scouting for robbers or more mundane threats. 
The guards say they have never encountered a robber, and often the patrol encounters nothing more alarming than a sock that has fallen from a clothesline.
"I spotted a little girl picking a branch from a tree, and I told her that we need to protect the trees and she shouldn't cut down the branches," said Yang Zhiqing, a 52-year-old retired woman, as she described her morning patrol in Wang Jiazhou. 
"I also mediated a quarrel. 
Two kids were fighting and I stopped them."
 
Mechanisms of the State
In the past, these street committees were viewed as control mechanisms of the state, putting into effect Government campaigns, registering late-night visitors to the house of a resident, or reporting on other unusual behavior of any of the residents. 
This control function remains, but many street committees have expanded their scope and taken on practical tasks, like setting up bicycle parking lots or local businesses to earn money.
They also preserve the Communist life of the neighborhood and hold political study sessions and stage activities to promote the pantheon of Communist heroes, like Lei Feng, a soldier. 
A few miles away, in the Chaoyang No. 1 Village -- a misnomer because it is actually a neighborhood of intertwining curvy lanes and boxy streets in Changsha city -- the street committee plans a campaign in March to "study Lei Feng."
Most urban residents are already closely monitored by their "work units," so the street committee particularly scrutinizes those few people -- like private entrepreneurs and the unemployed -- who have no work unit. 
Still, the members and their volunteers keep their eyes and ears open all the time; they keep tabs on residents, know where they work and what their habits are like.
If two neighbors are yelling at each other, a street committee member is likely to hear about it and step in. 
Large disputes get recorded in a log in the street committee office. 
Last year, for example, the Chaoyang No. 1 Village recorded 26 conflicts among its more than 1,000 households.
"Our political goal is to educate people to live harmoniously and act peacefully," said Liu Zhenming, a district official that oversees the Chaoyang No. 1 Village. 
"In America, if you don't have a street committee, where do you go when you have a problem?"
