
The streets of this provincial capital are paved not with gold but with a layer of asphalt topped with dust, mud and decaying cabbage leaves, but still the peasants troop here in search of jobs and a new life.
''You can make a lot more money in the city,'' said Gao Jingru, a lithe 53-year-old in a Mao suit. 
Mr. Gao brings odd-shaped stones and fossils from his village 50 miles away to sell to the residents of Chengdu, and in a good month he can earn the equivalent of more than $32 - 10 times as much as he would earn in his village.
The market street in Chengdu and many other Chinese cities is full of migrant laborers like Mr. Gao, and they pose a growing challenge to the Government. 
About 50 million people in China, nearly 5 percent of the nation's population, are migrants, and increasingly they are beyond the tight control of the Government.
The economic slowdown, particularly the closing of millions of rural enterprises, could add to the number of migrants. 
Official figures indicate that China's countryside has about 80 million surplus laborers, including 10 million here in Sichuan Province. 
Many seem to be remaining in their villages rather than swarming to the cities, where jobs are also tough to find, but their movements are difficult to predict.
 
Ignoring Restrictions
Unlike most developing countries, where peasants have always rushed to the cities and put up shantytowns on the outskirts, China has tried to control people's movements through a complex household registration system. 
Chinese citizens are not supposed to move without getting their registration changed, but these days many people simply ignore the requirements and move anyway.
''If the city needs my things, then I'll be here selling,'' said Chen Kailie, 47 years old, who moved to Chengdu from a village 20 miles away to sell flower pots. 
''If I can't make ends meet, then I'll go back to my hometown.''
The swelling tide of migrant laborers is one of the clearest signs that China's old command structure is wearing down. 
In major cities like Chengdu, Beijing and Shanghai, more than 10 percent of the inhabitants are migrants who come and go largely as they please. 
China has a complex web of ''street committees'' to watch over urban residents and make sure they do not cause political problems or have unauthorized children, but this system of scrutiny does not succeed in controlling those who do not belong in the first place.
The existence of this large ''floating population,'' as the Chinese call it, helps explain how student leaders of last year's crushed democracy movement have been able to elude the security apparatus for months. 
Five or ten years ago, most Chinese say confidently, the student leaders would have been arrested promptly; these days, they can simply blend in with the flow of other wanderers.
 
Enlivening the Economy
The migrants also present a more direct challenge: Like Mao Zedong and Deng Xiaoping and other Chinese revolutionaries, they are peasants who go to the cities and risk picking up dangerous political ideas. 
In last year's rioting in cities like Beijing, Changsha and Chengdu, migrants played a significant role, perhaps partly because they were less likely to be identified and caught than permanent residents.
Government officials, like Yan Cheng, the deputy secretary general of the Chengdu municipality, acknowledge that the floating population creates some difficulties for family planning and for public security, but he adds that on the whole it is a good thing because it enlivens the economy.
''This is an economic phenomenon, not a political problem,'' said Mr. Yan, who noted that the peasant migrants fill an important niche by selling farm products and filling jobs in service industries in the city. 
In Beijing, always the most security-conscious of Chinese cities, the police have made periodic efforts to round up migrants and send them home, but in other cities officials point to the services they provide and seem to regard them as a blessing.
''It's reality beating ideology,'' said Aprodicio Laquian, who recently completed a term as country director in China for the United Nations Fund for Population Activities. 
''The migrants will really be the salvation of China, because they solve needs that central planning can't.''
That also seems to be the view of most urban residents, who are sometimes contemptuous of the migrants' unkempt appearance and uncouth manners but appreciate being able to find a business where the service is attentive and the hours are long -even if it consists only of cabbages in a cart or old magazines spread on a blanket on a sidewalk.
''We think the floating population is terrific,'' said the owner of a small business in Chengdu. 
''Why?
Because we can exploit them. 
They're willing to work hard in exchange for just enough money to buy some food. 
We need them and they need us. 
It's a great partnership.''
