
Defense Secretary Dick Cheney pressed Defense Minister Moshe Arens of Israel today to explain United States intelligence reports that Israel had illegally shared American-made Patriot missile technology with China, senior Pentagon officials said.
In a 30-minute meeting at the Pentagon, Mr. Cheney presented Mr. Arens with intelligence indicating that Jerusalem had shared the technology in violation of United States-Israeli agreements that ban such sales.
Israeli officials have strongly denied such technology leaks since reports about them came to light last week. 
Speaking to reporters after meeting Mr. Cheney, Mr. Arens repeated the denials and said Israel had agreed to cooperate with American experts who will travel to Israel to investigate the claims.
The State Department spokeswoman, Margaret D. Tutwiler, told reporters today that Israel had agreed over the weekend to accept inspectors. 
She said the makeup of the team and when it would leave had not been decided.
The Defense Department had no official comment on the meeting today, but a senior Pentagon official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said he believed that Israel had transferred some Patriot technology to China, but that "it wasn't a serious loss."
American officials have expressed concern that Patriot technology could improve China's ability to build missiles, many of which are sold abroad, that are less vulnerable to counterattack. 
The Patriot missiles were used to destroy Soviet-designed Scud missiles fired by Iraq at Israel and Saudi Arabia in the Persian Gulf war.
The assertions that Israel may have illegally diverted Patriot technology have coincided with reports that the State Department's Inspector General, Sherman M. Funk, has found that Israel re-exported other advanced United States arms technology without Washington's permission.
A draft report by the Inspector General criticizes the State Department's Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs for failing to act on American intelligence reports that Israel was engaging in unauthorized arms transfers.
Details of the report were disclosed last week in The Wall Street Journal, which said the weapons that Israel had improperly transferred include air-to-air missiles sold to China, anti-tank missiles sold to South Africa and cluster bombs sent to Ethiopia and Chile.
The Assistant Secretary of State who heads the Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs, Richard A. Clarke, is being transferred from his job.
But some State Department officials said the transfer was part of a normal rotation and not a punishment, and Miss Tutwiler denied today that Mr. Clarke was "being fired."
Mr. Clarke has the full confidence of Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, she added.
Reports that Israel has improperly transferred American-made arms technology have circulated repeatedly in recent years, and Israel has strongly denied the charges each time.
 
White House Denies Accusation
Israeli officials have complained in recent days that they are the victims of calculated leaks by Administration officials aimed at embarrassing Jerusalem. 
The White House today denied assertions in Israel that the Administration was trying to undermine relations by leaking damaging information.
"No, that's not true," said the White House spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater. 
"We've worked long and hard for good relations."
Administration officials said Mr. Fitzwater's comments were also intended to help paper over a pitched battle inside the Administration between pro-Israeli and anti-Israeli officials. 
Some officials contend that the reports of Israel's technology sales are false, while others, more critical of Jerusalem, insist that some Administration officials have ignored improper Israeli arms exports for years.
Mr. Arens, speaking to reporters at the Pentagon, addressed only the allegations about the Patriot missiles.
