
A YOUNG PAINTER
The Life and Paintings of Wang Yani --
China's Extraordinary Young Artist.
By Zheng Zhensun and Alice Low.
Illustrated. 80 pp. 
New York:
A Byron Preiss/
New China Pictures Book/
Scholastic. $17.95.
(Ages 8 and up)
DOTING parents tend to see promise in even the most muddled brushstrokes of a beloved toddler. 
But while most must eventually acknowledge that their child is not Picasso in Pampers, Wang Shiqiang, a painter from Gongcheng, China, had a different experience. 
Mr. Wang's daughter, Yani, who was born in 1975 and began drawing at age 2, proved to be indeed a prodigy: when she was 4, her art was shown in several Chinese cities, and one of her early monkey paintings, "Scratching an Itch for Mother," was reproduced as a postage stamp. 
Now 16, Yani has had solo exhibitions in Japan, Hong Kong, Germany, Britain and the United States, including a display at the Smithsonian Institution two years ago.
"A Young Painter" by Zheng Zhensun, a Chinese journalist and photographer, and Alice Low, an American children's-book author and art teacher, is the story of Yani's career, told in both words and pictures. 
Not surprisingly, the latter are more effective in revealing Yani's artistic evolution. 
Filled with beautifully reproduced examples of her paintings -- some in foldouts for greater detail -- the book shows how Yani has progressed from droll portraits of monkeys and cats to bolder, more abstract renderings of people and landscapes. 
The accompanying text often gives her explanation of the works, revealing a child with tremendous imagination. 
One painting done when she was 4, "Is There a Moon on the Water?," depicts a baby monkey and its mother, searching the sky reflected in the river.
But though young readers will be thoroughly familiar with the artist's work when they finish the book, it is less likely that they will feel they know Yani. 
Except for commentary on specific paintings, her voice is strangely absent. 
Even many of the observations about her art seem to be her father's. 
And the authors offer little in the way of reflections from Yani on her personal life, seeming content to describe her rather than allowing her to portray herself.
Granted, extremes of self-revelation are hardly prized in Chinese culture, and Yani is characterized as both modest and somewhat shy. 
But since she is now an adolescent whose metier is self-expression, it seems odd that she has not played a greater role in this book. 
At times, a reader gets the impression that this is more her father's book. 
While the child's mother and brother are mentioned only in passing, Mr. Wang appears on virtually every page.
A related problem is the authors' uncritical appraisal of Yani's upbringing. 
While it is impossible to know how much of the writing is Mr. Zheng's and how much is Ms. Low's, the text implicitly endorses a child-rearing style that will strike many Westerners as rather rigid. 
Although no one can question the sacrifices Mr. Wang has made for his daughter -- he has even given up his own successful career -- it is disingenuous to claim, as the authors repeatedly do, that he has allowed her almost unlimited artistic freedom. 
Once, for example, Yani began to paint a bridge, only to be told by her father that "a bridge is not pleasing to the eye."
ON another occasion, Mr. Wang criticized Yani harshly for becoming upset when she was giving a demonstration and a stranger knocked over a cup on her worktable. 
He told her that she must stop painting if she could not be serious. 
Not bad advice, except that Yani was all of 4 1/2 at the time. 
It is hard to believe that American children will find this vignette sympathetic, much less inspirational.
While Mr. Zheng and Ms. Low ignore cultural differences in child rearing, they do examine them in relation to art. 
Wang Yani paints in the age-old Chinese style, and a helpful appendix describes both the tools and the techniques used to achieve it. 
Interestingly, her choice of techniques is very different from that of her father, who opted for oil painting instead of traditional ink and pigments. 
We can only wonder how she feels about the large role he plays in her life and career. 
But if the authors' portrait of Yani could use considerably more detail, her own work beckons and intrigues. 
It is testimony to her talent that we would like to know so much more about her.
