
As part of an effort to reshape the attitudes and values of university students, the Chinese authorities will require most freshmen this fall to undergo military training, possibly for as long as one year, before they enter their four-year study programs.
At the nation's most prestigious school, Beijing University, the political center of the student unrest this spring, new students are tentatively scheduled to spend one year in military training camps, Chinese teachers and officials say. 
The program is likely to include training in physical fitness, ideology and the use of weapons.
The basic training indicates the rising influence of the military since the June 4 crackdown, as well as an attempt by school authorities to instill discipline among students. 
It follows the disclosure on Saturday that, in an effort to rekindle Communist values, most university graduates will be required to work for a year or two in villages or factories before being permitted to enter graduate school.
''They will learn how to jog, fire guns, and they will discuss questions like, 'what is democracy?'
'' said a teacher at a university in Beijing. 
''Of course, they will study according to the military's definition of democracy.''
Training at most institutions may not last as long as at Beijing University, and some teachers said they believed it would only last two or three weeks at their schools. 
The program has not been officially announced, and many students do not know that the first day of regular classes will be delayed.
''They will be in for a big surprise,'' another teacher in Beijing remarked.
Word is beginning to leak out, and some officials at Beijing University are said to be concerned that the best students will hurriedly enroll in other institutions to avoid the full year of basic training.
School authorities have also stiffened the requirements to enter Beijing University, which cut enrollment from 2,000 last year to 800 this fall, and the criteria will go beyond intelligence and performance on a national exam.
''High school students are being thoroughly investigated'' for their political reliability, a teacher at Beijing University said.
Teachers at Beijing University and elsewhere are attending regular political study sessions, which returning students will also face when they begin classes late this month or early in September. 
Freshmen in many cities will start school in late September or even in October.
The basic training programs could take place at any military camp.
