
The World Bank and a United States agency announced loans to China today, reflecting further efforts by the Bush Administration to improve relations despite the American sanctions imposed after the crackdown on the democracy movement in Beijing.
A $30 million loan for earthquake relief was approved by the World Bank, a 152-nation lending institution in which the United States is the leading stockholder. 
It was the institution's first loan to China since martial law was declared there in June.
The Export-Import Bank, a Federal agency that supports American exports, announced a $23.1 million loan for the Shanghai transportation system. 
On Friday, the agency approved a a $9.75 million loan to the China National Offshore Oil Corporation. 
The loans were the first to China since June by that agency as well.
A $60 million loan for agricultural development had been scheduled for approval by the World Bank today, but action was deferred until Feb. 
27 at the request of the Bush Administration.
 
Allegations of Torture
Officials said the Administration sought the postponement because of criticism from Congress that its China policies have been too lenient in light of human rights abuses described in a recent State Department report.
The report, which has not yet been officially released, says that ''reports of torture and degrading treatment of persons detained for committing so-called counterrevolutionary crimes have been persistent and consistent.''
Deputy Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger, who with the national security adviser, Brent Scowcroft, made trips to Beijing in July and December, was a target of lawmakers in appearances today and Wednesday before Senate Foreign Relations and House Foreign Affairs committees.
Mr. Eagleburger argued that China's hope for change rest with reformers in the country's leadership rather than the masses who demonstrated around Tiananmen Square.
The Export-Import Bank grants loans at subsidized interest rates to the customers of American exporters. 
All major industrialized countries operate similar agencies and use them aggressively, in most cases far more aggressively than the United States, to boost exports, chiefly in the third world.
In the Chinese loan, American companies competed with West German and French bidders, export bank officials said.
 
Protecting American Contracts
The principal American exporter involved in the Shanghai project is General Railway Signal Inc. of Rochester, N.Y., which will supply signaling equipment. 
American participation in the project also includes fire alarm detection systems from Simplex Time Recorder, waterproofing material from W. R. Grace Company, water chillers from United Technologies and engineering services from De Leuw Cather International Inc.
Several lawmakers criticized the loans. 
Representative David R. Obey, Democrat of Wisconsin, chairman of the House Appropriations Committee's subcommittee on foreign operations and export financing, said the loans sent ''the wrong signal.''
''It's not helpful to be seen telling the Chinese, well, they did a bad thing, but then in 90 days we start kissing and making up,'' he said.
The loans follow the lifting of martial law by Beijing last month. 
The Administration maintains that the renewal of contacts and a limited resumption of loans are needed to promote reform from within China.
China Warns Against Criticism
BEIJING, Feb. 
8 (Special to The New York Times) - The Government warned today that any further attacks on its human rights record by the State Department, which is expected to issue a report this month on China's rights abuses, could impair relations between the two countries.
''Should the U.S. 
State Department insist on its wanton attacks against China in its human rights report, which is based on rumors and which is to be released soon, it will certainly do further serious harm to Sino-U.S. relations,'' a spokesman for the Foreign Ministry said.
