
The union of United Nations civil servants has asked Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar to extend the contracts of several Chinese workers at the Secretariat who the union says have been asked to leave their jobs under ''pressure from the Chinese Government.''
The Chinese Government says it has exerted no such pressure, describing its actions as merely routine staff rotations.
The president of the union that represents three of the at least six staff members in question said the Chinese Government was seeking to end their work at the Secretariat although they had been recommended for career appointments by their section and departments.
He suggested that the staff members were being penalized for their participation in protests against the Government after the student democracy demonstrations in China were crushed last summer, and for refusing to turn over parts of their paychecks in keeping with Chinese Government regulations.
Appointed to Fill Posts
''They have excellent performance reports,'' said Lowell L. Flanders, the president of the staff union. 
''They're intelligent, bright young men. 
They've done an outstanding job. 
If they were any other nationality, they would be entitled to a career appointment after five years of satisfactory service.''
Most staff members join the Secretariat on probationary appointments of two years, which lead to career appointments. 
But, as in the case of the staff members in question, some countries appoint their civil servants on the basis of secondment, a policy under which workers are loaned by their governments to fill posts in the Secretariat for a limited period of time.
The staff union, the Staff Council of the Secretariat, has taken up the cause of these language staff members as part of a campaign against abuses of secondment as a government way of controlling Secretariat employees.
Under the United Nations Charter, any nation that tries to influence the Secretariat - and any Secretary General who yields to such pressure - is in violation of the Charter. 
Nevertheless, experts say member nations have considerable influence over appointments.
 
Called Standard Procedure
In a recent unanimous resolution, the Staff Council suggested that the United Nations denied Chinese staff members new contracts as a result of ''undue pressure being exerted upon it from external authorities,'' an apparent reference to the Chinese Government. 
Mr. Flanders said five employees in New York and one in Vienna were affected, but that there might be more.
Mr. Flanders said he had discussed this issue with Mr. Perez de Cuellar at least three times.
Mr. Perez de Cuellar's spokesman, Francois Giuliani, said the situation was nothing more than standard procedure. 
''The contracts came to an end,'' Mr. Giuliani said. 
''That's it. 
The extension of contracts is not an automatic thing. 
There are many other cases like this. 
I don't know of any case when we've extended secondment once the government finished it.''
Yuan Shibing, a spokesman for the Chinese mission, said of the staff members in question: ''Their contracts have expired, so they should go home - that's the normal change of job. 
We are against some of the Chinese nationals who try to extend their contract in the Secretariat without approval of the Chinese Government. 
That's against the rules.''
 
One Worker Protests
In the Office of Human Resources Management here, Federico Riesco, the director of the Staff Administration and Training Division who wrote the staff members the final notice on their further appointments, said that although the staff members' service had been ''satisfactory,'' extending their contracts ''was not in the best interest of the organization'' and that he ''wouldn't want to go into it really.''
Most of the staff members involved refused to comment on their grievances. 
But one, Lirong Wang, a Chinese translator with the United Nations Industrial Development Organization in Vienna, wrote to the United Nations Staff Committee, accusing the Chinese Government of ''gross violations.''
Mr. Wang wrote that the Chinese mission in Vienna forced him to take part in ''political studies'' so that his mind would not be ''contaminated by some of the UN concepts and western values;'' that he had to report to the Chinese mission on his Secretariat activities; and that he was made to surrender a large proportion of his salary every month to the Chinese mission ''to buy luxury cars, give lavish banquets and rent houses or apartments'' and not to help poor people in China, as mission officials had led him to believe.
To protest these regulations - and more recently the massacre in Tiananmen Square - Mr. Wang, and several other Chinese staff members withheld their payments to the Chinese Government. 
''I decided in June 1988 to stop the forced transfer of my UN salaries to the Chinese mission. 
As a consequence, I was labeled as 'a criminal taking state assets,' '' Mr. Wang wrote in his letter.
Lori Berliner, a member of the staff union, said no statistics are available on the number of staff members who are denied new contracts, but she said that complaints are increasing and that ''many people who would like to come forward don't dare because of pressures that are exerted on them.''
