
In a visit that portends major realignments in Asia, China's Prime Minister, Li Peng, arrived here today. 
It was the first trip by a Chinese head of Government in more than three decades.
India, long allied with the Soviet Union, has been thrown off balance by the calamitous disintegration of its former ally and has struggled to find a handhold in a changing world order. 
Now, presented with overtures from China -- like India an enormous, largely rural, developing country -- India sees the potential in establishing a new structure of international relations involving a newset of alliances.
Not since Zhou Enlai met with India's first Prime Minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, 31 years ago, has a Chinese leader set foot on Indian soil. 
Since Mr. Zhou's visit in 1960, relations between the two Asian giants, which together embrace some 40 percent of the world's population, have wavered between outright belligerence and merely chilly. 
In that time, India, for decades an ally in all but name with the Soviet Union, and China have fought a vigorous border war, have jousted verbally over international disputes in Cambodia and Afghanistan and have differed over India's granting refuge to the exiled Tibetan leader, the Dalai Lama.
A major concern for India in discussions with Mr. Li is China's traditionally close and supportive relationship with Pakistan, with which India has fought two wars and which India insists is the major sponsor of separatist militancy in Kashmir. 
Indian officials, according to a Foreign Ministry official, are hoping to extract some assurance from Mr. Li that China will not provide Pakistan with surface-to-surface missiles as part of its weapons sales to Islamabad.
 
Concessions Unclear
It was unclear this evening, from either officials at the Chinese Embassy or from Chinese journalists, what concessions China was willing to offer India in its dealings with Pakistan.
Mr. Li's visit was greeted with outrage and protests by Tibetans who have taken refuge in India from China's occupation of their homeland. 
Just hours before the Chinese leader's arrival, the police detained hundreds of Tibetans protesting his visit and engaged in bloody clashes with thousands of others attempting to march on the Chinese Embassy.
But now, China and India find themselves adrift and isolated amid the rapid changes in the Soviet Union and Europe. 
China, still ostracized internationally because of its human-rights record, and India, stranded by a self-imposed economic isolationism, are struggling to find new partnerships in an emerging global order neither appear to like very much.
"It is historic," said a Western diplomat watching the visit from the sidelines. 
"It is important. 
The Indians are feeling a bit lonely in the world. 
This visit holds a whole lot more for India than for China. 
The only thing the Chinese have to gain is to pick up an ally in terms of issues like human rights and to find a friend to resist U.S. hegemony."
 
International Scrutiny
India has reacted sharply in recent months to Washington's efforts to raise a whole range of bilateral and regional issues -- from nuclear proliferation to intellectual property rights -- which it regards as evidence of American efforts to erode Indian sovereignty. 
Similarly, China has been vocal in its resentment of Washington's pronouncements on the issues of human rights, Beijing's weapons and nuclear technology sales and on trade issues. 
To that degree, some senior Western diplomats here said, the leaders of both nations feel beseiged.
China and India face international scrutiny over their behavior in Tibet and Kashmir respectively, both territories where there is widespread sentiment for independence. 
Diplomats here said that the Chinese and Indian leaders would likely seek support from each other that neither issue be the subject of debate in international formus, particularly the United Nations.
Yet, there remain serious differences between the two countries. 
The most visible source of tension between the two countries is China's continued occupation of Indian territory it took in the 1962 border war.
