
Any good Communists attending the recent premiere of China's grandest propaganda film, "Decisive Battles," had to have been disappointed with the audience reaction.
The scene was from China's Civil War, and a vast army of the enemy Nationalist Chinese forces filled the screen and were marching on the heroic Communist soldiers. 
At the most suspenseful moment, when it seemed the Communists were going to be annihilated, there was a burst of applause in the cinema.
The incident captured something of the spirit of Chinese cinema in the 1990's: blatant propaganda on the screens and cynicism and yawns in the audiences.
This summer the propaganda films are everywhere, and Chinese workers are being organized to see them in the hope that the movies will improve attitudes toward the Communist Party. 
But with politics replacing art as the raison d'etre of Chinese film, some Chinese see the billboards for the new epics as tombstones for the golden era of Chinese cinema.
In the 1980's, a new generation of Chinese film makers won international respect for works that were innovative and visually stunning, among them "Ju Dou," which was nominated for an Academy Award this year. 
But this summer's movies, particularly three that are strongly backed by the Government and the army, have a Maoist tinge that apparently is the wave of the future in Chinese arts, at least as long as the present leaders are in power.
The most important of the movies is Part 1 of "Decisive Battles," probably the costliest film ever made by a Chinese studio. 
Parts 2 and 3 are to come out later this year. 
The trilogy, depicting battles in 1948 and 1949 that let the Communists take power, is said to be the pet project of China's 84-year-old President, Yang Shangkun. 
Not surprisingly, Mr. Yang is a dashing young man in the movie.
 
125,000 Extras
Part 1 is three and a half hours of battle scenes interspersed with glowing portrayals of most of China's present leaders. 
There are no compelling characters, but there are a lot of non-compelling ones: the Army provided 125,000 soldiers for battles scenes. 
The trilogy is believed to have cost the Army more than $15 million -- reportedly more than all the 100 other films that China produces annually.
A shorter summer epic is "Kaitian Pidi," which was officially translated as "An Epoch-Making Event" but which translates more literally as "The Creation of the Heavens and the Earth."
The topic is the Communist Genesis: the forming of the Chinese Communist Party.
The third of the trio is "Mao Zedong and His Son," which deals with Mao's grief when he lost his son to an American air raid in the Korean War. 
The film is unusual in that it portrays Mao as a human rather than a god. 
Though it is clearly propaganda with anti-American overtones, it leaves many Chinese in tears. 
For all his unchallenged political power, Mao is unable to break the news of his son's death to the son's wife.
"The new trend is for these historical, political movies," a young Chinese journalist said regretfully the other day. 
Speaking of the earlier artistic films, he said: "That era has ended."
 
Arty Movies Are Still Made
But Geremie Barme, an Australian scholar of Chinese culture, said in a telephone interview that it was far too early to say that.
"These party epics that are sucking up huge amounts of money have tended to overshadow other developments in Chinese film," he said. 
"But still each year there seem to be a handful of arty movies still being made."
Mr. Barme cited "Li Lianying," a film about a famous imperial eunuch, and "Bloody Dawn," about the murder of a village schoolteacher who is suspected of having an affair with a local woman.
Moreover, Mr. Barme and others noted that internationally respected film makers like Chen Kaige and Zhang Yimou continue to shoot movies in China, but now with foreign financial backing and foreign audiences.
A Western diplomat who follows the film industry said incipient capitalism is also hurting art films. 
With declining subsidies for culture and uncertain attendance for highbrow films, studios are afraid that artistic films will lose money.
From the point of view of the studios, an important advantage of political films is that no matter how awful they are, they make money because the great majority of tickets are bought in bulk by offices and factories. 
Employees are encouraged to see the films during normal work hours.
