
China has issued new rules that would toughen restrictions on young people planning to study abroad, including a requirement that they first work for five years in China or pay large sums of money to the Government as deposit, officials say.
The new guidelines, issued by the State Education Commission last week and effective beginning Saturday, are apparently a result of months of deliberation on how to revise the program for overseas study, and to insure that greater numbers of students return.
The pronouncements were disclosed by several different Chinese officials and foreign diplomats, and they were confirmed by a spokesman at the State Education Commission.
Chinese officials have admitted privately that they are highly concerned that so few of their students have returned from studying overseas. 
Yet, the number of students preparing to apply to schools in the West has risen significantly since the military crackdown in early June, and word of the new rules, particularly the staggering amounts of money required for deposit, has worried many of them.
Despite assurances from Chinese leaders, many students say they fear that this new rule may represent a retreat from China's 12-year-old policy of promoting study in the West.
Two weeks ago, China's Education Minister, Li Tieying, told a group of returning students that ''the policy of sending people abroad to study will not, and has no reason to, change,'' according to the official People's Daily, which paraphrased Mr. Li's remarks.
The guidelines would require college graduates, who want to waive the work requirement and go abroad immediately, to pay the equivalent of about $530 for each year of college they attend. 
A student with a master's degree would have to pay the equivalent of $850 for each of the years in a master's program, and a doctoral student would need to pay about $1,275 a year. 
#2 Categories of Students It is not clear if graduate students would also have to pay for each of their years spent in college. 
The students would presumably get their money back if, and when, they returned to China. 
In contrast to these sums, a typical worker earns a salary of about $32 a month, and would need to save his entire salary for more than five years to pay for his child's college fee.
The Education Commission spokesman who confirmed the rules refused to elaborate on whether they applied to self-sponsored students or Government-sponsored students. 
Most students who study in the United States, for example, receive tuition assistance from the American university, but can be regarded by Chinese authorities as Government-sponsored students for visa purposes if the Government picks up at least a part of the educational bill.
Currently, however, self-sponsored students are not as strictly monitored as are sponsored ones, presumably because the Government has greater control over students it agrees to send overseas. 
According to the Chinese definition, the number of sponsored students tends to be higher than self-sponsored students, but in the last few months there are indications that the proportions have switched.
According to the United States Consulate in Beijing, there has been a marked decline in visa applications from Government-sponsored students, while those from self-sponsored students have risen. 
It is unclear if these new stipulations represent fundamental changes in an overall policy or merely stricter versions of a policy or regulation previously in place.
In China, the effectiveness of policies often depends on how thoroughly they are carried out. 
It is not clear if other ministries besides the State Education Commission are subject to similar rules, and even universities that fall under the jurisdiction of the Education Commission may not wish to carry out all parts of the regulation.
One Western diplomat suggested that, since the rule applies only to college graduates, students who had not yet received their bachelor's degrees may apply to study abroad and thereby circumvent the retroactive school fee and the five-year work requirement. 
''It's a possible loophole,'' he said.
