
China and the United States have reached a tentative agreement to prevent the export to America of goods made in Chinese prisons.
A memorandum of understanding, which was reached Thursday by teams of negotiators in Beijing, could resolve a long-running dispute in Chinese-American relations.
The United States bans the import of goods manufactured by prison labor, but for years Chinese prisons have quietly exported tea, pipes, engines, leather clothing and other products made by convicts.
The Chinese Government at first denied that such exports existed. 
More recently, it has said that while prison exports are against national law they may have occurred occasionally through the connivance of local prisons and foreign importers.
 
Prison Visits Denied
It is not clear whether the agreement, which requires the approval of Washington and Beijing, will be more effective in curbing the exports.
The principal stumbling block in the negotiations, which have been under way since late last year, was an American demand that United States officials be allowed to visit prisons to check accusations that they are exporting. 
China refused, saying such visits would violate its sovereignty.
Lorraine Toly, a spokeswoman for the United States Embassy, declined to say if the draft agreement would permit prison visits, and she said she could not discuss other elements of the memorandum. 
Ms. Toly said the United States team had been headed by Sandra Kristoff, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State. 
The Chinese team included delegates from the Ministries of Foreign Economic Relations and Trade, Foreign Affairs and Justice.
Export of prison goods is not an issue among Chinese dissidents, who assume that if exports are halted prisoners will still have to work just as many hours making goods for the domestic market.
 
Congressional Opposition
In the United States, however, the exports have inflamed Congressional sentiment against China because of the perception that Chinese prison labor is costing American jobs. 
Because of rights abuses and other issues, Congress has tried to impose conditions on the renewal of trade privileges for China. 
The efforts have failed, but a new attempt is planned when the trade privileges come up for renewal next year.
Former prisoners have said that labor programs vary among jails, but that sometimes convicts are beaten if they do not meet production quotas.
