
For the first time in the 150-year history of Hong Kong, people here will be able to vote directly for some of their legislative representatives in an election scheduled for Sept. 
15. And in the final days before that vote, the most compelling, most emotional campaign issue in this British colony is China.
While the 54 candidates competing for the 18 directly elected seats in the legislature have been discussing pollution, traffic and crime, their positions are often interchangeable and their debates dull -- until the subject of China is introduced. 
Then, voices are raised, tempers flare and charges and countercharges fly.
One candidate told voters that he had publicly opposed China's crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators in 1989, but that his opponent was "scared to death when dealing with China."
Another candidate accused his opponent of trying to pretend now that he had taken part in demonstrations against China in 1989.
With Hong Kong scheduled to revert to Chinese control in 1997, many here would like to see a strong, independent local government set up before then.
"The main political issue here is the growing influence of China," said Anthony Cheung, a political commentator and a senior lecturer in the City Polytechnic's Dept of Public and Social Administration. 
"Voters want to know how candidates have reacted to that."
While only 18 seats are up for direct vote in the legislature of 60, which has largely been a rubber-stamp body, voters and politicians are taking this election seriously, hoping that if it is a success, they can press Britain for further reforms.
In Hong Kong, where officials are often criticized for bowing to pressure from China, polls show that two of the most popular candidates are Szeto Wah and Martin Lee, both outspoken critics of China who have been publicly branded as "subversive" by Beijing.
Newspaper polls indicate that Mr. Lee's party, United Democrats of Hong Kong, may take more than half of the directly elected seats. 
The party's 14 liberal candidates have been critical of China's abuse of human rights and its interference in Hong Kong affairs.
Several other parties are fielding a few candidates, but most contestants are running as independents.
While pro-Beijing groups are supporting several candidates, and half a dozen other candidates are known for their mainland sympathies, Mr. Cheung said, "Today, in Hong Kong, to be branded pro-Beijing is a liability."
Indeed, one candidate endorsed by a pro-Beijing trade group has complained that his posters have been defaced with slogans like "running dog of the Chinese Communists."
The apparent popularity of the United Democrats and their allies has made both China and the British Government anxious, political experts say.
Recently, China's semi-official China News Service advised Hong Kong voters that "apart from considering the political platform of each candidate, they should also take into consideration the attitude of each candidate towards Hong Kong's relationship with the mainland."
"Without a good relationship with the mainland, there will be a great impact on Hong Kong's prosperity and stabilityI," the agency said.
The 18 popularly elected legislators will take their seats in the Legislative Council alongside 21 Government-appointed lawmakers, and 21 indirectly elected representatives from constituency groups defined by the Government, including doctors, lawyers and teachers.
Francis Ho, of the Government's Constitutional Affairs office, said that of the four million potential voters, about half were registered to vote.
And no one maintains that Hong Kong's six million residents are in the grip of election fever.
The local television and radio stations do not cover the campaigns on their regular nightly news programs, for fear of violating tough equal time laws laid down by the Government. 
And the Government does not permit political advertisements to be carried on radio or television.
Campaigning is largely a matter of handing out leaflets and knocking on doors.
