
While there are no free elections in China to use in judging the popular mood, one gauge of the people's sentiment is the names bestowed upon children.
By that standard, the hard-liners who run China are in trouble. 
Names with political meanings, redolent of the Communist past, are decidedly out of fashion. 
Almost no self-respecting parents now name their children Red, which used to be the most common name of all. 
Today's babies often get names that have an association with prosperity or the West, like Xiu, a name now common that means Elegant.
"These days people don't want political names like Red that are reminiscent of the Cultural Revolution," said Zhang Shuyan, a senior researcher in China's State Committee for Reforming the Chinese Written Language. 
"Now many names are unusual. 
Parents search the dictionary for a character that has a good meaning and is uncommon."
These days, parents strive for names that sound more cultured or cosmopolitan. 
Some children born in September, for example, were named Yayun, meaning Asian Games, after the mini-Olympics of which China was host at the time -- an international event that symbolized sophistication.
For baby girls, the character na, often used in transcribing Western names into Chinese, is common. 
It has little meaning, but because of its use in transcriptions it has the allure of associations with the West.
Almost all Chinese names have a meaning and are plucked from daily life.
For example, tens of thousands of people are named Li Jianguo (Build-the-Country Li), Zhang Hong (Red Zhang) and Wang Jun (Army Wang).
Those names proliferated during more orthodox moments of Communist history, and it used to be that a name offered an instant clue to when the person was born.
Anyone named Build the Country was probably born in 1949 or 1950, around the birth of the People's Republic. 
Yuanchao, meaning Assist Korea, is a common name of people born during the Korean War. 
Many who were born in the late 1950's, when Mao Zedong began an effort to catch up with Western industry, are named Chaoying, or Surpass England. 
And someone named Weidong, meaning Protect Mao Zedong, probably was born in the Cultural Revolution.
China's official newspapers reported approvingly that one soldier named his child Pingbao -- Suppress Rioting -- in honor of the crackdown against the democracy movement last year. 
In past years, that kind of name would have been ubiquitous, but in an indication of changing attitudes the newspaper report caused only mirth and ridicule.
A vast study of names by Ms. Zhang found that the single most common character used for names in the Cultural Revolution was Red. 
But since then, she says, the most common character in names has been hua, meaning magnificent and prosperous, and also signifying China.
Feng Yingshu, a sculptor, said, "It used to be that the time period provided a context, a frame in which to come up with a name for a child."
His own name reflects a drought at the time when he was born in 1948. 
The last character, shu, means a timely rain and includes the symbol for water.
Fortunetellers and astrology are still sometimes used in Hong Kong and Taiwan to derive names, but this is not common on the Chinese mainland today. 
Superstition is still evident in villages, however, where the desperate desire to give birth to a son leads to names for daughters like Zhaodi, Yindi and Ladi. 
All can be translated as 'Bring a Younger Brother.
As the Cultural Revolution generation enters adulthood, some people are changing their revolutionary names for more mundane ones -- as did many of the Soviet children who received similar names, particularly in the 1920's and 1930's, when Traktor, Elektrifikatsiya or Vladlen, for Vladimir Lenin, were not uncommon. 
A Chinese who deals regularly with Taiwan or Hong Kong business executives, for example, might feel a bit embarrassed if he was named Dongfeng, meaning East Wind, or Dajun, meaning Great Army.
While names are becoming more bourgeois, the names are still different from those that preceded the 1949 revolution. 
At that time, villagers often used ordinary characters from daily life. 
A child might, for example, be called Yuliang, meaning Surplus Grain, in the hope that he would always have enough to eat. 
Very feminine names, based on varieties of flower or jade, were common for girls before the revolution but have not made much of a comeback.
Mao Zedong's name meant Anoint the East. 
Deng Xiaoping's name is a common one and means Little Peace. 
Mr. Deng's partner and rival, Chen Yun, has a name that simply means Cloud.
One of the biggest changes in selecting names is that more and more people are getting names with only two syllables, consisting of one character for the surname and one for the given name. 
Chinese say that two-syllable names make it easier to hail somebody. 
But officials are concerned that a proliferation of two-character names will worsen the problem of large numbers of people having the same names.
Of the 1.1 billion people in China, about 100 million bear the surnames Wang, Chen, Li and Zhang. 
There were lots of mix-ups even when most people had three-character names, and with the popularity now of two-character names officials expect a good deal more duplication and confusion.
