
China announced today that it had decided "in principle" to sign the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, becoming the last major nuclear power to commit itself to the terms of the agreement to curb the spread of atomic weapons.
The announcement came during a summit meeting today between Prime Minister Li Peng and Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu of Japan, whose nation last week marked the 46th anniversary of the two American atomic bomb attacks. 
Mr. Kaifu, who arrived today for three days of talks, is the first leader of any industrialized country to visit China since the Tiananmen crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators in June 1989.
 
'Things Have Changed'
"On many occasions in the past, China made clear its reasons for not acceding to the treaty," Wu Jianmin, China's Foreign Ministry spokesman, said tonight. 
"Now things have changed. 
This is for the purpose of attaining the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons."
In recent months, China had hinted it might join the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, and today's announcement, while not entirely a surprise, is expected to be a boost to the international effort this year to curtail the spread of nuclear and conventional weapons, particularly to trouble spots like the Middle East.
The Foreign Ministry spokesman did not say when China would sign the treaty, nor did he say whether "in principle" meant that there were any issues China still wanted to discuss before it signed. 
He did say, however, that China has not "imposed any conditions" for signing the treaty.
China was the last of the five major nuclear powers to hold out against the accord; on June 3, France committed itself to the terms of the treaty, although it has not yet signed it.
Only a handful of countries -- including India, Pakistan, Israel, South Africa, Argentina and Brazil, which are thought to possess advanced nuclear technology -- have yet to sign the accord. 
But among the nations that have accepted it are countries like Iraq and North Korea that are believed to have ambitions of developing nuclear weapons.
[The Bush Administration welcomed China's announcement, saying the move was something the United States had long sought. 
"We welcome this development and we look forward to early ratification by China of the treaty," the White House spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, said in Kennebunkport, Me., where President Bush is vacationing.]
Mr. Li's announcement appeared to be a friendly gesture toward Japan, which has been more eager than Western countries to re-establish normal ties with China.
 
Ties 'Returned to Normal'
In the last two years, Japan and China have rebuilt strong economic, commercial and even diplomatic ties, without focusing on the Tiananmen crackdown or human rights abuses. 
Some Western countries, particularly the United States, continue to have frosty relations with China because of concerns about Chinese violations of human rights and weapons sales.
Prime Minister Li suggested to Mr. Kaifu, in a comment repeated by the official New China News Agency, that China regarded the summit meeting as an indication that Chinese-Japanese relations are now back to normal.
"We are pleased to see that our bilateral relations have returned to normal," Mr. Li said. 
"We hereby express our appreciation for the positive efforts the Japanese Government and Prime Minister Kaifu have made to restore and develop the bilateral relations."
 
Treaty Took Effect in 1968
One of the aims of Mr. Kaifu's visit was to encourage China to play a more active role in controlling weapons sales and the proliferation of nuclear arms.
Mr. Wu today did not explain why his country had long opposed the treaty, but China in the past has suggested that the pact was an effort by the superpowers to dominate other countries. 
Beijing has said the treaty discriminated against developing countries and hindered international cooperation for peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
The treaty, the subject of intensive negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union in the mid-1960's, bans the export of nuclear weapons and nuclear-arms technology. 
It went into effect in 1968.
The treaty was controversial because it sought to make permanent the nuclear-weapons monopoly of those nations that then possessed such weapons -- the United States, the Soviet Union, Britain, France and China -- and sought pledges from other countries nt to acquire any. 
The treaty also committed the nuclear powers to work toward total nuclear disarmament and to help nonnuclear nations that sign the accord to develop peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
Arms control experts say China's nuclear arsenal is much smaller than those of the United States, Soviet Union, Britain or France. 
According to a report by Jane's Information Group, China has a nuclear arsenal that consists of 1,455 devices, both strategic and tactical. 
Many of those include warheads on land-based missiles, but China also has bombs, submarine-launched ballistic missiles and mines and shells.
The Wisconsin Project on Nuclear Arms Control has reported that China has transferred sensitive nuclear material or technology to Pakistan, India, South Africa, Algeria and countries in South America.
In addition to seeking Chinese acceptance of the nonproliferation treaty, the United States has been pressing Beijing in the last year to curb its missile sales. 
Nevertheless, China went ahead recently with the sale to Pakistan of a package of M-11 missiles, which can carry nuclear warheads. 
It is apparently considering the sale of M-9 missiles to Syria.
China indicated recently that it was considering joining the Missile Technology Control Regime, an international agreement to curb the spread of missiles, but the issue was not raised at today's meeting, according to a Japanese Foreign Ministry spokesman, Sadaaki Numata.
 
Issue of Arms Transfers
Mr. Numata said Prime Minister Kaifu had pressed China for support in Japan's effort to sponsor a United Nations resolution calling upon countries to report weapons transfers. 
But China said only that it was willing to discuss the subject and gave no commitments.
Japan is now offering low-interest loans to China, and the Chinese have made a request for more economic assistance. 
But the only announcement of economic aid today was a new donation, worth $1.5 million, in disaster relief for Chinese regions devastated by flooding last month. 
Japan already had given $500,000 worth of aid.
One reason bilateral ties have improved relatively smoothly is that Japan has tended not to criticize China's human rights abuses harshly. 
In today's meeting, Mr. Kaifu seemed to touch lightly on human rights issues, referring to the concerns expressed at the recent summit meeting of the seven major industrialized countries about China's process of democratization.
Mr. Kaifu did not seem to win any assurances from China that Communist North Korea would allow international inspection of its nuclear installations.
 
--------------------
BEIJING, Aug. 
10 -- China and Vietnam announced today that they hoped to normalize relations, and called for further consultations in the near future.
A reconciliation between the two Communist neighbors, after a dozen years of enmity and occasionally armed conflict, would reflect the steps taken toward resolving the civil war in Cambodia. 
A reconciliation would also improve the chances that a lasting peace could be achieved in Cambodia.
China supported North Vietnam in its war against the American-backed South, but Beijing and Hanoi turned on each other after the Vietnamese invaded Cambodia at the end of 1978 and ousted the Chinese-supported Khmer Rouge Government. 
In the spring of 1979, China and Vietnam fought a border war.
The announcement today came in a joint communique issued after three days of talks between Chinese Foreign Ministry officials and Nguyen Dy Nien, Vietnam's Deputy Foreign Minister.
The communique said Hanoi and Beijing agreed that a comprehensive political settlement in Cambodia should be achieved "on the basis of a framework document of the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council."
That seemed to be a sign that Vietnam and China favor a United Nations plan for elections in Cambodia.
The statement may have been meant to allay fears that the two countries planned to have Cambodian factions loyal to them simply share power in Cambodia without ever consulting the Cambodian people.
Correction
