
If the Presidential campaign isn't going so well these days for President Bush, the Chinese leaders seem to think it's going even worse for them.
Most horrifying of all to the Chinese leaders, there is the prospect that next month United States voters will elect Gov. Bill Clinton, who has called for linking China's trade privileges to its human rights record. 
Mr. Clinton sent shivers down octogenarian spines here this summer when he called for "an America that will never coddle tyrants, from Baghdad to Beijing."
But even Mr. Bush, long regarded by the Chinese as an "old friend," has proved distinctly unfriendly on the campaign trail. 
Many specialists on China say relations are already severely strained and may get worse.
 
'Tense, Delicate Relationship'
"I think that we're going to see a very tense, delicate relationship and that we're going to see the relationship continue to go downhill irrespective of who wins the White House," said John T. Kamm, a Hong Kong-based business consultant and specialist on Chinese-American relations. 
"Of course, they'll probably go downhill a little faster if Clinton wins."
Chinese officials have long shown a preference for Republicans, and they often speak glowingly of former President Richard M. Nixon and Henry A. Kissinger for opening up relations, while giving much less credit to the Carter Administration for formally recognizing China.
Beijing seemed to regard the Democrats in the 1970's and 1980's as too weak-kneed in opposing Moscow.
 
U.S. Patience Wearing Thin
But there are a number of signs that the Bush Administration's patience with Beijing has worn thin, and that it is no longer willing to pay a political price for cultivating ties to China.
For example, the Administration is threatening that unless Beijing agrees by the end of this week to take major steps to open up its markets, the United States will retaliate against up to $3.9 billion in Chinese exports.
Just as bad, from Beijing's point of view, Mr. Bush announced last month that Washington would permit the sale of up to 150 F-16 fighter planes to Taiwan, which China regards as a renegade province. 
The sale of the fighter planes is regarded by many experts, American and Chinese, as a violation of a 1982 accord in which the United States pledged that it would not increase arms sales to Taiwan.
 
Taiwan Is Still Ticklish
"By brazenly selling F-16's to Taiwan over China's opposition, the United States has again revealed its hegemonist policy of using arms sales to interfere in other countries' internal policies," the official People's Daily said this week.
Beijing reacted to the F-16 sale by dropping out of arms talks with Western countries and by rejecting a longstanding proposal for a joint Chinese-American commission on human rights, and China has hinted it may retaliate further.
For now, the dominant issue is the deadline Saturday on reaching agreement on talks to open up the Chinese market to foreign competition. 
But experts say there is still time to avert a trade war, and note that past trade accords with Beijing have typically been reached at the very last minute.
"Given the importance of the issues at stake and given the progress that has been achieved so far, which is not insignificant, I think that there's a better than even chance that we'll be able to overcome the last hurdles," said a Western diplomat in Beijing.
For all their resentment at the Administration's recent toughness, the Chinese leaders do appreciate that Mr. Bush has vetoed Congressional efforts to put conditions on the most-favored-nation trade privileges that China enjoys.
Mr. Clinton, on the other hand, has advocated linking trade and human rights.
Ending most-favored-nation status would be a major blow to the Chinese economy, which counts on the United States as a crucial market for shoes, clothing, toys and other exports.
Last year 26 percent of Chinese exports went to the United States, and the figure may be even higher this year: in the first six months of this year, Chinese exports to the United States were running nearly 32 percent above the corresponding period in 1991.
Mr. Clinton has apparently given relatively little thought to China, and it is possible that he would work with Congress to put pressure on China without revoking most-favored-nation status.
But Chinese officials have been alarmed by his speeches and dismayed by the Democratic Convention, where the largest foreign delegation reportedly was Taiwan's, and even Tibet had nearly as many representatives as China. 
Two exiled dissidents, Li Lu and Chai Ling, were invited to the podium and hailed as heroes.
Among those advising Mr. Clinton on China are Richard Holbrooke, a former senior State Department official who is now an investment banker, and Michael Mandelbaum, an academic expert on international relations.
Mr. Mandelbaum visited Beijing earlier this year and held discussions that the Chinese say they found somewhat reassuring, in that both sides still seemed to care a good deal about the relationship, and Mr. Holbrooke came in July for a day-and-a-half visit on behalf of his banking clients.
 
Emphasis on Long Term
Mr. Holbrooke said he did not come as an emissary of Mr. Clinton, but he told the two Chinese leaders with whom he met that Mr. Clinton was very serious about human rights issues.
Mr. Holbrooke also told them that a victory by Mr. Clinton would be good for China because Mr. Clinton was more likely to invigorate the United States economy, providing a basis for healthy trade and sound relations in general.
Aside from listening to his advisers, Mr. Clinton is also believed to have consulted other experts on relations with China, including Stephen J. Solarz, a Congressman from New York, and Winston Lord, a former United States Ambassador to Beijing.
Whoever wins the election, there are other conflicts on the horizon, including the possibility that the United States will set up a new radio service -- perhaps called Radio Free China -- to broadcast across the bamboo curtain. 
China disapproves of the Voice of America, which it calls "voice of rumors," and it would be outraged if a more aggressive broadcast service were established.
Even now, some Chinese officials hope that the problems will ease.
"We want good relations with the rest of the world, above all with the United States, and even if Clinton wins I don't think that there will necessarily be a big change," a senior Chinese researcher said. 
"Of course if Bush wins, that's better, but that wouldn't mean that relations will be smooth either.
"Before Reagan was elected President, he was also very hostile to the Chinese mainland. 
But after he won the election he was very pragmatic and he had to face reality. 
Maybe after this election, it won't be quite the same as it was in the campaign."
