
In a strong sign of shifting political winds in China, the official press is abruptly attacking the hard-line attitudes it espoused for the last two years and has instead started to call on the nation to emphasize economic growth and even adopt useful elements of capitalism.
The pirouette was reflected in a front-page essay today in People's Daily, which in the past carried mostly dour warnings against Western subversion. 
Today's article, headlined "Opening up to the world and using capitalism," was the boldest in a monthlong flurry of signals that change-minded leaders may be gaining the upper hand over ideologues.
"All of modern Chinese history has demonstrated that China can travel only the socialist road, not the capitalist road," the article began. 
"At the same time, recent world history shows us that economically backward nations -- especially those with long histories of feudalism -- must correctly use capitalism, rather than rejecting it out of hand. 
Only by critically absorbing those elements of Western culture that are useful to us, rather than disdaining them, can we prosper and flourish."
The wave of recent editorials apparently reflects a push by Deng Xiaoping, the 87-year-old paramount leader, for China to devote more energy to becoming prosperous and less to remaining ideologically pure. 
The Politburo is believed to have confirmed this moderate line, and the new articles indicate that the hard-liners are losing control even over the newspapers that they have dominated for more than two years.
Still, political fashions in China often change quickly, and it is unclear whether the recent articles reflect a major and irreversible trend to speed up economic liberalization. 
Even if economic growth is back at the top of the agenda, there is no hint that the regime will release political prisoners or tolerate challenges from Tibetan separatists or underground Catholic priests or disgruntled university students.
Calls for ideological vigilance and tributes to model Communists generally filled the front pages in the two and a half years after the June 1989 crackdown on the Tiananmen democracy movement. 
The crackdown, in which the army killed hundreds of protesters and wounded thousands, was accompanied by the rise of hard-line leaders who installed their lieutenants as editors of the major newspapers.
The People's Daily article appears days before the United States Senate's vote, scheduled for Tuesday, on renewing most-favored-nation trade status for China. 
The Administration is urging the Senate to renew the favorable tariff treatment, continuing President Bush's policy of trying to change China's behavor on human rights, arms sales to the third world and other issues by contact rather than by confrontation and punishment.
 
No Shift on Rights Seen
While there is no evidence of any major change by China on human rights, on economic topics there is no doubt that a switch has taken place. 
The People's Daily article published today called for tolerating a measure of capitalism in the Chinese economy, and gave a ringing endorsement of stock markets and other practices associated with the West.
On Saturday, People's Daily carried a front-page editorial calling on the nation to focus more attention on economic development -- and, by implication, give less attention to the Marxist ideology that the same newspaper has emphasized since the rise of the hard-liners in June 1989.
Also on Saturday, the official Guangming Daily filled most of the top two-thirds of the front page with a call to "liberate our thinking, deepen reform, open the door more widely."
It was a dizzying change in emphasis for a newspaper that just last month carried a front-page appeal for universities to select students more on the basis of loyalty to Communism.
Mr. Deng began the new drive for reform with a trip last month to the southern Chinese special economic zone of Shenzhen. 
He called for more rapid change and went out of his way to praise Shenzhen, a symbol of economic experimentation that has shown spectacular increases in prosperity but also in prostitution and drug abuse. 
The tide shifted apparently in part because Mr. Deng and other leaders determined that the best way for China to avoid the fate of the Soviet Union is to make people richer, and in part because other octogenarians who take a harder line are too feeble to fight back.
Today's article in People's Daily carried the byline Fang Sheng, which is almost certainly a pen name of an individual or a group of people in the central leadership. 
The fact that it was published on a Sunday -- when almost no one reads the newspaper, which is delivered to offices and factories rather than homes -- suggests that a Politburo member may have ordered the top editors to publish it but that they did their best to insure that as few readers as possible would notice it.
 
Adapting Capitalism
"Using capitalism includes developing an appropriate capitalist economy within our country, as a useful supplement to the socialist economy," the article said. 
"As our country is in only the preliminary stage of socialism, it is impossible to wipe out capitalism completely, and some exploitation will linger for a long while. 
So the important thing is to improve our guidance of these phenomena, and direct them onto a course where policy allows them."
Many elements of today's long article had appeared previously in one place or another, but they had not been combined with such force or clarity. 
The tone throughout sounded like a rebuke to the hard-liners. 
In particular, the article indicated that most Communists now acknowledge the need to use foreign capital and technology.
"On other matters, it seems that there are still some differences," the newspaper said, in a clear reference to hard-liners who are wary of capitalist influences. 
The article added that instead of fearing contacts with the West, China should expand exchanges "to enrich our culture."
 
Defining Socialism
"In the past we took the tortuous path of sealing ourselves off from the world and refusing to use capitalism," the essay declared, in a reference to the Maoist era. 
"Leftist errors and other factors were behind this, but they have nothing to do with socialism. 
On the contrary, in principle socialism means an open system and a reform-oriented economy."
A People's Daily editor said by telephone that the essay today was not an editorial or a commentary, but simply an "article."
He said he did not know the identity of the author.
Wu Guoguang, a former People's Daily editorial writer now studying at Princeton University, said he could recall only one other case in the last 15 years in which the newspaper carried a front-page commentary with a byline that was a pen-name. 
The other one was arranged by Mr. Deng's family and published last year, and Mr. Wu said an essay like today's would have to have the approval of a top leader.
While recent commentaries have been short of specifics, their tone is important because officials at every level are what the Chinese call feng pai -- weathervanes. 
In other words, they watch for hints of prevailing political winds before taking any action.
