
The campaign by Deng Xiaoping and other Chinese leaders for faster economic change seems to be having an unintended effect: Dissidents and ordinary citizens are becoming a bit bolder in challenging the authorities.
Partly because the hard-liners appear to be losing ground as the airwaves fill with calls for reform, many Chinese say they find the atmosphere looser and less ominous. 
Some say that the fear that has gripped the country for the last three years, since the Tiananmen Square crackdown of June 1989, is gradually easing.
Consequently, some dissidents are no longer hiding their activities. 
They now openly meet with foreign reporters, write for foreign publications and denounce human rights abuses in their country.
 
Overseas Publication
Zhang Weiguo, a Shanghai journalist whose newspaper, The World Economic Herald, was closed during the Tiananmen democracy movement, is one of several democracy advocates who seem less afraid of the leadership than it is of him.
"I'm writing more articles now than when I was at The Herald," Mr. Zhang said in a recent interview in Shanghai. 
Since his articles cannot be published in China, he writes about China for leading newspapers in Taiwan and Hong Kong, and he has given telephone interviews to the BBC's Chinese-language service.
The security apparatus is clearly alarmed about such growing boldness, but it seems at a loss how to react. 
So the authorities settle for harassing Mr. Zhang, summoning him periodically for interrogation, as well as threatening him and refusing to allow him to leave Shanghai. 
But Mr. Zhang, who spent more than 20 months in prison after the 1989 crackdown, continues to speak.
Perhaps the only effective way to silence someone so fearless would be to re-arrest him and sentence him to a long prison term. 
But this might provoke a furor abroad, reinforce the image of China as a brutal and repressive place and increase the chance of American trade sanctions.
 
Order vs. Freedom
The treatment of Mr. Zhang is relatively lenient compared with the repression of a few years ago -- in 1989, for example, a marine biology student named Chen Lantao was sentenced to 18 years simply for speaking against the Government.
As fear diminishes, China may be becoming a more open country -- but perhaps also a less stable one. 
For the three years after the army's crackdown, in which hundreds were killed, thousands hurt and many more imprisoned, the peace was preserved through a balance of terror: The people were afraid of the Government and the Government was afraid of the people.
Some of that fear lingers on both sides, but less than before. 
Some in the Government acknowledge their apprehension that people could eventually take to the streets and overthrow the Communists, but there is a clear division within the leadership about the nature of the threat.
Hard-liners say the risk comes primarily from the dissidents and from contact with the West, and so they favor harsh repression. 
But others -- including Mr. Deng, the 88-year-old senior leader -- suggest that dissidents will get nowhere as long as the economy is booming, and so the leaders fear trade sanctions perhaps more than outspoken critics.
Still, there are several indications that the greater boldness has affected not only dissidents but also ordinary Chinese, although in ways that are not overtly political.
When application forms to buy stock ran out in the southern city of Shenzhen last month, some 50,000 would-be investors accused the Government of corruption and rampaged on the streets.
"That rioting would never have occurred in the immediate aftermath of the Tiananmen crackdown," said a Chinese journalist in Beijing. 
"But this year, with all the new talk about reform, people are feeling more hopeful and braver than before."
The journalist added, however, that most people are still afraid of openly criticizing the Government. 
For now, a repeat of large-scale pro-democracy demonstrations is impossible, he said.
"Lots of people are willing to be followers," he said. 
"But no one wants to be the first to say anything. 
There's a saying: the first bird in the flock is the one that gets shot. 
So there are plenty of birds that want to fly, but not in front."
The greater public boldness reached Beijing late last month, when China's normally docile soccer fans stormed out of Workers Stadium in Beijing after a loss to South Korea and marched angrily down the middle of the street. 
They shouted curses at the Chinese team, the head coach and the police.
It was the third outburst in a week from soccer fans, and the authorities were quick to arrest a few people and denounce the behavior.
The official Beijing Daily wrote, "These riotous acts, totally alien to China's long-noted politeness and courtesy, smeared the image of Beijing as well as our country."
Chinese soccer hooligans may seem like paragons of obedience compared to the more violent British soccer rioters, but in one sense the disruptions here are much more significant than in Britain.
The glue that keeps most Western governments together is public support for the system; in China, according to many foreign diplomats and Chinese, the adhesive is fear. 
So if Chinese soccer fans dare to march on the streets because of dissatisfaction with a sports competition, there is at least some chance that they may dare to protest the form of government.
 
Pitfalls in Leniency
Recent history also suggests that a diminishing fear of the authorities might eventually lead to political protest.
Throughout the last four decades, the times when Chinese have protested against the Government have not generally been the periods of greatest discontent. 
Rather, they have occurred when people perceived -- usually incorrectly -- that the atmosphere was sufficiently lenient that they could get away with it.
To be sure, the authorities do their best to let people know that they will not get away with it. 
Some democracy campaigners, though not the most prominent ones, reportedly were quietly arrested over the last few months, and political prisoners in northeastern China recently smuggled out a letter complaining of continued beatings in their jail cells.
The latest police move occurred today, when the authorities detained Shen Tong, a democracy advocate who had returned from exile in the United States, as he prepared to hold a news conference. 
If Mr. Shen's return was a sign of the dissidents' new boldness, his detention was a signal that the authorities are willing to fight back.
So far, however, the Government has not reacted to another recent development that may cause security officials to furrow their brows. 
Three prominent independent-minded Chinese openly joined the board of a New York-based organization, Human Rights in China, that is often critical of the Beijing authorities. 
While the Government has not punished the three, it is not clear that it will allow them to leave China to attend a board meeting in the fall.
This relative restraint is having an unintended effect: It is skewing the incentive structure for dissidents. 
A few years ago, any Chinese knew that denouncing the Government would mean immediate dismissal, arrest and incarceration. 
But now, some critics suffer only harassment, and they achieve international renown and invitations to be visiting scholars at foreign universities.
Likewise, relatives of political prisoners used to believe that they were best off keeping quiet so as not to offend the authorities. 
But in several recent cases, family members have concluded that they are better off causing a fuss or at least speaking to the foreign press. 
In part they believe that attention in the West may result in shorter sentences for their loved ones, and in part they seem to feel more daring and assertive than they used to.
"With all the talk about reform, the Government has been telling us to be bolder in our actions," said a worker in his 20's, flashing a mischievous grin. 
"And so that's what's happening. 
We're bolder."
