
A postscript to the cold war is being written here: a missile factory has been converted to make refrigerators.
Just as important, the refrigerators are rolling off assembly lines not in the company's old location in the mountains of south-central China but in a new industrial zone here in the provincial capital. 
As the people here say, the tiger has come out of the mountains.
The tiger is China's so-called Third Line of industry, built mostly in the 1960's. 
Fearing attack by the United States or the Soviet Union, Mao Zedong ordered 2,000 companies representing a large share of China's industrial and military capacity removed from vulnerable coastal areas to remote hillside towns in the country's interior. 
Mao thought that the Communists could rely on that Third Line of industry even if an enemy attacked the coast.
It was an extraordinary scheme, the most daring and perhaps the most ill-considered industrial relocation plan that any country had ever attempted. 
From the mid-1960's to the mid-1970's, nearly half of China's budget went to Third Line construction, but the new factories tended to be inefficient because of poor infrastructure and supply lines.
 
Moving Back to Cities
In this post-Mao, post-cold-war era, the Third Line companies are now moving back to the cities, and in many cases retooling to make consumer goods instead of weapons. 
Across the nation, enterprises that once produced tanks and missiles and other military products are now making 650 kinds of civilian goods. 
Here in Guiyang, the capital of Guizhou province, two new industrial zones are filling up with Third Line factories making everything from transistors to automobile headlights.
"Intellectuals are very happy with the move, after being in the mountains for two decades," said Wang Quan, director of the Guiyang office of the Zhenhua Electronics Industry Corporation, one such enterprise. 
"Life is better here, there is entertainment and culture, and there's better education for the kids."
Of the 700,000 industrial workers in Guizhou Province who work in Third Line enterprises, about a third have already moved to the cities or are in the process of doing so, according to Hu Lun, chief economist of the Guizhou Province Planning Commission.
 
Efficiency and Location
"We plan to move all our workers to Guiyang," said Mr. Wang, of Zhenhua, which has 30,000 employees at 21 factories scattered across Guizhou. 
"But that will depend on economics and on how efficient the factories are here."
One of the factories that already has moved and started operations in Guiyang is the Jianxin Machine Factory, a unit of Zhenhua that makes stone cutters, drill presses and other industrial equipment. 
In the past it exported some goods to Eastern Europe and now the managers are hoping that the improved location will improve exports to the West.
"It's much more convenient here," said Feng Yisong, a senior engineer of the factory. 
"Transportation is much easier, and it's far simpler to make contacts and get a hold of people. 
So our efficiency is much better now."
The factory shop -- emblazoned with huge red characters across the wall declaring: "Socialism is Good. 
The Communist Party is Good" -- is spacious and is taking advantage of a tax break to install some brand-new equipment in addition to assembly lines brought in from its old location near the town of Duyun.
 
Creating a Society
The director of the nearby New Cloud Equipment Factory, Long Hanmin, said that though there is a hefty cost to moving the plant and all of its employees to Guiyang, the move will soon pay for itself in improved efficiency and reduced transportation costs.
"We used to be a company town and had to create our own society," said Mr. Long. "We had to provide schools, restaurants, a movie theater and a hospital. 
In Guiyang, we don't have to do any of that."
Mr. Long's factory used to make electronic components for the army, but it shifted a half-dozen years ago to manufacturing similar civilian products, like transistors and capacitors. 
These days, the transition from military production to civilian production is well underway, not just in Guizhou but throughout China.
For Guizhou Province, one of the poorest in China, that switch -- coupled with the emergence from the mountains of the Third Line "tiger" -- also offers an important opportunity to lure foreign investment.
