
The Government acknowledged today that it faced grave budgetary difficulties, but at the same time proposed a budget for 1990 that includes a sharp increase in military spending.
The National People's Congress, now meeting in Beijing for a 15-day session that will give pro forma approval to the budget and other proposals from the leadership, also agreed today to accept the resignation of Deng Xiaoping from his last formal post, as chairman of the Government's Central Military Commission. 
Mr. Deng announced in November that he would retire from the post, and today's move was a formality.
The Congress did not name a new chairman, but it is widely expected to be Jiang Zemin, the Communist Party leader and Mr. Deng's choice to succeed him as China's paramount leader. 
In November Mr. Jiang succeeded Mr. Deng as chairman of the Communist Party's Central Military Commission, which in practical terms is the same as its Government counterpart.
The military spending increase, by $6.2 billion, or 15.2 percent, had been expected as a signal of the leadership's appreciation of the role of the People's Liberation Army in crushing democracy protests last year. 
The army was the major beneficiary in a budget report that was otherwise bleak.
''The condition for the state budget this year is grim,'' Finance Minister Wang Bingqian told the congress in an address. 
He presented a draft budget that included a nominal deficit of $1.89 billion, down slightly from last year.
But those figures were calculated under the Chinese practice of counting borrowed funds as revenue. 
Using Western accounting practices, the budget gap this year reaches $9 billion, up 14.5 percent.
Most Western and Chinese economists agree that China's economic difficulties are related less to the military crackdown last June than to the 18-month-old austerity program. 
The economic slowdown has made it more difficult for the central Government to raise funds, and has meant increased subsidies to money-losing state enterprises.
The budget proposal also included a 9.9 percent increase in education spending and a 7.9 percent increase in funds for agriculture. 
It is not clear how such numbers are derived or how reliable they are, and some university faculties have been told that education spending would drop this year.
Most Western diplomats regard the figure for military spending as a significant understatement of the total, partly because the budget allocation apparently does not incorporate sums the army earns from weapons sales and from civilian products produced by army-owned factories.
China's leaders have given strong hints - particularly after seeing the Romanian Army help topple a Communist Government in December - that they want to insure the loyalty of the army. 
In addition, the leadership has been trying to give the army a greater role in maintaining domestic security.
According to the Finance Minister's report, the two largest allocations, each amounting to about $14 billion or about 20 percent of the budget, are for capital construction and subsidies to money-losing enterprises.
China has tried to cut spending for inefficient enterprises by introducing a bankruptcy law, but the Government has been reluctant to allow money-losing companies to go bankrupt.
