
The Government said today that Wei Jingsheng, China's most famous political prisoner, is living in a private cell at a prison farm and that he refuses to admit that he has done anything wrong.
The disclosures today marked the first time that the Government has provided extensive details of the imprisonment of Mr. Wei, a 42-year-old essayist who has just begun the 14th year of a 15-year sentence.
Several senior officials of the Justice Ministry handed the information over to John T. Kamm, an American business consultant visiting Beijing on a Government invitation. 
Mr. Kamm, who lives in Hong Kong and has done business with China for 20 years, has been active in recent years in lobbying China to improve its human rights record.
 
Essays on a Wall
Mr. Kamm said the Justice Ministry officials complained bitterly about Western news articles suggesting that years of imprisonment had caused Mr. Wei to lose his teeth, his hair and his sanity. 
They denied the reports, saying Mr. Wei was in good health and constantly debated with the guards.
An electrician at the Beijing zoo, Mr. Wei emerged as the most famous essayist of the 1978-79 Beijing Spring movement, which created a "Democracy Wall" and covered it with posters demanding a political tolerance.
After the Government called for the "Four Modernizations" -- agriculture, industry, defense and science -- Mr. Wei wrote a passionate essay saying that China desperately needed a "Fifth Modernization" -- democracy.
Ever since his arrest and trial in 1979, there have been reports that Mr. Wei was physically and mentally ill; it was even reported once that he had died. 
But it was difficult to gauge the accuracy of these reports.
Mr. Kamm said the Justice Ministry officials had told him today that Mr. Wei occupies a single cell at a "reform through labor" farm near the central China city of Tangshan. 
They described him as a voracious reader, who keeps books in his cell and reads several newspapers each day.
 
TV and Debates
The officials said it was wrong to characterize Mr. Wei's situation as solitary confinement, because his cell opens onto another room in which there are several guards and a television set. 
They said Mr. Wei spends much of the day, when he is not reading, watching television and debating with the guards.
Mr. Wei is excused from the labor program but he tends some vegetables he is growing for himself, they said. 
The officials said that Mr. Wei occupied a private cell at his own request, and that he liked to go to read late at night and get up late.
While Mr. Wei basically abides by prison rules, he is "unclear" about his guilt, the officials said. 
When pressed by Mr. Kamm, they added that Mr. Wei neither acknowledges his guilt nor believes he has done anything wrong.
Mr. Wei's younger sister and a younger brother visit him every few months, the officials said. 
They added that Mr. Wei's father, a retired official who lives in Beijing but refuses to talk to reporters, does not visit his son and apparently does not get along with him.
While Mr. Kamm said he had no way of corroborating the Government account, he said the description sounded plausible. 
He said the treatment described was not so different from the conditions afforded to other sensitive prisoners, including Luo Haixing, a Hong Kong businessman who was released last year.
"In two years of working on these cases, they've never lied to me," Mr. Kamm said of the officials. 
"They don't tell me the whole truth, but they don't lie to me."
Mr. Kamm said the officials also told him that Wang Dan, a student leader who is serving a four-year term for his role in the 1989 Tiananmen demonstrations, was also proving difficult to "re-educate."
The officials said that Mr. Wang was being held at the Beijing No. 2 Prison, where he reads extensively, and that the guards have found it difficult to reform his ideology.
