
One of the most searing images of the crackdown on the democracy movement in China was the scene of a young woman being praised on national television for turning in her younger brother to the police for his role as a student leader.
The student leader, Zhou Fengsuo, had fled to his sister's home in this city in central China, hoping to avoid arrest. 
The television footage related that the sister and her husband allowed him to stay with them, but then on June 13 reported him to the authorities.
The incident was widely regarded as a symbol of the relentlessness and ferocity of the Government's crackdown. 
It recalled the Cultural Revolution, when Red Guards denounced their parents as counterrevolutionaries. 
It provoked soul searching among Chinese intellectuals, who pondered how, in a society where family ties have traditionally been so important, someone could deliver her own brother to the police. 
The answer may be that she didn't. 
The scuttlebutt in the city where it happened is that the sister, Zhou Wenrong, did not intend to alert the police. 
Moreover, it seems that the vast majority of people still do regard family ties as paramount, for Miss Zhou has become the pariah of Xian.
New Version of Events
The account that is circulating everywhere here is that Miss Zhou confided to her boss in the hope that the boss could visit her home and persuade the young man to turn himself in. 
It was the boss who notified the police.
Mr. Zhou was shown on television in handcuffs that evening, but there has been no subsequent indication that he has been tried or sentenced. 
Most knowledgeable Chinese doubt that he would be sentenced to death, but they say a sentence of 10 years to life in prison could well be handed down for student leaders at his level.
''She just meant to get her brother some counseling,'' said a 39-year-old worker. 
''All the neighbors knew he was staying here, and she was afraid one of them would report him. 
That would have been terrible for her career and her husband's, so she wanted Zhou Fengsuo to turn himself in.''
If all the neighbors did indeed know that Mr. Zhou was staying with the family, but did not report him despite an appeal on television for information about him, that suggests a surprising lack of cooperation with the authorities. 
It is the opposite of the impression that the authorities were trying to convey.
 
'Everybody Hates Her'
Those accounts of what happened are impossible to confirm. 
Local authorities refused a request to interview Miss Zhou, saying she was ill.
Nevertheless, nearly everyone here gives the same account of what happened. 
Likewise, the contempt and dislike for Miss Zhou seem widespread.
''Everybody hates her,'' a woman in her early 30's said. 
''She is afraid to go out on the street because of all the threatening letters she has received. 
People say she is going crazy. 
If she does go mad, her parents will have lost both children.''
The ostracism of Miss Zhou might suggest that everyone here is a staunch supporter of the student movement. 
In fact the situation is more complex, partly because the intense propaganda on television has had an effect on residents here. 
People here do not believe the Government accounts of what happened, but the images of bloodied soldiers have persuaded them that the democracy movement was not as pure as they had thought.
 
Modestly Successful Propaganda
''We are all Chinese,'' a young woman said. 
''It's wrong to kill the students and it's just as wrong to kill the troops. 
It's all very bad.''
To the extent that people have any sympathy for the crackdown, it is not founded on the Government's justification of protecting Communism. 
On the contrary, it is based on the belief that only when order is restored can people make money.
The propaganda has been modestly successful in portraying the democracy movement as responsible for the turmoil that threatened China's modernization policy. 
Those who expressed reservations about the movement said that while its aims were good, its later stages reminded them of the turmoil of the Cultural Revolution.
''I went through those 10 years of chaos,'' said a middle-aged worker. 
''Nobody in my generation wants to go through that again.''
 
Few Tourists, Little Disruption
Xian is one of the tourism capitals of China because of the tombs and other historical sites from the time when it was the cultural, political and commercial center of Asia during the Tang dynasty more than 1,000 years ago. 
These days, however, there are scarcely any tourists in town. 
The best hotel in the city, the Golden Flowers, is running at just over 30 percent occupancy, compared with nearly 100 percent a year ago, and it has slashed its rates from $115 a night to just $50.
There is no military presence, and no obvious threat to tourists. 
At least 43 ''counterrevolutionaries'' have been arrested in Xian, and investigations are under way in many Government departments and in the local Academy of Social Sciences to ferret out others. 
But for most people, life seems to be going on pretty much as before.
