
The Chinese Communist Party leadership has told its senior members in a confidential analysis that the Soviet Union is restoring capitalism and that its mistake was that it did not choose the right successor to earlier leaders, Chinese with access to high-level information say.
The analysis, which is being circulated among civilian and military party units in the capital, is the first official explanation of the Soviet events to be distributed since the coup's failure on Aug. 
21. One official says the analysis is based on advice from Deng Xiaoping, China's 87-year-old senior leader.
By arguing that the Soviet Union chose the wrong successor, China's octogenarian leaders are suggesting that they will be particularly careful to avoid selecting someone who would turn out to be like President Mikhail S. Gorbachev. This could suggest an especially hard line in promotions of party officials.
The party analysis is contained in Central Committee Document No. 4. It is said to be drawn from a speech by the Communist Party General Secretary, Jiang Zemin, and that speech in turn appears to be based on Mr. Deng's remarks.
While saying that there is a "restoration of capitalism" in the Soviet Union and criticizing Mr. Gorbachev, it does not convey the sense of alarm that many Chinese people believe the leaders must feel in reaction to the rapid disintegration of the Soviet one-party system.
 
Limited Context
There are varying accounts of the contents and the source of the comments, which were read aloud to lower-level party functionaries in recent days. 
Four officials confirmed the general contents of the document; however, they spoke from memory because they were not permitted to take notes.
Two of the officials added that those reading the document were told to say that it expressed their own views, apparently as a way of allowing the leadership to distance itself from the comments.
Mr. Deng is said to have made a brief set of remarks -- four phrases, altogether 16 words long -- while he was recently in Beidaihe, a seaside resort where many top leaders go to escape the summer heat.
His comments advised against drawing any quick conclusions about how the situation in the Soviet Union will turn out, suggesting that it was possible that turmoil could bring back an authoritarian government or at least would not necessarily turn the Soviet Union into a democracy.
His remarks also urged China to concentrate on fortifying itself and stepping up control without telegraphing this to the outside world.
 
Deng Advises Caution
One of the phrases Mr. Deng is said to have used, "tao guang yang hui," literally means to "hide one's capacities and bide one's time," suggesting a defensive rather than offensive strategy in countering the Soviet changes.
Coupled with "strengthen oneself," and another phrase that essentially means to watch developments with caution, Mr. Deng seemed to be calling on people to keep a careful guard, to build up the nation both ideologically and economically, and not to take any drastic actions.
A document now being circulated is said to include a 16-word comment by Mr. Jiang that is similar to the words of Mr. Deng. Mr. Jiang also advises Chinese to "bide one's time," and to watch developments closely. 
He adds that the nation should "get a firm foothold" and improve the country's strengths, another official said.
One phrase that Mr. Jiang did not use, but that Mr. Deng apparently did, is familiar to most Chinese: "Nei jin wai song," essentially meaning "tranquility outside, repression within."
This phrase led one of the officials to believe that the leadership will impose stronger discipline and controls throughout the military and party apparatus. 
Officials have already begun to review the speeches given by Mr. Deng just after the military suppression of democracy demonstrators in Beijing on June 3-4, 1989.
