
Fang Lizhi, China's leading dissident, said in an interview broadcast tonight that the United States had a ''double standard'' for human rights that was tougher on the Soviet Union than on China.
In the interview, with NBC News, Mr. Fang, who went into exile in Britain last month with his wife, Li Shuxian, also criticized the Bush Administration's decision to send a special mission of senior Administration officials to China last year after the authorities crushed the democracy movement.
Speaking in both English and Chinese, he also talked of the need he saw to push China into the international community and of the type of life he and his wife lived in the United States Embassy in Beijing, where they took refuge for more than a year.
The London bureau of NBC News said the interview had been conducted by Tom Brokaw and had been taped on Thursday at a hotel in central London.
Fang Sees a Double Standard
On the issue of human rights, Mr. Fang was asked whether he believed that United States officials had a double standard and were ''softer'' on China than on other countries.
Speaking in English, Mr. Fang said: ''Yeah, I think without doubt there is still some double standard there. 
Of course, they are better than before.''
President Bush, in London for a summit conference of NATO leaders, was asked at a news conference today about Mr. Fang's view that the United States had a double standard for human rights.
''I'd say that he's wrong,'' Mr. Bush said. 
''He's got a little time warp here, because we spoke out at the NATO meeting, indeed, I think we took the lead at the last, at a meeting in Europe, I guess it was the G-7 meeting, not NATO, where we took the lead in expressing our joint indignation in terms of the abuses of human rights at Tiananmen Square.
''We've kept certain sanctions on China. 
I am heartened that Fang Lizhi is free and free now to say what's on his mind. 
I would say that if he feels that way, he's simply not expressing the facts as they are. 
I don't agree with that. 
I know that some of my critics in the United States Congress say that, and I think they're just as wrong as they can be.''
 
Kept From Dinner With Bush
Mr. Fang said that he had not communicated personally with President Bush but that he hoped to meet him because the President still owed Mr. Fang and his wife dinner. 
He was referring to an incident in February 1989, when the Chinese Government prevented the couple from attending a banquet to which Mr. Bush had invited them at a hotel in Beijing.
Asked at his news conference whether he would invite Mr. Fang to the White House for dinner the President said: ''Well, he's here in this country. 
I thought he wanted to stay out of the public eye. 
I thought he himself said so, so you've got a little different information than that.''
Mr. Fang and Miss Li were in the United States Embassy in Beijing from June 5, 1989, until they were allowed to leave China last month. 
They took refuge in the embassy after the Communist leaders sent troops and tanks into Tiananmen Square to crush student-led pro-democracy demonstrations and after pro-Government demonstrators burned Mr. Fang in effigy.
The Chinese authorities issued a warrant for the couple's arrest and accused them of offenses tantamount to treason. 
Mr. Fang played no public role in the student campaign for political change, but China's leaders saw him as a major inspiration behind the protests and demanded that the United States hand the couple over to the authorities.
 
Medical Condition Cited
Chinese officials have been quoted as saying the couple asked to go abroad for medical treatment, vowed not to engage in activities directed against China and were allowed to leave after showing signs of repentance.
On June 26, the day after he arrived in Britain, Mr. Fang said he and Miss Li were looking forward ''in the next few days to a period of quiet, a chance to rest and recuperate and to have some medical tests.''
Mr. Fang, a distinguished astrophysicist, has accepted a post as a senior visiting fellow at Cambridge University's Institute of Astronomy, where he will study the early universe.
Mr. Fang said he did not ''think it was a good idea'' for President Bush to send the national security adviser, Brent Scowcroft and Deputy Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger to China last year. 
But he said China should not be isolated but should be pushed into the international community.
Mr. Fang said that he and Miss Li had sometimes felt alone at the United States Embassy but later received many letters and other ''information.''
He said he could communicate freely with foreigners during his stay.
Mr. Fang said he had lived the life of an ''American scientist'' in the beginning of his stay at the embassy but that he and his wife had become ''more and more Chinese,'' always eating Chinese food, which was prepared in a microwave oven. 
''And we used that modern machine to cook Chinese food,'' Mr. Fang said, ''so we give a new name called 'high-tech Chinese restaurant.'
''
