
In a rebuff to President Bush and a warning to President-elect Bill Clinton, China appears to have suspended its discussions with the United States on human rights issues, including American inquiries about specific political prisoners.
The action by the Beijing authorities halts a process that began in December 1990, when the Bush Administration hailed the talks as a sign of progress on human rights following the violent suppression of the democracy movement in June 1989.
The dialogue on rights was never especially productive, but it gave American diplomats and visiting officials a basis for raising inquiries about specific political prisoners. 
These on-again, off-again discussions, about broad human rights topics and individual cases, sometimes drew minimal Chinese responses and occasionally led to real improvements in people's lives.
For all the frustrations, the discussions meant that China at least acknowledged that human rights were a valid topic of discussion. 
Now, even that much seems to be in jeopardy.
Mr. Clinton sharply criticized China for human rights abuses during the Presidential campaign. 
Since the election, he has eased up a little on that criticism, but indicated that he would continue to take a tougher line on the issue than the Bush Administration.
 
Throwing Down the Gauntlet
In effect, then, the Beijing authorities were laying down a challenge to Mr. Clinton as he and his advisers fashion a China policy.
Their action also comes as disagreements are expected in coming months on trade and other issues.
The Chinese approach in the wake of the American election is still being developed, however, and may permit discussions about human rights with legislators and others who are not part of the Administration.
In a significant step, China is welcoming a delegation of five Senators next month, a visit in which rights concerns are certain to be raised.
The latest Chinese decision seems to be a response to Mr. Bush's announcement in September that the United States would permit the sale of F-16 fighter jets to Beijing's adversary, the Chinese Nationalists on Taiwan. 
The Government here was outraged by the sale, which appeared to violate American pledges, and some diplomats expect further retaliatory action.
"The United States Government decision to sell F-16 fighters to Taiwan has seriously hurt Sino-U.S. relations," the Foreign Ministry said in an oblique statement today, 24 hours after it was asked for details about the suspension of the human rights discussions. 
"The Chinese Government has expressed its solemn and just stance on this."
The United States is not without leverage. 
Beijing, for instance, is worried that if it reacts too strongly, it will lose its low-tariff access to the American market, known as most-favored-nation status. 
Mr. Clinton has said that he favors linking China's trade with its human rights situation, but much will depend on how this principle is drafted into legislation on extending this trading status.
A Western diplomat explained: "You're talking about the U.S. taking 30 percent of their exports, and their exports to the U.S. are growing 40 percent this year. 
And they're counting on this to continue to grow. 
It's something that their entire reform package is based on."
Mr. Clinton's changing tone in recent weeks leaves his intentions unclear. 
During the campaign, he said that President Bush had failed to win concessions from China on rights and trade issues, but last week he said that "in the last several months" China had begun to moderate its policies.
"We have a big stake in not isolating China, in seeing that China continues to develop a market economy," Mr. Clinton said. 
"But we also have to insist, I believe, on progress in human rights and human decency."
The Foreign Ministry did not directly respond to the questions about whether the rights discussions had been terminated. 
By avoiding a direct response, the ministry seemed to be offering tacit confirmation without painting itself into a corner.
In a sign of the sensitivity of the issue, the United States Embassy in Beijing took two days to provide this terse response: "We believe an active dialogue on the issue offers the best chance of furthering both countries' interests. 
We continue to press China on human rights at every opportunity."
The embassy declined to comment further, but at a meeting earlier this month, American diplomats are believed to have tried to give the Chinese Foreign Ministry an unofficial though written inquiry on political prisoners.
The Chinese refused to accept it, so the Americans left it on a chair as they packed up and prepared to leave the room. 
The Chinese picked it up and said that there would be no response. 
The Americans were apparently heartened that they at least picked it up.
China's growing trade imbalance with the United States, in which its exports far exceed its imports, is another prickly issue. 
The surplus, now second only to Japan's, amounted to $13.4 billion in the first nine months of this year, more than in all of 1991.
The Beijing leadership has also been slow to carry out an agreement with Washington on curbing the export of goods made with prison labor.
If that were not enough to worry about, the Chinese Government's fierce opposition to democratic changes in Hong Kong may cause further tensions with the United States.
There have been significant improvements in other areas. 
China seems to have curtailed its arms sales, and it has allowed many, if not all dissidents to leave the country. 
It has released some prominent Catholics from prison and sharply toned down its Communist propaganda.
Last month, Beijing caved in on American demands that it open its markets to more American goods, and it is taking other steps to allow parts of its economy to be run on market lines. 
And, in a bouquet to Mr. Clinton, the Chinese announced shortly after the election that they would buy two million tons of American wheat, the first such purchase this year.
The suspension of human rights discussions was apparently decided at the highest level. 
The leadership informed various Chinese ministries that they should not discuss rights issues with American officials.
A test of how the Chinese will apply the suspension is expected during the Senators' visit. 
According to current plans, the delegation is to be led by Senator David L. Boren and to include Senators Bob Kerrey, Carl Levin, Claiborne Pell and John W. Warner.
In an important suggestion that it wants to be conciliatory, China plans to let the Senators visit Tibet. 
It ordinarily controls access to Tibet very tightly, effectively barring Western journalists from visiting the region.
