
THREE times a week, 19 Chinese dissidents meet in Albert Einstein's former lecture hall to discuss how to bring democracy to their homeland.
Many of them fled to the West after the bloody crackdown in Tiananmen Square two years ago. 
Now they work from a safe haven inside the ivy-covered walls of Jones Hall at Princeton University, where Einstein, a refugee from another regime, Nazi Germany, once taught.
"We carry so much blood," said Su Wei, a 38-year-old writer and literary critic.
"I don't want to be a political leader," he said. 
"But there was so much blood we spent at the square, so big a price for the democracy hated in China. 
So we have to say something, do something."
The dissidents helped bring about the student democracy movement that ended June 4, 1989, when the Government ordered soldiers to fire on the crowd in Beijing, killing hundreds.
 
'They Need Our Voice'
"All we gained before 1989 we have lost," said Liu Binyan, 66, a former journalist for the Communist Party newspaper People's Daily, who left China before the student protests. 
"The freedom of the people has become less. 
The people now, they need our voice."
More than 100 Chinese dissidents applied for positions as visiting scholars at Princeton under a program financed by a $1 million donation from an alumnus, John Elliott. 
The school chose 23, some of whom have since moved on.
The scholars receive stipends to work in their own fields while researching and writing a book together about the 1989 movement.
On their own time, they are waging a war against Communism through freelance articles published in Hong Kong and American newspapers and magazines that are smuggled into China. 
Some are working on plays, poems or books they hope will find their way into the hands, minds and hearts of the Chinese people.
 
Memorizing, Not Analyzing
Surrounded by Chinese calligraphy about human rights in the office of the Princeton Chinese Initiative, the scholars described their campaign over a constant stream of cigarettes and warm Coke, both reminders of home.
Bai Meng, 28, the poet who drafted the "Declaration of the Hunger Strikers" for the student protesters, said that before democracy could work in China the people's minds needed to be reshaped.
He said that in China, students were taught to memorize, and not analyze, the Government's version of history. 
They are exposed only to acceptable theories like Communism, he said.
At Princeton, Mr. Bai said, the scholars are learning to open their minds to new theories and ways of formulating ideas. 
They use their writings to teach the Chinese back home to do the same, he said.
Zhang Langlang, 48, is a painter, writer, philosopher and humorist. 
He tries to educate the people he left behind about Western ideas through humorous stories in publications subscribed to by companies in China. 
He says he places his messages between the lines, where the Government cannot find them.
"My articles don't make the Government nervous because they don't focus on politics," he said with a laugh. 
"China's leaders are very stupid and can't understand my articles."
 
'Democratization Is Difficult'
Su Xiaokang, 41, a journalist and film maker, made the 1988 documentary "River Elegy," which questioned China's authoritarian tradition and encouraged the Government to open itself to the outside world. 
He is studying television in the United States with the goal of using the medium to change the Communist system.
"Democratization is difficult, and television is a strong tool," he said through an interpreter.
The scholars hope that by combining their different experiences, professions and ideas, they can figure out what has caused successive democracy movements to fail. 
Only by understanding the problem can the scholars solve it, they say.
But they are running out of time.
The donations that finance the Princeton program are expected to dry up in June, forcing the scholars to scatter. 
They will have to put earning a living before helping China, said Ruan Ming, 60, a political scientist and journalist who was expelled from the party because of his ideas.
The scholars have only now overcome the culture shock of living in the West and learned enough English to communicate their ideas, he said.
"We're finally at the stage where we can do things and the program is ready to be resolved," Mr. Ruan said. 
"There isn't enough time."
