
The People's Republic of China began celebrating its 42d anniversary tonight with an acknowledgment that the road to socialism is tortuous, but it pledged to keep going anyway.
"The glorious history of the People's Republic of China of the past 42 years has proved and will continue to prove that no difficulty can crush or cow the Chinese people," Prime Minister Li Peng declared, in a possible allusion to the collapse of Soviet Communism.
"No tempest will shake their determination to move along the path of building socialism under the leadership of the Communist Party of China."
Mr. Li spoke at a National Day reception in the Great Hall of the People. 
Outside, tens of thousands of Beijing citizens gathered around Tiananmen Square, gazing at festive decorations that included an enormous floral arrangement reading "Socialism Is Good."
National Day formally falls on Oct. 
1 -- the day in 1949 when Mao Zedong declared from the Tiananmen rostrum that the People's Republic had been formed and that "the Chinese people have stood up!"
-- but festivities customarily begin the previous evening.
The authorities have arranged for flags and banners to be put up throughout the capital, but the mood remains relatively somber among the public. 
Even in the Great Hall, the celebratory banquet was smaller than usual, with officials' saying that this was because of the disastrous flooding that hit eastern China this year. 
Apparently the leaders thought it inappropriate to overdo the banquet at a time when many people were still homeless from the floods.
For the first time in recent years, the authorities did not allow foreign journalists to mix with the banquet guests, possibly because correspondents in the past sometimes asked officials questions. 
The Government has been sharply critical of Western journalists recently and is following a growing number of them.
Mr. Li, in his speech tonight, pledged that China would "open our door even wider" to the outside world and "accelerate our pace of reform."
He also promised to "continue to carry out political restructuring."
But he did not provide any specifics, and he also said that China would "strengthen the function of dictatorship," presumably over those who oppose Communist Party rule. 
Apparently in an allusion to the party's disintegration in the Soviet Union, he said, "The road is tortuous, but the future is bright."
