
When people here lower their voices and speak frankly about politics, their suspicions and hostilities frequently focus on a sprightly 82-year-old man whose most important hour may not yet have arrived.
Sharing conspiracy theories is as much a pastime here as sipping tea, and President Yang Shangkun is at the center of many of the yarns spinning their way around Chinese dinner tables and foreign diplomatic cocktail parties.
In fact, many of the conspiracy theories seem to be based on erroneous information about the extent of President Yang's family connections, and some Chinese say the gossip vastly overstates the tensions between Mr. Yang and the nation's senior leader, Deng Xiaoping.
But there is a logic in the fascination with President Yang, for his health seems much better than Mr. Deng's, and he could well inherit paramount power after Mr. Deng dies. 
This is a possibility even though, two weeks ago, it was disclosed that Jiang Zemin, the party leader, was designated Mr. Deng's heir apparent.
Mr. Yang is vice chairman and secretary general of the Central Military Commission, and his grip on the army could give him a crucial edge in a power struggle. 
''Nobody trusts Yang,'' a Communist Party official said recently. 
''We think he is scheming to seize power, and trying to put all his relatives in the army.''
 
Diplomats Suspicious, Too
There is particular suspicion and uncertainty because major personnel shifts are said to be under negotiation in the army leadership. 
Mr. Deng is considering leaving his last official post, Chairman of the Military Commission, and Mr. Yang is one of the contenders to succeed him, although Defense Minister Qin Jiwei is believed to regard himself as a better choice.
Many foreign diplomats are just as suspicious of Mr. Yang as are the Chinese, and some go so far as to say that the President is part of a new ''gang of four'' conspiring to consolidate power just as the original gang sought power as Mao was dying 13 years ago. 
According to this theory, the other members of the gang are Prime Minister Li Peng, Li Ximing, the Beijing Communist Party leader, and Chen Xitong, the Mayor of Beijing.
President Yang is often regarded as one of the leaders responsible for the suppression of the democracy movement in June, partly because he summoned troops to Beijing. 
At the time, many Chinese and foreigners believed that he was mounting a coup against Mr. Deng, although that theory faded somewhat after Mr. Deng reappeared and reasserted himself shortly after the crackdown.
 
Relationship Is Disputed
The most common accusation against Mr. Yang is that he is building up a dynasty in the armed forces. 
Chi Haotian, the Chief of Staff, is often referred to as his son-in-law, while the head of the 27th Army - the army orinally believed responsible for most of the June bloodshed, although its role is now seen as less central - is often described as a nephew of the President named Yang Jianhua. 
In fact, some officials, even those with no sympathy for Mr. Yang, say Chi Haotian is definitely not Mr. Yang's son-in-law. 
And if there is such a person as Yang Jianhua, he is not commander of the 27th Army, officials say. 
The officials also say President Yang, who once saved Mr. Deng's life before the Communist Revolution, is so clearly beneath Mr. Deng in status that he would never seek the top position so long as Mr. Deng is alive.
The President is often regarded as a hard-liner, but many Chinese with access to high-level information say that is not quite right. 
One Chinese who knows Mr. Yang says he has the best sense of humor among the elderly leaders, and that he has generally backed the wing of the leadership supporting further change rather than the group favoring more central planning.
''Right now he's a reformer, backing Deng on everything,'' said another official. 
''Of course, after Deng goes, who knows what he'll do. 
His loyalty to Deng is personal, not based on policies.''
