
China warned today that it would "react strongly" if France or any other country sold jet fighters to Taiwan, but the French, the United States and possibly other Western nations seem to be quietly pushing ahead with military sales to the Chinese Nationalists.
Taiwan newspapers, including the semi-official Central Daily News, reported today that the authorities in Taipei, Taiwan's capital, signed a contract on Wednesday to purchase 60 Mirage 2000-5 fighters and 1,000 or more short- and medium-range missiles. 
French officials would not confirm the report, and by some accounts they plan not to make an announcement of the deal in hopes of lessening Beijing's anger.
Because China claims sovereignty over Taiwan, it has always denounced such weapons sales. 
But diplomats say that almost any measure the Beijing authorities could take would have repercussions at home, and whatever steps it takes against France, it might feel compelled to take, as well, against the United States.
Washington signed an agreement with Taiwan on Nov. 
11 to provide its air force with 150 F-16 jets, worth as much as $5.8 billion. 
The formal signing drew little attention, because it had been expected since Sept. 
2, when President Bush announced the sale during a campaign stop at a Fort Worth plant of the General Dynamics Corporation, the F-16's manufacturer.
The Chinese sharply criticized the United States at that time and suspended their participation in international talks on curbing arms sales. 
They also rejected a proposal to establish a two-nation human rights commission and have hinted at further action.
On Wednesday, Taiwan military officials reportedly signed contracts in Taipei with Dassault Aviation, the French company that manufactures the Mirage fighter, and Matra, another French concern, which makes missiles.
Wu Jianmin, the Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman, said today that Beijing had noted the Mirage sale reports. 
"We firmly oppose the sale of military weapons to Taiwan by any country," he said, "whether it does it openly or secretly, or whether it announces it or not. 
We strongly demand the French Government refrain from approving such a contract. 
If it ignores the strong opposition of the Chinese side and insists on having its own way, the Chinese side will react strongly."
He gave no indication of what retaliatory measures Beijing might take, but said, "China lives up to its word."
The United States office in Taipei today confirmed newspaper reports there that Washington is sending Carla A. Hills, the President's trade representative, to Taiwan for a conference early next month, the first official trip by a Cabinet-rank official since Washington broke diplomatic relations with Taipei more than a dozen years ago.
