
The son of the new Chinese Communist Party leader has spent the last three years as a graduate student in electrical engineering at Drexel University here.
The student, Jiang Mianhang, the son of Jiang Zemin, the new General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party, is characterized by the head of his department as ''a likable guy.''
But the younger Mr. Jiang prefers to keep out of the public eye in light of the recent events surrounding his father's appointment.
''I hope you will understand why I prefer not to comment,'' he said when contacted by phone at his West Philadelphia apartment near the Drexel campus. 
''My father is my father, and I am me.''
When asked to clarify that statement, he said, ''I believe it is self-explanatory.''
 
No Comment on Turmoil
Mr. Jiang said he liked Drexel and enjoyed being in the United States. 
He would not make any comment on the events of recent weeks in China or on the protests that have taken place in Philadelphia and the rest of the country.
''He is due his privacy,'' said a fellow Chinese graduate student who asked not to be identified. 
''It is difficult to say anything at all about Chinese politics for fear of what might happen to your family. 
I admire him for keeping his profile low, and even those who do not agree with his father respect his preference to stay far from the controversy.''
''He is a likable guy - everyone seems to like him a lot,'' said Dr. Bruce A. Eisenstein, head of the electrical and computer engineering department at Drexel. 
''He is a good student. 
He is well thought of in the department and does well in school. 
It was known to us through other sources about his father's position, but that had nothing to do with his admission in 1986.''
Dr. Thomas Canavan, Drexel's interim vice president for academic affairs, said: ''There has been no furor at all at Drexel about this. 
I really don't know how many students knew he was here and I'm sure most of the university administration had no knowledge of him.''
''He is a student in course and doing well,'' Dr. Canavan said. 
''At the time of his admission, I'm sure it was noted that his father was Mayor of Shanghai, but it would have created no special sensation. 
I believe it will create no special sensation now.''
 
Many Students From Asia
Dr. Eisenstein, the head of Mr. Jiang's department, said about 80 of the 110 full-time graduate students in his department were foreign, the great bulk of them from Asia. 
He said he had no firm count about how many others are from China.
Drexel also has 350 part-time graduate students and 1,400 undergraduates in the electrical and chemical engineering department, almost all of them Americans, Dr. Eisenstein said.
''Most Americans with undergraduate degrees in engineering are able to get high-paying jobs, so if they go to grad school it is usually part time,'' he said. 
''Foreigners like Jiang come to Drexel and the rest of the schools in America to do research work that they can't do at home.''
Dr. Eisenstein said that Mr. Jiang was doing research toward his Ph.D. this summer, but that he did not want to comment on the nature of the research.
