
Facing curbs on billions of dollars of its exports, China signed an accord with the United States today in which it agreed to remove a broad range of trade barriers to American goods, including computers, chemicals and cameras.
Under the agreement, China committed itself to eliminate a vast majority of the quotas, import-licensing restrictions and secret rules it has used to impede the imports.
United States officials said the accord was a major step toward transforming China into a nation that takes a more open approach to trade rather than rely on a dense web of restrictions to protect domestic industry. 
.
Senior officials signed the agreement just hours before Washington had said it would impose steep punitive tariffs on imports from China.
 
It's Good for Voters, U.S. 
Says
In language clearly aimed at voters, Administration officials said the agreement would create jobs and bring revenues to farm and factory alike.
"Today's successful conclusion provides American businesses, farmers and workers with unprecedented access to a rapidly growing market with 1.2 billion people," Michael H. Moskow, the Deputy United States Trade Representative, said at a news briefing.
Mr. Moskow said the accord would mean hundreds of millions of dollars in extra United States exports in the short term and billions more within several years. 
He said 75 percent of China's barriers against United States goods would be removed within two years, and the vast majority within five years.
American officials said the agreement could help keep China's trade surplus with the United States from soaring; it could rise to $17.5 billion this year, from $12.7 billion last year. 
China exported about $19 billion in goods to the United States last year, and that figure is expected to jump to $25 billion this year. 
American exports to China totaled $6.3 billion last year, and were expected to rise to $7.5 billion this year.
 
What Items Are Covered
Under the pact, China agreed to significantly reduce tariffs on machinery, chemicals, electrical parts, film products, candy, fruits and cosmetics. 
China also agreed to eliminate by next March 31 all restrictions on purchases of digital switching equipment made by American telecommunications manufacturers.
Today's agreement takes some pressure off of President Bush because Beijing had threatened to impose penalty duties on approximately $3.9 billion in American goods, including grain, aircraft and automobiles, if Washington had gone ahead with its penalties. 
China's imposition of such duties would have reduced export sales by United States businesses.
Mr. Moskow said that among the other products on which China had promised to lift restrictions were instant-print film, compressors, air-conditioners and photocopiers.
 
Health Restrictions
China also promised to impose sanitary restrictions against imports only if such rules had a scientific basis. 
American officials said this would help exports of wheat, citrus fruits, apples and grapes. 
Washington has often protested such restrictions as intended more to protect domestic industries than to safeguard health.
In a move that Beijing had long opposed, China also agreed that United States automobile manufacturers in joint ventures in China would be allowed to import components and kits, rather than having to make all those parts in China.
American officials indicated that they had made no major concessions.
They said that one of China's specific requests was that Washington review and eventually reduce its restrictions on high-tech goods that are considered to have strategic importance. 
Mr. Moskow said Washington agreed to such reviews, consistent with national security interests.
American officials said today's agreement was an important step toward China's joining the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. 
That group, which sets the rules for world trade, generally accepts nations as members only after they have adopted a fairly open trade rules.
