
China's leaders have a special dream for a patch of empty ground in northern Beijing: the hope that in September 2000, in a 100,000-seat stadium to be built on that spot, they will preside over the opening ceremonies of the Summer Olympic Games.
After months of preparations, the Chinese leadership formally announced its bid today to become the host of the 27th Olympiad. 
Prime Minister Li Peng said in a letter sent today to the International Olympic Committee that China would try "to make the 2000 Olympic Games a grand celebration in sports marking the advent of a new millennium with a better prospect of peace and friendship."
Politics, not sports, underlie the Government's enthusiasm. 
The Games would be an important opportunity to win back international respect after the 1989 crackdown on democracy protesters, and a chance to unite the Chinese people behind a patriotic cause.
The Olympics would also give the Government a chance to redirect the spotlight of foreign attention from human rights issues to its achievements in building prosperity and a smoothly functioning capital with clean streets, excellent hotels and clear telephones.
 
Decision Due in 1993
The decision on the site of the 2000 Olympics is to be made by the International Olympic Committee in September 1993, and already there are a half-dozen contenders in addition to Beijing: Berlin, Braslia, Istanbul, Manchester, Milan and Sydney.
"Each site has its advantages, so for all of us the starting line is the same," said Wu Zhongyuan, a member of the executive board of the Beijing 2000 Olympic Games Bid Committee. 
"The competition is very tough."
Mr. Wu spoke in an interview in the bid committee's bustling office in donated space in a second-grade Beijing hotel.
As Beijing's advantages, Mr. Wu cited the city's existing sports installations, including 33 sports grounds and 46 practice grounds, which he asserted provide a better base than any other contender. 
In addition, he appealed for sympathy for an ancient nation that is home to 22 percent of the world's population but has never been host to the Olympics.
