
The Central Committee of the Communist Party will meet next month to ratify a detailed policy of economic retrenchment that will last through 1991, Chinese officials and foreign diplomats say.
The meeting will also deal with the case of the ousted Communist Party General Secretary, Zhao Ziyang, officials say. 
While Mr. Zhao's fate has not been entirely decided by the small circle of Chinese leaders led by Deng Xiaoping, most people in the central party apparatus expect that Mr. Zhao will be vigorously denounced but will not face a criminal trial.
Although there has been no official announcement of the Central Committee meeting, officials and diplomats say that the agenda has been largely worked out and that officials are hammering out details of an economic plan to be approved at the meeting.
'Turning Point for China'
''This will be a very important meeting, because it comes at a turning point for China,'' an Eastern European diplomat said.
In the present environment of uncertainty and instability in China, with no clear political or economic direction, the meeting will be a closely watched indicator of who is in control and of what kind of policies are likely in the coming years.
The meeting will be the first by the Central Committee, which includes 174 full members and 110 alternates, since a session in late June that formally dismissed Mr. Zhao and elected a new set of leaders. 
Officially, the meeting will be called the Fifth Plenum of the 13th Communist Party Central Committee.
It will issue a ringing endorsement of the need for a continuation of China's open-door economic approach and other policies of change, Chinese officials say. 
But they add that aside from professions of reform, the main economic task will be approval of a detailed three-year retrenchment plan beginning this year and lasting through 1991.
While the retrenchment began a year ago and was expected to be maintained for several more years, the focus on consolidation instead of change is unlikely to raise confidence among foreign investors.
In part to reassure the world that China is maintaining its commitment to liberalization, some specific new changes are likely to be approved, officials say. 
Among them are price adjustments in some sectors, changes in the tax system and a realignment of the banking system.
''We think that reform and retrenchment are inseparable,'' said Liu Guoguang, the vice president of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences and one of the nation's most influential economists. 
''If we can't control inflation and the health of the economy, then we can't introduce new reforms, especially price reform.''
 
No Major Changes Seen
Mr. Liu, who is an alternate member of the Central Committee, said in the interview that he had no information about the meeting or what policies would be adopted, but he suggested that there would be no major changes introduced in the next few years.
''Right now we can't take a big step toward reform, because of the risk of inflation,'' Mr. Liu said. 
''During the period of adjustment, only small steps can be taken. 
Then afterward we can take bigger steps.''
The retrenchment program will stress the need to reduce inflation, control investment and consumer spending, and increase roads and bridges and energy production, officials say. 
The central Government will try to regain some power and funds from the provinces and local governments, and a new system of taxation or financial quotas from local authorities is likely to raise funds for the central Government.
The official Chinese-language newspaper Economic Information also suggested that the plan will involve some steps that most Western economists would regard as a retreat from the economic restructuring plan of the last decade. 
The newspaper said China would adjust the ratio of state companies to collective enterprises. 
This apparently means that the number of state-owned corporations will increase rather than diminish, as it has steadily in the last decade.
 
No Bank 'Commercialization'
The newspaper also said the Government would prevent the ''commercialization of banks,'' which seemed to mean that banks would be obliged to lend to state-owned companies instead of collectives, regardless of judgments about profitability and credit-worthiness.
It was not clear from the article if these elements would be formally announced at the meeting, or if they would simply take shape over the next few years.
Little real decision-making is expected during the meeting. 
The principal decisions will almost certainly have been made by the Politburo and by retired leaders well before the session opens.
A Western diplomat said the meeting was also likely to be significant as a benchmark and a signal that the latest wave of repression could be eased somewhat. 
He said he planned to try to make contact with his Chinese friends after the meeting for the first time since the democracy movement was crushed in early June.
There has been some speculation in Beijing, but no evidence, that Mr. Deng might use the meeting to announce his resignation from his last formal position, chairman of the Central Military Commission. 
Such an announcement, and in particular the decision about who would replace him, would be of enormous significance, but so far the talk seems to be more rumor than anything else.
