
In the most tangible sign so far that China is retreating from its decade-long commitment to sending students abroad, new restrictions will make it virtually impossible for most university graduates to study in other countries unless they work first for five years.
The rules, which had been anticipated since early this month, took effect on Feb. 
10. They have not yet been widely disseminated, although a copy was obtained here.
''If enforced as written, it's going to have a big impact,'' a Western diplomat in Beijing said. 
''There have been competent Chinese graduate students going to the U.S. that won't be going there anymore.''
But many experts, noting that Chinese students have been adept at evading previous restrictions, said much would depend on how the new restrictions are put into force. 
End to an Academic Exodus?
On their face, the regulations would considerably reduce the annual stream of about 12,000 students to the United States that had been one of the most remarkable aspects of China's former open-door policy.
The basic change in the new rules is a requirement that university graduates work for five years before they go abroad to study, although students with relatives overseas can pay for an exemption from the work requirement.
The regulations seem to be motivated by Government alarm over the large number of top students, educated essentially for no charge at China's best schools, who go overseas and fail to return to contribute to their country.
''It is a continuation of their concern over the brain drain,'' said Karen C. Stanton, consul at the United States Embassy in Beijing. 
''They are losing their best and their brightest, and the reality is that past efforts have failed to control this flood.''
Although Chinese officials agree that the policy is aimed mostly at preventing an exodus of top minds, the new rules come at a time when China is again emphasizing ideological devotion over professional ability in hiring and promotion.
 
Socialism's 'Gravediggers'
Chinese and Western officials say the authorities are also concerned by the support lent by students abroad to the democracy movement at home.
''The Government does not want to help educate the gravediggers of socialism,''a Chinese teacher said.
The document describing the new rules was circulated by the state Education Commission. 
It states that only students who have not yet reached their final year in a university, or students with Chinese relatives overseas, can win exemptions from the work requirement.
Students seeking the latter exemption must apply for identification papers from a provincial Government office indicating that they related to a Chinese person overseas.
''I think there are going to a lot of fake relatives,'' a Chinese intellectual said. 
''The authorities can't possibly check into everyone's background.''
Students eligible for the exemptions must pay for each of the years of university-level schooling they completed. 
Graduates must pay the equivalent of about $530 for each of their college years; students at the masters level, $850 per year, and students at the doctoral level, $1,275. 
If they return to China within eight years, their money will be refunded.
 
Few Can Afford Exemption Fees
Most students and their immediate families could not afford such fees, although some will be able to take advantage of loans from relatives abroad.
Several Western diplomats said the loopholes softened the impact of the rules. 
They noted that similar regulations were used in Eastern European and some Western countries. 
France, for example, has a work requirement for students educated at state universities.
''The pressure to go abroad is so strong, and it's on everyone's mind right now,'' a Western official said of China. 
''If they just stonewall, then the rules would be called restrictive and coercive, like the old policies before. 
They open a small hole so people won't say they're not reasonable.''
Consular offiials say they will be unable to gauge the effect of the rules on visa applications before May or June.
The new regulations were announced to university officials earlier this month, less than two weeks after President Bush vetoed a bill that would have relaxed visa restrictions on Chinese students in the United States.
Beijing's new rules, which apply to students applying on their own as opposed to scholars sponsored by the Government, appear to be part of an overall tightening of control over university students.
Students sponsoring themselves have been receiving an increasing proportion of visas for study in the United States. 
Their applications are multiplying more rapidly than those of Government-sponsored students, who will not be affected by the new rules.
