
The Government said today it had ordered the expulsion from China of a Hong Kong journalist who has been detained for a week on charges that she offered bribes for secret documents.
The journalist, Leung Wai-min, a 32-year-old reporter for The Hong Kong Express newspaper, was detained in the early hours of Oct. 
25 and kept incommunicado. 
She was not allowed visits from her husband or editor or from British Embassy officials.
China said that Ms. Leung would be forced to leave "within a limited period of time," but there was no indication she had been released. 
Her editors and her husband were unable to locate her and did not know her whereabouts.
By deciding to deport Ms. Leung, instead of putting her on trial, the Chinese authorities were apparently trying to calm anxieties in Hong Kong over the issue. 
Ms. Leung's detention underscored the prickly relations between the Chinese Government and the foreign press, and reminded Hong Kong journalists that they will be working under Communist rules after the territory reverts to China in 1997.
The official New China News Agency said Ms. Leung had bribed a Government employee into obtaining a "most confidential" document, a copy of which she then forwarded onto her Hong Kong headquarters.
On Oct. 
5, Ms. Leung's newspaper published the entire text of the keynote speech by the Communist Party leader, Jiang Zemin. 
The speech was delivered at an important Communist Party Congress that was held in mid-October.
The New China News Agency said Ms. Leung had destroyed her copy of the speech by burning parts of it in her hotel room bathroom, before discarding the remains in several trash cans on the streets. 
The dispatch added that Ms. Leung had obtained many secrets from the Government employee in exchange for a "large sum of money."
Patrick W. T. Wong, deputy editor at The Express newspaper, did not deny that Ms. Leung had obtained an advance copy of Mr. Jiang's speech. 
Asked if she had paid for a document, Mr. Wong said he had not seen her and so could not comment, but he added that his newspaper did not approve of paying money for information.
 
An Apparent Confession
National television this evening showed Ms. Leung, calm and steady, affixing her fingerprint to what appeared to be a signed 15-page confession. 
She was filmed answering several questions and then the camera displayed a bundle of money, suggesting that it had been found as evidence.
Until Ms. Leung is released, it will be impossible to confirm this account. 
Chinese Government versions of events have not always been noted for their accuracy.
The authorities say they treated her with leniency because she confessed to her crimes and was acting under the direction of her editor. 
The report said her editor had given an apology and promised that such a case would not happen again. 
The New China News Agency did not say what would happen to the two Chinese who obtained the document and provided it to her.
In May, Chinese State Security authorities searched the office of the Beijing-based reporter for The Washington Post, Lena H. Sun. They confiscated documents and issued a stern warning that she was involved in activities "incompatible with her status," but there have been no further repercussions.
