
China rejected American scrutiny of its family-planning programs today, saying it was a nation's sovereign right to determine its own population policy.
The comments by a Foreign Ministry spokesman, Li Zhaoxing, at a weekly news briefing were nominally directed at the United States Congress. 
But they also appeared to be intended to caution the Bush Administration, which will soon have to take a stand on whether the Chinese family-planning program includes forced abortions.
After reports that China's rigorous family-planning policy was resulting in female infanticide and forced abortion, Congress in 1985 approved a law requiring the Administration to determine annually whether the program includes forced abortion. 
If it does, aid to the United Nations Fund for Population Activities is halted on the ground that the agency is helping such policies.
The Reagan Administration concluded each year that the Chinese program included forced abortion, but the Bush Administration has so far not made a determination. 
In June the United States will have to decide whether to approve a new population plan for China when it is presented to the agency's governing council, to which the United States belongs.
 
Correcting the Overzealous
''It is a country's sovereign right to decide its own population policy,'' Mr. Li said. 
''China's population policy is formulated according to its own national conditions. 
China's pursuance of a family-planning policy that prevents excessive population growth and raises the quality of its population not only serves China's own development but also contributes to the population stabilityI and economic development of Asia and the world as a whole.''
Chinese officials acknowledge that in the past overzealous local supervisors compelled women to have abortions, but they say this has been corrected. 
Now many officials seem concerned that laxity in the last two years has resulted in a new population boom.
The official Chinese press reported today that despite the ''one family, one child'' policy, since 1980 the average Chinese couple has had 2.47 children.
