
China's Communist Party dismissed General Secretary Zhao Ziyang from all his posts today and named a new set of leaders who are likely to favor somewhat new directions in the nation's economic and political development.
The new leaders advocate economic relations with the outside world and aggressive economic development, but their past suggests that the emphasis will be on the planned economy rather than the market, and that they will be ready to crack down harshly on any sign of political protest.
The new Communist Party General Secretary is Jiang Zemin (pronounced jeeahng dzuh-meen), a 62-year-old engineer who has been Mayor and Communist Party leader in Shanghai in the last few years during efforts there to modernize the economic base of China's largest city.
 
Erudition but Not Fervor
A friend says that Mr. Jiang can recite passages from the American Declaration of Independence - in English - but that in Shanghai, he acted firmly to quell the pro-democracy movement.
The most important reason for choosing Mr. Jiang, according to Chinese familiar with high-level decision-making, was that China's elderly leaders believe he will improve the Communist Party's image and help rebuild the confidence of foreign business. 
They regard Mr. Jiang as being among the smarter officials in the Politburo, a cosmopolitan and well-educated politician.
Mr. Jiang speaks English, Russian and Rumanian and can read Japanese and French. 
He has met many foreign business executives, and his son is now studying in the United States. 
All of this has created for him a reputation for a certain dynamism among a leadership with the reputation of being dowdy, doddering and out of touch. 
A Wider Party Problem?
Nonetheless, diplomats and others suggested that the selection of Mr. Jiang may have been a sign of the leadership's being out of touch, if it believed him to be popular abroad. 
Mr. Jiang is generally credited with having done an acceptable but not outstanding job in Shanghai, and earlier this year he outraged many Chinese and foreigners by dismissing the most outspoken newspaper editor in the country.
The leadership reshuffle was approved today at a full meeting of the Chinese Communist Party Central Committee, but the decisions almost certainly were made earlier by the senior leader, Deng Xiaoping, in consultation with other elderly leaders.
The changes in the leadership announced today will reshape the highest level of decision-making, the Standing Committee of the party Politburo. 
Two members have been dismissed from what used to be a five-member panel and three new members have been appointed.
The dismissals, which had been expected, appear to end the careers of both Mr. Zhao and the propaganda chief, Hu Qili. 
Three new members have been appointed: Mr. Jiang; Li Ruihuan, a former carpenter who rose to become Mayor of the industrial city Tianjin, and Song Ping, a party official with long experience in economic planning.
The dismissal of Mr. Zhao, the second General Secretary to be ousted in two years, is another sign of the perils that Mr. Jiang will face. 
Since the Communist Party came to power in 1949, every party leader except Mao Zedong has been dismissed from the job. 
While Mr. Jiang had been a possibility mentioned for the position, he was not the front-runner, and it is not clear how much power he will really have so long as elderly leaders like Deng Xiaoping are alive.
''I don't think Jiang will be the real leader,'' a United States Government analyst said tonight. 
''He will be weaker than Zhao. 
Power doesn't come from the position one holds. 
It all depends on prestige, clout, personal connections and seniority, and Jiang doesn't seem to have much of these. 
He is a junior member of the Politburo, and has only been on it for less than two years.''
Neither Mr. Zhao nor Mr. Hu was widely liked or respected, at least until it became clear that they had been purged. 
But both were associated with the vigorous and sometimes carefree patterns of economic growth of the last decade.
Mr. Zhao worked early in his career in bustling Guangdong Province, and won fame for his economic experiments in relatively poor Sichuan Province, and he was comfortable relying on markets and small businesses to increase competitiveness in the economy.
Mr. Zhao also associated with some of the nation's most respected and iconoclastic economists and political scientists, and if he had remained in power, it is considered possible that he would have instituted major changes after Mr. Deng died. 
Instead, he has been disgraced, perhaps in part for favoring conciliation with student leaders but probably most for defying Mr. Deng on the issue and for using the difference of opinion to mount a bid for paramount power.
Mr. Zhao, who is 69 years old, is still a party member and could perhaps make a comeback in a few years. 
Mr. Deng, after all, was purged toward the end of the Cultural Revolution at the age of 71 and restored to power at age 74.
''There is a possibility of a comeback so long as he lives,'' an Asian diplomat said of Mr. Zhao tonight.
But his status is uncertain. 
No self-criticism has been announced, which suggests that he has refused so far to admit serious error despite weeks of strong pressure from the leadership. 
In addition, he was dismissed, suggesting that he refused to resign, which is probably how Mr. Deng would have preferred to handle the matter.
''At the critical juncture involving the destiny of the party and the state, Comrade Zhao Ziyang made the mistake of supporting the turmoil and the splitting of the party, and he had unshirkable responsibilities for the development of the turmoil,'' a statement approved by a full meeting of the party Central Committee said.
 
Unanimity in Question
The official media did not mention if the voting was unanimous, suggesting that there may have been some ''no'' votes. 
But Chinese television showed one vote that appeared to be unanimous, though it was not clear what the members were voting on.
The Central Committee statement said that the party would ''look further into his mistakes'' - which may be a warning that if Mr. Zhao complains, he will be expelled from the party or even face criminal charges.
In an apparent attempt to reassure the West, the statement said that China would maintain an open-door policy.
''The policy of reform and opening to the outside world, as the road to lead the country to strength and prosperity, must be implemented as usual in a steadfast manner,'' the party said. 
''The country must not return to the old, closed-door path.''
 
New Faces, Old Goals
But the party also outlined four major tasks for the future, and the first three of those were not calculated to reassure the West: first, quell the ''counterrevolutionary rebellion''; second, continue the economic retrenchment policy begun last year, and third, encourage ideological work and oppose ''bourgeois liberalization.''
The fourth was to improve the party image and punish corruption.
Mr. Jiang is friendly with China's former President, Li Xiannian, as well as with another senior figure, Chen Yun, and these connections must have helped him.
And he came to know a Politburo member, Wan Li, in the 1950's, when Mr. Wan was Deputy Mayor of Beijing and responsible for several major construction projects, including the Great Hall of the People. 
Mr. Li was a ''model worker'' and carpenter who took charge of the construction, which went extremely quickly.
Both men ran major industrial cities - Shanghai and Tianjin - and encouraged foreign investment and pragmatic economic policies to spur growth. 
In both cases, the emphasis was on industry and economic planning, perhaps because the foundation of the urban economies was already state-owned industry.
The final person to rise today is Ding Guangen, whose main fame is as Mr. Deng's regular bridge partner. 
Mr. Ding, who now is an alternate member of the Politburo, in addition to the 14 full members, is said to be an excellent bridge player whose friendship and access to Mr. Deng constitute a major political advantage. 
Mr. Ding was appointed today, along with Mayor Li, to a position in the Secretariat, which handles day-to-day matters of the party.
One man who did not rise, but who had been expected to, is Qiao Shi, the Politburo Standing Committee member in charge of security matters. 
Mr. Qiao had been the leading candidate to succeed Mr. Zhao as party leader, but instead there was no change in his position.
One account going around is that Mr. Qiao did not want the position, fearing that whoever took it would not last long. 
It is also possible that if the party wanted to refurbish its image, it did not want to elevate a man with close connections to the security agencies.
In addition to Mr. Zhao and Mr. Hu, two other men lost power. 
One is Rui Xingwen, an ally of Mr. Zhao who lost his job in the party Secretariat. 
The other is Yan Mingfu, a protege of Mr. Deng himself who had favored conciliation with the student demonstrators. 
Mr. Yan was also dropped from the Secretariat, but one account is that he has been depressed lately by the turn of events and himself chose to leave the post.
