
China and Vietnam have agreed on a broad outline for a Vietnamese troop withdrawal from Cambodia by the end of September, a Vietnamese diplomat here said today.
Several important aspects of the plan have yet to be decided, and rival Cambodian factions apparently still must reach some agreement among themselves. 
But the reported accord between Vietnam and China appears to bring Southeast Asia a step closer to resolution of one of its most persistent and bloody disputes, the one arising from the 10-year Vietnamese intervention in Cambodia.
The agreement came last week in meetings in Beijing between a Vietnamese First Deputy Foreign Minister, Dinh Nho Liem, and ranking officials of the Chinese Foreign Ministry. 
The visit had been intended to be secret, but officials on both sides later confirmed that it had taken place without detailing the nature of the talks.
The Vietnamese diplomat, who asked not to be identified by name, said that the two sides had agreed that all countries should steadily reduce their support to Cambodian guerrilla groups. 
Such aid would completely end in September when Vietnam completes its troop withdrawal.
 
'International Body' Urged
That would mean that China would stop its support for the Khmer Rouge, militarily the strongest of three groups fighting against the Vietnamese-backed Government in Cambodia.
Prime Minister Li Peng of China and his Foreign Minister, Qian Qichen, had previously indicated that aid to Cambodian factions could be reduced during Vietnam's troop pullout. 
But the agreement appears to go further than previous comments in guaranteeing that as Vietnam withdraws, China will cut off its support to the Khmer Rouge.
Chinese officials had refused to discuss the content of last week's talks about Cambodia.
In addition, the Vietnamese diplomat said China and Vietnam had agreed that ''an international body'' should be sent to Cambodia to serve three purposes: monitor Vietnam's troop withdrawal, insure that other countries stop their support of opposition factions and supervise the selection of a new Government.
In Washington, the State Department said it had no independent confirmation and noted that it came from ''diplomats,'' not official statements by China or Vietnam. 
Charles E. Redman, the State Department spokesman, said the United States was encouraged by the ''very intensive level of diplomatic activity'' surrounding Cambodia, but he would not comment on the report from Beijing.
