
Less than a year and a half after China's leaders sent tanks and machine guns to crush the Tiananmen democracy movement, Western sanctions are being dismantled and China is regaining status in the international community.
Japan is resuming subsidized loans to China. 
The European Community last month lifted economic sanctions against China. 
A group of American Congressmen is expected in Beijing this month for the first time since the crackdown. 
Countries like Saudi Arabia and Singapore have in the last few months established diplomatic relations with Beijing.
"China has withstood the international anti-socialist environment and safeguarded the socialist system," crowed the official New China News Agency.
While most of the world has suffered from the gulf crisis, China has been a beneficiary. 
Scholars, diplomats and Chinese themselves say China benefited in two ways: Saddam Hussein's behavior gave the West a new enemy and China won gratitude for its cooperation in imposing sanctions against Iraq.
 
'Best of All Worlds'
"The gulf crisis accelerated a process that was already under way, of them waiting us out," said a Western diplomat in Beijing. 
"It's the best of all worlds for them, because they'be been able to reintegrate themselves with the West without sacrificing any third world credentials to do it."
Yet there are signs that over all China is a loser in the geopolitical reordering that has accompanied the end of the cold war. 
China has lost the leverage it had in playing the Soviet Union and the United States against each other, and its leaders may also be at a disadvantage in an environment in which nuclear weapons matter less than economic strength.
"People don't pay much attention to China any more," a European ambassador said the other day. 
Most experts agree that China matters less than it used to -- a proposition that drives some Government officials here to alternate between despair and fury. 
Visiting Americans these days are sometimes greeted with almost obsessive explanations of why China is still of fundamental importance to American interests.
 
Never Much of a Threat
The West's sanctions were never threatening to China in any fundamental sense. 
The sanctions included delays in new World Bank loans, a freeze on most military cooperation, and a halt to most high-level exchanges. 
Ordinary imports from China were never curbed, and in fact they have risen sharply: China's trade surplus with the United States could exceed $10 billion this year, up from $3.5 billion in 1988, before the crackdown.
Military cooperation remains on ice, but World Bank loans are gradually being resumed, and high-level exchanges are increasing. 
Zhu Rongji, Shanghai's mayor, visited the United States this summer; Wan Li, the head of China's legislature, will tour Great Britain this month; and Wu Xueqian, a politburo member, is leaving in a few days for Tokyo.
"The pace is very slow, but I can see that the direction is toward improvement in relations" with the West, said Yuan Ming, an international relations expert at Beijing University.
In any case, sanctions affected China's relations with only a relatively small number of countries. 
Most of China's neighbors were uncritical of its behavior and continued to do business with China as before.
In some respects, China now has broader international support than ever: Saudi Arabia and Singapore have newly established diplomatic relations with China, while Indonesia has resumed ties. 
South Korea will open an office in Beijing very soon, and would like to establish diplomatic relations.
"We were never so upset about the crackdown," said a diplomat from an Asian country that has its own human rights problems. 
"It's their business."
 
Communist Legitimacy Eroded
This is not to say that the crackdown on the democracy movement was painless, for the killings of peaceful protesters deeply eroded the Communist Party's legitimacy at home and among Chinese overseas as well as in the West. 
But some Chinese officials say the hard-liners probably regard the foreign sanctions as an acceptable price to pay, given that their alternative may have been loss of power. 
The price may be acceptable even if, as many believe, the Government's relations with the West will never again be as warm as before.
"Things will return to business as usual, but that emotional enthusiasm for China won't come back any time soon," a Western diplomat said.
One reason is that while the Bush Administration is gratified by China's cooperation in the Security Council, China's critics are less impressed. 
Their quarrel with Beijing was not about diplomacy, but about human rights, and they see no fundamental easing of the domestic repression.
While the Bush Administration is expected to favor further dismantling of sanctions, Congress may have other ideas. 
John T. Kamm, president of the American Chamber of Commerce in Hong Kong, expects Congress to make a new attempt next year to end China's Most Favored Nation status. 
He also is bracing for an effort to establish a code of conduct for American corporations dealing with China.
"We may well find ourselves in a position where Japan and the European Community are lifting sanctions, and we're adding sanctions," Mr. Kamm said.
 
Mutual Resentment and Suspicion
China wants a resumption of cooperation with the West, but it is wary that too much interaction might again lead to unrest. 
The resentments and suspicions are mutual and may slow the reconciliation on both sides.
A classified Communist Party document, obtained from a well-connected Chinese in Beijing, conveys these apprehensions. 
The document, an analysis of international affairs published at the end of last year by the Central Committee Propoganda Department, warns that "the struggle between the two systems" will be prolonged and intense.
"Since the appearance of the first socialist state in 1917, this kind of struggle has never ceased," the analysis reads. 
"It only varies in its form, intensity and the tactics employed. 
Now the struggle has entered a new stage, and the struggle will be sharper, more complex and more intense than before. 
We must be highly vigilant."
While most nations are celebrating the end of the cold war, China has been saying, even before the invasion of Kuwait, that the new environment is not so wonderful after all.
 
Emerging Regional Powers
One difficulty for China is that a multipolar world is likely to see the emergence of new regional powers including Japan, South Korea, Vietnam, India and Indonesia. 
China has had wars or bitter disputes with each of these countries in recent decades.
"They've always hailed, in theory, the emergence of a more multipolar world," said Harry Harding, a China scholar at the Brookings Institution in Washington. 
"But now that it's finally happening, the problem for China is that its relations with many of these emerging poles are rather strained."
Chinese leaders are most anxious about the rise of Japan, which they remember fighting in the 1930's and 1940's, and they often regard Americans as naive in playing down Japan as a military and strategic threat. 
Some Chinese are even warning that the Soviet Union and Japan could form a threatening alliance in the Pacific, creating a reason for cooperation between the United States and China.
China has clearly lost leverage in that it can no longer play the United States and the Soviet Union against each other. 
But Mr. Harding says that in a larger sense China has fewer cards to play in a world in which money increasingly seems to matter more than guns.
