
China significantly raised the stakes today in its dispute with Britain over Hong Kong by declaring that all contracts signed by the territorial Government and not approved by Beijing will become invalid when London ends its rule there in 1997.
The Hong Kong Government responded immediately that the declaration violated the Chinese-British Joint Declaration of 1984 and the Basic Law, the documents that govern the transition period and guarantee economic and political freedoms to the territory for 50 years.
"According to the Basic Law, contracts which are valid under Hong Kong's existing laws will continue to be valid and recognized and protected by the Hong Kong special administrative region, provided that they do not contravene the Basic Law," the Hong Kong Government said in a written statement.
It was the first substantial step taken by China to retaliate against British plans to bring greater democracy to Hong Kong, plans that Beijing says violate the agreements it signed with Britain. 
But China's international standing and credit-worthiness could be reduced if its retaliatory steps are widely construed as violating the agreements.
 
Confusion and Concern
Even if the announcement does not derail the plans for a peaceful transfer of control over the territory, it is certain to cause confusion and grave concern among a wide variety of local and international companies that do business with the territorial Government. 
The Hong Kong Government has signed thousands of contracts that could be affected.
"The implications could be very broad," said an American businessman in Hong Kong who refused to be identified. 
"If you've done business with the Hong Kong Government, which is itself a large contractor, you have to ask yourself: What is the validity of that contract?"
By undermining Hong Kong's authority to issue contracts extending beyond 1997, the Beijing statement seemed particularly intended to prevent Britain from continuing its efforts to build a new airport and a new container port in the territory.
The Hong Kong Government recently announced that it would pursue plans to build a new airport even if China did not give its final approval to the proposed financing arrangements, and the Hong Kong legislature approved an initial allocation of funds last week by a narrow margin.
"It's horrific," Emily Lau, a Hong Kong legislator, said of the Beijing move in a telephone interview. 
"They're intimidating the Hong Kong people. 
They're trying to bring Hong Kong to its knees. 
They will resort to anything."
The Chinese announcement was made after the Hong Kong stock exchange was closed for trading today. 
The stock market index lost 2.9 percent of its value today in reaction to a far more limited Chinese threat made on Friday -- that it might not honor contracts relating to the new container port.
Today's statement said: "According to the Sino-British joint declaration, Britain's administrative power over Hong Kong will terminate on June 30, 1997, and it will then have no right to handle any affairs after the date. 
Accordingly, all contracts, leases and agreements signed or ratified by the Hong Kong British government will be valid until June 30, 1997."
The statement added that aside from certain land leases, "other contracts, leases and agreements signed and ratified by the Hong Kong British Government which are not approved by the Chinese side will be invalid after June 30, 1997."
Beijing said it would "take a positive attitude in examining and approving contracts, leases and agreements after June 30, 1997."
Today's announcement reflects the extreme irritation that China feels toward new British proposals to make the territory a bit more democratic, coupled with Britain's increasing willingness to make decisions about Hong Kong without Beijing's approval. 
Since the new Hong Kong Governor, Christopher Patten, took office in July, Britain has taken a much more confrontational approach in dealing with China.
Mr. Patten proposed in October that election rules be changed to expand the number of people who can vote for legislative seats representing Hong Kong industries. 
China disagrees with the proposal and is infuriated that it has not been given a veto over the changes.
