
A former student leader from China who defected to the United States in April revealed the existence of an underground human-rights organization yesterday. 
He said it operates through groups in cities throughout China.
The former student leader, Tang Boqiao, overseas spokesman for the group, asserted that it had several hundred members, mostly former students who took part in the 1989 pro-democracy movement, were imprisoned, and have since been released. 
It was impossible to verify the size of the organization.
Mr. Tang said at a news conference in Washington that the group, the All-China People's Autonomous Federation, had been able to circulate thousands of copies of underground publications and had printed its own constitution.
Chinese authorities have successfully suppressed nearly all anti-Government activity since the student-led democracy movement was crushed in June 1989. 
And while student leaders have spoken privately about various underground groups since late 1989, they have until now resisted discussing them openly for fear of discovery by Chinese law-enforcement agencies.
Mr. Tang said in an interview that his group had decided to reveal itself because the number and size of independent groups that make up the federation have grown in recent months, and because Han Dongfang, Hou Xiaotian and other dissents have been increasingly able to speak out. 
His announcement was also timed, in part, to coincide with the third anniversary of the crackdown in June 4, 1989.
"We are trying to create a little breathing room," Mr. Tang said of the group's efforts to speak and publish freely. 
"This is a first step."
But he would not reveal any names or locations of groups within the federation, saying they would try to operate openly at a later date.
While Mr. Tang's reluctance to reveal specific members of his group made it impossible to verify his assertion that it operates in 22 of mainland China's 29 provinces, Robin Munro, who co-wrote a recent human-rights report with Mr. Tang, said the group was extensive and well-organized. 
Mr. Munro is a research associate with Asia Watch, a division of Human Rights Watch, based in New York.
