
Stiffening resistance to American efforts to free the dissident Fang Lizhi, China has made new demands on the United States in discussing terms for his release, American officials said today.
The United States tried again recently to arrange the release of Mr. Fang, who has taken refuge at the American Embassy in Beijing, but China still refuses to let him leave the country, the officials said.
Indeed, they said, after the United States met one of China's original conditions for Mr. Fang's release, allowing the resumption of some World Bank loans, China issued another demand: that the United States resume exports of military goods and high-technology products to China.
State Department and White House officials said they saw no prospect that Mr. Fang would leave the Embassy in the near future because Chinese authorities were tightening their political control over the country to prevent protests and demonstrations as several important anniversaries approach.
'He Is Not Isolated'
Chinese authorities have demanded that Mr. Fang write an ''admission of guilt,'' acknowledging that he helped organize the demonstrations in Tiananmen Square in May and June last year. 
American officials said Mr. Fang was unlikely to admit guilt now after having railed against the Chinese Communist Party, complaining of arbitrary, dictatorial rule, corruption and nepotism for several decades.
Mr. Fang, an astrophysicist, continues his work and study at the American Embassy and is able to correspond with scientists all over the world, Administration officials said. 
''He is not isolated,'' one official said.
Another American official said of the Chinese: ''It's in their interest to resolve the case, to regain the confidence of intellectuals in China, to gain the respect of the world community, to revitalize scientific exchanges with the outside world and to improve bilateral relations with the United States.''
A program assistant at the National Academy of Sciences, Derek S. Wilson, said the Academy suspended scholarly exchanges with China after the Tiananmen Square crackdown. 
Most of the programs are still suspended, although the Academy has sent several social scientists back to China in the last few months, he said. 
Chinese Deported by U.S. 
On a separate matter, Administration officials confirmed today that President Bush had not issued an executive order to protect Chinese students in the United States, even though he says repeatedly that he has issued such an order.
Administration officials said the difference between an executive order and the President's action was one of semantics, not policy.
The term ''executive order'' refers specifically to a Presidential proclamation with the force of law published in the Federal Register. 
On Nov. 
30, when he vetoed a bill to allow Chinese students to remain in the United States, Mr. Bush said he had directed the Attorney General to ''insure that no nationals from the People's Republic of China be deported against their will.''
Mr. Bush's directive has not been published in the Federal Register, does not have the force of law, can be changed without public notice and protects only those Chinese who were ''present in the United States on June 5, 1989.''
Chinese who took part in the Tiananmen Square demonstrations in early June were obviously not in the United States at that time. 
Immigration lawyers said the Immigration and Naturalization Service had arrested, detained and deported some Chinese who supported the student demonstrators, came to the United States and sought political asylum after June 5.
 
Assertions on Executive Order
Representative Nancy Pelosi, Democrat of California, the author of the bill vetoed by Mr. Bush, said he should issue a formal executive order if he truly has no intention of sending Chinese students back to China.
In a television interview broadcast by NBC News on Feb. 
28, Mr. Bush bristled at criticism of his China policy. 
''I put into effect an executive order that's broader than the legislation that was so touted,'' he said.
Likewise, in a news conference on March 13, Mr. Bush said, ''The approach I took, accomplishing something by executive order that the Congress wanted to do dramatically later on through legislation, was the proper approach.''
In a handwritten letter to Senator Connie Mack, Republican of Florida, on Jan. 
24, Mr. Bush said, ''The executive order, in my view, protects the Presidency and does better by the students.''
But White House and State Department officials confirmed that Mr. Bush had not issued an executive order. 
Asked why the President continually boasted of having issued an executive order, Douglas A. Davidson, a White House spokesman, said: ''He is the executive, and he ordered it. 
These distinctions are semantic. 
It has the same effect. 
It doesn't really matter how it's done, by a Presidential memorandum, directive or executive order.''
