
This is the ''other China,'' a land of poor peasants and occasional smokestacks, where for some households upward mobility means nothing more grand than moving out of their cave and into a house.
As China develops, the caves are giving way to brick or mud homes, and most people in northwestern China have basic clothing and enough food to eat. 
But there is still none of the sense of economic vibrancy and rapid change that permeates the coastal areas of southeast China.
The peasants here in Gansu Province earn an average of just $100 a year, the lowest of any province in China. 
Their basic needs have mostly been met, but economists and other analysts say that the people of Gansu have probably benefited less than other Chinese from the restructuring of the last decade.
''In recent years, the country has had a policy of regional favoritism,'' said Chai Zhuqing, an official of the provincial planning commission. 
''The coastal areas developed very quickly, with the help of the state and foreign investors. 
But we're in the hinterland, with long distances to transport goods.''
A recent survey suggested that the gap between China's rich and poor areas is continuing to grow. 
In the first half of this year, the survey found, per capita incomes of peasants were $49 higher than a year earlier in southern Guangdong Province, the wealthiest part of the country. 
In the poorest parts, like Gansu and Tibet, incomes grew by just $5, compared with those of a year earlier.
''The gaps have increased and I can't see that trend changing anytime soon,'' Nicholas Lardy, a China scholar at the University of Washington, said in a telephone interview. 
Professor Lardy said that the central government is no longer redistributing resources among regions the way it once did, and that this will limit Gansu's ability to bridge the gap.
Under Mao, China's economic planners milked rich areas such as Shanghai for the benefit of other parts of the country. 
The planners also tried to build up the industrial capacity of the interior, partly for national security reasons, so that the country could continue to produce if it were attacked.
Even so, China's industry is geographically lopsided. 
Of the nation's 500 largest industrial enterprises, 111 are either in Shanghai or in northeastern Liaoning Province, while only 25 are in the six provinces and autonomous regions of China's west.
The Government in recent months has expressed increased concern about the plight of the hinterland, and there is no longer as much conviction as there used to be that some areas should get rich first and then spread the wealth to the interior. 
But there is still not much of an economic strategy for China's interior.
''Opening the door on the northwest frontier'' read the headline of a front-page editorial in the semi-official China Economic News last month, but the article contained few specific ideas for how to develop the frontier. 
While rich in mineral resources, the northwest lacks the entrepreneurial tradition of coastal areas, as well as their wealth of overseas relatives and other links.
The People's Daily and other official publications have recently called for developing overland trade with other Asian countries and even rebuilding a ''land bridge'' to Europe. 
This revived form of the old Silk Route will take shape around the end of next year when China completes a rail link across its northwestern border with the Soviet rail system.
Officials here in Gansu Province are optimistic that the rail link will allow them to export their products to European ports, so that Gansu too can participate in the opening to the outside world that has left the coastal region so flush with wealth.
Much of China is now alarmed at the prospect of recession, because of an economic retrenchment, but Gansu seems less worried. 
In September, industrial production in the province was 8 percent higher than a year earlier, while in cities such as Shanghai production actually fell. 
Officials note that the local economy was never particularly overheated, so the slowdown will not be very painful.
