
The police arrested several Chinese today as they tried to mark the third anniversary of the army's attack on democracy demonstrators in Tiananmen Square, and detained and roughed up foreign journalists covering the incident.
The police detained seven foreign journalists for about three hours, and beat up a Tokyo Broadcasting System television cameraman who had been trying to film plainclothes policemen on the square. 
The cameraman, Atsushi Yamagiwa, was reportedly knocked to the ground and kicked before being taken away bleeding.
An hour earlier, a Chinese man named Wang Wanxin was dragged away after he tried to unfurl a banner calling on Deng Xiaoping, China's senior leader, to apologize for the 1989 army crackdown in which hundreds were killed and thousands wounded. 
It is unclear what happened to Mr. Wang, who is said to be in his 40's.
Foreign reporters who were present at the detention of Mr. Wang and the beating of Mr. Yamagiwa were detained and their film was exposed. 
Among those detained were jounalists from the United States, Canada, Germany and Japan. 
The police punched and kicked several of the reporters before taking them away.
In 1989, the army attack on the student protesters began late at night on June 3 and continued for most of June 4. 
The attack is widely known in Chinese as the June 4 incident.
A new sign in the center of Tiananmen Square warns visitors not to lay mourning wreaths, unless the authorities have given approval five days in advance. 
The sign also forbids laughing and joking in the vicinity.
The authorities have warned dissidents and others not to cause trouble on the anniversary, and security has been stepped up throughout the capital.
One unusual precautionary measure was taken at Beijing University, which in the years since the crackdown has seen some unrest on the June 4 anniversary. 
In an effort to reduce the availability of glass to smash, a common gesture of protest for some students, bottle-collectors were sent around the dormitories, offering to pay about four cents per glass bottle.
The Foreign Ministry expressed appreciation of President Bush's announcement on Tuesday that he was recommending unconditional renewal of low-tariff trade benefits for China.
"The Chinese Government appreciates this realistic and wise decision of President Bush," a Foreign Ministry spokesman said. 
A spokesman for the Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations and Trade also expressed appreciation of Mr. Bush's recommendation to extend most-favored-nation trade benefits, but said the annual debate over the issue in Congress made the Chinese authorities "uncomfortable."
The spokesman called on Washington to come up with a "more efficient" way of providing low-tariff trade.
The Government also said that it would now allow Dai Qing, a journalist who this year is holding a fellowship at Harvard University, to return to visit her family in Beijing. 
On Saturday, Ms. Dai, who is 50 years old and is often critical of the Government, was refused permission to board a plane in Hong Kong for Beijing. 
She now has a ticket to fly to Beijing on Sunday.
Another Chinese living in the United States, Gong Xiaoxia, was also recently refused entry to China because of her political views. 
It is unclear if she will now be allowed to return.
