
The Chinese rebuff to Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d over human rights and arms sales last weekend drew little initial criticism in Congress tonight and appeared unlikely to spur action on legislation to limit China's trading status.
President Bush said of the trip: "I think it was worthwile. 
I think when all of it's out, I think people will think some progress is made."
He declined to disclose details of Mr. Baker's successes, and said, "Now we sit down and figure out what's the next step."
Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine, the majority leader and the chief Senate sponsor of legislation to make China's most-favored-nation trading status contingent on changes in human rights, trade and arms-sale policies, told reporters he would await details from the State Department before responding.
But Nancy Pelosi, the California Democrat who led the House effort on similar legislation, said in an interview that the visit provided additional evidence of the "failure of the Bush China policy."
She said Mr. Baker tried hard but did not succeed because China "did not take seriously any messages from the United States because the President wasn't a part of them."
Senator Claiborne Pell, the Rhode Island Democrat who heads the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, said in a statement, "I know Secretary Baker has been working immensely hard and am sorry the results so far are disappointing to him and to all of us concerned about U.S. relations with China."
Mr. Mitchell's bill was passed by the Senate on July 23. 
But the 55-to-44 vote was so far short of the two-thirds needed to override a threatened veto that no House-Senate conference has yet been held to reconcile differences with the Pelosi bill. 
That measure was adopted on July 10 by a vote of 313-112, easily a veto-proof margin, but the Senate total was 12 votes short of the 67 needed when all Senators vote.
The conferees may meet this week, but Congressional aides said it was unlikely that a conference agreement would come to the floor before Congress adjourns for the year, which it hopes to do next week. 
But there are likely to be floor speeches in the Senate on Tuesday criticizing Chinese policies on arms and human rights.
But today there was evident reluctance in the Senate to attack the Baker mission because of a sense that he had pressed the Chinese for change in the areas that Congress was most concerned about.
Representative Pelosi was more aggressive. 
She said it was "ridiculous" for China to demand concessions in the form of computer and satellite export licenses as the price of a commitment not to export missiles to Syria, Pakistan and other countries.
Her bill would end most-favored-nation trade status next year unless the President certified China had made "significant overall progress" in human rights, religious and press freedom and prison conditions. 
The bill would also require China to end coercive abortion or sterilization, assure the United States it was not exporting ballistic missiles to the Middle East or spreading nuclear technology, and end the export to the United States of products produced by prison labor.
Mr. Mitchell's bill covers similar ground, but does not give Mr. Bush as much of an opportunity to clear China by certifying that progress is being made, as the Pelosi bill does.
On Friday, while Mr. Baker was in China, the Senate passed another resolution condemning China's human rights policies. 
It specifically complained about the case of Dai Qing, a journalist awarded a Nieman Fellowship at Harvard University, but denied a passport to use the fellowship.
Ms. Dai, who was detained during Mr. Baker's visit and prevented from meeting him, was praised in the Senate as courageous. 
The resolution, passed without debate, called on President Bush to tell Beijing of "the urgent concern of the Congress and the citizens of the United States for the rights of all political prisoners in China and urge the Government of the People's Republic of China to recognize the right of Dai Qing and all Chinse writers to free expression and travel."
