
China's Communist Party Central Committee concluded a major six-day meeting today, after approving a moderate, cautious new blueprint for the 1990's and warning that the next decade could determine the rise or fall of the nation's Communist system.
At the long-awaited meeting, the Central Committee formally approved the five-year plan that is supposed to govern the economy from 1991 to 1995 as well as a broader 10-year "program" for the 1990's. 
No specific measures or targets were disclosed today, but the party leaders issued a communique acknowleging that the Central Committee had held the meeting and mentioning some elements of the economic plans.
The communique cautioned against rapid economic growth and emphasized the need to raise efficiency and improve the nation's industrial structure.
Chinese officials and economists had said earlier that the conclusions of the meeting would reflect the compromises struck between the various leadership factions -- in particular, between provincial and central leaders and between hard-liners and liberals. 
The communique showed little sign of the conflicts between those groups, but its remarkable vagueness suggested that no single faction had dominated the blueprints.
 
Over 500 Leaders Attend
National television showed the party General Secretary, Jiang Zemin, dressed in a dark Mao-style jacket, giving a speech, as the party's Politburo members sat somberly beside him on the rostrum. 
The meeting included 171 Central Committee members, plus 107 alternate members and about 300 other Chinese leaders, according to the official New China News Agency.
"Success or failure in our efforts in the 1990's to consolidate and develop the achievements made in the 1980's and to greatly promote economic growth and social progress will have a direct bearing on the rise or fall of China's socialist system and the future and destiny of the Chinese nation," the communique said, as issued by the press agency.
In a later passage, it apparently alluded to the collapse of Communist systems in Eastern Europe, saying, "In the face of a complicated and ever-changing international stituation, it is crucial that we manage our domestic affairs well."
The leaders called for self-reliance, but also endorsed the policy of economic openness. 
They only briefly mentioned specific areas of economic restructuring, like prices, taxes, labor and enterprise. 
It also suggested that Chinese leaders did not want to repeat the economic mishaps, including inflation and economic overheating, that accompanied high growth during the last five years; they contributed to the pro-democracy demonstrations in May and June of 1989.
 
Zhao's Fate Not Mentioned
The document did not mention the fate of the former Communist Party General Secretary, Zhao Ziyang, who was ousted during the Tiananmen Square crackdown more than 18 months ago. 
Mr. Zhao has been said to be under investigaton, and the party, at least publicly, has still not made any formal determination of his role during the democracy movement.
No changes in the leadership were announced, and the party did not appear to expand the 14-member Politburo, on which three seats have been vacant since the crackdown.
The document gave no target economic growth rate, but the official press has said the economy should grow at about 6 percent annually in the next few years. 
This is dramatically slower than the previous decade's average annual growth, which was about 10 percent.
 
Splits With Local Authorities
According to Chinese economists and officials, the meeting had been delayed until now because of serious disagreements between the central Government and the provincial governors over the degree of regional autonomy and taxes that the provinces must hand over to Beijing. 
Because of severe fiscal deficits, central leaders had been seeking higher taxes from the provinces and greater influence over local markets, but the governors reportedly rejected earlier versions that they felt would have been too onerous.
One characterstic of the last decade had been the devolution of authority from Beijing to the localities, in an effort to raise economic incentives and spur the economy. 
In contrast, the new five-year blueprint includes an attempt by central leaders to take back some of that power. 
Officials have said the plan will give the central Government greater power but not quite as much as it had sought.
China's leaders also hope to spur ailing state enterprises -- one third of them are losing money -- and preserve the household responsibility system that allows individual farming.
