
China imposed martial law in the Tibetan capital on Tuesday, and thousands of soldiers were reportedly deployed throughout the city early today to begin a crackdown after three days of violent protests against Chinese rule.
The nationally televised nightly news announced the imposition of martial law Tuesday evening, saying the Government in the capital, Lhasa, had been authorized to take ''any measures necessary to restore order.''
''Any person who defies martial law or who instigates others to do so will be severely punished,'' said the order, approved by the State Council, China's cabinet, and signed by Prime Minister Li Peng. 
[Experts on Tibet say the anti-Chinese unrest is the most serious challenge to Beijing's rule since a bloody uprising 30 years ago. 
Page A11.] The official New China News Agency said martial law had been imposed because ''separatists have been constantly causing disturbances in the city over the past few days.''
Since Sunday, at least 12 people have been killed and more than 100 wounded in clashes between protesters and the police, according to official accounts. 
Unofficial accounts say the toll is much higher.
The press agency said the city and parts of two adjoining counties would be ''cordoned off'' and ''all meetings, parades, strikes, petitions and any other gathering are banned.''
The order also gave security forces vast powers to stop vehicles and pedestrians in the city of 70,000 people.
An American tourist in Lhasa, reached by telephone from Beijing, said that at midnight Tuesday, jeeps carrying loudspeakers ordered residents to stay inside and informed them that martial law had begun.
Soon thereafter, 31 trucks carrying Chinese soldiers sped into the city, said the American.
The soldiers were deployed at ''designated places,'' the press agency said early today.
Earlier Tuesday, Tibetan protesters attacked Chinese, ransacked their stores and stoned government buildings as part of demonstrations calling for an end to Chinese rule.
Until the soldiers arrived, the police had been trying to keep order, clearing the streets and threatening to shoot anyone found in the central square.
''There's a lot of sirens going and a lot of troop movement outside,'' said the American, who spoke on condition that he not be identified, citing the fear of reprisal by the police. 
''I can hear soldiers pounding on doors,'' he added.
The order declaring martial law said that no foreigners would be allowed to enter Lhasa without permission, and those in the area without permission were required to leave. 
The American, who said he had not been informed of the rule, estimated that there were about 80 foreigners in Lhasa.
 
Unofficial Account of 75 Dead
On Sunday and Monday, clashes between the police and Tibetans left 11 Tibetans and one Chinese policeman dead, along with 100 wounded, official reports said.
No new deaths were reported on Tuesday, but Westerners quoted Tibetans as saying that as many as 75 people had been killed and 300 wounded in the three days of protests.
Two groups of about 100 Tibetans marched Tuesday near the main square and on Beijing Road, the main thoroughfare. 
The police then cleared the streets, threatening to shoot anyone, the American said. 
Sounds of gunfire crackled in the afternoon, but by nightfall, he added, Tibetans began to venture outside again.
