
The director of a research institute here made a novel proposal the other day: he suggested that full professors receive the same salary as waitresses at the nearby Shangri-La Hotel.
There is little chance that the Government will approve the proposal, which would involve huge pay increases for the professors. 
But his idea underscores the humble circumstances of teachers in China, contributing to what is widely perceived today as a crisis in education.
At the annual session of the National People's Congress that adjourned on Tuesday, one of the topics that generated the most complaint was education. 
The outpouring of criticism appears to have galvanized top officials to acknowledge the problem and take action.
Prime Minister Li Peng said at a news conference Monday that he would convene a special committee to examine the nation's education problems. 
He also said he agreed with Deng Xiaoping's remarks on education.
''Our biggest mistake in the last 10 years has been that education has not been developed sufficiently,'' Mr. Deng, the senior Chinese leader, told Uganda's leader, Yoweri Museveni, who was visiting in the opening days of the legislative session.
In another sign of official recognition of the problem, Li Tieying, the Minister of Education, told reporters late last month, ''Our education is backward, our people's attainments fall short, and the low level of education has become a major constraint on our country's modernization and reform.''
While the Government is cutting spending on most programs, it has pledged to raise education expenditures by 15.4 percent to the equivalent of $10 billion. 
But some delegates said that sum is not enough. 
In some areas, children trudge hours each way through fields to classrooms in dilapidated shacks, or they learn from teachers with barely a high school degree, or are forced to share ragged books. 
In Beijing, some children bring their own chairs to school. 
Even in top universities, students often live six to a room that snugly fits one desk and three bunk beds.
Some rural children attend school in converted Buddhist temples or abandoned buildings, where conditions are often unsafe. 
Ninety percent of primary schools and 60 percent of junior high schools lack proper buildings and books, according to official figures.
Across the country, 220 million people are illiterate in a country with a population of 1.1 billion, and the average adult has only five years of schooling. 
While virtually all children enroll in primary school, one-third do not continue on to junior high school. 
High school enrollment has plunged by 27 percent over the last decade.
With China's rapid economic development, the symbols of achievement are no longer a college diploma or the rank of a scholar, but a new color television or a videotape player. 
While students still covet a scholarship to an American university - a possible route to permanent residency in the United States - the value of a local education is diminishing.
 
Professors Average $39.50
''If I had to make the decision again, I wouldn't become a graduate student,'' said a doctoral candidate in computer science at Beijing University. 
The student, who began his program six years ago, said that now not only the students but even the professors are going elsewhere.
A professor in China averages $39.50 a month, a bit less than the average for employees in Chinese business enterprises, and much less than taxi drivers or waitresses at international hotels.
When a college student advertised for a wife recently in a local newspaper, a young woman responded with a sarcastic scolding.
''Of what use is studying?'' she wrote. 
''Scribblers are not even as good as beggars. 
You can't eat culture, and you can't put ideals in the bank.''
The delegates to the National People's Congress admitted that the small increase in state funds will do little to improve the situation. 
The Education Ministry has suggested a school tax and higher tuition fees.
