
The Bush Administration today welcomed China's release of 211 prisoners arrested for involvement in the pro-democracy demonstrations, but urged Beijing to disclose the number and names of all the others who remain in detention.
Administration officials said they viewed the Chinese move as an attempt by Beijing to improve its image in American eyes at time when President Bush is considering whether or not to extend most-favored-nation trade status for China. 
The trade status would enable China to continue exporting products to the United States at the most advantageous tariff rates.
A bipartisan coalition is taking shape in Congress to challenge the President if he renews China's trading benefits.
Administration officials insisted that they did not specifically request that the Chinese make such a prisoner release at this time, but rather have been telling Beijing for months through diplomatic channels that it will be impossible to improve relations unless those who were arrested for the sole crime of demonstrating for political freedom were set free.
 
More Information This Time
''Officially we welcomed the move,'' an Administration official said. 
''We don't want to spit in their eye when they do something positive for whatever reasons they might have done it. 
This was certainly better than the announcement that they released 573 in January, which did not include a single name or any proof.''
With the latest release, the names of six prominent democracy movement leaders were included by the Chinese.
''The fact that they did it while the President is considering M.F.N. is obviously not unrelated,'' the official added. 
''Nobody has to hit them over the head with it. 
They understand from every conversation we have had with them that a key determinent in the United States' willingness to improve relations is the release of prisoners. 
But I don't think M.F.N. is the only reason. 
When they make decisions of this nature internal security is the prime factor.''
Last year United States-China trade reached $18 billion, including $13 billion worth of Chinese exports to the United States. 
In fact, the United States is now China's biggest trading partner, even larger than Japan.
