
China has accused Taiwan of using its wealth to buy diplomatic recognition with foreign countries, as a new quarrel further strained relations across the Taiwan Strait.
China suspended formal relations with Liberia on Tuesday, a day after Taiwan restored ties with the West African nation. 
It was the second diplomatic face-off between China and Taiwan since July, when Taipei re-established ties with Grenada.
The quarrel comes as Taiwan is pressing a diplomatic offensive in the third world seeking to gain influence and respectability - and, particularly, diplomatic recognition. 
Taipei, like Beijing, claims to be the legitimate government of all China, but only 25 countries recognize Taipei while 134 recognize Beijing. 
$150 Million to Liberia With its enormous foreign exchange reserves and acknowledged expertise in economic development, Taiwan is in a good position to offer aid to developing countries. 
Reports in Taiwan have said Liberia would receive about $150 million in coming months, after its decision to normalize relations with Taipei.
''The Taiwan authorities use silver bullets in the name of cultural, economic, trade and technological exchanges to buy the hearts of the people, and to develop diplomatic relations with certain countries,'' the official People's Daily declared in a front-page commentary on Wednesday.
Relations between Beijing and Taipei had improved sharply in the last two years, since Taiwan allowed its citizens to visit relatives on mainland China. 
Taiwanese businessmen also began investing in China, and prospects for closer ties were greatest in May, when a senior Taipei official attended an Asian Development Bank meeting in Beijing.
Relations became tense again after Beijing's military suppression of the democracy movement in June. 
China accused Taiwan of sending spies to help spread the unrest, and Beijing arrested and then expelled a Taiwanese newspaper reporter who had been in contact with a student leader.
 
Taiwan's Two-China Policy
Taiwan's diplomatic campaign has not focused on getting countries to switch their diplomatic recognition from Beijing to Taipei. 
Instead, it has sought to have countries recognize both governments at the same time.
In the past, China and Taiwan have pursued a policy of ''sole recognition,'' although in the last year, Taipei has adopted a more ''flexible diplomacy'' that would allow dual recognition of both China and Taiwan by a third country. 
China has rejected this approach.
''The authorities on Taiwan should understand that on the question of 'one China' and 'unification of the motherland,' there is no flexibility to speak of,'' the commentary on Wednesday said.
Beijing's suspension of relations with Liberia, a step short of severing ties, was the same response as to Grenada's normalization of relations with Taiwan in July.
In suspending relations, China said Liberia's decision to restore ties ''runs counter'' to the principle of sole recognition in the joint communique signed by the two countries in 1977, when they established relations. 
At that time, Taiwan broke off relations with Liberia.
