
The Chinese authorities staged a public execution today of three young men who were accused of taking part in a violent political protest in Shanghai.
The executions were the first to be reported of anyone in the democracy movement since the military crackdown on June 4. 
[Another seven people, described as ''rioters,'' were executed in Beijing Thursday for various acts of violence during the military crackdown on the democracy movement, Reuters reported from Beijing, quoting the official New China News Agency.] The United States and other countries had pleaded with the Chinese Government not to execute political protesters. 
[Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d joined a chorus of Western leaders in denouncing the executions.
But he said the Bush Administration was not planning any additional actions against Beijing ''at this time.''
Page A10.]
A Hard-Line Attitude In another sign of a hard-line attitude here, the Beijing radio announced tonight that 45 people had been sentenced to death or imprisonment in the eastern city of Jinan, in Shandong Province, for ''seriously endangering public order.''
The announcer said they had been sentenced after an open trial attended by 10,000 people, but did not indicate how many had been sentenced to death and how many to imprisonment.
Such large gatherings to humiliate political criminals have been rare in recent years, and the trial in Jinan seemed to mark another example of reversion to methods that had largely disappeared since the end of the Mao era in 1976. 
#6 Convictions in Shanghai An editor at Jinan Daily News said in a telephone interview that 17 of the 45 had been sentenced to death, and that 9 others had been sentenced to death with a two-year reprieve at hard labor - intended to give convicts a chance to reform and win commutation to life imprisonment. 
The others were sentenced to various prison terms, the editor said, but he cautioned that at least some of the 45 were convicted of offenses unrelated to the political unrest.
The authorities in Shanghai also announced that six more people had been convicted in court today, apparently of taking part in the same protest as the three who were executed. 
These six are expected to be sentenced in the next few days.
 
Bush's New Measures
The three young men in Shanghai were presumably executed in the Chinese way, with a bullet fired in the back of the head at close range.
The executions, as well as the new death sentences, followed the Bush Administration's announcement on Tuesday of new measures to protest China's suppression of the democracy movement. 
These included a suspension of high-level contacts between American and Chinese officials and a declaration that the United States will try to postpone consideration of new loans to China by international institutions.
The Administation also appealed to China to grant clemency to those sentenced to death and to pardon those who were arrested for their role in pro-democracy demonstrations. 
Carrying out the death sentences ''could only deepen the wounds of the past few weeks,'' the White House spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, said Tuesday.
China had no direct response today to the new steps announced in Washington, but the executions and announcement of new death sentences could be interpreted as an indirect response. 
#1,500 Known Arrests More than 1,500 people are known to have been arrested throughout the nation for taking part in the seven-week democracy movement, but it is not clear how many may face the death penalty.
In addition to the three executed in Shanghai, eight people in Beijing are awaiting appeals on their death sentences. 
Except for the sentences announced in Jinan, no other people are known to have been sentenced yet for taking part in the democracy movement.
The death penalty is relatively common in China, and hundreds of people are believed to be executed each year for violent crimes or large robberies or corruption cases.
Normally, the execution is carried out at an execution ground and the public is excluded. 
But on this occasion, several thousand people were reported to have attended the execution, apparently to make more of an example of the punishment. 
Occasionally during anti-crime campaigns in the past, executions have been shown on television, but that did not happen today.
 
Firefighters Attacked
The three men in Shanghai - Xu Guoming, an employee of a Shanghai brewery; Bian Hanwu, who is unemployed, and Yan Xuerong, a worker at a radio factory - were sentenced to death last Thursday but had appealed.
They were accused of helping to set fire to a train on June 6 and then attacking firefighters who arrived to put out the fire. 
No one was killed, but some firefighters were beaten up and nine rail cars were burned, forcing the closing of the rail line for two days.
The Government has not mentioned the circumstances in which the crowd attacked the train. 
The crowd had gathered to block the rail line, in protest of the killings of hundreds of students and workers in Beijing two days earlier by the army. 
A train rammed its way through the human blockade, killing six people who lay on the track, and only then did the outraged crowd attack the train and set it afire.
It is not known what evidence existed against the three men, who appeared to be in their 20's or perhaps early 30's, or even exactly what role each was accused of having played in the incident. 
Nor have the authorities indicated how they caught the three, who were apparently arrested several days later rather than on the scene.
 
Called Mentally Retarded
A diplomat in Shanghai said that Mr. Yan was mentally retarded, and that others who were facing trial in connection with the burning of the train were also mentally impaired. 
This could not be confirmed, and it is not clear whether this would be a factor in their arrest or a coincidence.
People's Daily reported today that the Supreme People's Court had issued a notice urging that ''punishment without leniency'' should be extended to those who engaged in violent protests, who planned the ''chaos'' and who organized the ''counterrevolutionary propaganda.''
''Major or typical cases could be publicized through television, radio and newspapers so as to frighten criminals into submission and encourage the masses to fight the counterrevolutionaries and criminals,'' the newspaper said.
The radio tonight also reported the arrest of Zhou Chifeng, a student from the central city of Wuhan, whom the authorities identified as a liaison officer in the student occupation of Tiananmen Square in Beijing. 
The radio report accused Mr. Zhou of stirring up unrest against the Government.
 
On U.S. 
Relations
So far, no students are known to have been sentenced, and it is not clear if those who were not directly linked to violent protests could be sentenced to death simply for planning the democracy movement, known here as the ''counterrevolutionary rebellion.''
Prime Minister Li Peng appeared tonight to make some indirect comments about the growing tension with the United States.
''When China is in difficulties for the time being, it sees clearly who are true friends and who are false ones,'' Mr. Li told visiting the Pakistani Foreign Secretary, Humayun Khan. 
''Now some countries have exerted diplomatic and economic pressures on China and tried to interfere in China's internal affairs. 
This is short-sighted and unreasonable, and we believe that more people will change their opinions so long as they get to know the facts.''
Mr. Li said China would not bow to external pressure, but he added that China would maintain its open-door policy and its program of change. 
He also emphasized that the authorities would punish only a small minority of the participants in the democracy movement, although he did not specify how many people this might consist of.
 
'According to Law'
''The tiny minority of criminals will be punished according to law, and the Government will be lenient in dealing with most of the people who took part in parades and demonstrations, sit-ins and hunger strikes, even those with extremist opinions,'' he said.
Earlier today, the Government announced other arrests, including 44 ''ruffians'' who were accused of taking part in protests in the capital and then fled south to nearby Hebei Province. 
The Shanghai authorities announced that 65 people had surrendered there, and that some, having been persuaded of their errors, had later informed on others.
Four others were arrested in connection with an attempt by two women to flee the country by boarding a Paris-bound flight with false passports. 
It was not clear how they had obtained the passports or if they were also sought for other reasons.
The official newspapers called today for more ''ideological education'' for college students around the nation. 
The State Education Commission ordered local governments to arrange the educational sessions and in particular to stress the study of a recent speech by Deng Xiaoping, China's senior leader, that included the official account of the ''counterrevolutionary rebellion.''
