
Nearly a year after China's two securities exchanges opened with fits and starts, demand for stocks is so strong that people line up on the streets to buy them. 
Now, the Government is planning to let foreigners in on the action.
China's two stock exchanges, in Shanghai and in Shenzhen, a special economic zone on the southern border, are working furiously to bring out special shares for foreigners in the next few weeks.
But the process of issuing these shares, called B shares, has caused clashes between authoritarian-minded Chinese officials and Western financiers, who are helping to underwrite the deal. 
Moreover, a headshake of disapproval from one of China's octogenarian leaders could mean another delay or even a cancellation of the deal.
Still, compared with other emerging exchanges, like Taipei and Seoul, which have loosened their rules for foreign investors slowly, China's socialist Government is racing ahead.
"China has actually proceeded quite fast compared to Eastern Europe, for example, or even compared to some other Asian countries," said Rolf Gerber, managing director at SBCI Finance Asia Ltd., a Swiss Bank Corporation subsidiary that is coordinating the foreign underwriters of the new shares. 
"In this way they are very progressive, although they understand very little about the habits of how such transactions are done internationally."
China's bid to sell stocks to foreigners, without first developing the domestic stock markets more fully, underscores its appetite for ways to raise foreign capital.
Shanghai's exchange is still in its infancy and currently trades only eight stocks, with a total market value equivalent to about $430 million. 
At the end of November, Shenzhen listed 11 new companies, in addition to the six already traded, that have a total market capitalization of about $100 million. 
All are state-run enterprises.
Stocks are so popular that price-to-earnings ratios go as high as 428, many times those of even the most promising American and Japanese companies. 
But the authorities seem ambivalent. 
The Government has restricted listings and tried to curtail speculation for fear of subverting socialism.
The Government had not allowed any other new companies to be listed on the Shanghai exchange during its first year of operation, until 10 more won approval earlier this month, according to the English-language China Daily. 
Companies must wait at least three months before they are formally listed.
"The central Government is being very cautious," said Zhang Ling, a spokeswoman at the Shanghai Securities Exchange. 
"They think that if the market develops too quickly, there will be harmful effects. 
If there are no clear results or if the results are poor, then they will be even more careful."
 
Conflict Among Aging Leaders
The slow development of the markets also appears to result from indecision or conflict among China's octogenarian leaders, like Deng Xiaoping and Chen Yun, who are nominally retired but still hold real power.
Earlier this year, when Chen Yun and Li Xiannian, two of these octogenarians, were traveling in Shanghai during the Chinese New Year holiday, they happened to notice that many people were poring over the stock market pages of a local newspaper that prints the results of the week's activity. 
Apparently believing that the market's rapid growth was contrary to socialism, the two complained to Zhu Rongji, then Mayor of Shanghai.
Subsequently, the exchange's original plan to issue foreign shares as early as April was delayed until now. 
Foreign participation will be controlled and limited.
Just as China has separate currencies for foreigners and for local Chinese, there will be two kinds of shares: A shares for Chinese and B shares for foreigners, both in local currency. 
Foreigners will have to pay in foreign exchange for their local currency shares but will earn dividends in foreign exchange. 
Asian investors, particularly in Hong Kong and Taiwan, are expected to be among the major buyers of the B shares.
In Shenzhen, the Governmentsigned underwriting agreements last Thursday with 10 Hong Kong-based brokerages to market about $34 million in B shares issued by 10 Shenzhen enterprises.
But Shanghai, where the process began earlier, is likely to sell the first equity issue directly to foreigners. 
The Shanghai Vacuum Electronic Device Corporation, a state-run television picture-tube maker, has signed agreements with foreign underwriters to place about a million B shares, raising about $74 million.
The company has already issued two million shares domestically to individual investors and other Chinese companies, although it is restricted as to how many shares over all can be sold to individuals. 
On Dec. 
12, the price for A shares was 863.40 yuan.
The deal has been an eye-opener for both the Western underwriters and the Chinese officials. 
China hemmed and hawed for nearly a year before it gave final approval to the issuance of B shares, but then it expected the deal to be done immediately. 
Early in November, China abruptly asked a syndicate of six foreign underwriters to fix the share price at 420 yuan -- about $72 at the essentially free-market rate that will be used instead of the official exchange rate.
 
Chinese in "an Enormous Hurry"
The Chinese proposal included a tight timetable and a demand that the foreign firms respond by the end of the day. 
In the West, underwriters carefully negotiate the timing of a deal, fixing the price of shares around the time of the placement. 
But in this case, the price was to be set months in advance.
The foreign firms had not even had a chance to examine the financial condition of Shanghai Vacuum Electric. 
Arthur Andersen & Company, the accounting firm, was not allowed to begin its review of the company until early November, and even then, Shanghai Vacuum Electric executives complained that the accounting firm was scrutinizing the books too thoroughly.
Four of the six original participating firms found the terms of the deal unacceptable and withdrew. 
The Chinese "were in an enormous hurry," said Ted Rule, director at Standard Chartered Asia Ltd., one of the underwriters that stepped down. 
"They wanted things to get done in a period of time which I thought was unrealistically short."
 
A Replacement Syndicate
Before he even knew what the company's earnings were, Mr. Rule said, he was asked to commit to a price at which the underwriters would buy the shares. 
Part of the reason for the hurry appears to be the company's desire to issue the B shares -- representing a 33 percent interest -- before the end of the year to qualify for lower tax rates as a joint venture.
After the other underwriters left, Sun Hung Kai & Company, a Hong Kong securities firm, and SBCI Finance Asia, the Swiss Bank unit, remained. 
Salomon Brothers (Hong Kong) Ltd. joined to form a new consortium that completed the deal. 
The new consortium signed an underwriting agreement on Nov. 
30, with the price fixed at 420 yuan. 
The foreign underwriters insisted on a safety clause that would allow them to pull out or renegotiate the price if they found something in the company's books that they did not like. 
Now, the shares will probably be marketed in the first quarter of next year, in January at the earliest.
 
Swiss Bank's Examination
Recently, Swiss Bank was allowed to examine the company closely for the first time, touring its factory and talking with the company's managers. 
Discovering how China's planned economy meshes with the free market was a bit of a revelation, Mr. Gerber of Swiss Bank admitted, but he remains committed to the deal.
"I haven't seen any shocking things that would prevent us from doing it," he said. 
"But we're all used to a free market, so we had to revise our understanding in terms of how the Chinese economy works."
The Shanghai company has also agreed to allow Swiss Bank to become the 16th and only foreign member of its board, so that the Chinese can gain advice on how to adjust to a free market economy. 
Foreign underwriters will place 80 percent of the issue, while three Chinese securities firms will place the rest.
 
Takeovers Highly Unlikely
So far, China's rules do not limit the shares a Chinese individual can buy, nor is it expected that the regulations will limit the B shares a foreigner can buy. 
Theoretically, a foreign and a Chinese investor could team up to purchase more than 50 percent of a listed company.
But the Government is unlikely to allow such a move. 
"Takeovers?" a Chinese official exclaimed, laughing at the idea. 
"They may not yet have any rules that prevent this, but they don't need them. 
They just won't let it happen, at least for now."
