
China has laid off 100,000 coal workers and will lay off hundreds of thousands more in the coming years, as part of a broad effort to modernize its energy industry, an official report said today.
The layoffs suggest that the Communist Party is finally grappling directly with the enormously complex and painful problems of industrial revamping.
Until now, the Government has resisted such layoffs for fear of provoking worker unrest -- the same kind of anxieties and outrage that erupted in Britain in October when the Government there proposed laying off 30,000 coal miners.
The Communist Party here sees the problem the same way that the Conservative Party perceives it in Britain: some mines cannot be operated economically at current prices. 
But the British Prime Minister, John Major, was forced to scale down his program in response to the public outrage, while the self-professed leaders of the Chinese working class seem determined to expose the miners to the discipline of the market.
The official China Daily said the China National Coal Corporation, a huge state-owned conglomerate that employs three million people, would close 30 inefficient mines in 1993 alone and lay off 30,000 miners and 70,000 workers in related jobs.
The newspaper said the company planned to reduce the number of its coal workers by 400,000 by the time the current five-year plan ended in 1995. 
The report added that another major state-run coal company, which it did not identify, also planned "massive layoffs to increase efficiency."
The China Daily also said that 100,000 coal workers had already been laid off, although it did not say when that had happened. 
It said that most had found other kinds of jobs, and the Government apparently also will help employees laid off in the future to find jobs in new companies in the service sector.
The Energy Ministry refused to comment today. 
The coal corporation directed phone calls to Tan Enli, its director of policy research, and he declined to discuss specifics. 
But he did say that the article in China Daily was premature and should not have been allowed to be published.
"We'd like to do these things," Mr. Tan said, referring to the prospective layoffs for 1993 and subsequent years. 
"But first we need approval. 
In January the company will hold a conference to decide whether to go ahead with these plans."
In China, if a conference is called to debate a topic, that usually means that the aim is to build a consensus and legitimacy for a decision that has already been made.
 
 
A Big Headache
State-owned corporations like the coal company have been a big headache for China's leaders. 
While the overall economy is booming at a 12 percent growth rate this year, the main beneficiaries are private and collective enterprises.
Among state companies, which account for about half of industrial output, only a third are earning profits, with another third showing losses and the rest breaking even. 
Coal mines have particularly suffered, because their costs have gone up while the price of the coal they sell is fixed at artificially low prices by the state.
The solution is twofold: to raise coal prices and to lay off surplus workers. 
But the Government has worried that consumers might protest rising prices for coal, which is used for both heating and cooking, and that miners might protest the layoffs.
Now the authorities appear to be moving on both fronts, not only in the coal industry, but throughout the economy.
 
Price of Coal to Be Raised
In addition to laying off surplus coal workers, China has said it is raising coal prices gradually so that they will reach market levels within the next few years. 
This year, for example, the National Coal Corporation is allowed to sell 20 percent of its output at market prices, and in 1993 the figure will rise sharply.
Elsewhere in the economy, state-owned companies are also revamping and laying off workers.
In the central Chinese city of Chongqing, for example, the local Foreign Affairs Office says a state-owned knitting mill was declared bankrupt in September, costing 3,000 workers their jobs. 
At the time, it was the biggest single bankruptcy ever allowed in China, the local officials say.
Until recently, the state normally bailed out such money-losing factories indefinitely, because of the fear of worker unrest. 
In the spring of this year, the Government was deeply worried by a series of wildcat strikes and attacks on change-minded factory managers.
As a result of those incidents, the leadership cooled down the talk about how beneficial layoffs were for economic efficiency. 
And now, while going ahead with the restructuring, it appears to have decided to provide as many sweeteners to the workers as possible.
Each laid-off coal worker will be eligible for a no-interest loan of up to $1,720 to help start a business or find work elsewhere. 
The Government will also give the coal corporation a $340 million loan to allow it to start service companies that can absorb some of the laid-off employees.
