
The Communist Party Central Committee plans to hold an important meeting in the capital beginning Wednesday, foreign diplomats and knowledgable Chinese said today.
The meeting is being held in secret and the agenda is not yet known, probably not even to all the 175 Central Committee members and 107 alternates. 
But diplomats said they expected that the session would focus on party and political matters, personnel decisions, the economy and preparations for the annual meeting of the legislature later this month.
China's Politburo apparently also quietly held an expanded session recently to set the general guidelines for the Central Committee meeting.
 
Personnel Changes Expected
It has been widely expected that high-level personnel changes would soon be made by the Central Committee and endorsed at the upcoming meeting of the National People's Congress. 
But the Central Committee is not expected to publicize any personnel decisions when its meeting ends early next week.
''Personnel decisions are extremely sensitive, especially at this time when the leaders know that they need to maintain as much stabilityI as possible,'' said a Chinese with access to information on such matters. 
''If they change too many people around, that would mean instability. 
But they need to make changes in order to improve the situation.''
There has been much speculation that the leadership changes may even include the ouster of President Yang Shangkun and Prime Minister Li Peng. 
Many Chinese and diplomats now say that such changes are unlikely at this legislative session, partly because of an inability to agree on a new lineup. 
But they add that the leadership is likely to replace deputy prime ministers and ministers.
The leadership has also indicated that it is concerned about the security situation, a topic likely to arise at the plenum. 
The official New China News Agency reported today that Qiao Shi, a member of the Politburo standing committee, has described China's political and economic situation as basically stable but warned that the ''potential for instability also exists.''
 
'Public Order' a Problem
''Problems with public order remain severe,'' the agency quoted him as saying.
The meeting may also ease economic policy. 
Last month, Prime Minister Li toured Guangdong Province, the region at the forefront of the country's economic change, and diplomats interpreted it as a sign that the leaders wanted to encourage development of the coastal regions and their export-oriented companies.
On Friday, after an important session of the State Council began, Mr. Li called for measures ''to put an end to sluggish growth by the end of June.''
That suggests an easier credit policy and a step backward from the austerity policy that Mr. Li has championed until now.
In a separate dispatch, the New China News Agency announced today that the Communist Party leader, Jiang Zemin, will visit North Korea in mid-March. 
Mr. Jiang is likely to discuss the Chinese situation and the events in Eastern Europe with the North Korean leaders, Kim Il Sung and Kim Jong Il.
