
A top Chinese official met today with Vice President Dan Quayle and Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and said there would be no bloodshed in Beijing if the demonstrators continued to exercise restraint, an Administration official said.
The Chinese official, Wan Li, the chairman of the National People's Congress, the legislature, told Mr. Quayle that the students' ''reasonable demands'' could eventually be met and that army troops had been deployed around Beijing to maintain order, not to suppress the students.
The Administration official said Mr. Wan seemed to position himself carefully between Prime Minister Li Peng and the demonstrators. 
Mr. Wan was reported to have said China must have internal stabilityI if it is to continue liberalizing its economic system, and must end the student unrest before it can take further steps toward democracy.
 
Broadcasts Are Jammed
At the same time, the Voice of America said today that the Chinese authorities had begun jamming its broadcasts to China for the first time since 1978, shortly before the United States and China established diplomatic relations.
Administration officials said Mr. Quayle had emphasized several themes: the need to avoid violence and the United States' interest in promoting human rights and democracy around the world.
Mr. Baker, repeating the Administration's cautious stance toward the demonstrations, said he had told Mr. Wan, ''The United States appreciated the restraint which at least so far the Government of the People's Republic has shown.''
Speaking to reporters, Mr. Baker said, ''The United States supports freedom of speech'' and reported he had urged Mr. Wan ''that there be no resort to violence or bloodshed on the part of both sides of this problem.''
Mr. Wan, who is 73 years old, is a longtime ally of Deng Xiaoping, China's senior leader, and is considered a key figure in the current political crisis in Beijing. 
As head of the Congress, he could play a critical role in reported efforts by supporters of the protesters to get the Congress to revoke martial law and remove Prime Minister Li Peng.
 
No Public Comment
Reflecting the seriousness of the situation in Beijing, the normally genial and outgoing Mr. Wan declined to make any public comments today after his meetings with Mr. Quayle and Mr. Baker. After his talk with the Vice President in the Old Executive Office Building next to the White House, Mr. Wan maintained a stony stare as Mr. Quayle read a prepared statement, and Mr. Wan's interpreter refused to translate several questions from reporters about the demonstrations.
Mr. Wan is believed to be caught in a difficult position by the power struggle in China. 
For he is both a close friend of Mr. Deng - sometimes serving as Mr. Deng's bridge partner - and is a leading exponent of China's changes in recent years.
In the late 1970's it was Mr. Wan, then the Governor of Anhui Province in central China, who first began to decollectivize agriculture by allowing peasants to farm their own land in an effort to increase productivity. 
His action, then a breathtaking break with Communist orthodoxy, was later copied nationwide and forms the basis of Mr. Deng's political changes.
Mr. Wan has also been an outspoken supporter of more political openness, having made a major speech in 1986 advocating a greater role for China's intellectuals. 
These actions have placed him on the liberal side of the Chinese political spectrum.
 
Bush Meeting Scheduled
Mr. Wan, who arrived in Washington after a trip to Canada, is scheduled to meet with President Bush on Tuesday, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney on Wednesday and receive a honorary degree from Johns Hopkins University on Thursday. 
On Saturday he is to visit Disney World in Florida.
A scheduled tennis match between Mr. Wan and President Bush was canceled because ''it would be inappropriate at this time,'' Roman Popadiuk, a White House spokesman, said. 
Mr. Wan is an avid tennis player and had played with Mr. Bush when the President was the American envoy in China in 1974 and 1975.
In his 55-minute meeting with Mr. Quayle, Mr. Wan said that before he left China 10 days ago, the Chinese rulers agreed that no violence would be used against the student demonstrators. 
But Mr. Wan said that he was not fully aware of all the decisions that might have been made since then.
A statement issued by the Vice President's office said that Mr. Quayle expressed a hope that the Chinese authorities ''could resolve the situation without resorting to violence.''
Richard W. Carlson, director of the V.O.A., said that there was ''jamming on three of the five V.O.A. 
Mandarin Chinese frequencies.''
The jamming was apparently designed to cut off the flow of information to Chinese students and others demonstrating for greater democracy.
Many demonstrators had been relying on V.O.A. broadcasts to keep informed during the five weeks of pro-democracy protests.
