
Perhaps the best-performing financial instrument in the world in 1992 has been a slip of white paper entitling the bearer to buy newly issued stocks on the Shanghai stock exchange. 
Sold early in the year for $5.50, by the summer these forms fetched nearly $300.
The soaring prices reflect the growing enthusiasm, bordering on desperation, of ordinary Chinese to become shareholders -- preferably rich ones.
After six years of on-and-off experimentation with shares, China is accelerating the development of a modern stock market. 
New companies are being listed each week, the number of investors is surging and hard-line critics have been muzzled.
 
Making a Transition
"The ideological problems are basically resolved," Wei Wenyuan, the executive director of the stock exchange, said in an interview in an alcove above the trading floor.
A local stockbroker put it more bluntly. 
"We're in a transition to capitalism, conducted under the leadership of the Communist Party," he said.
That is hyperbole, for the number of stock companies make up only an infinitesimal proportion of the economy. 
But the stock market is emerging as a central element of the nation's economic reorganization, and popular support seems boundless.
In early August, more than a million would-be investors waited in line -- some for days -- to buy applications for stocks being issued in the southern city of Shenzhen. 
The applications cost $20 and had only a random 10 percent chance of being approved to buy shares. 
Even so, the potential investors rioted when the applications ran out.
Some 50,000 people rampaged through the streets, attacking police cars and shouting anti-Government slogans. 
The police fired tear gas and some gunshots, and there were unconfirmed reports that two people were killed.
 
Leadership Meets
The clamor of a riot was not the kind of boom that reformers had hoped for. 
The Cabinet is said to have been worried as it met in the Zhongnanhai leadership compound in Beijing to watch secret police videotapes of the rioting, but so far there is no sign of a big slowdown in the move toward stocks.
"The Shenzhen incident was a problem arising at a technical level," said Wang Poming, the American-educated vice president of the Stock Exchange Executive Council of China. 
"It doesn't have anything to do with policy, or with the market itself. 
I don't see any major retreat from the shareholding system."
Mr. Wang said the rioting would probably lead to the establishment of a type of Securities and Exchange Commission to provide improved oversight.
China began to get excited about stocks late in 1986, and Shanghai and several other cities quickly set up rudimentary trading systems. 
A prominent economist, Li Yining, urged then that most of the nation's state-owned factories be turned into shareholder-owned companies.
 
A Popular Trend
Progress was slow, however, partly because of the rise of the hard-liners at the time of the Tiananmen crackdown in June 1989. 
Shanghai opened a much more credible stock exchange in December 1990, and Shenzhen formally opened its own a few weeks later. 
Now other cities are frantically trying to get Beijing's approval to open exchanges, but the authorities are refusing on the basis that Shanghai and Shenzhen should be national markets.
Foreigners have also been invited to buy Chinese stocks through special "B shares" listed on both the Shanghai and Shenzhen exchanges. 
Early this year, B shares were all the rage as investors dreamed of getting in on the ground floor of one of the most vibrant economies in the world.
Since then, the B share market has stalled, in part because the shares are relatively expensive and thinly traded.
"These are the ups and downs you get at the beginning of any emerging market," said Timothy Beardson, chairman of Crosby Securities Ltd. in Hong Kong. 
"China is going to have a very large stock market, one of the largest in the world, in our view. 
As the market gets bigger it'll get broader, and I think it's here to stay."
 
Foreigners Show Interest
About 20 stock funds have been set up by Crosby and other foreign brokerage firms to buy Chinese equities, and Chinese companies are also trying to list directly on exchanges in the United States, Hong Kong and Australia.
The Shanghai market now lists 17 A share issues, for Chinese investors, along with 8 B shares. 
Mr. Wei, the exchange's head, says that by the end of the year there will be 50 A shares and 10 B shares.
Likewise, the number of seats on the exchange has risen to 212 from 46. 
Soon, there will be 600 seats.
Mr. Wei estimates that 1.2 million people -- a bit more than two-thirds from Shanghai and the rest scattered around the country -- have bought shares through the exchange. 
Among them are 10,000 to 20,000 professional investors, known as the dahu, who have $100,000 or more in their brokerage accounts.
 
Some Fortunes Made
Some dahu -- the most famous is a Shanghai resident who goes by the name Millions Yang -- have made fortunes. 
For while B shares have been stagnating, the A shares traded by Chinese have been soaring.
"A fellow in my office put 5,000 yuan into Gold Cup Company shares a few years ago, and now it's worth 80,000 yuan," an envious official in Beijing said. 
Eighty thousand yuan is a bit less than $15,000.
These success stories have enticed more people into the market and created what is known here as "stock fever."
Books about stocks are selling wildly, night schools on how to trade stocks have been set up in major cities, and newspapers are running columns on how to invest.
 
Ignoring the Fundamentals
The only tactic that has not been tried has been analysis of fundamentals. 
Partly because of the unreliability of Chinese accounting, and partly because fundamentals do not matter as long as no one else looks at them either, trading often seems a bit divorced from reality. 
Price-earnings ratios exceed 100 for most Shanghai A shares, compared with a bit more than 10 for stocks in the less risky Hong Kong market.
Chinese investors seem to have a much clearer concept of upside potential than downside risk, even after a speculator lost $730 and committed suicide by electrocuting himself.
"What a numbskull," a Shanghai journalist said. 
"If he'd just waited, the market would have gone up again and he would have got his money back."
Restrictions on upward and downward movement of Shanghai stocks were lifted in May, and prices now generally follow the market. 
The first collapse came in Shanghai in August, with stocks abruptly plunging by nearly half. 
Some experts said the sharp selloff was a good thing, because it burned a few fingertips and chastened investors.
 
Talk of Intervention
Officials insist that the authorities did not intervene in the market collapse, but the word among Chinese brokers and journalists is quite different. 
They say the Communist Party General Secretary, Jiang Zemin, telephoned the Shanghai party leader and asked for smooth trading in advance of a party Congress this fall.
When stock prices continued to slump, the exchange apparently halted trading for 20 minutes -- under the guise of a computer breakdown -- and ordered brokers to buy and support the market. 
The intervention worked, and prices have returned to their earlier range.
"Privatization" is still a taboo word in China, sending shivers down the spines of Communist hard-liners. 
But some younger officials use the term "going public" to suggest that share issues are just another form of public ownership.
 
Pace of Change Is Disputed
"The key thing is that the Chinese have done it right," said William H. Overholt, executive director of the Bankers Trust Company in Hong Kong. 
"They've taken the time to create the institutional mechanisms for privatization before doing the privatization."
Some economists are impatient with China's relatively plodding steps, compared with the rapid changes in some former Communist countries. 
But others, including Mr. Overholt, say that China has prudently established a suitable foundation for capital markets.
"The East Europeans have done it utterly wrong, which is to rush pell-mell into reallocating the whole ownership and management of national productivity without having the institutional mechanisms in place to manage it properly," he said. 
"China will come out looking good."
