
Television programming has been blamed for many things, but China is perhaps the first country to accuse a program of helping sow the seeds of a counterrevolutionary rebellion.
The Chinese Government has ferociously denounced a previously acclaimed television series, ''River Elegy,'' whose six parts were broadcast twice last year on the Government-run national network.
'' 'River Elegy' was a propaganda coup for bourgeois liberalization,'' Hong Minsheng, the deputy director of China Central Television Station, said in a blistering self-criticism broadcast on the evening news. 
''The broadcast of 'River Elegy' provided theoretical and emotional preparation for the recent turmoil and rebellion.''
The attacks on ''River Elegy'' represent the latest front in the century-old debate about whether traditional Chinese culture should be glorified or scorned, whether the nation's poverty is best diagnosed as the result of foreign imperialism or of a rotting indigenous civilization. 
Oddly, the Communist authorities are firmly on the side of ancient tradition, the defenders of the honor of the ''old China'' that they rebelled against in seizing power 40 years ago.
 
A Heretical Strain
Most Chinese are taught in school that theirs is a glorious cultural inheritance, but since late in the last century a heretical strain of intellectual thought has attributed China's lack of economic and democratic development to flaws in its culture.
''River Elegy,'' which suggests that Chinese civilization is stagnant and needs to be refreshed by foreign influences, is the most powerful statement of this heretical strain so far. 
It has come to symbolize the debate about how China should modernize and whether it should cherish or discard certain values and symbols of the nation's past.
The television series takes its name from the Yellow River, a potent symbol of China, which is portrayed as violent, erratic and stagnant. 
What is needed to revive China, the film suggests, is the influence of the Pacific Ocean: trade, exchanges and the West.
''Those who are now criticizing it as being a rejection of China's national culture and a need for complete Westernization - that criticism is well founded,'' said Andrew J. Nathan, a professor of political science at Columbia University, in a telephone interview.
The television series was firmly backed by Zhao Ziyang, the Communist Party leader who was ousted in June after the suppression of the democracy movement, and its principal scriptwriter, Su Xiaokang, was a leading dissident and the object of a nationwide manhunt before he escaped to Hong Kong. 
The criticisms of the series thus have a political dimension, and the attacks on it have been on the airwaves and front pages since late July.
 
'Bourgeois Liberalization'
'' 'River Elegy' distorts Chinese history, entirely negates the fine traditions of Chinese culture and vilifies the Chinese people,'' the national television news declared, after convening a panel to castigate the program. 
''The essence of the film is to negate the socialist system, oppose the leadership of the Communist Party and propagate all-round Westernization. 
'River Elegy' is the product of bourgeois liberalization, in collusion with the doctrine of 'peacefully transforming China' as peddled by the international reactionary forces. 
We should see that behind the series there is a life-and-death struggle for the Chinese nation and the socialist system.''
In another sign of the Communist Party's effort to rebuild its legitimacy by presenting itself as the defender of traditional culture, a Politburo member, Li Ruihuan, called for more emphasis on the study of China's cultural heritage. 
Mr. Li said that while it was wrong to copy indiscriminately from ancient culture, China should devote more attention to ancient books and other emblems of the civilization.
The role of defender of traditional culture is a somewhat delicate one for the Communist Party, which had scarcely taken over China when it ordered the dismantling of the city walls and many other ancient sites in Beijing. 
The desecration of ancient culture reached its peak in the Cultural Revolution from 1966 to 1976, when anything old was considered fair game for the Red Guards, who destroyed ancient temples, books, vases and furniture with equal abandon.
 
Horror and Applause
''River Elegy'' tried a more intellectual approach. 
The series - which aroused an immense reaction of both horror and applause throughout the Chinese-speaking world - complained that the Chinese take such pride in their past achievements that they obscure their present failures.
''The fact remains that our civilization is moribund,'' Mr. Su asserted in the series.
''River Elegy'' even criticized the Great Wall, which it labeled ''a symbol of confinement, conservatism, impotent defense and timidity in the face of invasion.''
The television series made some of the same points as the book ''The Ugly Chinaman,'' written by a Taiwanese social critic, Bo Yang, five years ago. 
That book has been banned in China but remains in demand among young intellectuals. 
Its popularity and that of the ''River Elegy'' series reflect the struggle among Chinese intellectuals to account for their nation having been left behind as the rest of the world industrialized in the last two centuries.
'' 'River Elegy' crystallizes in the 1980's an issue that's been around China since the 1880's,'' said Harry Harding, a China scholar at the Brookings Institution in Washington, ''and that is the degree to which Chinese culture provides the basis for modernization, or conversely, the extent to which Western culture provides that basis.''
