
In a famous Sherlock Holmes case, the key clue was a dog that did not bark. 
These days, sleuths who follow China are focusing on a similar indication that something is amiss: the clue this time is the Central Committee that does not meet.
The evidence is mostly circumstantial, but it points to significant disputes among China's top leaders. 
The jostling seems to be about power, succession and the political and economic directions the nation will take in the 1990's.
The hardest of the hard-liners in the Government seem to have gained influence in the last few months, but are unable to win a consensus for the changes they want in personnel and policies, Chinese officials and foreign diplomats say.
Thus the stalemate continues at the pinnacle of the leadership, and the Communist Party Central Committee is unable to meet and ratify the changes or the five-year plan that is to begin in January.
The Central Committee meeting was expected to convene in September or October, but a Politburo member recently told a Japanese visitor that it would not meet even in November. 
Prime Minister Li Peng said today that the committee would meet before the end of the year, so December seems to be the current target.
 
'Fighting Among Themselves'
"During the Asian Games, the leaders concentrated on the games and there was some cooperation and unity," said a Chinese with close ties to senior officials. 
The Asian Games, a miniature Olympics, ended on Oct. 
7.
"But now they're fighting among themselves to get their way on a whole range of issues, and until they reach some agreement, the Central Committee can't meet."
A Western diplomat was blunter, saying, "We think it's a battle."
The traditionalists have been able to score some gains because the pivot of the political system, Deng Xiaoping, appears to have withdrawn from daily involvement in political affairs. 
Mr. Deng appears to be staying at home and enjoying an apolitical life as patriarch of a family of 16 living together in one courtyard.
Mr. Deng, who is 86 years old, has not been seen in public since July -- a gap that normally results in rumors that he is seriously ill. 
But these days, Mr. Deng is said to be in satisfactory condition, and his youngest son, Deng Zhifang, is planning a trip to the United States, which also suggests that his father is getting along.
The octogenarian hard-liners -- whose patriarch is Chen Yun, an 85-year-old who has not been seen in public in more than a year -- are said to be pushing for a major promotion for Deng Liqun, 75, a retired head of the Communist Party Propaganda Department.
 
Guidance to Journalists
Some party elders are also ignoring their lack of formal positions and are quietly issuing hard-line instructions on whatever catches their attention. 
Deng Liqun, for example, is believed to be meeting with newspaper editors and advising them on what to write.
Former President Li Xiannian, 81, was recently outraged to read in a news summary that the city of Shenyang in northeastern China was planning to sell stakes in several dozen companies to foreigners. 
A Chinese with high-level associations said Mr. Li scrawled "reckless" on the report and issued instructions that the sale be halted.
The octogenarians have also curbed the influence of Li Ruihuan, who is a protege of Deng Xiaoping. 
Mr. Li appeared in July to win a turf battle with the traditionalists over control of the Culture Ministry.
Mr. Li's victory immediately rippled throughout the Government: At the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, hard-liners became much more friendly to the scholars, whom they were subjecting to grueling Communist Party study sessions.
But in August, the group of octogenarians began to complain that Mr. Li was making statements that went beyond the party line. 
Deng Xiaoping did not come to his defense, and Mr. Li's influence has diminished.
 
Centralized Planning Continues
Another sign of hard-liner dominance is the five-year plan, drafts of which have circulated among senior officials. 
Economists and others who have seen it say that it includes general calls for further reform, but that as it stands, it is primarily a document of central planning.
But if the reformists are lying low these days, they have not given up the battle. 
At the end of last month, the leaders of China's provinces were summoned to Beijing to study and approve an outline of the five-year plan. 
Instead, the governors rebelled, a major embarrassment to Prime Minister Li, and refused to approve the plan.
According to accounts by knowledgeable Chinese, the governors complained that the draft transferred too much power and wealth from the provinces to the central Government. 
Some governors, including Ye Xuanping of Guangdong province, dared to interrupt Prime Minister Li, and the meeting reportedly ended in tumult. 
Now the draft is being re-examined and is expected to be modified after negotiations with the governors.
The one item on the Central Committee's agenda that has already been agreed upon, Chinese officials and diplomats say, is the fate of the ousted Communist Party leader, Zhao Ziyang. 
Mr. Zhao was formally dismissed from all his posts in June 1989 and has been under investigation since. 
But the leadership is now believed to have agreed to end the investigation and allowed him to remain in the party.
