
Teacher Fang and Teacher Li, as their admirers know them, still carry Chinese passports, and it is not impossible that they would return to a changed China. 
But many Chinese here say, with regret, that one lesson of the last year is that exiles can have little impact on the motherland and that distance makes them almost irrelevant.
 
From Heady Days to Reality
After the military crackdown on the democracy movement a year ago, many refugees who escaped abroad joined with other overseas Chinese to form organizations that they hoped would press the battle for democracy that was lost in Tiananmen Square. 
In the breathless days of international sympathy and endless press coverage, one of the parallels often made was with Sun Yat-sen's campaign at the beginning of the century to overthrow the emperors. 
Sun Yat-sen succeeded in fomenting revolution from abroad in 1911 and was able to return to become President of the new Chinese republic.
It has not been so easy this time. 
The overseas democracy movement, particularly the Paris-based Federation for a Democratic China, faces a task that is far more difficult than the one Sun Yat-sen encountered in the dying days of the Qing Dynasty. 
Now the Government is strong and the Communists seem able to regulate the flow of information and prevent infiltration by the overseas organizations.
''Their influence is extremely small,'' said the admirer of Mr. Fang and Miss Li, speaking of the exiles in general. 
''We can't read their publications, and we can't have any contact with them. 
We're afraid to join any underground that might be linked with them.''
 
A Darkening View
Of course, the Government may gradually ease the intimidation, and that may lead to greater access by dissidents based abroad. 
Likewise, informal contacts with foreigners and the flow of information from abroad seem to sow dissatisfaction with the present leaders, but this happens mostly by itself rather than by design of the overseas democracy movement.
Hua Sheng, a prominent economist who left Beijing a few months before the protests and is now studying at Oxford University in England, said that at first there was optimism among the exiles that they could help bring about change in China and then return, in some cases to take up important positions. 
That optimism has dissipated, he said in a telephone interview.
''Especially recently, most Chinese students have become pessimistic about their influence on China,'' he said. 
''The longer they are away from China, the less confident they feel.''
Scholars like Mr. Hua face a painful choice. 
They can return to China and struggle for change while suffering poor living conditions, suspicion from rivals and the risk that they will be denounced or denied the chance to do meaningful work, or they can remain in foreign countries where it is difficult to find the jobs they want and where they are cut off from their avowed aim of saving the motherland.
 
Overseas Movement's Problems
The overseas Chinese democracy movement had barely begun when it was beset with credibility problems and internal conflicts. 
Moreover, the overseas movement has found it very difficult to penetrate China's armor.
For example, there were several efforts to send information into the country by fax machines, but the Government immediately warned owners of the machines that they would get in trouble if copies of the faxes were passed around. 
As a result, intellectuals sometimes heard about the fax campaign, but overwhelmingly from Voice of America accounts rather than from bootleg copies of the faxes.
The exiles have also been hobbled by a lack of support from foreign governments, particularly those of Hong Kong and Taiwan. 
The British-run Government in Hong Kong has refused to let the exiles visit, much less run their offices in the territory.
One project that might have given the overseas groups a major platform for their views was the Goddess of Democracy, the radio ship they planned to use to broadcast to China. 
That plan collapsed in May when Hong Kong, Taiwan and Japan responded to pressure from China by refusing to allow the ship access to their ports.
What most surprised many Chinese intellectuals was that Taiwan, the traditional anti-Communist bastion among overseas Chinese, appears to be giving up that role. 
Diplomats say that as Taiwan becomes more democratic, its Government has become less preoccupied with activities to sow discord or democracy on the mainland and more concerned with winning votes by keeping the peace and nurturing business ties with the mainland.
The 50 million Chinese around the world have been enormously important in helping China open up over the last dozen years, and ethnic Chinese from Hong Kong, Taiwan and elsewhere have supplied more than 60 percent of foreign investment.
These links between China and the outside world, including the growing number of Taiwan tourists on the mainland, may well hurt the Government more than a boycott. 
Few if any of the overseas Chinese are evangelists for democracy, but they often speak scathingly of the Communists' economic performance and of their political campaigns.
