
The Government replaced its ministers of public security and trade today at a closing session of the legislature's standing committee. 
It also established the death penalty for serious traffickers in narcotics and pornography.
Chinese officials and foreign diplomats had expected the Cabinet shuffle, and the changes did not give any clues to the status of China's power struggle. 
Few Cabinet changes have taken place over the last year, and they have been announced with little fanfare because China still appears to be trying to preserve an image of political stabilityII.
Wang Fang, 70 years old, the minister who presided over public security during demonstrations in Beijing in June 1989, was replaced by his deputy minister, Tao Siju, 55, the official New China News Agency reported today.
The Public Security Ministry initially adopted a lenient approach to controlling the pro-democracy demonstrations in Tiananmen Square in 1989. 
But that approach failed, and ultimately the military was brought into the capital to crush the protests.
 
Reasons for Removal Unclear
In choosing such a strategy, Mr. Wang probably followed guidelines from China's senior leaders, and it is not clear whether his removal is related to his performance in 1989 or whether he is retiring because of his age.
Zheng Tuobin, the Minister of Foreign Economic Relations and Trade, was also removed from his post. 
No reason was given.
Mr. Zheng, who is 66, was replaced by his deputy minister, Li Lanqing. 
The 58-year-old Mr. Li speaks English and Russian and is a former Deputy Mayor of the nearby city of Tianjin.
The legislative session, of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress, also passed resolutions that decree life imprisonment or the death penalty for serious crimes relating to the spread of pornography or narcotics.
Since the rise of the hard-liners in June 1989, the Government has waged a campaign against pornography, and recently it has also become increasingly concerned about the return of opium and other narcotics to some parts of China.
"The resolution is aimed at safeguarding social order and promoting advanced socialist culture by punishing pornography pushers," the press agency reported.
