
In front of a stall filled with tiny clothes in baby blues, pinks and greens, a man sits on a stool inhaling a cigarette with the intimidating nonchalance that he acquired in prison.
He spent five years in prison for street fighting, but after his release, with few friends and no work prospects, he decided to start a small vendor business. 
Last year, after three years in the clothing trade, this salesman - embarrassed about his past so that he gives only his surname, Zhao -made the equivalent of $5,400, about 10 times the average income in China.
While foreigners tend to regard entrepreneurs as heroes of the Chinese restructuring, many are social outcasts, and they are frequently accused of acquiring their goods by bribing factory managers. 
Their immense wealth also breeds growing resentment among many ordinary Chinese.
Partly because of such resentment, and perhaps because of its suspicion of private enterprise, the Government has begun a program to control the nation's 14.5 million individually owned businesses and raise their taxes. 
The Communist Party recently announced that ''exploiters'' would not be allowed to become members, and many believe this was a reference to wealthy entrepreneurs.
 
Drive Against Steet Traders
The authorities in Beijing also concluded a 100-day campaign against ''illegal street traders,'' including cigarette and clothing vendors, hair salons and food and drink outlets. 
The official English-language China Daily said the campaign had exposed 110,000 unauthorized businesses and produced more than half a million dollars in unpaid taxes and fines.
Official newspapers have said that much of the money made by the entrepreneurs is never reported to the tax collectors and that the majority of vendors have been in prison. 
A prison background apparently is common because released inmates have difficulty finding new employers, so they are forced to strike out on their own. 
On the other hand, most Chinese are reluctant to forsake their jobs and plunge into business, with its economic and political risks.
As a result, some former felons have been among the greatest beneficiaries of the economic restructuring policy of the last decade. 
There are no statistics on average incomes among private vendors, but it is certain that they earn many times China's average monthly wage of about $40.
The income disparities are creating discomfort for the Government, which prides itself on socialist egalitarianism. 
Since the new leadership took office in June, there have been ''cleanups'' in some of the capital's free markets. 
Police have closed down stalls of those vendors who do not pay rent, who evade taxes, who sell pornography or who ignore other regulations.
The Government complains that wealthy entrepreneurs are inflating prices, aggravating shortages and ''dampening the enthusiasm'' of state employees and intellectuals. 
Many of these vendors also contributed vast sums of money to the students during the democracy movement.
 
The Fastest-Growing Sector
It is not clear how far the Government will pursue its harsh line, partly because it needs private enterprises to help absorb a growing number of unemployed people. 
The authorities recently announced a tax break for private businesses that employ jobless workers in certain trades.
While private enterprises in the cities and rural areas are a minuscule portion of the overall economy, employing fewer than 27 million people, they constitute the fastest-growing economic sector. 
Their wealth is highly visible, for they can afford such conveniences as washing machines and video recorders, and they also have money to spend at wine bars and discos. 
Mr. Zhao complains about not having a Mercedes-Benz and an apartment large enough for his possessions.
Younger vendors also tend to dress better than most Chinese. 
One of their biggest problems is where to keep their money. 
A man selling athletic wear says he has four different bank accounts in the names of his wife, child and parents. 
He also keeps a large amount of money at home.
Small entrepreneurs pay rental and management fees for their stalls, and the total expenses including taxes could run to more than $160 a month. 
Normally, profits cover the expenses many times over, but since the violent crackdown on June 4, some vendors say earnings have been down by more than one-half. 
This is partly because of the shortage of foreign tourists. 
Even now, however, the vendors still earn much more than factory workers.
For all the anticipation of greater state control, the concern does not seem to show in their attitude.
 
'It Won't Rattle Us'
''They will put more controls on us,'' said a vendor selling women's blouses. 
''But we have already been through the worst. 
We've survived the Cultural Revolution, so no matter how tight their policy is, it won't rattle us and it won't last long.''
The Cultural Revolution, started by Mao in 1966, was a period of rigid Communist orthodoxy lasting 10 years.
Li Binglu, a 25-year-old former public relations manager, opened a restaurant and bar this fall. 
She paid $8,100 in capital, borrowed from friends, and pays the same in annual rent along with $270 in monthly taxes.
''My friends warned me that society was not stable and that the Government is severely controlling private enterprise,'' she said. 
''But if I make $27 a month from the state, it's just not worth it. 
I'd rather use a year's savings and get the experience, even if the Government shuts me down.''
