
China's leaders announced a sharp increase in military spending today, despite a rising budget deficit and economic challenges that will mean slower growth in the economy this year.
The increase in military spending, the second in two years, apparently reflects the rising status of the People's Liberation Army since the army-led crackdown in 1989. 
The Chinese military is gaining influence at a time when a transition of generations in the nation's leadership is likely before long, and greater financial resources are expected to bolster that influence.
 
Chagrined by Comparison
In addition, Western diplomats and Chinese with ties to the military leadership say that during the Persian Gulf war, the Government was deeply distressed by the remarkable display of Western weapons, which are far more advanced than Chinese military systems. 
The military leaders have apparently lobbied hard for more money to modernize weapons systems.
Finance Minister Wang Bingqian said arms spending this year would rise by nearly 12 percent, to the equivalent of $6.25 billion. 
An itemized military budget is not made public, and it is unclear what is included in this amount. 
In addition to this money from the Government, the Chinese military presumably also raises substantial amounts from weapons sales and from civilian factories that it operates.
The budget increase, which followed a rise in military outlays last year of 15.5 percent, was announced at a session of the National People's Congress. 
The congress, a rubber-stamp parliament, convened Monday for a session that will last less than three weeks and is expected to approve a new 5-year plan and a 10-year economic program.
The economic plans were marked by bitter negotiations between the provinces and the central Government, which is experiencing a severe shortage of money and wants local areas to pick up more of the burden.
Mr. Wang announced a nominal budget deficit for this year equivalent to $2.56 billion, down slightly from last year's estimated deficit of $2.89 billion.
But those figures were calculated using the Chinese practice of including borrowed funds as revenue. 
Using Western accounting practices, the budget gap would reach $9.34 billion this year, compared with $9.15 billion in 1990. 
In addition, the 1991 deficit is expected to exceed Mr. Wang's forecast, as a year ago he had forecast a deficit much lower than the actual amount.
Still, the adjusted deficit last year amounted to only 2.6 percent of the gross national product. 
The Government acknowledges that a deficit is likely to persist.
The state enterprises, one of the Beijing Government's main sources of revenue, have become a cash drain, Mr. Wang acknowledged. 
He provided figures indicating that losses at the state enterprises exceeded profits by a ratio of nearly 8 to 1. 
The Government is afraid to close factories losing money because of the risk of provoking unrest among workers. 
And subsidies to such factories absorbed nearly a third of revenue in 1990.
 
Maldistribution of Wealth
Mr. Wang also reported that in some areas throughout the year, public institutions were unable to pay salaries on time. 
He indicated that another "glaring issue" was the uneven distribution of income, which has widened as the economies of southern provinces, like Guangdong, expand faster than those of other provinces.
The budget proposal for this year also included an increase of 9.7 percent in funds for culture, education, science and health; a 12 percent decline in price subsidies, and a slight decrease, to $10.1 billion, in subsidies to state enterprises. 
It is unclear if these plans will be realized.
China's economy, which has been governed by an austerity plan since the fall of 1988, was forecast to grow even more slowly this year.
