
China said today that its first nuclear power plant had begun trial operation this week in the southeastern coastal province of Zhejiang.
The start-up of the 300,000-kilowatt reactor at the Qinshan plant was delayed for two years by construction problems. 
The plant, which started tests on Sunday, is to be visited by international inspectors before it goes into full operation in June, the official New China News Agency said.
The news agency said that "debugging and experimental work" was being carried out at the plant, but did not give other details.
The announcement comes amid heightened attention to China's highly secret atomic energy program, including concerns about its nuclear cooperation with countries including Iran and Iraq. 
Some experts are also worried about the safety of China's planned Daya Bay plant near Hong Kong.
China, the sixth nation capable of designing and building a nuclear reactor, is seeking to expand its nuclear energy capabilities, particularly in industrialized coastal regions where shortages of coal and electricity hold back economic development.
 
Confidence in Chinese Program
An inspector with the International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna expressed confidence today in China's nuclear energy program, although he said it was too early to comment on the safety of the Qinshan plant.
"I'm not worried about them starting their own project," said the inspector, Jean-Paul Bember, who visited the plant for the second time in January. 
"I think they are very careful about what they are doing."
On Sunday, Chinese news organizations reported that complications in installing pipes at the Daya Bay plant, 30 miles from Hong Kong, had delayed its opening to mid-1993. 
It originally was scheduled to begin operations in late 1992.
Construction at the Daya Bay plant was halted for nearly two months in 1987 after officials found that 316 steel reinforcing bars were left out of the foundation. 
Work resumed after supplementary bars were installed.Concern has been expressed in Hong Kong about the plant's design safety.
China has recently disclosed more information about its atomic energy program in an apparent effort to counter Western criticism that about the secrecy surrounding its transfers of nuclear technology.
Beijing said last month it was selling a miniature neutron source reactor to the International Atomic Energy Agency for transfer to Syria. 
Earlier it disclosed that it had sold Iran an electromagnetic separator and a minireactor that it said were for peaceful uses.
The Government made the disclosures after denying any transfer of nuclear weapons technology.
Western critics have accused China of selling nuclear technology and equipment with potential military application to nations including Iran, Iraq, Algeria and Pakistan.
