
China today announced the release of 211 people jailed for taking part in the democracy movement last year, including several of the most prominent supporters of greater democracy. 
Diplomats described the action as an attempt to improve Beijing's relations with the West.
The Government also said ''431 law-breakers involved in the turmoil and rebellion'' were still under investigation. 
The implication was that only 431 people remain behind bars in Beijing, of the thousands who were detained after the military crushed the protests last June. 
It was the first time the authorities had given a figure for pro-democracy protesters in prison. 
[In Washington, the Bush Administration welcomed the release of 211 prisoners, but it urged Beijing to disclose the number and names of all the others who remain in detention.] Fate of Prisoners Unclear ''This is important,'' a Western diplomat here said of the prisoners' release. 
''This is a message to Western countries, and it should be welcomed.''
But a diplomat from another Western country was more cautious. 
While stressing that the announcement was good news, he said he wanted to know what restrictions had been placed on those released, as well as a clearer indication of who remained behind bars and what would happen to them.
The diplomats said the principal reason for the release, or at least the timing, was Chinese concern that the United States might revoke most-favored-nation status for Chinese exports. 
President Bush must decide by June 3 whether to recommend continuing most-favored-nation status, which gives Chinese exports the same relatively low tariffs that the United States levies on goods from almost all other countries. 
An end to the low tariffs would be a significant blow to China's export sector.
 
Writer Is Among Those Freed
Among those released today was Dai Qing, a prominent writer in her mid-40's, who apparently offended the leadership with a speech in Tiananmen Square in which she praised the student demonstrators but also called on them to leave the square. 
Also freed was Cao Siyuan, 44, a lawyer who was heavily involved in a campaign a year ago to use constitutional procedures to revoke martial law and perhaps unseat Prime Minister Li Peng.
''Coming back home was like a dream,'' The Associated Press quoted Miss Dai as saying in a telephone interview. 
''After 10 months my kitchen is like a stranger.''
The A.P. quoted Miss Dai as adding that she could not say more, for fear of rearrest.
This evening Miss Dai's husband said that she was out and that in any case it was better that she not take a call from a reporter. 
A woman who answered the phone in Mr. Cao's home said he could not take a reporter's call. 
The announcement, by the official New China News Agency, said that among other prominent figures released were Li Honglin, former president of the Fujian Province Academy of Social Sciences; Zhou Duo, an employee at a computer company who was one of four hunger strikers at the time of the crackdown last year; Yang Baikui, a political scientist in the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, and Li Nanyou, an editor at a Beijing publishing house.
No Word on Many Dissidents There was no word on other prominent dissidents, like Wang Dan, the scrawny history student from Beijing University who became probably the most important leader of the student movement. 
Mr. Wang, along with other important figures in the movement, is believed to be held at Qincheng Prison in the outskirts of the capital.
The brief announcement said little more than that ''211 law-breakers involved in the turmoil and counterrevolutionary rebellion last year have been given lenient treatment and released upon completion of investigations.''
The statement added that those who confessed and showed repentance would be dealt with leniently, while those who ''continue to do evil will surely be punished strictly in accordance with the law.''
In January, the Ministry of Public Security announced the release of 573 people who had been involved in the democracy movement in Beijing. 
But there is little doubt that many more people were detained after the crackdown - most estimates by diplomats are in the range of 5,000 to 10,000 in the capital alone - and that most of these were released one by one in the late summer, fall and winter.
 
Uncertainty of Estimates Cited
One dissident estimated in an interview recently that the number still in prison probably was in the hundreds rather than in the thousands.
But he emphasized that such calculations are fraught with uncertainty. 
While many intellectuals have informal networks to pass around information about each other, little is known of the workers who were arrested in the crackdown and its aftermath.
In addition to those still in prison for their involvement in the 1989 democracy movement, dissidents say that about 10 people are still incarcerated for pro-democracy activities in the Democracy Spring movement of a decade ago.
The Government also has not relented, so far, in the case of Fang Lizhi and Li Shuxian, the dissident couple who remain in refuge in the American Embassy in Beijing. 
Allowing Mr. Fang and Miss Li to leave China would improve the chances that China could retain most-favored-nation status, but some Chinese officials worry that such a concession would make the Chinese lose face internationally.
