
In an acknowledgment of the gulf between China's leadership and its people, the Communist Party's Central Committee called today for stronger ties to ordinary citizens.
Many diplomats and Chinese expected the Central Committee, which has been meeting behind closed doors for four days, to make significant personnel changes within the party, including additions to the Politburo. 
No such changes were announced.
''No change within the party is a symbol of party stabilityI,'' one Chinese said. 
In recent internal documents and speeches, party leaders have emphasized stabilityI as a guiding principle.
But it is not uncommon for Chinese leaders to announce decisions weeks or even months after they have been made, so it remains possible that personnel changes were made by the Central Committee but will not be announced until later.
 
'Going Among the Masses'
Today's announcement was read on national television while scenes of the meeting, with Chinese leaders raising their hands in approval, flashed across the screen. 
''Leading cadres at all levels must persist in the system of frequently going down to the grass-roots units and going among the masses,'' read the party statement, carried by the official New China News Agency.
The statement cited ''bureaucratism,'' passivity and corruption as some of the practices that had helped to estrange party officials from the ordinary people, many of whom have privately expressed disenchantment with the party since the military crackdown on the Chinese pro-democracy movement last June.
''This means they are indeed keen on improving relations with the people, and getting support from the people,'' a foreign diplomat here said. 
''They are trying to convince the people that the party is very sincere.''
The meeting, which began on Friday, was apparently delayed by two days from its original schedule, the diplomat said. 
He said he did not know what had caused the delay.
 
Laying the Groundwork
Diplomats and Chinese say the Central Committee meeting is preparing the groundwork for the coming session of the National People's Congress, China's Legislature, which is expected to announce an easing of austerity policies as well as changes of senior and mid-level Government personnel.
Weeks ago, diplomats and informed Chinese speculated that changes at a level as high as the post of Prime Minister could be made. 
But today's announcement seemed to suggest that Prime Minister Li Peng would keep his post.
The New China News Agency said today that Mr. Li had made an important speech to the committee, suggesting his central role at the meeting.
