
American intelligence reports indicate that China is continuing to sell missile technology to Syria and Pakistan despite statements by Chinese leaders that they are willing to curb missile exports, according to senior Administration officials.
Beijing has recently delivered to Syria about 30 tons of chemicals needed to make a solid-fuel missile and plans to deliver an additional 60 tons in March or April, said the officials, who added that the amount was enough to make a "significant" number of intermediate-range missiles.
It has also delivered to Pakistan guidance units that could be used to control the flight of M-11 ballistic missiles, they added.
The issue is important because the United States is ready to lift the sanctions on the sale of American satellite parts and high-speed computers that were imposed last spring after the United States learned that China had secretly delivered launchers for M-11 missiles to Pakistan.
President Bush, who favors removal of the sanctions, will raise the issue of China's proliferation practices when he meets at the United Nations on Friday with China's Prime Minister, Li Peng. 
Leading lawmakers and human rights organizations have sharply criticized the meeting, the first between the leaders since Chinese troops crushed the democracy movement in China in June 1989.
During the visit of Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d to Beijing in November, Chinese officials said they would abide by the provisions of a 1987 international agreement restricting the export of missiles and missile technology, but only if the Administration lifted the sanctions.
The Administration has made the issue of nonproliferation a linchpin of its post-cold-war foreign policy, and is especially eager to halt the transfer of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and ballistic missiles to the developing world.
The President's plan to meet with Mr. Li reflects Mr. Bush's firm belief that the best way to moderate China's behavior is through dialogue, a strategy that has been criticized even inside the Adminstration.
"There was great controversy about whether the President should even meet Li Peng," a senior Administration official said. 
"It raised the whole debate about how best to bring the Chinese along -- by stiff-arming them or by coaxing them when they make a few moves in the right direction."
Administration officials have played down the significance of Friday's meeting, describing it as a short encounter and as a "courtesy" to the Chinese, who requested it.
When asked at a briefing today whether an announcement to lift sanctions was imminent, a State Department spokesman, Joe Snyder, said that once the two Governments completed the agreement reached during Mr. Baker's meeting in November, "the Administration plans to take the steps necessary to lift the June 1991 sanctions."
"We have no set timetable for lifting the sanctions," he said.
 
Divisions in Administration
There are deep divisions in the Administration over the wisdom of lifting the sanctions. 
Many intelligence officials and some senior Pentagon officials oppose any easing of restrictions, while the White House is clearly in favor of such a move.
The State Department notified Congress in a letter in mid-December that it intends to lift the sanctions. 
But resistance by Chinese leaders to an American demand that they put their oral promise to Mr. Baker in writing has contributed to a delay, Administration officials said.
Some non-proliferation experts in the Administration are convinced that the recent sales to Syria and Pakistan would constitute clear violations of the agreement, known as the Missile Technology Control Regime, which was devised by the United States and other powers to limit the supply of ballistic missiles to the developing world.
But other officials use a broader interpretation, saying it is nearly impossible to determine whether the transfer of certain technology that might have dual uses is a violation.
The suspicion felt toward China in some quarters of the Administration was reflected in remarks by Defense Secretary Dick Cheney after a speech in Wisconsin this week. 
Mr. Cheney said that his "prime concern" with regard to China was proliferation.
"They have in the past, on occasion, been less than scrupulous in their concern for maintaining control over that technology," he said.
 
China's Policy 'Worrisome'
Similarly, in testimony before the Senate Armed Services Committee last week, Lieut. 
Gen. James R. Clapper Jr., Director of the Defense Intelligence Agency, called Chinese arms sales and proliferation policies "worrisome," adding, "China is currently assisting many of the nations that we estimate will acquire a ballistic missile capability by the end of the decade."
China has vigorously denied selling entire missiles or warheads to Syria, Pakistan or any other country in the Middle East or Southwest Asia. 
Indeed, American officials say there is no proof Beijing has shipped such weapons.
Many American officials and independent non-proliferation experts have expressed growing concern, however, that China is circumventing the spirit of missile-control agreements by selling missile components. 
Such transfers are significant because developing countries can assemble the parts and, in some cases, market the technology themselves.
"These transfers would help both Syria and Pakistan develop a manufacturing capability for their own missiles and would even allow them to proliferate missiles to other countries," said Gary Milhollin, director of the Wisconsin Project on Nuclear Arms Control, a private group. 
"It happens at the very time that China is promising to change its behavior."
 
Limitations to Guidelines
A senior Pentagon official acknowledged the limitations of the missile control guidelines, saying they were "a way to keep a lid on things, but not strictly control" proliferation.
American intelligence reports over the last few years have also shown that China has discussed with Iranian officials the possible sale of M-9 missiles.
Launchers and M-11 training missiles were delivered to Pakistan last year, despite Beijing's pledges not to sell medium-range missiles in the Middle East and Southwest Asia. 
The Chinese view the M-11, which is said to have a range of about 180 miles and can carry a nuclear warhead, as a short-range missile, although the United States considers it a medium-range missile covered by the missile technology agreement.
