
China expelled a British journalist today amid some indications that the Government is tightening control over foreign journalists.
The Briton, Andrew Higgins of The Independent, said he had been summoned to the Public Security Bureau today and ordered to leave China within 48 hours. 
The authorities did not give a reason, but in June Mr. Higgins reported on a confidential Chinese document that discussed the suppression of a nationalist movement in the Chinese region of Inner Mongolia.
Security officials found the document in his luggage while he was on a trip within China. 
The Chinese Embassy in London later advised The Independent's head office to transfer Mr. Higgins. He had already been planning to leave China in the next few months.
 
Wrote About '89 Crackdown
Mr. Higgins, who is 33 years old and speaks fluent Chinese, is co-author of a book about the military crackdown on the democracy movement in 1989.
"I'm saddened and disappointed," Mr. Higgins said this evening. 
"I've spent a good part of my life involved with and interested in China, and so to have it all sealed off to me so unceremoniously is very distressing."
Mr. Higgins is the first Beijing-based correspondent to be expelled since John Pomfret of The Associated Press and Allan W. Pessin of Voice of America were ordered to leave in June 1989, 10 days after the crackdown at Tiananmen Square.
The state security apparatus appears to have tightened surveillance of foreign journalists in the last few weeks, possibly as a reaction to the upheaval in the Soviet Union. 
Security agents seem to be following more foreign correspondents than usual, and sometimes interrogating those Chinese who dare to meet with them.
In addition, at least four American correspondents were contacted by an unknown Chinese last week and asked to take some materials and pass them on to Representative Nancy Pelosi, a California Democrat, who was visiting China. 
The correspondents declined, fearing that they were being set up for a charge of spying, and in at least one case security agents were seen hovering in the background taking photos.
In another sign of a harsh line, the Government refused today to allow Hou Xiaotian to visit her imprisoned and hospitalized husband, Wang Juntao, a prominent dissident. 
Ms. Hou was scheduled to have her monthly meeting with her husband today, but for the second month in a row the authorities refused to admit her, said a Chinese with firsthand knowledge.
The prison officials did not give a reason, but they had earlier asked Ms. Hou to write a self-criticism and to promise that she would cut off all contacts with foreign journalists. 
Ms. Hou declined, fearing that a self-criticism might be used as the basis for legal action against her and concerned that her husband's treatment might worsen if she pledged not to tell anyone about it.
Mr. Wang, who is serving a 13-year prison sentence for his role in helping to plan the Tiananmen democracy movement, went on a hunger strike last month. 
The authorities say that he is eating at least some meals now.
