
Perhaps what is most remarkable about Zhu Jianbin is not that he has spent the last nine years in prison for trying to promote democracy, but that he has been so totally forgotten in the labyrinth of the Chinese penal system.
Mr. Zhu is evidence that repression sometimes works, for the authorities have locked him up without attracting any significant criticism or tarnishing their image.
His very existence has been virtually obliterated, for most democracy advocates here and abroad have neverheard of him, and even in this city where he worked and dreamed of democracy, people shake their heads and say they have never heard his name.
The Chinese leaders appear ready to go ahead soon with criminal trials of some major figures in the 1989 democracy movement, and the Government may well believe -- based on the evidence of Mr. Zhu and countless others -- that the harm to its image will be slight and transitory.
Beijing may well believe that such a temporary setback is an acceptable price for making an example of some activists and frightening the rest intosubmission.
Hundreds, and perhaps thousands, of people remain in Chinese prisons and labor camps for their involvement in the 1989 democracy movement. 
Last week, the Government formally charged two editors of an economics journal, Wang Juntao and Chen Ziming, with counterrevolutionary crimes because of their participation in the movement. 
They and others are expected to face trial soon, and perhaps prison sentences of up to 15 years.
The result has been a flurry of foreign indignation -- just as there was a burst of outrage a decade ago when China imprisoned the leaders of the1978-79 Democracy Spring movement. 
But that outrage gradually dissipated, and only Wei Jingsheng is much remembered now, in China or abroad. 
Mr. Wei, an electrician and essayist, is now in the 12th year of his 15-year prison sentence. 
He is said to be in solitary confinement, with even the guards ordered not to speak with him.
Mr. Zhu's case never attracted much attention, partly because he lived and worked here in Wuhan, where there are no resident diplomats or foreign journalists. 
Mr. Zhu, who is now 35 years old, was a worker at a big steel mill in Wuhan and an editor of a journal about democracy, "The Bell Tolls."
"We've been sending letters, but we've never heard anything," said Barbara Krasnoff, a member of an Amnesty International group in New York that has "adopted" Mr. Zhu as apolitical prisoner. 
"We never found out if he has any family."
"It's very hard not to lose interest in a case," Ms. Krasnoff added in a telephone interview. 
"We're human and if you don't hear anything from somebody for so many years he becomes almost fictional. 
Every once in a while we have to take out his picture and remember that this is a real person."
The way in which Mr. Zhu has been forgotten, except to the Amnesty group, raises larger questions about the democracy movement in China. 
Nelson Mandela managed to inspire many South Africans while he was in prison, and in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union dissidents kept alive the memories of many who were in labor camps.
But Chinese intellectuals say that the tendency here has been to forget thosewho are locked away. 
Many of the students involved in the 1989 Tiananmen movement had never heard of the leaders of the Democracy Spring Movement a decade earlier -- names of men like Xu Wenli and Wang Xizhe, who are serving 15- and 14-year prison sentences, respectively.
Fang Lizhi, the Chinese dissident now living in England, wrote in an essay this year about "The Chinese Amnesia" -- the tendency for society to forget and ignore past repression -- as a factor inhibiting the emergence of greater democracy in China.
While Professor Fang argued that the Communist "Technique of Forgetting History" was losing its effect with regard to the 1989 crackdown, there is no sign of greater interest in those who remain in prison for their efforts a decade ago to promote democracy.
