
Fang Lizhi, China's most prominent dissident, said today that he and his wife were looking forward to ''a chance to rest and recuperate and to have some medical tests'' as they started a new life in Britain.
Mr. Fang and his wife, Li Shuxian, arrived Monday night at the United States Air Force Base at Upper Heyford, near Oxford, after the Chinese authorities allowed them to leave their refuge in the United States Embassy in Beijing and go into exile.
Cambridge University said Mr. Fang, a distinguished astrophysicist, had accepted a post as a senior visiting fellow at the university's Institute of Astronomy, where he would study the early universe.
Research Is Backed
In a statement issued through the Royal Society, the academy of sciences that has agreed to support his research for at least a year, Mr. Fang said:
''The past year has been difficult for us but we have received strong support from the international scientific community and friends everywhere. 
My wife and I would also like to express our heartfelt appreciation to President Bush, Ambassador Lilley and the staff of the U.S. 
Embassy in Peking. 
We look forward in the next few days to a period of quiet, a chance to rest and recuperate and to have some medical tests.''
Mr. Fang and his wife took refuge in the United States Embassy on June 5 last year after the Communist authorities - who issued a warrant for the couple's arrest for committing crimes tantamount to treason -used troops and tanks to crush student-led pro-democracy demonstrations. 
The officials have said that the couple had asked to go abroad for medical treatment.
 
'A Family Reunion'
Mr. Fang said that his son, Fang De, who is still in China, would soon be able to study abroad and that he and his wife were ''naturally looking forward to a family reunion.''
''As citizens of China,'' Mr. Fang said in the statement, ''we hope to do whatever we can in the future to help China's continuing progress and development.''
The Royal Society had planned to have Mr. Fang speak at a news conference today, but the briefing was canceled after he met with British diplomatic officials. 
When the couple were allowed to leave China, the Chinese Ministry of Public Security said they had agreed not to engage in activities against China.
Britain's Foreign Office said today that the Government had not imposed any condition of political silence on the couple, who are here on a six-month renewable visa.
