
About 1,200 people, most of them graduate students from China, rallied in Manhattan yesterday in support of pro-democracy demonstrators in Beijing.
The twin themes of the gathering at Dag Hammarskjold Plaza, near the United Nations, and subsequent march to the Chinese Consulate at 12th Avenue and West 42d Street were denunciation of China's senior leader, Deng Xiaoping, and its Prime Minister, Li Peng, and support of the democracy movement challenging the Beijing Government.
The protesters' carried colorful banners and placards, including a poster depicting Mr. Deng as the ghost in the logo from the movie ''Ghostbusters.''
There were delegations from Princeton, Rutgers, Yale, the University of Connecticut, and Penn State, among others.
As the march began, some people began singing the spiritual ''We Shall Overcome,'' substituting lyrics like ''China will be free.''
 
Shouting to Consulate Staff
When the marchers arrived at the consulate building, they broke into chants of ''Li Peng, Step Down.''
When they saw consulate staff members peering down from upper-story windows, some using binoculars, the protesters began to shout, ''Come down, if you're Chinese!''
At one point, a student identified as Haitao Zhang cut his hand and used the blood to write a four-character slogan that translates as ''An eye for an eye'' on a cloth banner. 
Mr. Zhang tried to give the banner to consulate officials, but they would not accept it, other protesters said. 
Mr. Zhang was taken to a hospital for treatment.
Most students said they agreed with the decision of their counterparts in Beijing to leave Tiananmen Square. 
''We can't achieve everything in one night,'' said Yiming Tang, a graduate student at Columbia University and one of several coordinators of the march.
Students who head back to their homes and universities will spread their fervor for democracy among more people that way, he said, adding: ''We have to go step-by-step. 
Perhaps we should say this is the end of the beginning, like Sir Winston Churchill.''
