
Signaling uncertainty about China's political stabilityII, Moody's Investors Service Inc. today downgraded the country's long-term credit rating.
While the move reflected the likely difficulty China will have in returning to the financial marketplace since suppressing the democracy movement in June, bankers say China will still be able to raise money - though at higher prices than it is used to paying.
The downgrading of the debt rating from A3 to Baa1 is unlikely to have an immediate impact on China's borrowing costs since China has raised only about $5 billion in foreign currency bonds, none of it in United States markets. 
Bonds rated A are considered ''favorable'' and are one step above those with a Baa rating, which are considered medium grade.
Moreover, foreign banks are more concerned about when the World Bank will resume lending to China than they are about ratings.
The lower rating reflects the general assessment that China will have to pay more for its conventional loans than its previous typical margin of one-quarter percent above the London interbank offered rate, or Libor, a standard benchmark.
Indeed, bankers here and in Hong Kong say that since June, rates for trade credits and occasional other loans have generally risen by half a percentage point, and sometimes even more. 
The higher interest rates, for bank loans or bonds, will raise China's borrowing costs and put new pressures on an already strained economy. 
China is to begin repaying larger amounts of its $43 billion foreign debt next year, and higher interest rates will increase the difficulties of refinancing these loans.
The rating change could have been more severe and the fact that it was not is one indication that financial analysts and bankers are being careful not to overestimate the impact of the June crackdown on China's creditworthiness. 
Moody's may also have been particularly careful since its initial rating last year of A3 was lower than had been expected.
''We think there is a lot of rhetoric accompanying the economic adjustments, but the inference that this is a complete return to the old operating method is not necessarily valid,'' Roger B. Arner, director of Moody's Japan K. K., said today in a telephone interview from Tokyo.
Two American banks have arranged loan syndications for Chinese borrowers that are expected to be signed this month. 
Both were five-year loans for $50 million, by the Hong Kong merchant banking arms of the Bankers Trust Company and the Chase Manhattan Bank.
In each deal, the Chinese borrowers were successful in obtaining pricing below Libor in return for a currency risk.
The Bankers Trust loan syndication, to the China International Trust and Investment Corporation, or Citic, offers three-quarters of a percentage point above Libor to its syndication partners. 
The loan was oversubscribed.
The more recent Chase Manhattan deal has had greater difficulty attracting participants. 
The loan was made to China Resources Holdings and offers partners three-eighths of a percentage point over Libor for the first three years and one-half of a percentage point for the remainder. 
So far, about $25 million has been sold to other banks.
