
Ignoring a light drizzle, the women emerged from their houses carrying small plates of potatoes, goose livers and pickled cucumbers, and placed them on tables clustered outside a shiny white three-story house.
The focus of attention was a tiny boy bundled up like a bushy red ball and cradled in the arms of his new mother. 
He had just turned one month old, a magic age in the hardscrabble Chinese countryside, traditionally signifying that a baby is likely to survive, and nearly a hundred peasants had come with gifts of little red packets bulging with money.
"He's the first son," said Mai Shunjing, the scrawny grandfather, as he let out a smile filled with broken teeth and big aspirations. 
"This is an important day for our family."
Half a dozen years ago, there would have been a similar celebration, but without the food, the money or the wine. 
Life has overwhelmingly improved over the last six years, even the last six months, for the 440 people in Pan Shi, a village in a land of rich, rolling rice paddies in southern China's Guangdong Province.
 
Well Off and Typical
Pan Shi (pronounced pahn sher) is a bit wealthier than the average Chinese village, but customs and conditions here are still fairly indicative of how China's 900 million peasants -- three-quarters of the nation's population and nearly 17 percent of the world's -- go through life.
The great issues that absorb residents of Beijing, and through them catch the attention of the West, are of subdued interest here. 
The peasants seem little interested in challenging the Government on freedom of expression, for instance, preferring to put their energies into defying Government limits on having children.
They do not seem intrigued by macroeconomic questions, like whether China's economy now trails only that of the United States and Japan, but rather by such mundane matters as whether they will be able to afford running water instead of having to fetch water from a well.
Yet even here, the peasants feel vulnerable to what happens 1,000 miles away in the capital. 
The Communist Party's policies may change tomorrow. 
Or some official may arbitrarily decide to ruin one family or another.
"Our life is so much better now than before, but in China, you never can tell what the Government will do," said a young entrepreneur who runs a factory in another village. 
"I don't know how long this economic policy will last. 
So whenever I get the chance, I'm going abroad. 
Life is stable in America."
 
Knowing When to Clam Up
While they may not know much about politics, the peasants here in Pan Shi know enough to clam up when the topic comes up. 
As the festivities for his grandson continued over a 10-dish banquet by the porch, Mr. Mai turned sheepish when asked what he thought about the growing gaps between the rich and the poor.
He managed a faint smile before mumbling something about there being no gaps at all. 
Immediately, however, his son came to his rescue, and Mr. Mai slipped away.
"We don't talk politics in this house," said Jinsheng, his 29-year-old elder son. 
"My father has suffered too much in his life, from the Cultural Revolution, from this and that movement.
"He is old and afraid. 
I don't want anything to happen to him again because of politics. 
I have to protect my father. 
If it weren't for him, I wouldn't be here today."
 
Politics Is Passive
For most villagers, politics is not an interactive process but a passive one. 
A new political movement means that they must change the slogans on the village walls, or -- worse yet -- attend silly meetings instead of working the fields.
To be sure, the Government now holds elections for village chief, but only one person runs. 
That is partly because villagers cannot quite imagine a political race, and partly because it is no longer a very attractive position.
"Most people don't want to do that kind of work," said Chen Qiumei, a 33-year-old woman with two children, both boys. 
"The Government wants you to do a lot of work that offends other people."
A few others echoed her view. 
In a place where much of life is lived outside, there are few secrets. 
The village leaders often have take sides with one villager over another.
 
Spying for Family Planning
The worst part is reporting on mothers who get pregnant for a second, third or fourth time. 
The village chief risks being regarded as a traitor for turning in his friends.
Mai Ruiqian, a 46-year-old sturdy fellow with a rounding stomach, became the new Mayor this year. 
He is a member of the Mai clan that dominates the village: nearly all men are named Mai, and only their wives, who came from other villages, have other surnames. 
It is common in China for a village to be made up of a single clan, and many villages are known only by the surname of the people who live there: the Mai Village, the Wu Village, and so on.
One sign that the job is not as enviable as it was in the past is that the last chief declined to run for a second term. 
Still, Mayor Mai says he has found a way around the difficulty of picking on his neighbors: He leaves the troublesome tasks to his superiors in the township government a few miles away.
"The township sends its family planning people here," Mr. Mai said, expressing relief that he does not have to worry much about it. 
"They have the family planning rosters."
 
A Phone but No One to Call
Mr. Mai enjoys a few perks, like lunching in the township with officials nearly every day. 
But there are problems: arranging for water for crops and for more electricity to meet the growing demands of modernization. 
In a small triumph, the village also got a public phone recently; the only problem is that since few peasants have a phone, there is no one to call.
The phone, however, is a sign that the peasants are pretty well off in Pan Shi. 
Indeed, in addition to the public phone, two families have their own phones -- not including the Mayor.
Being moderately well off, in Pan Shi's case, means that peasants here earn an average of about $175 per person per year, instead of the national average for peasants of about $125. 
The figure may be a bit misleading because the peasants grow most of their food themselves and have few expenses.
Another reason they are doing well is that people throughout this region called Taishan have many relatives in Hong Kong, the United States and Canada. 
Taishanese is still a common dialect in Chinatowns in the United States, although in the last few decades it has been partly eclipsed by Cantonese and, more recently, Mandarin.
The gates to Pan Shi itself are a reminder of the overseas connection, having been built with money sent home from migrants abroad and carrying a tablet with the names of dozens of contributors.
 
Plastic for the Crops
Still, it was only when someone here introduced a new farming technique -- protecting the vegetable crops with plastic covers -- that life for everyone seemed to get better. 
The plastic serves to keep moisture in the soil and protect the vegetables from freezing, and the practice has since become widespread throughout China.
Mai Caidong, 26, is among the new entrepreneurs who are branching in new directions. 
Not content simply to spend her days wading in the rice paddies or bending over the cabbages, she is taking advantage of opportunities to go into business.
Up at 3:30 A.M., she and her husband roar off on their motorcycle to the Taishan city center every day to sell fruit and vegetables, a business that brings them about $2,600 a year. 
Last year, they saved $1,700 of that in the bank, although Ms. Mai recently diversified her assets by investing some of that in a gold necklace from Hong Kong and other jewelry.
"They let us go into private enterprise, and most people don't feel bad if they stay behind in the village," said Ms. Mai, sitting in her clean, spacious living room. 
"Of course, my husband wants to go to Guangzhou and set up a rice shop."
