
In a significant shift in its strategy to modernize the country, China said today that it would restrict the number of graduate students it sends to the United States and other nations, and would begin producing far more members of its technological elite in Chinese universities.
The new policy was described in the Chinese press today, and officials explicitly linked the move to the crushed democracy movement, which sprang from some of China's leading universities. 
The Government has contended that its students have been over-influenced by the West.
In an interview published in the English-language China Daily, the Vice Minister of Education, He Dongchang, said that a ''screen'' must be placed over China's windows to the world to prevent ''flies and worms'' from infesting the country. 
''Opening to the outside world does not necessarily mean seeking knowledge from only a few Western countries,'' Mr. He said. 
#26,000 Enrolled in U.S. 
Schools According to statistics compiled last year, about 26,000 Chinese nationals were enrolled in American universities in 1988.
The move comes at a time when China, which has depended heavily on foreign technology and education in recent years, is trying to loosen its dependence on the West. 
That drive accelerated after the crackdown on the democracy movement in early June.
For example, meeting today with scientists developing China's space program, Prime Minister Li Peng said that after the June demonstrations ''we have come to the sober conclusion that China's space industry, either for national defense or civil purposes, must be developed through self-reliance and hard struggle.''
He urged them to use as much domestic technology as possible.
Several weeks ago the Government announced a plan to force university graduates to spend two years in labor programs, many in the countryside. 
As colleges start up this week, the first course is ''ideological re-education.''
It starts with the study of speeches that Deng Xiaoping, the country's foremost leader, gave after the student movement was driven off the streets.
 
Fewer Doctoral Studies Abroad
In the new policy described today, Mr. He did not specify how many students China would allow to go abroad. 
But the Vice Minister, who is considered a close ally of Mr. Li's, said that ''China will concentrate on producing its own doctors in the future instead of sending students overseas for doctorates.''
A report on the official New China News Service today said that ''the state has made a preliminary decision to reduce the number of students who will be sent abroad for graduate and doctoral studies,'' while increasing the number of ''visiting scholars'' sent to the United States and other nations for brief periods of study.
The move appears intended to help solve one of China's most vexing problems: Many students who leave the country never come back. 
Presumably visiting scholars would be older and have deeper ties to China, including spouses and children back home.
''I think they have concluded that after 10 years of sending students abroad, they aren't getting that much out of it,'' said a leading American businessman here familiar with many Chinese students educated in America. 
''And when people do come back, they are resented by people who did not go abroad and underutilized by the state.''
 
Lack of Jobs Is a Problem
Mr. He himself conceded in the interview that China often does not find ''appropriate occupations'' for its returnees, and said that would improve, along with pay and quality of housing.
Presumably, the Government is also concerned by the thousands of Chinese students abroad who have organized a movement in exile, with extensive contacts back in their homeland. 
Mr. He suggested that ''patient and painstaking ideological work'' should also be conducted by Chinese students living overseas.
But rather than turning to ideology, many students are turning to American consulates, taking advantage of President Bush's offer to extend student visas.
Chinese officials said before the democracy movement crackdown that about 7,000 students are doing post-graduate work around the world under Government financing. 
Government departments and state-run enterprises send another 5,000 abroad.
 
Users of Exit Visas
But many students are abroad on their own money, or on scholarships provided by foreign universities. 
It is unclear whether China intends to limit the number of exit visas granted for such independent study. 
Among the heaviest users of those visas are the children of Government and Communist Party leaders. 
Many members of the Politburo have children studying abroad.
In the interview published today, Mr. He suggested that too many students are going abroad to improve their own living standards rather than ''according to the needs of the state,'' and their work should be directly applicable to solving concrete problems in China.
While Chinese students abroad have entered a variety of fields, their presence is particularly strong in computer design and programming, electrical engineering and physics. 
But those are areas where Chinese universities lag far behind, and many complain on their return that they have neither the budget nor the equipment to carry out their work.
