
The Government assures foreigners that life in China has loosened up, but lately many Chinese are shaking their heads, whispering: ''Nei jin, wai song'' - ''tranquillity outside, repression within.''
The expression has also been used internally by the Government to describe its policy of managing China's image, Chinese officials say.
The result of this attitude, Chinese intellectuals say, is that there is a divergence between the texture of life on the surface and the inside reality. 
Moreover, as the Government tightens its control on certain groups, contours of repression emerge to separate the largely unaffected ordinary Chinese from those under special scrutiny.
''When they lifted martial law, they announced to the world that everything was smooth and peaceful,'' a Chinese worker said, referring to the lifting of martial law in Beijing in January.
''But the troops are still here hiding indoors,'' he said. 
''To the outside world, they say life is normal. 
In Beijing, they drill the troops even harder.''
What goes on in the army is often a mystery to many Chinese. 
But particularly after noticing the army's role in the collapse of Nicolae Ceausescu's Communist Government in Romania, China quietly tightened control over its army, and there is talk about changes among regional commanders.
China's leadership has also explicitly distinguished between doctrine for domestic consumption and face-saving propaganda for the outside world. 
In closed meetings, the party has criticized the Soviet President, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, implying that he is not a true socialist, but officials have told Chinese not to publicize the criticism.
''They explained to us why Romania collapsed, and why China was different from Romania and the rest of Eastern Europe,'' a teacher said. 
''They also told us not to discuss this with outsiders, especially foreign reporters.''
Chinese intellectuals say the Communist apparatus, with its strata of rank, bureaucracy and secrecy, has many ways to tighten control over clusters of people without influencing the rest of society. 
For instance, party members are now facing greater pressures because they must re-register in a new screening procedure intended to weed out problem members.
Tension is growing at the higher echelons, partly because of power jockeying over major decisions before the National People's Congress, which convenes on March 20. 
China's security agencies have issued orders to restrict the flow of information about China's internal matters to the outside world.
The state has also managed the press and broadcasting more tightly.
