
If Dan Quayle ever gets annoyed at the jokes made about him, he should hear what is said about China's Vice President.
Wang Zhen, the 82-year-old Vice President, has emerged as one of the most outspoken hard-liners in the Chinese Government, and that makes him the target of some of the most bitter invective that is quietly muttered among young Chinese.
In the last few weeks, when rumors started to go around that Mr. Wang had fallen and broken his leg, many intellectuals expressed regret that he had not fallen on his head.
 
Not Seen in Public Lately
There is still no confirmation that Mr. Wang was injured, but he has not been seen in public since Aug. 
5. The account making the rounds among knowledgeable Chinese is that Mr. Wang arranged a private meeting with another hard-liner, 88-year-old Peng Zhen. 
When it was over, Mr. Peng reportedly tugged on the door and then lost his balance when it suddenly sprang open. 
He tumbled backward on the slight Mr. Wang, and the two leaders, with a combined 170 years on this planet, collapsed in a heap.
Whether or not this version is true, the satisfaction it evokes among intellectuals is palpable.
Mr. Wang is not the leader of the hard-liners. 
That title probably goes to Chen Yun, the 85-year-old head of central planning, who has not been seen in public for more than a year. 
But Mr. Wang is among the most outspoken, combative, energetic and persistent of the octogenarian hard-liners.
The position of Vice President is largely symbolic in China, but Mr. Wang has used it as a bully pulpit to push his vision of socialism, and this has won him attention and influence.
One example of Vice President Wang's influence reportedly came in August, when he read in Dongtai Qingyang, a classified news summary for the leadership, about chaotic and unauthorized stock trading in the southern city of Shenzhen. 
According to a Chinese with direct knowledge of the incident, Mr. Wang promptly wrote a memorandum denouncing such stock trading and circulated it to the Politburo.
 
Opening of Exchange Delayed
Prime Minister Li Peng was less aroused than Mr. Wang but agreed to investigate the matter and send an inspection team to Shenzhen. 
The upshot is that the Shenzhen Stock Exchange has had to delay its formal opening indefinitely.
By contrast, Mr. Wang's son, Wang Jun, is a highly regarded business executive in China's leading Western-style investment company, the China International Trust and Investment Corporation.
Even Mr. Wang's enemies generally acknowledge his sincerity and determination, even if they disagree with his views.
''Whatever you think of him, he's one of the most persistent people around,'' said a Western diplomat. 
''He hasn't changed his tune over the years.''
Two years ago, for example, Mr. Wang was the only leader who took strong exception to a television series called ''Death of a River.''
The series criticized the Yellow River, a symbol of China; to develop itself, the series suggested, China had to look outward to the blue ocean that symbolized the West.
Mr. Wang condemned the series on the ground that it profaned China's rich cultural heritage. 
For a time his was a lonely voice, but now his view has prevailed and the series is banned.
 
Defender of Mao Icon
When some younger people proposed in early 1989 that the portrait of Mao be taken down from Tiananmen Square, it was Mr. Wang who threw down the gauntlet. 
''If the portrait is removed,'' he is said to have declared in a meeting with other officials, ''I will never again go to Tiananmen Square.''
After the crakdown in June 1989, a widespread rumor reported that Mr. Wang was calling for special prison camps along China's northern border, where disgruntled intellectuals could be locked up for years. 
There is no evidence that the rumor was true, but it suggests how Mr. Wang is viewed -and feared.
Although he only has a third-grade education, Mr. Wang has taken a keen interest in literary and cultural affairs, which explains his frequent clashes with younger intellectuals. 
Particularly since the 1989 crackdown, he has tried to make writers and artists use their works to win support for socialism.
Mr. Wang's impetuousity seems to go way back. 
As a 16-year-old boy, he reportedly was dismissed from his first job, as a fireman on a locomotive, when he slapped the wife of a foreign employee of the railroad. 
Perhaps the incident helped to radicalize him, for within three years he joined the Communist Party and soon began rising through the Red Army to power and prominence.
