
The provincial government in this poverty-stricken region of northwestern China is aggressively enforcing a new law requiring the sterilization of mentally retarded people.
So far this year, officials here say, more than 1,000 people have been sterilized under the law, which requires people with significant mental retardation to be sterilized if they are married or intend to be married. 
If the couple evade the law and the woman becomes pregnant, she must have an abortion.
The law was approved by the provincial Parliament a year ago and took effect at the beginning of the year here in Gansu province, where it directly affects about 30,000 retarded people out of a population of 21 million.
Law Receives Wide Praise
The law has been hailed nationwide, and officials say that the national Legislature and half a dozen provincial governments are thinking of adopting similar legislation. 
Several provinces have sent delegations here to study the measure as they consider drafting their own laws.
''The purpose of the law is to raise the quality of our population and of our nation,'' Miao Xia, the deputy head of the Gansu Province Family Planning Association, said in an interview. 
''We want to solve the poverty problem in part by raising the quality of the population.''
As Miss Miao acknowledged, however, the new law raises questions of morality and the role of legislation: Does society have a right to force people to be sterilized?
If a citizen has committed no crime, but happens to be retarded, can the state intervene to the point of forcing sterilization or an abortion?
 
Different Views in the West
The law is an echo of the eugenics movement in the West earlier in this century. 
Tens of thousands of ''mental defectives'' were sterilized across the United States, mostly between the 1920's and the 1950's.
In Virginia, which kept records, about 8,300 were sterilized between 1924 and 1972 under a state law providing for compulsory sterilization of the mentally disabled. 
The law was upheld in a landmark Supreme Court ruling of 1927 in which Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes made a now notorious comment: ''Three generations of imbeciles are enough.''
In Nazi Germany, a system of eugenic health courts ordered the sterilizations of more than half a million people from 1933 to 1940. 
They were judged by the courts to be suffering from mental retardation, physical deformities, schizophrenia and other illnesses.
In most Western countries, such sterilization programs have been sharply curtailed in response to public furor. 
The Chinese sterilization law could escalate longstanding complaints by the United States Government over China's population control policies, which seek to limit the number of children born and impose penalties on couples who violate the rule. 
[President Bush vetoed a $14.6 billion foreign aid bill Sunday night, objecting specifically to an allocation of $15 million for the United Nations Population Fund. 
Foes of abortion in the United States have opposed its financing on the ground that the agency performs work in China, whose population program includes abortion and sterilization.] Individual Vs. 
Society But in China there has been almost no public reaction to the sterilization law. 
Some Chinese intellectuals observe that their nation is inspired not by the notion of an individual's rights, or theories of social contract that limit the state, but by a Confucian heritage in which the individual is subordinated to the good of society.
Before the law was approved, the discussion centered not so much on ethics as on practical questions such as how the law would be enforced, and whether the mentally retarded were likely to have mentally retarded children.
''Some people said that ordinary people can have an idiot for a child, while two idiots can have an ordinary child,'' said Wang Jian, the Secretary General of the Gansu Population Studies Association. 
''But we explained that even if their child is normal, it will carry a gene for idiocy.''
The degree to which mental retardation is hereditary has been vigorously debated in the West, and no clear consensus has emerged.
 
How the Law Applies
The Chinese provincial law applies to people with moderate or serious mental retardation, such as those with an IQ of 49 or below. 
The retardation must be congenital and must be confirmed by a doctor.
The law has initially been put into effect in four particularly poor counties in Gansu, and has been accompanied by a major publicity campaign to convince people of the measure's importance. 
The arguments are not aimed at the mentally retarded themselves, for they are deemed insufficiently aware to react much one way or another, but at their families.
Many of the mentally retarded are married to people of average mental ability, and their spouses have not been enthusiastic about the law, some officials acknowledge. 
While their partners would not have to be sterilized themselves, they would be prevented from conceiving children within the marriage.
 
Policy Is Criticized
Two leading American geneticists say that the number of mentally retarded children would not be significantly reduced by sterilization of mentally retarded people.
''There are many causes of mental disease and deficiency - some genetic, some environmental, some simple and some complex,'' said Dr. James F. Crow, emeritus professor of genetics at the University of Wisconsin. 
''The Chinese program as described seems exceedingly crude.''
Scientists said it was likely that less than half of the mentally retarded acquired their disability genetically.
''For a good many of these sterilizations, there would be no genetic basis,'' said Dr. James V. Neel, professor of human genetics at the University of Michigan.
About 1 percent of the world population suffers from mental retardation. 
Dr. Neel estimated that it would take approximately 20 generations to reduce the frequency of a gene from 1 percent of the population to one-tenth of 1 percent.
Although scientists said the Chinese plan had little scientific merit, they suggested that sociological arguments could be made for such a plan. 
For example, ''one can argue that affected persons do not provide a good environment for their children and should not have them for that reason,'' Dr. Crow said.
