
In a sign of Government concern at growing calls for human rights, China's official media today attacked a dissident petition drive for an amnesty of China's political prisoners.
But in a sign of the more relaxed political atmosphere here, the dissidents reacted by immediately organizing a news conference to respond to the Government charges. 
They also announced the establishment of a four-member working group called ''Amnesty 1989'' with an office in a local hotel and a telephone that was billed as a 24-hour hot line for democracy.
They said they would put out a weekly newsletter on human rights issues. 
Such a newsletter would apparently be illegal, since it would not be licensed by the authorities.
 
First Such Campaign in 10 Years
Such open campaigning for human rights in China has not been seen in nearly a decade, since the ''Beijing Spring'' political thaw of late 1978 and early 1979. 
That thaw was followed by a crackdown in March 1979, which included the arrest of Wei Jingsheng, an electrician whose essays had called for China not only to modernize its economy but to nurture democracy as well. 
Mr. Wei was subsequently sentenced to 15 years in prison.
Thirty-three Chinese intellectuals last week opened the petition drive for an amnesty of political prisoners, particularly Mr. Wei. More than 70 other mainland Chinese have also signed the petition, and in the United States more than 700 people, mostly Chinese nationals, have also signed their names in the last few days, organizers say.
In Taiwan, 32 scholars have also signed a letter supporting the appeal.
 
Dissidents Invited to Bush Dinner
Moreover, at least two of the most prominent supporters of the amnesty have been invited by President Bush to a banquet in Beijing on Sunday night where they may brush shoulders with senior Government officials. 
The two are Su Shaozhi, a political theorist who was one of the 33 intellectuals who signed the letter, and Fang Lizhi, China's best-known dissident, who initiated the call for the amnesty with a personal letter to China's senior leader, Deng Xiaoping, in January.
The petition drive appears to have alarmed the Government. 
Official newspapers carried a dispatch today from the Government-run New China News Agency that sharply condemned the appeal for amnesty. 
The dispatch quoted a Justice Ministry official as saying that Mr. Wei had been fairly sentenced by an independent court, and that the Government had no power to intervene in its sentence.
The article singled out Chen Jun, a 30-year-old manager of a private bar in Beijing, for criticism. 
It said Mr. Chen was the chief sponsor of the letter.
Signers say, however, that the main organizer of the letter was Bei Dao, a 40-year-old poet and author who is regarded as one of China's best writers today. 
Bei Dao, whose real name is Zhao Zhenkai, held a press conference today with Mr. Chen in which they complained that the Government published only the criticism of their letter and not the letter itself.
