
A high-ranking official who supported the Tiananmen democracy movement is about to go on trial, a Chinese who was briefed on the case said today.
The official, Bao Tong, was political secretary to the Politburo's Standing Committee and a member of the Central Committee. 
He is the highest official to have been imprisoned in connection with the Tiananmen movement three years ago.
The Beijing Intermediate People's Court notified Mr. Bao's family members today, telling them that the trial would take place in eight days. 
Court officials have declined to comment.
Mr. Bao, a thin, bespectacled 59-year-old, has been held in solitary confinement in Qincheng Prison since he was detained on May 28, 1989. 
He was formally arrested only in January of this year, on charges of disclosing state secrets and spreading counterrevolutionary propaganda.
He was the right-hand man to Zhao Ziyang, the Communist Party General Secretary, who was ousted after the Tiananmen crackdown and who is now under virtual house arrest. 
Mr. Bao was an ardent proponent of political change and headed the Central Committee's Political Reform Research Center. 
He had great influence over domestic and international policy.
The court would not tell family members today whether they could attend the trial, the Chinese said. 
Family members are normally allowed to attend trials in China, but they can be barred in cases that involve state secrets or other sensitive issues.
Mr. Bao's lawyer was also apparently notified of the trial, but it is not clear whether the court authorities will give him access to Government files he believes are necessary to prepare a defense. 
The lawyer is Zhang Sizhi, who has represented other political prisoners and is expected to put up a spirited defense for his client.
Normally, defense lawyers do not contest their clients' guilt but merely ask the court for mercy. 
When Mr. Zhang represented other dissidents last year, and vigorously defended them in court, he was reprimanded afterward by the judicial authorities.
In March, the Politburo expelled Mr. Bao from the party and stripped him of his Central Committee seat. 
A guilty verdict is virtually certain, and the Politburo has presumably decided on the penalty the court will impose.
Mr. Zhao's case has been handled strictly as an internal party matter, through an investigation that is believed to have been completed. 
It is unclear what the party will ultimately do with Mr. Zhao.
