
The Gold Cup Automobile Company is China's pride: a behemoth corporation that embodies China's hopes of transforming its state-owned factories into efficient, market-oriented enterprises.
Gold Cup manufactures minibuses and trucks, but just as important in a country where many state-owned concerns lose money, it has been making ever-larger profits. 
Tugged into the unfamiliar world of market economics by an aggressive chairman hailed as one of China's shrewdest industrialists, Gold Cup has become a laboratory for change and an inspiration to those who believe in the future of Chinese industry.
One of the experiments that has attracted the most attention is Gold Cup's effort to sell shares that are listed on the Shenyang stock exchange. 
The company is the largest in China to issue stock. 
What's more, the shares are sold nationwide instead of just to the company's employees. 
Gold Cup's shares can be freely transferred and, at least in theory, the shareholders could vote to oust the management.
''To me, it's basically an attack on the socialist ownership system,'' said Carl Eugene Dorris, the United States Consul General in Shenyang. 
''Because it's a state company with 50,000-plus workers, it's perhaps the most important experiment in the northeast, or in all of China. 
There are a lot of people watching, and if it succeeds, it will perhaps be a new direction for China.''
A look at Gold Cup provides a peek into the murky world of Chinese industry: the cozy links between Government and business, the travails of management in a system that relies on an uneasy mix of socialist principles and market mechanisms and perhaps the hope that at least in some situations, daring management can make a big difference for China's state-owned companies.
It is not coincidence that Gold Cup is based in Shenyang, a drab northeastern city that has become the nation's laboratory for restructuring state-owned industry. 
Gold Cup has license from Beijing to tamper with tradition. 
The result is a work environment different from that in most Chinese factories.
In a way, it is misleading to refer to China's state-owned companies as businesses, because they are so different from American businesses. 
For one thing, they are owned by ''the whole people,'' which is so vague that nobody really knows who owns them. 
And because nothing terrible happens if they lose money, they tend to maximize not profits but revenues or bonuses to workers. 
Their raw materials are often not purchased on the free market but supplied by the state. 
And prices for what they sell are also often controlled.
Even in its origins, Gold Cup suggests how different Chinese companies can be from their American counterparts. 
Five years ago, officials simply turned Shenyang's Auto Industry Bureau into a company consisting of the city's auto plants. 
The regulators suddenly found themselves in charge of 58 factories that previously had little or no connection - indeed, some had been collectively owned instead of state owned. 
(Collectively owned businesses are typically owned by the employees.) The former head of the auto industry bureau, Zhao Xiyou, suddenly became head of the Shenyang Auto Industry Corporation, which last year changed its name to the Gold Cup Auto Industry Corporation. 
Gold Cup is the brand name of one line of minibuses and trucks that the company manufactures.
Gold Cup makes 35,000 vehicles a year, providing one-fourth of China's domestic pick-up trucks and half of the minibuses made in the country. 
It reported profits last year of about $40.5 million on total income of $375 million. 
While Chinese accounting methods are far from rigorous, the reported numbers reflect a 25 percent rise in profits and a 27 percent increase in revenues from a year earlier.
By 1993, the company hopes to be earning more than $120 million a year and producing much higher quality vehicles. 
''Our goal is that we want people not to be able to tell whether our vehicles are imported or local,'' said Bi Wenjie, chief of Gold Cup's auditing division.
Almost no one outside Gold Cup seems to think that is realistic. 
So far, the pick-ups and minibuses are obviously cheaply made and are not generally regarded as very reliable. 
''Nobody would get one if they could afford a Japanese model,'' acknowledged a Government official.
Still, most people seem to think that the quality has improved and that high import duties will continue to restrict competition from Japanese vehicles. 
Principally because of duties, a Japanese minibus or pick-up costs three or four times as much as a Chinese vehicle of about the same size, though the Japanese model is also likely to be better made and include extras like air-conditioning.
Gold Cup has attracted attention in large part because of Mr. Zhao, its manager. 
A 54-year-old native of Shenyang, he has studied economics and is regarded by both Chinese and foreigners as a man who ignores ideology and aims to make money for his company.
One of the main reasons for Mr. Zhao's success, and his company's, seems to be his longtime association with a kindred spirit, Liaoning Province Governor Li Changchun.
Governor Li, who was mayor of Shenyang at the time that Gold Cup was made a company, is an aggressive advocate of economic restructuring and an ally of Communist Party General Secretary Zhao Ziyang. 
That alliance led to Shenyang's becoming a laboratory for economic change; Gold Cup has often played the role of guinea pig.
In 1985, for example, Beijing sent one of its most unorthodox economists, Hua Sheng, to Shenyang, where he worked with Gold Cup as part of an effort to make Chinese industry more efficient. 
Mr. Hua now says he has a high regard for what Gold Cup is doing, but adds that it is inadequate because strong ties remain between the Government and companies like Gold Cup. 
Mr. Hua has achieved some fame here with his solution: that China must abandon its state-ownership system.
Under Mr. Zhao, Gold Cup has taken several initiatives to make itself a more efficient state enterprise. 
By Western standards, they may seem ludicrously tame, but are very bold by the standards of China's other state-owned industrial corporations.
The company picked a board of directors, consisting of experts on law, economics and industry, to oversee the management. 
A board of directors is a novelty: most companies are directed by the company manager and Communist Party secretary, with vague supervision from various Government departments.
Gold Cup's party secretary, He Zhongbin, also is unusual in that he disavows any competition with Mr. Zhao. While party secretaries and company managers in China are often at each other's throats, Mr. He is an enthusiastic supporter of the changes that are taking place. 
He also is deputy manager of Gold Cup, while Mr. Zhao is deputy party secretary, which perhaps reduces party-management conflicts. 
''I don't think there are a lot of companies organized like this in China,'' Mr. He said, ''We have a lot of cooperation here, and that is one factor behind the company's development.
Paradoxically enough, another initiative to make Gold Cup more efficient was bankruptcy. 
A collectively owned factory under the parent corporation several years ago, it became the first company in China formally to go bankrupt since the Communist Revolution in 1949.
Wages also became more flexible, to encourage workers to be more industrious. 
Large monthly bonuses were initiated in 1987 as incentive payments; they can now add up to four times the regular monthly wages. 
Bonuses were also linked to the company's profitability. 
The system of incentive payments has extended to Mr. Zhao, who nominally earns $42 a month, about twice as much as an ordinary worker. 
Of course, like other senior officials in business or government in China, he enjoys many perquisites, such as use of a car and housing, that permit a much higher standard of living than his income would suggest.
The board of directors set a target of $36.1 million of profits in 1988 and said that if it was met, Mr. Zhao would earn a bonus of almost $500 - not much by American standards, but about a year's salary to him. 
If profits fell short of the target, his pay would be docked. 
He met the target and took home the bonus.
Bad workers at Gold Cup have already had their wages docked, and a very few have even been fired for violating regulations. 
''Everybody noticed when workers were docked,'' said Shen Chuanjian, a secretary at the factory's office.
After last year's share issue, Gold Cup is now about 50 percent owned by the state, 40 percent by various companies, 7 percent by corporate stock purchasers - including other state-owned and collectively-owned concerns with cash to spare - and 3 percent by individual stock purchasers. 
And if another large stock issue goes ahead as planned in several years, the state share in the company would drop below 50 percent, a sensitive demarcation in a nation that has not yet decided whether the state should give up its majority interest in companies it owns.
Gold Cup also plans to issue $4 million in United States dollar-denominated stocks to help raise hard currency to finance imports of needed equipment. 
So far, however, the country's central bank has not given approval for the sale of dollar-denominated stock, which would be issued both to foreigners and to Chinese holding foreign currency. 
In the meantime, Gold Cup has lost the chance to be the first corporation to sell to foreigners; a company in the southern city Shenzhen issued Hong Kong dollar-denominated stocks in December and January.
Mr. Bi said the biggest problem for Gold Cup is simply getting hold of the raw materials it needs. 
Buying steel, for example, often depends less on the price than on the ability to cultivate good relations with a steel plant somewhere. 
And raw materials that come from abroad must be paid for in hard currency, which is scarce.
''Right now we want to import steel boards costing $3 million, but we only have $1.5 million in U.S. currency,'' Mr. Bi said. 
He added, however, that he expected more hard currency to turn up soon, from the state or from Gold Cup's exports to southeast Asia.
One of the most crucial raw materials that is in short supply is electricity. 
Gold Cup has had to stop Saturday production because of electricity shortages, and there is the possibility of further cutbacks.
But such problems would be far worse were it not for Mr. Zhao's connections with the locality. 
These have been an enormous boon to the company. 
Shortly before Gold Cup issued shares last year, for example, it was able to convince Shenyang that its tax rate should be lowered. 
The company argued that the state, as half-owner, would get half of the stock dividends and that these should count in lieu of taxes. 
The Government obligingly cut the tax rate for share-issuing companies in Shenyang from 55 percent to 35 percent.
City officials seem to think they should do their part to help a local company make good. 
Guan Weiguo, executive director of Shenyang's economic restructuring commission, proudly explained: ''Gold Cup is experimenting not only for Shenyang, but for the entire country.''
