
A highly charged issue is looming in relations between the United States and China, and it has Chinese officials and intellectuals concerned over their future, their standard of living and their contacts with the West.
The issue is most-favored-nation trading status, and the concern is over whether the United States will renew favorable treatment on tariffs to China. 
By June 3, President Bush will make a recommendation to Congress for a vote, and Chinese officials and business executives are worried that Mr. Bush might not recommend renewal or that Congress would block it.
As a clear gesture of conciliation toward the United States, China announced Thursday that it had released 211 political prisoners, and had earlier lifted martial law in Lhasa, the capital of Tibet, but diplomats reacted cautiously. 
They said it was not clear whether one or two actions would be enough to ease American indignation at political repression in China.
Benefits of Trade Status
China, which exported about $12 billion worth of goods to the United States last year, has benefited enormously in the last decade from most-favored-nation status, which gives Chinese exports the same relatively low tariffs of 10 percent to 25 percent that the United States imposes on goods from most other countries. 
If the status were revoked, China would have to pay up to 90 percent duty on some items, mostly apparel, toys and electronics.
''If most favored nation is not renewed in June, and if Congress approves, then it could hurt both countries,'' Wei Mingyi, president of China International Trust and Investment Corporation, said in a recent interview. 
''Trade between the two countries could be set back by 20 to 30 years.''
The issue comes a year and a half after China began an austerity plan that has left the economy virtually stagnant, with zero industrial growth in the first quarter this year compared to the same period last year. 
Inflation is down and growth rose slightly in April, but some Chinese and Western economists say it will be a tough task to stimulate the economy significantly again without bringing back inflation, which reached double digits in 1989.
 
Threat to China's Exports
From China's point of view, the threat to its exports could not come at a worse time. 
Revocation of most-favored-nation status could cut China's exports to the United States by about 50 percent in the first year, and more in the following years. 
This would mean a decline in China's exports of about $6 billion in the first year alone, amounting to about 11 percent of its total exports last year of $52.5 billion.
Trade between China and the United States has soared in recent years, and last year it rose by 43 percent over 1988 to $17.8 billion. 
But trade frictions between the two countries could rise regardless of whether most-favored-nation status is revoked, because of China's mounting trade surplus with the United States. 
In the first two months of this year, its trade surplus with the United States was $1.3 billion, or 79.2 percent higher than the surplus for the same period last year, according to statistics from the United States Department of Commerce.
At that rate, American economists estimate, China's trade surplus with the United States could reach $11 billion this year, possibly making it the country with the second highest trade surplus with the United States, after Japan.
A small minority of Chinese intellectuals interviewed say they are so disillusioned with the Government that they support revocation of most-favored-nation status, but the great majority appear to favor continuation of the trade benefits.
 
'Torn Over the Issue'
''We feel torn over the issue,'' a Chinese researcher said. 
''On the one hand, we want the United States to punish the Chinese Government for what it did. 
But on the other hand, we know that such a punishment would affect our own personal lives, and frankly, we don't like the thought of having to endure the suffering.''
Most intellectuals say the Chinese Government would retaliate, probably at first by raising tariffs or restricting American imports, such as wheat and technology and equipment. 
But their anxieties go far beyond the impact on trade between the two countries. 
They say the Chinese Government would close its doors at least slightly to the world, restricting travel to America, cutting cultural exchanges and access to a wide range of Western things from books to fashions to ideas.
It is uncertain how the revocation of most-favored-nation status would affect Chinese politics. 
On the one hand, it would hurt the economy and perhaps increase the pressure within the leadership for the removal of Prime Minister Li Peng, who is in charge of the economy.
On the other hand, many Chinese say that the most likely outcome is that the hard-liners would seize the occasion to begin a campaign for self-reliance instead of openness, and encourage a new wave of anti-Americanism.
''It will deal a blow to the reformers,'' said a Chinese businessman. 
''It will foster an anti-Western attitude.''
