
Congress has passed a bill allowing Chinese students to stay in the United States after their visas expire. 
But Administration officials said today that President Bush might veto it at Beijing's request.
Chinese students active in the democracy movement overseas say they would face political persecution if forced to return to China.
Administration officials maintain that the bill is unnecessary because there is already an American clemency program for Chinese students. 
They say China dislikes the bill so much that Chinese authorities might end student exchanges with the United States if it becomes law.
'Planted the Seeds of Democracy'
Senator Alan K. Simpson, the assistant Republican leader in the Senate, said that on Nov. 
15 ''the Chinese Foreign Minister advised our Ambassador in Beijing that if this legislation is enacted, the Chinese Government will terminate outright the Fulbright scholarship program, as well as all other educational and cultural exchange programs with the United States.''
Such programs ''planted the seeds of democracy in China,'' the Wyoming Republican said.
In Beijing, a Chinese Government spokesman said today that the bill was unacceptable.
And a spokesman for the State Department said it opposed the bill.
Mr. Simpson said Mr. Bush would probably veto the measure.
Administration officials said Mr. Bush was aware that a veto would shock millions of Americans who sympathize with the Chinese students. 
But they said Mr. Bush, a former chief of the American mission in Beijing, did not want to offend the Chinese leaders if he could avoid it.
 
Warning on the Consequences
John H. Sununu, the President's chief of staff, said the Administration was still evaluating the bill and was concerned that it might have the ''unintended negative consequence'' of reducing opportunities for Chinese students to come here in the future.
The bill, introduced by Representative Nancy Pelosi, Democrat of California, was approved in the House of Representatives on Sunday by a vote of 403 to 0 and in the Senate on Monday by voice vote.
Under the bill, most of the 40,000 Chinese students in the United States could stay here and apply for new visas without going home for the two-year waiting period normally required for foreign students. 
The Chinese would have up to four years to apply for other types of visas or to seek status as permanent residents of the United States.
The State Department says the bill is not needed because the Administration has already established a clemency program for Chinese students, under which the Immigration and Naturalization Service can defer deportations to June 6, 1990.
 
'It's Not a Real Option'
But Chinese students have shunned that program. 
''It's not a real option because it requires us to make a declaration against our country, branding us as traitors and counterrevolutionaries,'' said Haiching Zhao, chairman of the National Committee on Chinese Student Affairs.
Mr. Zhao said he doubted that China would cancel student exchanges if the Pelosi bill became law. 
''The Chinese Government reaps a tremendous benefit from the acquisition of intellectual capital through the exchange program,'' he said.
Chinese Army troops crushed China's democracy movement and killed hundreds of protesters in Beijing on June 4. 
Since then, students at Chinese universities have been required to attend classes on party doctrine and ideology.
A spokesman at the Chinese Embassy here, Wu Zurong, expressed ''grave concern'' about the Pelosi bill and said it ''will damage Sino-U.S. exchanges in education.''
Chinese students in the United States said they hoped that Mr. Bush would not be swayed by Beijing's threats.
Mrs. Pelsoi said, ''If the Chinese Government is going to act in a repressive fashion, threatening to take retaliatory action, that just underlines the need for this legislation.''
