
The explosive events in China have sent shivers through Italy's faltering Communist Party, the largest in the West, and have emboldened Socialists who hope to emerge soon as the country's dominant left-wing group.
Communists here are bracing for what may prove to be unusually important elections for the European Parliament on June 18.
It clearly troubles party elders that because of China's turmoil Italians will vote with fresh memories of a Communist government that ordered its soldiers to shoot citizens demanding democracy. 
As a result, they have gone to considerable lengths to denounce Chinese leaders and to organize demonstrations of solidarity with the student-led democratic movement.
Perhaps more significantly for the future of Communism in Western Europe, the party secretary, Achille Occhetto, has gone further than ever to align himself with European social democratic movements in his continuing campaign to stop a decade-long slide at the polls. 
His efforts have even rekindled a public debate that arises periodically over whether it is time for the party to change its name. 
''We are not part of an international Communist movement,'' Mr. Occhetto said in a newspaper interview this week.
''In the East, communism is a term that has no relation any longerto its historic origins, and constitutes a political framework that is completely wrong,'' he said, adding, ''There is absolutely nothing left of communism as a unitary and organic system.''
Today, he called on the Government to freeze economic relations with China.
If Mr. Occhetto's damage-control strategy fails, the Socialist leader, former Prime Minister Bettino Craxi, is standing by to pick up the pieces.
 
Craxi Weary of Junior Role
Throughout the 1980's, the Socialists have been junior partners to the more numerous Christian Democrats in a series of coalition Governments, but Mr. Craxi is growing weary of the role. 
His ambition is to command an Italian left restructured under a single umbrella, but first his Socialists must overtake the Communists, who though weakening, have been second only to the Christian Democrats throughout the postwar era.
Thus, for him, the European parliamentary elections are far more critical than simply who will wind up going to Strasbourg. 
To drum up interest in the campaign, Mr. Craxi went so far as to help bring down the Government, through relentless badgering that finally impelled Prime Minister Ciriaco De Mita to resign three weeks ago.
While Mr. De Mita remains in office as caretaker over the shell of a Government, senior politicians have held endless consultations to figure out who should lead next. 
Their talks drag on and on, but a solution seems likely to elude them until after the so-called European elections.
Mr. Craxi was heartened last week by the results of local elections in 165 municipalities. 
For the first time, Socialist candidates won a bigger share of the vote than the Communists, 19.1 percent to 16.9 percent. 
In 1987 parliamentary elections, by comparison, the Socialists drew only 14 percent to the Communists' 22.6 percent.
The balloting in a relatively small number of localities was hardly conclusive. 
Mr. Occhetto dismissed it out of hand, saying his party lost primarily in Mafia-dominated towns in the South.
Nevertheless, political commentators say that if the results are duplicated on June 18, they may have a broad impact on the balance of party power, and could even trigger early national elections. 
At the least, it is said, they are likely to determine the shape of the next government.
