
Britain and China announced a breakthrough today in their bitter 18-month dispute over the future of Hong Kong, agreeing that the colony can build an expensive new airport, but on the condition that China will gain even more influence over Hong Kong's affairs.
It was an ambiguous resolution at best to the highly emotional airport battle, which was seen by each side as a test of the other's good faith and by some as a sign of China's impatience for control over the prosperous capitalist enclave.
Britain received the assurances it sought that China will honor any debts the $16.2 billion airport incurs, even after Hong Kong returns to Chinese sovereignty on July 1, 1997. 
That guarantee was considered essential to attracting private capital, on which the project depends.
In return, Britain acceded to China's demand that it be formally consulted on all major decisions about the airport. 
China also received extensive financial influence over Hong Kong, with Britain promising that when the colony is turned over it will have at least $3.2 billion in cash reserves.
 
British Leader Plans Visit
Hong Kong has never disclosed the size of its reserves, but they are believed to amount to tens of billions of dollars. 
China hinted during the dispute over the airport that it believed Britain was trying to empty the colony's coffers before China took control. 
China will now be able to influence both the financing of the airport project and the colony's overall finances.
The British Government also announced that Prime Minister John Major would travel to the Chinese capital soon to sign a memorandum of understanding containing the agreement.
That, too, could prove a bonus to the Chinese; the leaders of the industrialized nations agreed to halt all high-level visits after China's violent suppression of demonstrations in Tiananmen Square in June 1989. 
Mr. Major's visit would be the first by a major Western leader since then.
"We have an agreement that enables us to go ahead with this project with the confidence and certainty we've been looking for," said Hong Kong's Governor, Sir David Wilson.
He added, "I don't think this is a bad deal for Hong Kong."
 
The Key Phrase
The Hong Kong General Chamber of Commerce praised the accord, and Martin Lee, a lawyer who has pushed for open elections in Hong Kong, said he welcomed the agreement's assurances. 
But Mr. Lee added that the threat to the colony's autonomy was worrying. 
"This would be most unacceptable," he commented.
The key phrase in the agreement is, "Any decision will give full weight to the Chinese Government's views."
The problem of what Britain will do if China continues to object to some aspect of the airport project after it is consulted remains unresolved.
"We think it's reasonable and makes sense to consult China on these issues," said Peter B. Davies, a spokesman at the British Embassy here. 
He added that "there are no secret annexes" that stipulate how disputes would be handled.
Britain had pushed for construction of the airport as a vote of confidence in the future of Hong Kong and to help insure its prosperity after it is returned to China.
 
Private Capital to Pay
The current airport, which juts into busy Hong Kong harbor from a crowded residential and commercial district near the heart of the city, will be replaced by a complex on the adjacent island of Lan Tao.
It will require huge amounts of excavation and landfill and construction of a suspension bridge nearly a mile long. 
Private capital is expected to pay for much of the project. 
Morgan Stanley & Company, the American securities firm, is the adviser on raising the billions of dollars that will be required.
China insisted it had a right to influence the airport plan, even though it has no formal say in the colony's affairs until 1997. 
At one heated moment a top Chinese Government official said that only the Chinese Government had the right to speak for Hong Kong's people.
Such remarks and Beijing's relentless criticisms were perceived by many in Hong Kong as meddling, a worrying sign that China would interfere in the colony's capitalist system in spite of a promise it will remain unchanged for 50 years after the 1997 handover. 
The bickering undermined already fragile confidence in Hong Kong.
 
A Form of Veto
Particularly worrisome for the British and many in Hong Kong was a sense that China was exercising a form of veto over a major Hong Kong issue. 
The project needed China's promise to honor the airport's debts to attract private capital. 
China had conspicuously withheld that promise; today it was offered.
As part of this financial understanding, the Bank of China was promised a large role in raising the loans needed for the airport. 
In addition, a Bank of China official will sit on the governing airport authority.
The Chinese Government said it would support "necessary and reasonable borrowing by the Hong Kong Government," even if it is to be repaid after 1997. 
What would count as reasonable was left unclear.
But China will hold a veto over any steps that would leave the airport with more than $640 million in debt after 1997. 
A joint committee will be formed, half of whose members will be Chinese, to review all major contracts and franchises that will run beyond 1997.
