
Chinese officials bitterly insisted today that the Hong Kong government had made concessions and apologies to persuade Beijing to resume accepting the return of Chinese illegal immigrants from the colony.
The Chinese version of the negotiations, given at a news conference today, differed from that given by Hong Kong officials on Monday when they announced the resolution of a two-week-old diplomatic impasse with Beijing.
Angry that Hong Kong had permitted Yang Yang, a top Chinese swimmer, to leave the British colony for the United States, China abruptly refused the routine return of 70 illegal immigrants on Oct. 
8. Beijing agreed to resume normal border routines on Monday, after more than two weeks of intense negotiations.
'Time and Time Again'
Pointing out that Hong Kong had insisted Monday that the dispute had been resolved with no concessions, officials at the New China News Agency, Beijing's de facto embassy here, said, ''In the past two weeks, the Hong Kong government has time and again apologized to us about the consequences of the Yang Yang case.''
At the news conference today, Zhang Junsheng, deputy director of the New China News Agency branch here, said Hong Kong ''explained to us the reason they sent Yang Yang away was due to pressure from the U.S. 
State Department and the U.S. 
Congress.''
But a senior Hong Kong government official said today, ''There was absolutely no pressure from the Americans.''
A spokesman for the American Consulate here denied the charge as well, saying, ''The U.S. 
Government did not pressure anyone over the Yang Yang visa application.''
Political analysts inside and outside the government have said New China News Agency officials here were acutely embarrassed when, in order to secure the return of Mr. Yang, they issued a public statement promising that the athlete, who asserted that he had secretly helped Chinese dissidents, would not be punished if he were returned to China. 
Hong Kong officials still permitted the young man to leave for the United States, a move that stung Chinese officials. 
Just Saving Face?
''I think this whole news conference was a face-saving exercise,'' a foreign diplomatic official said. 
''The Chinese want to claim a diplomatic victory. 
They want to regain the face they lost.''
But he pointed out, China did resume accepting its illegal immigrants, taking back more than 100 today, as planned.
''They want the last word, but they want to get on with life, with normal relations as well,'' the official said.
The New China News Agency statement said the Hong Kong government had assured Chinese officials it would not permit the colony to be used as a base for ''subverting the People's Republic of China,'' and added that Hong Kong government had cited examples of measures it had taken to ''restrain the anti-P.R.C. subversive activities.''
A Hong Kong government spokesman said that New China News Agency officials were told that Hong Kong would not be allowed to become a base for subversives, that the laws of the colony applied to all and that no group would be given more tolerance than the law allows. 
He also said that ''in the course of the discussions the Hong Kong government expressed regret to N.C.N.A. if any embarrassment had been caused to them as a consequence of their putting out a statement on Yang Yang.''
 
Existing Agreements Reaffirmed
The spokesman once again said that two sides have reaffirmed existing immigration agreements. 
On Monday officials said under those agreements Hong Kong had the right to use its discretion about returning Chinese citizens who were ''special cases.''
At the news conference, Mr. Zhang said the two sides had agreed not to disclose the details of the agreement which settled the illegal immigrants dispute, but he wanted to make clear the New China News Agency position and ''to clarify any confusion.''
