
China agreed today to allow two American companies to compete directly with Chinese rivals in shipping the nation's cargo, resolving a longstanding dispute over market access.
The Chinese concession, which comes at a time of mounting trade frictions between Washington and Beijing, is expected to facilitate trade with China and perhaps reduce transportation costs. 
It also is the first time that foreign companies will operate wholly owned subsidiaries in China's transportation business and directly compete with Chinese rivals.
China's decision averted a possible upward spiral of retaliatory measures that ultimately might have affected as much as half of the total two-way trade, estimated to be about $24 billion last year. 
The decision coincided with unrelated trade talks in Washington, in which a deal was struck this evening on protection of intellectual property.
"The company is very pleased," said Gary D. Gilbert, a Hong Kong-based vice president of Sea-Land Service Inc., a CSX Corporation subsidiary and one of the two American carriers granted approval to conduct business in China without Chinese agents. 
The other is American President Lines Ltd.
 
'We're Free Traders'
"We're free traders," Mr. Gilbert said. 
"We're in the business of moving commerce between countries, and the more free trade there is the better we like it."
Limited access to the Chinese market has been a major complaint of American companies and trade negotiators. 
The maritime dispute was reportedly raised by Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d during his visit to Beijing in November. 
It apparently was not directly linked to other trade issues.
"In so far as the individual negotiations, it is unrelated, but when looking at things like the attitude in Congress, it becomes one more log in a big fire," said a foreign businessman involved in trade between China and the United States. 
"It's all part of what we feel are barriers to market access."
China had effective control over the flow of goods into and out of the country, requiring American carriers to work solely through two Chinese booking agents, who in some aspects of the business were their direct competitors. 
In contrast, Chinese carriers were free to operate relatively openly in the United States.
 
Inquiry Was Begun
In July, the United States Federal Maritime Commission began an investigation into the treatment of American shipping companies in China. 
If the commission had determined that China indeed was unfairly restricting access, it could have imposed a charge of $1 million on each Chinese vessel that called at an American port. 
The Chinese side could also have retaliated with corresponding measures.
Presumably to avoid such stiff penalties as well as an ensuing trade war, China agreed to loosen its restrictions and allow two American shipping companies to establish subsidiaries and operate branch offices in China.
Half of all trade between the countries is carried by Chinese or American ships and would have been affected by the dispute, while the remainder is hauled on ships of third countries.
Sea-Land hauls about 13 percent of the trade between the United States and China; American President holds about 10 percent of the market.
