
The Government said today that it recently released 573 people who had been imprisoned for taking part in the democracy movement last year.
It was the first official announcement since a Government order at the end of June that banned the publicizing of information on arrests and punishments.
The action seemed to be part of an effort by the Chinese authorities to improve their image before the United States Congress reconvenes next week and considers sanctions against Beijing.
The lifting of martial law in the capital last week was also widely seen as an attempt to improve China's international image and reduce the possibility of new sanctions.
 
Flurry of Arrests and Executions
The official New China News Agency said the lawbreakers had been released ''because during investigations, they pleaded guilty and showed repentance.''
The brief report quoted an unidentified police spokesman as saying, ''Our policy is to educate anyone who can be educated and temper punishment with leniency.''
The report said the spokesman ''hoped that those who took part in the turmoil and counterrevolutionary riots, broke the law and obstinately stuck to the wrong course would understand the situation, repent immediately and plead guilty for leniency.''
The authorities detained thousands of students, workers and intellectuals in June and July, after the military crackdown in early June.
There was never an announcement on how many were arrested, but most estimates started at 10,000 and some were far higher.
After an initial flurry of arrests and executions were reported on television and led to an international outcry, the Chinese leadership circulated an internal document ordering that information about detentions and punishments no longer be publicized.
Since then there have been very infrequent reports, mostly in provincial Chinese newspapers, of arrests or executions.
 
Mistreatment of Prisoners
Some of those arrested were released in the late summer and early fall, and a significant number of students and intellectuals were released beginning in December, say dissidents who maintain an unofficial network among themselves.
The announcement today appeared to refer to those released beginning in December. 
Most of those released were not beaten by the jailors, and in some cases the guards showed a measure of admiration or respect for the political prisoners, friends say.
But some prisoners are said to have been mistreated in other ways.
One intellectual, for example, was kept in handcuffs constantly for the first 35 days of his imprisonment, a close friend said.
The intellectual had to rely on other prisoners to help him eat, dress and use the toilet.
After his release, his former employer refused to take him back, and no other concern would hire him. 
Since employers provide housing, the dissident had no place to live, no money to live on and no prospects for a career.
It is not clear how many people are still imprisoned for their role in the democracy movement, but nearly all estimates are in the high hundreds and probably the thousands.
The most prominent prisoners, like Wang Dan, a student leader; Ren Wanding, an essayist, and Liu Xiaobo, a literary theorist, all remain behind bars and nothing certain is known of their condition or treatment.
Almost all that is known about prisoners concerns intellectuals and students.
Very little is known about the many workers who played important roles in the movement, because they and their families were not part of a dissident network that could help them and spread the word about their circumstances.
