
THE Forbidden City has had its difficulties with visitors -- 17th-century Manchu invaders, 19th-century foreign devils refusing to kowtow -- but these days the problem is a new one: visitors aren't coming. 
The 9,000-room complex, which once housed the emperor and his eunuchs and concubines, is largely bereft of Western tourists.
Modern-day imperial accommodations, such as the Palace Hotel in Beijing, are equally short of Honored Guests, as the foreign devils are now called. 
The Palace Hotel, one of the best in China, says its occupancy rate is 20 percent, and similar rates hold for some other deluxe hotels in China.
All this is bad news for the Chinese tourism authorities, who had been enjoying large annual increases in tourism until the army crackdown in June 1989. 
But it is good news for those Western tourists who choose to make the trip. 
When I first visited Beijing in the summer of 1983, there were no hotel rooms available and I had to sleep on a cot in a hotel lobby with hordes of other unshowered tourists; now visitors have a wide choice, and the competition among hotels is improving service and lowering prices.
Indeed, from the point of view of convenience and economy, this is by far the best time to visit since China opened to the outside world a dozen years ago. 
New hotels in major tourist destinations offer satellite television and international direct dialing, in place of previous charms like brown water and squashed-insect stains on the walls. 
Many people in the tourism industry speak English. 
Taxi fleets have been expanded, and sybarites can even rent a Rolls-Royce in Beijing. 
The state airlines last year began selling round-trip tickets to some destinations, and it is becoming increasingly common to encounter an edible meal on a plane. 
The motto no longer seems to be: Air China, service with a snarl.
Overall, the number of overseas tourists in 1990 reached about 28 million, an improvement since the latter part of 1989 but still short of the peak of 32 million in 1988. 
But these numbers are misleading because they are made up overwhelmingly of Hong Kong Chinese, and many of these "visits" are simply one-day excursions across the border into China from Hong Kong. 
Some 211,000 American tourists visited China in 1990, down from a peak of 301,000 in 1988.
Of course, there is a reason why Western tourists are staying away: the 1989 crackdown and the continuing repression have dispelled the image of China as a happy place, associated with thoughts of pandas and progress; these days thoughts about China still turn quickly to blood on Tiananmen Square.
Many of our friends, in debating whether to come to China, have expressed moral concerns about whether visiting now serves to bolster the hard-line leadership and sends the wrong message. 
Whatever the ethics of the matter, few Chinese seem to favor a tourism boycott. 
Even those who detest their Government are surprised that Americans would stay away for moral reasons, and some say the gesture is misplaced. 
More tourism revenue and more interaction with the West will increase the pressures for change and for democracy, they say.
A secondary concern of some foreigners is safety, particularly because of memories of soldiers of the People's Liberation Army firing machine guns randomly at crowds in June 1989. 
The United States State Department has lifted its travel advisory about China, however, and these days there seems little danger to tourists. 
Even during the crackdown, no tourists are known to have been injured, and despite official denunciations of the United States, most Chinese are extremely friendly to Americans.
Still, China is among the least predictable places on earth, and it makes sense to be cautious. 
China is sometimes compared to a volcano, and if it erupts then foreigners as well as locals could feel the effects.
In June, around the first anniversary of the crackdown on June 4, 1989, plainclothes police unexpectedly began to beat up Western journalists, students and tourists who loitered at Tiananmen Square or the university district. 
That stopped after a few days, but the anniversary this year is likely to be sensitive once more. 
There are no clear-cut rules for avoiding trouble, other than obeying the police and avoiding photography of military sites or anything else that might be particularly sensitive. 
In general, however, a tourist is unlikely to feel threatened in China, for customs officers scarcely look at one's luggage and there are few police about. 
The atmosphere on the streets does not feel oppressive.
IT is probably unwise to bring in books or magazines about the crackdown, but even that is not a grave crime: the worst that is likely to happen is that they might be confiscated. 
Talking to people about politics, or about the crackdown, is entirely possible, but don't press the queries if the person seems flustered. 
Many tourist guides and officials are uneasy expressing their political views to a stranger, and they may worry about getting in trouble if they are overheard.
On the other hand, many young Chinese -- particularly university graduates -- are delighted to exchange views with foreigners. 
One way to meet local people is to visit a local "English corner," where people gather in the evening to practice their English. 
The best English corner is in Shanghai, along the Bund by the Huangpu River, but you may ask around in other cities if there is a functioning English corner.
If people approach you on the street to chat, you needn't fear that they are necessarily trying to swindle you. 
It is possible they want to do some black market currency dealing, but it is also quite likely that they simply want to practice their English. 
Many young people are also desperate to get to the United States, so they may ask questions about applying to American universities, and a few may even hope to find an American to pay their way.
The result of the drop in tourism is that the best tourist hotels, which often cater to Americans and Europeans, are not doing very well. 
Less expensive tourist hotels are doing a bit better, partly because of a rise in the number of tourists from Taiwan -- there were some 920,000 last year.
The drop in tourism seems even greater than the numbers suggest, because a wave of new hotels has been completed around the country. 
The three major destinations, Beijing, Shanghai and Xian, are particularly overloaded with new hotels. 
Planned before the crackdown, in anticipation of continued rapid increases in tourism, they are fighting for customers -- so bargains are everywhere. 
The newly opened China World Hotel, which with the Palace Hotel is the best in Beijing, normally charges $150 for a standard twin room, but until the end of March offers a reduced rate of $70 (plus 15 percent for tax and service; telephone 500-5258). 
The reason is simple: occupancy is only 20 percent. 
At the Palace Hotel, a standard twin is $108 (plus 15 percent; 512-8899). 
Moving down a notch in service, there has been a proliferation of midrange hotels. 
The newly opened Tianlun Dynasty Hotel has an introductory rate through March, possibly longer, of $45 (plus 10 percent; 513-8888), while the best bargain of all is at the Holiday Inn Lido, which through the end of March is charging only $30 (plus 10 percent; 500-6688).
THE best hotel in Shanghai, the Hilton, which is in the same league as the Palace and the China World in Beijing, has a rate of $99 through early March (plus 10 percent; 255-0000). 
The newly opened Portman Hotel has rooms beginning at $42 year-round (plus 10 percent; 258-2582).
Similar bargains can be found in other major cities, and it is well worth trying to negotiate a deal before making a reservation.
One alternative to Western-style hotels is Chinese guest houses that used to accommodate national leaders. 
The rooms are not as convenient and comfortable as those in Western hotels -- room service may not exist, double beds are hard to find, and food is not so good -- but they offer beautiful settings and much more Chinese charm than a Western hotel. 
In Beijing, for example, the former residence of Chairman Hua Guofeng (China's leader from 1976 through 1978) has been turned into the 20-room Hao Yuan Guest House. 
It is near bustling shopping streets, yet it offers quiet rooms off a central courtyard in the traditional Chinese style, for just $29 and up per night ( 553-179); reservations are advisable because there are many long-term guests, but the receptionist may not speak English.
An advantage of the Hao Yuan is that it is close to the Palace Hotel, with its restaurants and taxis. 
The main guest house in Beijing, Diaoyutai, also called Angler's Rest, is more isolated but is situated in a beautiful park in the Western part of the city. 
Diaoyutai is still used to accommodate foreign dignitaries (President Bush stayed there in 1989), but rooms are offered to the public when available (most of the time) for $140 a night and up (866-250).
In Shanghai, a similar official guest house offers rooms for $59 a night (Shanghai Guest House; 432-8800.)
The only problem with staying at a nice hotel in China is that it gives a misleading sense of the country. 
A standard tour of Beijing, Shanghai and Xian offers about as much insight into China as an excursion to Manhattan and Beverly Hills might provide a Chinese an understanding of the United States. 
Some 70 percent of Chinese live in villages, and even the city dwellers would have to save their entire salaries for months to stay a single night in the kind of hotels that accommodate foreigners.
So for those with a hankering for adventure, it is worth making an effort to leave the well-worn path and delve into the real China. 
One way is simply to hire a taxi and ask the driver to take you to a village somewhere a couple of hours away. 
One possibility is the Zhou Kou Dian area southwest of Beijing; another is the Nankou area, along the road to the Great Wall. 
Villagers are normally happy to get foreign visitors, particularly if they bring some nominal gifts, such as a cheap soccer ball for the children, or if they have a Polaroid camera and can leave photos behind.
ANOTHER option, for those with more time, is to take a few days to visit a place like Mount Tai, a holy mountain in Shandong Province that attracts peasants and pilgrims and that can be climbed in a few strenuous hours. 
Such excursions may mean inconveniences and communications problems, but they also offer adventure and a chance to mix with ordinary Chinese.
Licking a five-cent Popsicle on the mist-shrouded peak of Mount Tai, or playing table tennis on warped board with gleeful village children -- that's the real China.
