
With Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d visiting here in part to press for the release of hundreds of Chinese dissidents, two more of them were detained over the weekend as the Beijing authorities apparently sought to prevent them from meeting with Mr. Baker's aides.
Before Mr. Baker arrived in Beijing on Friday for a three-day visit, American officials had tentatively arranged meetings between his deputies and several dissidents in Beijing.
But tonight one dissident, Hou Xiaotian, the wife of a prominent democracy advocate now serving a 13-year prison sentence, said she was awakened at 1 A.M. Saturday, taken briefly to a police station and then driven to a Beijing suburb. 
There she was kept in a comfortable guest house, where she was allowed to watch television but was not permitted to leave or to make telephone calls.
Ms. Hou said her guards were reasonably cordial and indicated that she had been detained because of Mr. Baker's visit. 
The authorities drove her home tonight, a couple of hours after Mr. Baker left Beijing.
"I had hoped that through his efforts, Wang Juntao and Chen Ziming and other political prisoners would be released, but I know this requires a long time," Ms. Hou said when asked to discuss what she would have told Mr. Baker. "But before then, I think there are practical needs that should be met, problems such as improving their health care."
Mr. Wang, who is Ms. Hou's husband, and Mr. Chen were sentenced to 13 years for their reputed roles in the Tiananmen democracy movement that was crushed in June 1989.
Dai Qing, a journalist who had been denied an exit permit to take up a fellowship at Harvard University this fall, also reportedly was detained this weekend because of tentative plans to visit with American officials. 
Her telephone number produced a busy signal all night, and it is not clear if she has been released yet.
Mr. Baker was asked at a news conference before his departure about the detention of Ms. Dai. He said, "If it's true, it would be distressing news."
 
Churchgoers Barred
It was not clear how the Chinese authorities knew of the tentative meetings, which apparently were not arranged on the telephone. 
But Chinese officials knew that there had been suggestions that Mr. Baker or his assistants might meet with dissidents.
Earlier this morning, when Mr. Baker attended a service at a local church, seven or eight regular Chinese churchgoers were denied entrance because the authorities suspected that they were troublemakers, one of them said.
"For some reason, they didn't let me into church today," the churchgoer said. 
"I even went to the service when President Bush was here. 
It's my right to go to church, and when they didn't let me in, I felt very shaken and disturbed."
One of Mr. Baker's aims in his talks with Chinese officials was to achieve the release of some Chinese dissidents. 
China so far has not released any, but it did give information on about 800 dissidents whose names were on a list presented by American officials to Beijing.
