
Prime Minister Li Peng opened the annual session of China's legislature today with a call for tighter control on what he described as ''hostile elements at home.''
The speech lasted more than two hours and was the equivalent of a state of the union message. 
It signaled the Government's plans to ease its 18-month economic austerity program. 
Mr. Li suggested that monetary policies would be loosened somewhat to revive the stagnant economy, which has become a focus of discontent recently.
Despite several vague assertions that China will go further with economic and political liberalization, the speech took an unmistakable hard line on almost every topic it touched upon. 
Mr. Li called on officials to ''redouble ideological and political work,'' and he called for vigilance against ''some factors leading to social instability.''
Tightening of Public Security
''While fostering socialist democracy and the socialist legal system, we must intensify dictatorship by the socialist state apparatus,'' Mr. Li said. 
''Prosecutors and judges should fully perform their duties and be on the alert so that they can promptly crush attempts at infiltration and subversion by foreign hostile forces, and so that they can crack down on all sabotage by hostile elements at home.''
The speech, which also called on governments at all levels to build up police units so as to tighten public security, is not the work of the Prime Minister alone. 
Drafted by a brain trust and circulated among senior officials for suggestions, the address is regarded as representative of the general views of leaders - some of them retired and occupying no formal position - now making crucial decisions.
In reviewing events of last year, Mr. Li hailed the suppression of the democracy movement last year, saying:
Opium War Anniversary ''China's victory in quelling the turmoil and the rebellion has foiled the vain attempt of the international anti-Communist and anti-China forces to subvert China's legitimate Government and socialist system.''
The speech included warnings about foreign subversion, and it also called on school authorities to mark this year's 150th anniversary of the Opium War with Britain.
''They should make use of the occasion to expose the crime committed by imperialists in their aggression against China and to educate about the history of the Chinese people's traditional patriotic struggles against imperialism, so as to heighten their vigilance against the imperialist strategy of peaceful evolution,'' Mr. Li said.
The Government often refers to ''peaceful evolution,'' which it describes as the West's plan to achieve the gradual displacement of Communism in China.
 
Most Leaders on Rostrum
Most of China's top leaders were on the rostrum today for Mr. Li's speech and the formal opening of the National People's Congress. 
But for the second year in a row the paramount leader, Deng Xiaoping, did not attend. 
Mr. Deng, who is 85 years old and feeble, is nominally retired. 
[The Congress accepted Mr. Deng's resignation from his last government post, as chairman of the state Central Military Commission, The Associated Press reported on Wednesday.] In recent years, the National People's Congress, whose nearly 3,000 delegates meet annually for a session of about 15 days, has occasionally sought to offer more than simply a stamp of approval for the leadership's decisions. 
Government proposals always pass, but they have occasionally been delayed, and last year for the first time a measure attracted a significant minority of no votes.
The assertiveness came to a peak last May, when about one-quarter of the 159-member standing committee called for an emergency session to repeal martial law, against the wishes of Prime Minister Li. 
These days the Congress is expected to be more compliant, partly because one of the organizers of the May effort, a lawyer named Cao Siyuan, is still in prison. 
Another backer of the emergency session, Hu Jiwei, a former editor of People's Daily, was dismissed last week from his positions in the Congress.
