
In a wave of trials ending Tuesday, Chinese courts sentenced 18 of the nation's best-known dissidents to prison for terms ranging up to 13 years. 
But while those trials have ended, almost nothing is known about the hundreds of others who are in prison for taking part in the Tiananmen democracy movement.
The Chinese have never given an accounting of those arrested in the crackdown beginning in June 1989, but most estimates are that more than 1,000 people are still in prison, detention centers or re-education camps for their involvement in the Tiananmen Square protests.
"Just the cases that will serve their purposes are announced, and the rest are never reported," said Robin Munro, a Hong Kong-based researcher for Asia Watch, a human rights organization. 
"We certainly believe these trials are the tip of the iceberg."
Among the others are such people as Han Dongfang, a 28-year-old railway employee who led a Beijing workers group in support of the students; Wu Jiaxiang, a Communist Party researcher who sympathized with the students and was arrested in July 1989, and Chen Ting, a worker arrested forhelping to organize protests in the central Chinese city of Hefei.
Asia Watch has compiled a list of 960 names of people believed imprisoned, and many others have been quietly sentenced without their cases coming to public attention. 
Family members often say they dare not seek help from foreigners.
"In our hearts, we feel terrible for not speaking out," said a relative of a young man who is serving an eight-year prison sentence. 
The family decided not to report the prisoner's name to foreign human rights workers for fear that the family members themselves would get in trouble."Some day, things will change," the relative said, "but for now we must keep silent."
The stiffest sentence in the latest trials was 13 years. 
But in occasional trials in the provinces, local leaders of protests were given even harsher punishments. 
In Shandong Province, for example, a 22-year-old worker named Zhang Jie was officially reported to have been sentenced to 18 years in prison for making a speech denouncing the army crackdown in Beijing.
Workers are typically given much longer sentences than intellectuals, and often face a more physically punishing prison regime. 
Although intellectuals may risk serving their terms in solitary confinement, workers are more likely to risk beatings, freezing nights in unheated cells, and near-starvation rations.In addition to those formally tried, a large number of protesters were sent to re-education camps. 
The police are allowed to send people to such camps for up to three years without going through the courts. 
The United States State Department report on human rights, issued this month, says that just two re-education camps near Beijing housed more than 800 youths detained extrajudicially for involvement in the Tiananmen protests.
So far, there has been no public reaction within China to the trials, and most Chinese express relatively little outrage or even interest. 
Some attribute the muted reaction to a yearning by people to withdraw from political affairs, which they say are burdened with painful memories and a feeling of hopelessness.
"People noticed the sentences, but itwasn't a big thing," said one Chinese who is moderately critical of the Government. 
"People are much more interested in the gulf war."
Family members of political prisoners have been warned not to talk to foreign journalists, and this places them in an agonizing position: do they disclose what they regard as outrageous injustices, if the consequence will only be further punishment inflicted on them and their loved ones?
"They are really villains, trying to exploit the love a woman has for her husband," Hou Xiaotian, wife of one of the dissidents who was sentenced to 13 years, wrote in an open letter last month. 
In the letter she described how prison guards refused to accept items she had brought for her husband unless she disclosed her contacts with correspondents.
