
Prime Minister Li Peng said today that China would move cautiously to expand the role of the market in the 1990's, but he vigorously warned against efforts to subvert the Communist Party's leadership.
"Under the present situation characterized by stabilityI and unity, there are still some factors that could lead to instability in China," Mr. Li said in his annual report to the National People's Congress, which convened today. 
"Attempts at subversion, dismemberment and sabotage by foreign hostile forces working against China still continue."
To curb the risk of instability, Mr. Li called for upholding "the people's democratic dictatorship" and for increasing the military budget. 
The army has already seen its allocation increase since it crushed the democracy movement in June 1989.
Mr. Li's speech, the annual work report of the Government, amounts to the Chinese leadership's public blueprint for the 1990's. 
The National People's Congress, a rubber-stamp legislature that meets once each year for a session of less than three weeks, is expected to approve a five-year economic plan and a 10-year development program that both take effect this year.
 
More Slogans Than Specifics
Much of the speech, which lasted nearly three hours, was devoted to the economy, but it emphasized slogans and was short of specific new measures to promote economic restructuring. 
While mentioning the need for price rationalization and reductions in subsidies to inefficient enterprises, Mr. Li made clear that the hard-line leadership intends to stick with orthodox Communism and central planning.
Mr. Li's vision of economic development appeared to be of central planners gradually improving efficiency and output at major state-owned companies. 
There was little reference to the private and collective enterprises that respond to incentives and have proved far more dynamic than the state sector.
In tone, the speech was slightly more enthusiastic about change than some previous declarations of policy. 
Mr. Li said repeatedly, without providing many new specifics, that China would steadily deepen its 12-year-old economic liberalization program.
"We must continue to deepen the reform and open China more widely to the outside world," Mr. Li said.
 
'Bourgeois Liberalization'
Mr. Li did not refer directly to the 1989 democracy movement, but he seemed to allude to it several times, including once when he said that in the past "an unchecked flood of bourgeois liberalization" had brought grave consequences to society. 
He said that the Communist Party had made some mistakes in the past, the most important of which was that in the 1980's the party neglected "ideological and political education."
In another indication that the hard-liners do not intend to relax political controls, Mr. Li cited 12 major principles devised by the Central Committee to build Communism in China. 
The first of these 12 principles begins "uphold the people's democratic dictatorship."
Mr. Li did not identify the "foreign hostile forces" he accused of working to subvert Chinese Communism, but he appeared to mean the United States and other Western countries. 
He particularly called for vigilance against "peaceful evolution," which China alleges is a strategy that the United States has pursued since the 1950's to defeat the Communist Government without waging war.
