
China today sharply rejected a United States protest against gunfire directed at a diplomatic compound here, and the Government published new attacks on Zhao Ziyang, the ousted Communist Party leader, that may presage criminal proceedings against him.
The Chinese Foreign Ministry presented a note to the United States Ambassador, James R. Lilley, rejecting as ''groundless'' and ''sheer fabrication'' a protest the American Embassy made on Monday about the shooting incident.
In that incident, which occurred on June 7, three days after troops shot and killed hundreds of pro-democracy demonstrators, soldiers fired at the Jianguomenwai diplomatic compound and damaged apartments occupied by diplomats from the United States and other countries. 
No one was hurt in the shooting.
The Foreign Ministry quoted the note as describing the shootings as ''probably deliberate and premeditated,'' and criticized such language as ''irresponsible'' and reiterated its account that troops fired on the compound in self-defense after a sniper fired on them from within.
 
New Government Appointments
China also announced two new low-level Cabinet appointments as well as a new Ambassador to the United States. 
The former Ambassador, Han Xu, had seemed in some respects to share Mr. Zhao's pro-Western outlook, and so his dismissal could be interpreted as politically motivated.
But Mr. Han had been in Washington for more than four years and even before the recent unrest there were rumors that he would be replaced soon in the normal course of events. 
A new post for Mr. Han was not immediately announced. 
The new Ambassador to Washington is Zhu Qizhen, a Deputy Foreign Minister with responsibility for relations with the Americas.
Mr. Zhu, who is 61 years old, is a longtime diplomat not associated with any particular set of policies. 
He has seemed to favor warmer relations with the United States, but he is also known for his caution.
In a sign that supporters of Mr. Zhao may be purged from positions on the Standing Committee , the panel appointed a special four-member committee to investigate an attempt in May to convene an emergency session of the committee to repeal martial law.
Some of those who tried to convene the emergency session also hoped at the time that this might lead to the dismissal of Prime Minister Li Peng, but the attempt to call a special session was blocked and those who supported the effort are now finding themselves in political trouble.
A long report on the ''counterrevolutionary rebellion,'' as the democracy movement is now known, also hinted at further purges and possible criminal action against Mr. Zhao.
The report by Mayor Chen Xitong of Beijing, shown tonight in a special television report and released by the official New China News Agency, refers to Mr. Zhao in several places without the customary title ''comrade,'' a suggestion that he may be stripped of his party membership. 
In other places, the report refers to him as ''comrade.'' do not bite last graf
