
China and Indonesia signed an agreement today to restore diplomatic relations next month, ending a 23-year rift between the two most populous nations in East Asia.
Both sides described the agreement as of ''historic significance'' and said they hoped it would contribute to peace and stabilityI throughout the Pacific region. 
The new agreement is expected to lead to increased trade between the two countries, to further discussions aimed at resolving the war in Cambodia, and to an accord to establish diplomatic relations between China and Singapore.
Prime Minister Li Peng will travel to the Indonesian capital, Jakarta, to mark the resumption of relations on Aug. 
8. For him and for China's diplomacy as a whole, the agreement is a rare bright spot in a year that has been characterized by isolation and invective since the army crackdown against the democracy movement in June 1989.
The accord also puts the seal on China's repudiation of its onetime program to export revolution to other parts of Asia and the world. 
It was accusations of support by China for a Communist-backed rebellion in Indonesia in 1965 that led to relations being suspended two years later. 
Until then, China and Indonesia had enjoyed close relations.
 
'Turning of a New Page'
It was partly because of the rift with Indonesia that China reconsidered its attempts to spread revolution, and today Foreign Minister Qian Qichen seemed much more interested in exporting goods than revolution. 
He said at a news conference that he had no idea whether Indonesia still had a Communist party - and his tone seemed to imply that he did not much care, either.
Ali Alatas, Indonesia's Foreign Minister, said at the news conference that a new trade agreement was already under way to bolster two-way trade, which was valued at $920 million last year.
''I believe it is no exaggeration that what we have achieved today is a significant development and in fact signifies the turning of a new page in our bilateral relationship,'' Mr. Alatas said.
People's Daily had earlier called Mr. Alatas's visit - the first by an Indonesian Foreign Minister since relations were suspended in 1967 - a ''great event.''
The Chinese press has not explained the reason for the rupture of relations in the 1960's, attributing it only to ''some complicated historical causes.''
 
Surprise Meeting in Tokyo
The agreement today comes after more than 16 months of negotiations that followed a surprise meeting between Mr. Qian and President Suharto of Indonesia in Tokyo on Feb. 
23, 1989. 
The two men then agreed to work toward normalization of relations.
Singapore is widely expected to follow Indonesia in establishing formal ties with Beijing. 
Singapore already has good ties with Beijing, and runs a trade office here. 
But it has not formally established relations with either China or Taiwan.
