
China's Foreign Minister said today that despite normalization of relations with the Soviet Union, China will maintain a special and closer relationship with the United States for the foreseeable future.
The Foreign Minister, Qian Qichen, said that relations with the Soviet Union would grow, but that it would be difficult to challenge the great lead in economic, cultural and educational contacts between China and the United States.
In a rare interview this afternoon, Mr. Qian also said relations with the United States were likely to flourish in the Bush Administration, partly because of President Bush's experiences in China, when he lived here from 1974 to 1975 as head of the United States mission in Beijing. 
Mr. Qian also said President Bush's visit to China this weekend, after the funeral of Emperor Hirohito in Tokyo, will be ''of great significance.'
'
''He is paying this working visit soon after assuming office, and I believe the timing of the visit shows the importance he attaches to relations with China,'' Mr. Qian said.
On Issue of Taiwan
But Mr. Qian also said there were various obstacles in Chinese-American relations, principally disagreements about Taiwan. 
In addition, he called on the United States to assist in the process of reunifying Taiwan with the Chinese mainland, something the United States has always refused to do.
Mr. Qian, a 61-year-old veteran diplomat who became Foreign Minister almost one year ago, spoke in Chinese in a Foreign Ministry conference room at the 35-minute interview. 
He apparently granted the interview because of the imminent visit by President Bush.
A suave man who speaks fluent English and Russian, Mr. Qian has sometimes been regarded as sympathetic to warmer relations with the Soviet Union. 
Like Prime Minister Li Peng and many other officials of their generation, Mr. Qian studied in the Soviet Union in the 1950's when relations were close between the two Communist giants, and some Chinese and foreign analysts believe that the Soviet-educated officials are more likely than others to favor renewed ties between China and the Soviet Union.
But in the interview Mr. Qian dismissed that idea. 
''State-to-state relations are unrelated to the experience of the national leaders, or to the places where they have lived,'' he said. 
''State-to-state relations are different from personal relations.''
 
Broad Range of Issues
Mr. Qian said the talks between President Bush and Chinese leaders will cover the broad range of international issues and bilateral relations. 
He said he doubted that they would focus on any particular topic.
Discussing Taiwan at length, however, he cautioned that some Americans both in Government and in the private sector incorrectly believed it was in the United States' interest to keep Taiwan and the mainland apart.
Mr. Qian also appeared to suggest that the United States should do what it could to oppose Taiwan's recent adoption of ''flexible diplomacy.''
By using its considerable economic influence, Taiwan has persuaded a number of countries in the last six months to exchange offices or in other ways increase official or semi-official contacts.
''In reality, such a practice aims to create a political concept of 'two Chinas,'' or 'one China, one Taiwan,' '' Mr. Qian said. 
''We are absolutely against it.''
 
Critical of Taiwan's Diplomacy
Strongly critical of Taiwan's flexible diplomacy, Mr. Qian said it was unlikely to be successful and thereby unlikely to have a major influence on Chinese-American relations.
Mr. Qian's comments appeared designed to serve two purposes. 
On the one hand, he reassured the United States that the Chinese-American friendship would not suffer from normalization of Chinese-Soviet relations, which is expected to follow the visit to Beijing of the Soviet leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, in May. 
On the other hand, Mr. Qian seemed to wish to caution the United States against encouraging Taiwan to seek a future separate from that of the mainland.
While he said that American trade interests had a large headstart over Soviet exchanges, Mr. Qian also noted that the Soviet Union had some trade advantages, such as proximity. 
And his assessment that Chinese-American relations would continue to outstrip Chinese-Soviet relations for the foreseeable future seemed based more on a cool assessment of economic advantages rather than on any intrinsic judgment about the merits of each superpower as a friend.
In discussing attempts to resolve the conflict in Cambodia, Mr. Qian strongly criticized Vietnam and called on other countries to pressure Vietnam to pull its troops from Cambodia by the end of September.
 
Vietnam Is Criticized
''Vietnam is not trustworthy,'' Mr. Qian said. 
''We cannot believe its words, and the international community should exert more pressure on it.''
Mr. Qian said he believed that Pol Pot, the Khmer Rouge leader whose regime ruled Cambodia from 1975 to 1978 and killed more than a million inhabitants, is still in Cambodia today. 
Many Western and Asian diplomats suggest that China may offer Pol Pot refuge as a way of withdrawing him from the scene.
Mr. Qian said, however, that no one has asked for refuge and that in any case it would be inappropriate for China to encourage anyone to seek political asylum here.
