
In a toughly worded statement, China today rejected as ''speculations pure and simple'' recent reports that the dissidents Fang Lizhi and Li Shuxian would be allowed to leave China soon.
While the statement did not rule out the possibility of the couple's release, the wording suggested that there has been no decision yet on allowing the two to leave. 
The statement hinted that as a minimum step the Chinese Government would like them to apologize before they go.
Mr. Fang, an astrophysicist who is China's best-known dissident, sought refuge with his wife in the United States Embassy soon after the violent crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators in Beijing in early June. 
His presence in the embassy has been a major source of tension between the United States and China.
A Western diplomat said today that he had been informed by Chinese officials that the stumbling block in arranging a compromise was that the Chinese authorities were demanding that Mr. Fang write a self-criticism, but that Mr. Fang refused to do so.
 
Widespread Rumors
In the last few weeks, there have been widespread rumors that Mr. Fang and Miss Li would be allowed to leave before the end of January. 
It has been rumored that the Chinese Government wanted to appear conciliatory to reduce the chance that the United States Congress might adopt further sanctions against China, and that the Chinese leadership wished to reward the Bush Administration for its decision to send Brent Scowcroft, the national security adviser, to Beijing on two secret missions.
The latest report, which led to the Chinese statement, appeared in Pai Shing Semi-Monthly, a China-watching magazine published in Hong Kong. 
The magazine said that Beijing and Washington had reached an understanding that Mr. Fang and Miss Li would be allowed to travel to Australia or Italy.
The magazine said that Deng Xiaoping, China's senior leader, had approved the plan.
White House officials have dismissed the report, saying there are no new developments in the case.
The Chinese statement, which was issued by the Foreign Ministry and carried by the official New China News Agency, seemed intended to dampen such speculation.
