
Banks in China will lend $27 billion to state-operated enterprises that need cash, a central bank official said on Wednesday, although the Government's tight credit policy will remain in effect.
The loans are to be extended in the last quarter of the year, Hong Yuncheng, a spokesman for the People's Bank of China, was quoted as saying by the official Xinhua News Agency.
''The loans are still within the original plan set for this year, and the fund shortages will be eased to a certain extent,'' Mr. Hong said. 
''The tight credit policy is still proceeding in accordance with the schedule, and the total number of loans has been brought under control.''
Economy Is 'Bad'
One Asian economic expert in Beijing, who asked not to be identified, said the Government appeared to be relaxing its credit restrictions ''because the economy is so bad.''
The large injection of money is unlikely to be a heavy burden on China's economy, one Western diplomat said.
''The Government has been saving up pennies all year to have a big wad of cash in the fourth quarter when the harvest comes in, when they really need cash,'' the diplomat said. 
''They don't need to issue i.o.u.'s and can stay within budget.''
Last year, the Government issued large numbers of i.o.u.'s to farmers in exchange for grain, causing widespread resentment and some protests. 
This year there have been isolated reports of i.o.u.'s being issued.
''In China, it's not unusual for a lot of money to move into the economy in the fourth quarter,'' the Western official added. 
''What is unusual is that the Chinese have shown such restraint in the first three quarters.''
 
Warning on Program
Xinhua quoted unidentified analysts as saying that China must stick to its austerity program and its tight monetary and credit policies for up to three years. 
Inflation remains troubling and money demand is strong.
The central bank is joining the Industrial and Commercial Bank, the Bank of China, the Agricultural Bank and others to raise money for the loans to finance important state projects, purchases of agricultural goods and exports, said Mr. Hong, the People's Bank of China spokesman.
Chinese banks have offered $108 million in loans to hundreds of foreign-financed enterprises that face money shortages because of China's austerity program.
The austerity measures, which began a year ago, cut Government spending and credits extended to industry and canceled thousands of construction projects. 
The measures have pushed many small private and collective companies into bankruptcy and have nearly forced some larger enterprises to collapse.
Last month, the value of industrial output declined for the first time in a decade, raising fears that the economy was nearing a recession.
