
When President Bush voided the sale of a Seattle aerospace supplier to a Chinese Government agency, the company's executives and employees saw themselves caught in political crosswinds stemming from the killings of demonstrators in Tiananmen Square in June.
For two weeks, the Chinese Government did not comment on Mr. Bush's action, but today the silence ended. 
The official New China news agency asserted that the deal by the China National Aero-Technology Import and Export Corporation, or Catic, to buy Mamco Manufacturing Inc. was entirely legal and did not pose any threat to the United States, the Reuters news agency reported.
The Chinese said the United States would be responsible for any financial losses that resulted from President Bush's order. 
The statement did not specify what recourse Beijing might seek.
In Compliance With Laws
An official of Catic was quoted by Reuters as saying the acquisition ''is solely a commercial activity in the area of civilian aircraft manufacture, the whole procedure of which was in full compliance with the Federal and local laws and regulations of the United States.''
The official added, ''This acquisition does not involve any high-technology leakage, nor does it impair or threaten the national security of the United States,'' Reuters reported.
Roger Bolton, a spokesman for the Treasury Department, said: ''We are going to withhold comment until we hear directly from the Chinese Government. 
We haven't heard from them yet.''
On Feb. 
2, Mr. Bush had ordered Catic, a Chinese agency that exports military and civilian planes, to divest itself of Mamco, saying Catic's continued control of the airplane parts maker might threaten the national security of the United States. 
A panel comprising officials of eight agencies and headed by Stephen Canner, the director of the Office of International Investment in the Treasury Department, had recommended that the purchase be rescinded. 
Catic had acquired Mamco on Nov. 
30.
Mr. Canner has declined to comment on the reasons for the panel's recommendation.
 
Boeing Is Main Customer
Mamco supplies small mechanical parts, built to customer specifications, for commercial aircraft. 
Its largest customer is the Boeing Company, and it reported sales of $19 million in 1989.
''I find it hard to believe we pose a threat to national security,'' Kenneth A. Keller, president and chief executive of Mamco, said in a recent interview. 
''We're no different than literally hundreds of other machine and job shops around the country.''
Mr. Keller said officials of the Chinese agency had attempted to persuade United States officials to rescind the ruling, which requires that Catic divest itself of Mamco by May 1, unless an extension of up to three months is granted.
Mr. Keller said Catic was ''exploring all other avenues'' to prevent the divestiture. 
But if those attempts are not successful, he said ''we'd probably talk to Catic about a re-acquisition of the company.''
''It is just too early to speculate what will happen,'' he added.
Mamco makes no parts for export. 
In addition to Boeing, its customers include McDonnell Douglas, Bell Helicopter and Cleveland Pneumatic. 
Mamco does not employ full-time designers or engineers and does not own the rights to the designs of its products. 
None of its products are on Government lists of militarily significant high-technology parts. 
205 Employees A 50-year-old company that had been privately held before its sale to Catic, Mamco operates in an industrial area of Seattle. 
Its 205 employees work two shifts on weekdays and one on Saturday and Sunday.
Catic is responsible for much of China's imports and exports, and some American officials have contended that it has close ties to China's military. 
The Seattle Times, quoting unidentified Congressional sources, has reported that Catic provided two General Electric jet-turbine engines to the military, which dissassembled them for study, breaking agreements that the engines would be for civilian use only and would be left intact.
The order involving Mamco is believed to be the first in which a President has ordered a foreign corporation to sell an American company it had already purchased. 
President Bush acted under a 1988 trade bill that authorized the President to block sales of companies to foreign interests if the sales are seen as threats to national security.
Mr. Keller, who is 45 years old, a certified public accountant from Oregon, purchased Mamco in 1988 with two partners, James Young and Barry Allen. 
The three men had met and worked together for six years at Security Properties Inc., a Seattle real estate company, where Mr. Keller was chief financial officer. 
They left that company with the intention of buying a number of businesses in the Pacific Northwest at a rate of one a year. 
Mamco was their first acquisition.
 
Joint Venture Sought
Mr. Keller said that as the partners searched for other companies to acquire, they decided to bring in joint-venture partners. 
In early 1989, an accounting firm introduced them to officials of the Chinese agency.
''Catic was not interested in our proposals, but a few months later offered to buy Mamco instead,'' Mr. Keller said.
After the deal was concluded in November, the company's managers stayed on to insure that it remained under American management. 
Catic did bring two executives to the operation, including Shan-Jun Xiong, Catic's chairman of United States operations. 
He is not involved in day-to-day operations of Mamco, Mr. Keller said, but oversees Catic's other interests in the United States, including its dealings with Boeing and McDonnell Douglas.
