
DISCONTENT with the way the heavens have arranged its rivers and rainfall, China is embarking on a program to build huge waterworks that could have a colossal impact on the nation's development in the 21st century.
The Yellow River, so thick with silt that it sometimes seems a flowing yellow mud pie, courses past timeless villages in northern China whose peasants are constantly threatened by floods from the same waters that sustain them in irrigating their fields.
Farther south, Asia's mightiest river, the Yangtze, drains an area inhabited by 380 million Chinese, or 8 percent of the world's population, leaning against ancient dikes that would release a flood that could kill one million people if they burst in the middle of the night.
The new waterworks projects, which are intended to ease the threat from the country's age-old cycle of devastating floods as well as transfer water hundreds of miles to revitalize dry areas of China, have been under discussion for three decades or more. 
Collectively they would represent the country's most significant development projects since the Grand Canal was completed in the 13th century to transport hundreds of thousands of tons of grain each year to Beijing.
Preliminary approval has already been given to one project, a proposed 730-mile canal that would pump water from China's south, where rainfall is plentiful, to northern areas around Beijing that are running dry. 
The $10 billion channel is the first of three that are planned for the next century to reinvigorate a broad swathe of northern China with southern water. 
Government officials have warned that Beijing could not remain the nation's capital without a new supply of water to sustain it.
Much more controversial is an $11 billion project called the Three Gorges Dam that is proposed for the Yangtze River. 
Supporters note that the project, which would be bigger than any existing hydroelectric station, would sharply reduce the risk of a potentially disastrous flood. 
But critics point out that the price is immense: 1.1 million people would have to be relocated from a 375-mile long area that will be flooded, some of China's most beautiful scenery would be marred, and a rare porpoise would be threatened with extinction.
 
A Waterway Called 'Sorrow'
Preparatory work is already under way on the third major project, the Xiaolangdi Dam on the Yellow River. 
That $2 billion dam will generate electricity, control silting, make irrigation easier and reduce the risk of a catastrophic flood on a waterway that is known as "China's sorrow" because of its propensity to overrun its banks. 
Since 602 B.C., the Yellow River has changed course 26 times, sometimes by hundreds of miles, each time wreaking immense havoc.
In addition to these projects, China is planning to build more than 60 substantial hydroelectric projects in the 1990's to fuel industrial growth in the next century.
Such efforts to refashion nature would be important in any country, but they are particularly significant in a country like China, whose culture and history are inextricably linked with water. 
One of China's legendary heroes, a father-of-the-nation figure, is Yu the Great, who 4,200 years ago coordinated flood-control projects along the Yellow River where Chinese civilization was born.
"Water looms larger here," said Roy D. Morey, the representative in China of the United Nations Development Program, which is assisting China in its many water projects. 
"Historically, what rivets people's attention is the fact that you either have too much or too little. 
One is either lamenting the ever-shifting channel of the Yellow River, or you're talking about the arid or semi-arid regions of China that have never had enough water."
Floods are a special risk in China because in some places the rivers are actually higher than the surrounding ground. 
In these areas the water is held in place by dikes, and if a dike is breached, the river spills out and forms a new channel on lower ground.
The rivers' elevation is linked to the tremendous amount of silt they carry. 
A result of soil erosion upriver, silt is suspended in the flowing water and is gradually deposited on the river bed, raising the level each year. 
In the case of the Yellow River, the bed has been built up as many as six inches, leading the peasants to raise the dikes correspondingly, and over the centuries the river has risen higher and higher. 
In the lower reaches of the Yellow River and in part of the middle section of the Yangtze, the water flows as many as 30 feet higher than the surrounding terrain.
"People walk under water," goes a folk saying, "and the river flows overhead."
 
Debate on Projects Is Missing
Some scholars argue that despotism was born in water-based cultures like ancient China's because of the need for centralized organization of irrigation and flood control. 
In any case, there is no doubt that authoritarianism lives on in China, and some believe that that is one of the fundamental problems of all of these projects: they are not subject to the checks of democratic debate.
"Information from those opposed to constructing the dams usually doesn't get up" to the leadership, says William Y. B. Chang, an expert on Chinese water issues at the National Science Foundation in Washington. 
Mr. Chang says he is concerned that the decision-making has been based more on political than scientific reasoning and that the new water projects may not reflect the best value for the money.
He notes, for example, that many areas of China are short of water -- in rural Shaanxi Province, peasants may have to hike miles to the nearest well -- but that the enormous effort to divert water to the north will feed the political and industrial centers of Beijing and Tianjin, where people already are relatively well off.
The project has already received preliminary approval, and the construction is expected to get fully under way within the next few years. 
The canal will begin at the Yangtze River and pump water up a slight gradient to the Yellow River, and then pass in a tunnel beneath the Yellow River and from there flow downhill to Tianjin and Beijing. 
There is not enough water in the Yellow River to supply the project, so the canal must start at the Yangtze much farther away.
While pumping the water uphill will use enormous amounts of electricity, which is scarce, the advantage of the route is that the channel is, for the most part, already in place: the Grand Canal, begun in the year 600 by at least two million laborers and extended in the 13th century. 
Parts of the Grand Canal are still in use, although others were blocked when the Yellow River shifted channels in 1855.
The impetus behind the project is simply that nature lavishes water on the southern part of the country but is much more stingy in the north. 
Some 180 million Chinese in the north are short of water and the situation is becoming more desperate.
 
Effects of Bargaining
The diversion project will take 11.76 billion cubic yards of water from the Yangtze each year. 
Most will be used to irrigate farmland along the route, with only 1.3 billion cubic yards reaching Beijing. 
The project had to be designed to supply substantial benefits to the provinces along the way in order to win their approval. 
Jiangsu Province, in particular, bargained hard to get a large share of the water in exchange for its participation.
Eventually, the Government intends to build two additional systems to carry water to the north from the Yangtze, but they will have to wait until the next century.
Over one of the routes, in the center of the country, the water would run downhill, so this system would not require pumping stations, but it is extremely complex technically and would require extensive tunneling through mountains. 
The other route would involve construction in remote areas on the Tibetan plateau. 
In this project, water would be pumped uphill from tributaries of the Yangtze to the headwaters of the Yellow River, and in conjunction with the other two routes this plan is expected to encourage development in the poor and parched areas of northwestern and north-central China.
The intensity of the bargaining with the provinces to win approval for the "south waters north" and the Three Gorges Dam projects is reflected in the many compromises made in the plans.
"There are few things that tell you as much about the politics of a country as where it builds its dams, because dams create big winners and big losers," said Kenneth G. Lieberthal, a political science professor at the University of Michigan.
For example, as Professor Lieberthal noted, the Three Gorges Dam is to be almost 607 feet high, with a normal water level of 574 feet. 
That level will create a reservoir that will just reach the city of Chongqing. 
The Communist Party leaders in Chongqing had insisted that the reservoir reach their city, to give them a year-round river port for large vessels. 
But the leaders rejected a higher dam, even though this would have helped in flood control efforts, because part of the city would have been submerged.
The dam would have a hydropower station with a capacity of 17,680 megawatts, making it the largest in the world except for a proposed Russian project that has been put off.
One of the greatest problems with the Three Gorges Dam and other water projects in China is how to deal with the silting. 
Each year about 520 million tons of silt is carried down the Yangtze past the site of the Three Gorges Dam, and skeptics argue that in a few decades the reservoir will become an unnavigable pool of mud.
Backers of the project have conducted extensive tests, some of them using a half-mile-long laboratory version of the Yangtze, and they insist that siltation would not be a major problem. 
In the summer, when the river is the muddiest, they plan to lower the reservoir level and flush the silt through, while in the fall, when the river is clearer, they would build the water level.
Government officials seem to be pushing hard for a final go-ahead on the Three Gorges project in March, at a meeting of the National People's Congress. 
As evidence of the danger, they cite devastating flooding last summer in which 3,000 people were killed and 3.2 million were left homeless, and they emphasize that the sooner work begins on the dam, the less onerous the relocation requirements will be, partly because of the rapidly rising population.
"The sooner Three Gorges starts functioning, the better," said Su Qianqing, an official of the Ministry of Water Resources in Beijing. 
"It's going to be more difficult for us to solve the problem of relocation if we don't start now."
The Three Gorges Dam has been under discussion since the 1920's and is by far the country's most controversial construction project. 
In the relatively open environment of the late 1980's, an incipient environmental movement seemed to have defeated the plan for a dam when a Politburo member announced a postponement of further consideration until at least 1995.
But over the last 18 months the project has been resuscitated, and in the aftermath of the crackdown in Tiananmen Square in 1989 most environmentalists and critics of the project have been cowed into silence. 
Dai Qing, a prominent writer who is one of the dam's foremost opponents, was arrested after the crackdown, and Li Rui, a party elder and water specialist who also opposed the project, was placed under tight restrictions.
"I still have some hope that the Three Gorges Dam won't go ahead," Ms. Dai said last month, shortly before she was allowed to go to the United States to accept a fellowship at Harvard University. 
"If we devote so many resources to the Three Gorges, then everything else will have to wait. 
Education and science spending will slow, and China's backwardness and burden on the world economy will grow."
