
China imposed new restrictions on foreign journalists today and banned articles that in the view of the authorities ''distort facts'' or violate ''the public interest.''
The rules, signed by Prime Minister Li Peng on Friday, took effect today on their publication in People's Daily.
''Foreign correspondents and news agencies must observe journalistic ethics, and must not distort facts, fabricate rumors or use improper means in their reporting,'' read the most sweeping of the new rules. 
''Foreign correspondents and news agencies must not engage in activities that are incompatible with their status, or those that endanger state security, national unification, or the public interest of Chinese society.''
In serious cases, journalists who are found to have violated the regulations could be expelled from China.
The rules specified that they were to be interpreted by the Chinese authorities, so the practical effect was not immediately clear.
It would be possible for the Chinese to expel reporters under the new rules on the vague ground that the reporters' articles harmed the public interest.
It is also not clear whether it is permissible to interview people on the street, or students on a university campus, or customers in a shop.
Such interviews were all explicitly banned during the period of martial law in Beijing, from May 20 to Jan. 
10.
The new rules state only that all interviews with any ''work unit,'' including any university, factory or Government institution, must be officially arranged.
A strict interpretation would ban interviews on university campuses, and street interviews might be banned on the ground that they are an ''improper means'' of reporting.
The relationship between foreign news organizations and the Chinese Government has often been strained, particularly since the military crackdown on dissent in June.
The authorities have accused foreign correspondents of distorting what it describes as a successful and restrained operation to crush a counterrevolutionary rebellion.
China has always regulated foreign journalists, and most of the 22 new rules were simply restatements of previous written or unwritten rules. 
The new regulations apparently were intended in part to take the place of the martial-law restrictions.
Those rules, which were not scrupulously obeyed, purported to ban virtually all unauthorized reporting, including unscheduled interviews in any factories, schools or neighborhoods.
The new regulations stipulate that reporters must obtain permission before leaving Beijing on any reporting trip, and that when on such a trip they cannot do any reporting outside the topics for which they have received authorization.
The rule is more explicit than one already in existence. 
The result is that authorization must be obtained even for trips to cities accessible to tourists, like Shanghai or Canton.
In the past, that rule and others were often ignored by the authorities and the journalists, and it is unclear whether passage of the new regulations means that they will now be more rigorously enforced.
As before, foreign news agencies cannot freely hire Chinese nationals, but must use only staff provided by the Government.
The new rules go a step further by stipulating that agencies must obtain Government permission even when hiring foreign nationals.
 
U.S. EXPRESSES 'GREAT CONCERN'
WASHINGTON, Jan. 
20 (Special to The New York Times) - An Administration official said today that the new restrictions on foreign journalists were cause for ''great concern.''
He said the United States would ask China to clarify what it meant.
Under the rules, he said, ''It is not clear if you can go out and freely talk to people on the street for a news story.''
The rules, he said, apparently do not authorize the Chinese Government to censor articles before publication, but they seem intended to encourage ''a little self-censorship by journalists.''
