
The Chinese leadership has tentatively decided to name two new Deputy Prime Ministers, including the reformist Mayor of Shanghai, in a move that is expected to give a lift to the faction that favors more rapid economic change.
The promotions, which have circulated as rumors and speculation for some time, have been formally put in writing and circulated among leading officials and the "Democratic Parties" that cooperate with the Communist Party, an official said.
"Unless one of the octogenarians gets up and starts objecting, the promotions will go through," the official said. 
"Something unforeseen might come up, but as of now the plan is to elevate them."
The appointments would be formally presented to the delegates of the National People's Congress, a rubber-stamp Parliament now holding its annual session, and approved over the next week.
The most important appointment would be the selection of Zhu Rongji, the 63-year-old Mayor and Communist Party Secretary of Shanghai, as the Deputy Prime Minister. 
Mr. Zhu, who was denounced as a rightist in 1957, is an engineer who has been Mayor of China's biggest city since 1988.
A protege of China's senior leader, Deng Xiaoping, Mr. Zhu has risen extremely rapidly in the last few years and would be well positioned to replace Prime Minister Li Peng if Mr. Deng and the other octogenarians who hold ultimate power can reach a consensus on replacing Mr. Li.
Mr. Zhu is one of the few senior Chinese leaders who is generally admired by young Chinese, as well as by foreign business executives. 
He has a reputation as a practical official who leans toward market mechanisms and is far more concerned with invigorating the economy than with Marxist ideology. 
But the central-planning faction in the leadership also deems him acceptable, partly because Mr. Zhu worked under the Planning Commission from 1952 to 1975 and so is regarded by them as a central planner as well. 
Mr. Zhu would replace Yao Yilin, a 74-year-old leader of the central-planning faction. 
Mr. Yao has been seriously ill for many months, Chinese officials say.
The other new Deputy Prime Minister is said to be Zou Jiahua, the 65-year-old head of the State Planning Commission. 
He has a reputation as a moderate, but one Chinese who knows him says he leans toward the reformists.
Mr. Zou is the son of a famous Communist journalist and the son-in-law of the late Marshal Ye Jianying, who was an ally of Mr. Deng and an important figure in China until the mid-1980's.
