
Police officers attacked 140 foreign students with truncheons and cattle prods today in five hours of unrest near a house where the foreigners, mostly Africans, were isolated after a week of racial violence, witnesses said.
Officers moved in to arrest a student from Ghana in connection with a campus brawl a week ago that led to five days of anti-African protests in this eastern Chinese city, a student said.
About 300 to 400 police officers surrounded the restaurant of the guest house 60 miles northwest of Nanjing to arrest Alex Dzabaku Dosoo, a student at Hehai University accused of beating a university employee in the fight.
The police ordered the students to come out, then burst into the building, striking them with truncheons and shocking them with electric cattle prods, two African students and a Nepalese student said.
The 140 students were taken to a field near the guest house, and the police demanded they get on buses. 
The witnesses said that when the students resisted by holding onto each other, the police divided them into groups according to the college they attended.
''They were taking them by force and beating them,'' an African student said. 
''When we walked out, I personally saw one Congo student being beaten by - I don't know - six or seven policemen.''
 
Fear for Their Safety
Police officers used loudspeakers to order the students to return to their schools. 
''We tried to tell them that it was not safe to go back,'' an African said. 
He said the students were waiting for diplomats from their countries, with whom they had met at the guest house last Tuesday.
The police forced 16 students to return to their colleges, nine to Hehai and seven to Nanjing Polytechnic Institute, the witnesses said. 
Seven or eight others were isolated as ''troublemakers,'' the witnesses said. 
It was unknown where they or the rest of the students were taken.
Last Monday, the 140 foreign students had fled to the railway station in Nanjing to try to leave the city, but were forced by police to move to the factory guest house outside the city.
Liang Ruiju, president of Hehai University, said today that the students had ''turned the guest house into an independent kingdom.''
He said students barricaded the entrance to the building since Wednesday to prevent Chinese officials from entering.
But an African student said: ''That's crazy. 
There was nothing like that. 
We were completely isolated from the outside.''
The initial fight, which broke out Dec. 
24 when African students brought young Chinese women to a dance, was followed by violent protests in which thousands of Chinese youths destroyed property in the students' dormitories and marched through the streets chanting racist slogans.
