
Chinese exiles and opposition figures from around the world ended an inaugural meeting today establishing the Federation for Democracy in China, an umbrella group that aims to coordinate worldwide opposition to the Beijing Government.
The 150 Chinese, in one of the most important meetings of the Chinese opposition since the crackdown in Tiananmen Square in June, elected Yan Jiaqi, an intense 47-year-old political scientist, as president of the federation. 
Late in July, 1,100 Chinese students from across the United States met in Chicago to press their cause.
In an interview, Mr. Jiaqi said he was confident that economic problems in China and a power struggle among the leadership would fuel a public clamor for democracy that would lead to a rehabilitation of the democratic movement.
''Tiananmen Square was a turning point in Chinese history,'' said Mr. Yan, who was a senior adviser to the ousted Communist Party General Secretary, Zhao Ziyang.
Wuer Kaixi, an outspoken leader of the student protesters in Beijing, was elected vice president of the federation. 
Other founding members were Wan Runnan, one of China's most prominent entrepreneurs; Su Xioakan, a writer and intellectual, and Chen Yizi, a former adviser to Mr. Zhao and the highest-ranking Chinese official known to have gone into exile.
 
Influence Asserted
The federation's leaders asserted that they could exert effective pressure on China's Government even though they are outside the country. 
They say they expect to obtain funds from Chinese living in Hong Kong, Singapore, the United States and elsewhere.
''There are 56 million Chinese living abroad,'' Mr. Chen said. 
''We hope to unite them.''
Mr. Wan, who had headed a computer company, said: ''We can have a great impact even though we're all in exile now. 
We made a lot of friends in the country, and as soon as we raise any issues, there will be a lot of people ready to follow us.''
In its founding statement, the federation, which will be based in Paris, said it opposed a monopoly of power in China and supported human rights, democracy and an economy that responds to market forces.
Mr. Yan, who had been director of Beijing's Institute of Political Science, was not optimistic about Jiang Zemin, the new party leader and the man chosen by Deng Xiaoping to succeed him as China's paramount leader.
''Jiang is not a reformer, and he is not a democrat,'' he said. 
''He is a bureaucrat. 
What he is gifted at is navigating his way politically. 
He is a puppet of Deng. 
I don't think he can remain in power a long time.''
 
Battle to Come
Federation leaders said they foresee a power struggle between Mr. Jiang and Li Peng, the hard-line Prime Minister who was instrumental in the crackdown in June.
The federation's leaders said they would urge governments to continue sanctions against China.''If repression grows worse, then the sanctions should be increased,'' Mr. Yan said. 
''But tourism should continue. 
We don't want China to be closed off from the rest of the world.''
