
At a busy intersection here the other day, a young policeman wheeled around and scolded a knot of bicyclists for stopping in the middle of a crosswalk. 
When one of the bewildered cyclists pointed out that there was no crosswalk painted on the newly repaved boulevard, the officer said: ''You know the rules!
What would a foreigner think of such a stupid excuse?''
With an edge of nervousness, a few sharp warnings and a flurry of activity counter to the usual languid summer pace of the Chinese capital, Beijing is preparing for its biggest diplomatic event in years - the 11th Asian Games.
Though technically a sporting event, the 16-day Asian Games, which start here on Sept. 
22, have become a major public-relations and political exercise. 
The last host, South Korea, used them and then the Olympics to make diplomatic breakthroughs with former enemies in the Communist world.
The games are now proving useful for China, which is trying to wipe away the stain of its suppression of the democracy movement in June 1989 and smooth its effort to be host of the Olympics in the year 2000.
''To be quite frank with you, the events on June 4 created some inaccurate impressions in the minds of people overseas,'' Wu Zhong Yuan, an executive member of the organizing committee, said in an interview in the main hall of the newly constructed Asian Games Athletes' Village. 
''The principle of the 11th Asian Games is, as we put it, to demonstrate our unity, friendship and progress.''
There is anxious anticipation, for instance, that President Roh Tae Woo of South Korea, which does not yet have relations with China, may visit. 
Recently, China normalized relations with Indonesia, and began them with Saudi Arabia and is expected to announce the formal establishment of relations with Singapore just before the symbolic flame opening the games arrives here from Tibet.
Another attempt to demonstrate amity was the decision to begin the flame's journey in the remote mountains of Tibet, which was forced to submit to Chinese rule during the 1950's and was put under martial law last year because of anti-Chinese riots.
The Government has attacked the preparations for the event with such energy that it has left many Beijing residents surprised by the show of industriousness, if not cynical at the thought that millions of images of smiling pandas hung all over town - the games' symbol is Pan-pan, a chubby panda bear - can help restore the Government's image.
Parts of the city usually hidden by gray walls or walls of stacked bricks have received fresh coats of plaster and paint - the first in decades.
The Government announced that it had increased by 10 times the fine for spitting in public, to the equivalent of $1.06.
 
Stern Warnings and Executions
Bicyclists have been warned that they will be fined if they continue to ride outside bike lanes or cross intersections against the light, a problematic threat given that there are 7.5 million bicyles, according to estimates, in the capital.
At the athletes' village, in the northern part of the city, officials wrestle with such problems as where to find enough watermelons to feed the 6,500 athletes and more than 90,000 guests. 
(The answer appears to be Xinjiang Province in the far northwest.) The wide avenues approaching Tiananmen Square, which were scarred by the tanks that rolled through last summer, have been repaved. 
The only visible reminder of the killings are the broken steps of the revolutionary martyrs' monument in the middle of Tiananmen Square, crushed by tank treads during the crackdown of June 4.
There have been more than 1,000 executions of criminals since May, which China has said are part of a crackdown on crime. 
Several Western diplomats said the well-publicized executions were also meant as a warning to would-be troublemakers in the capital.
''Generally speaking, the situation is stable in Beijing now,'' Mr. Wu said.
''I can assure you,'' he continued, ''there will not be the kind of unrest we experienced last year.''
