
The police today detained a prominent Chinese student leader who had returned from exile in the United States and was preparing to meet with foreign reporters to discuss his plans for setting up a chapter in China of the pro-democracy organization he heads.
The security forces seized Shen Tong, a 24-year-old graduate student at Boston University, at 12:30 this morning at his family home in Beijing. 
Two other Chinese, Qi Dafeng and Qian Liyun, were taken away with Mr. Shen at about 4 A.M. and none of the three have been seen since.
Three French television journalists were escorted from Mr. Shen's home and then expelled today.
Ross G. Terrill, an American writer of several books on China, was detained at his hotel room for a few hours in connection with Mr. Shen's press conference, but he was allowed to move freely after United States Embassy officials intervened.
 
Embassy Expresses 'Concern'
"I was pushed into my room and then I tried to get out and was stopped," said Mr. Terrill. "They said I was in violation of the rules."
Several guards were posted outside his room during the day. 
The American Embassy submitted a protest on Mr. Terrill's behalf to the Foreign Ministry. 
It also expressed "concern" over the detention of Mr. Shen, who holds a Chinese passport.
The detentions seemed to arise from Mr. Shen's plans to hold a press conference to discuss his decision to set up a local chapter of the Democracy for China Fund, which he heads. 
Mr. Terrill, who is on the fund's advisory board, tried to preside over the conference instead, until the police detained him.
Mr. Shen's mother, Li Yixian, said the police passed her a note written by her son that said he was being questioned at a hotel, but did not give the location. 
The police gave no reason why Mr. Shen was detained, but they confiscated his computer disks, notebooks and other materials collected during travels throughout China this past month.
"They didn't show us any identification," said Miss Li, his mother. 
"Then one of the policemen took my son away."
 
Visit Kept Quiet
Mr. Shen was one of the top leaders in the 1989 Tiananmen democracy movement and then fled to the United States and became active in lobbying for more attention to human rights violations in China. 
He also wrote a book about his experiences in China.
Although Mr. Shen returned to China about a month ago, he kept his visit quiet. 
He apparently is the most prominent democracy leader to return to China from exile.
Mr. Qi, who lives in China and was jailed for 20 months after the Tiananmen Square military crackdown, traveled with Mr. Shen and worked closely with the Democracy for China Fund. 
Miss Qian, the wife of another student leader, Xiong Yan, was apparently also helping Mr. Shen.
The materials confiscated could presumably be used to incriminate other Chinese whom Mr. Shen met during his journey. 
In a statement released to the press before his detention, Mr. Shen said he conducted interviews with intellectuals, workers, peasants and bureaucrats across the nation on behalf of the fund.
Mr. Shen apparently also met with dissidents belonging to underground pro-democracy groups that the Government bans outright. 
The authorities gave no indication whether they detained him for the materials he gathered or solely for his plans to hold a press conference.
Whether the Government knew he had been traveling and interviewing people across the country is not clear. 
Mr. Shen flew from Hong Kong to the southern city of Guilin and then traveled freely to cities and the countryside.
 
Others in Danger
"In four weeks I have seen things which encouraged me and others which made me sad," Mr. Shen said in his statement.
Mr. Shen and his assistants had notified official Chinese news organizations about the press conference. 
This may be how the authorities discovered his plans.
Robin Munro, a researcher at Asia Watch, a division of Human Rights Watch, said that the authorities were likely to be much harsher toward Mr. Qi and other less-well-known figures than to Mr. Shen himself, who is partly protected by his prominence in the United States.
"There's a fear that the real victims of this debacle are the lesser-known people involved in the Shen Tong project," Mr. Munro said.
