
In the student union at the University of Wisconsin, Jian Tang wore a sweatshirt emblazoned with the slogan ''We Have a Dream: Freedom, Democracy -China, China, China.''
The 31-year-old graduate student in nuclear engineering has made no secret of his disdain for the Government of China. 
And he said that if he was forced to return, he had a good idea what his future would hold.
''A labor camp, perhaps,'' he said. 
''Or imprisonment. 
Or execution.''
Sadness and Disappointment Chinese students in the United States have voiced sadness and disappointment over the Senate's upholding of President Bush's veto of a bill permitting them to remain in the United States after their visas had expired. 
There are about 40,000 Chinese enrolled at American universities, with one of the largest groups, about 450 students and visiting scholars, here at the University of Wisconsin.
President Bush has said he will order administrative measures to protect all Chinese in America from forced deportation. 
While students said they did not fear being asked to leave the country, many of those interviewed here and at other American schools insisted that their concerns were more than symbolic. 
They argued that an administrative order would leave them more vulnerable than they would have been if the legislation had passed.
''Without protective legislation, we are in danger every day,'' said Ma Yong Sheng, who is studying for a doctoral degree in biology at City College of New York, adding that the veto ''doesn't hurt the democracy movement but it sends the wrong message to the Chinese leadership.''
Students said they had reason to question Mr. Bush's credibility on issues involving policy toward China, especially in light of recent disclosures that two top Administration officials visited the Beijing Government soon after the massacre in Tiananmen Square last June.
''It's hard for us to believe that what he says is reliable,'' said Mr. Tang, a native of Chong Qing.
 
Students Remain Wary
But even among those who remain skeptical of Mr. Bush's intentions, few seriously believe that the President would quickly do an about-face and send the Chinese home.
''But down the road these things can change,'' said Michael Dean, director of the Wisconsin Office of International Students and Faculty. 
''It was just this January, for example, that the U.S. 
Government would no longer issue an extension on voluntary departures for students from Uganda. 
And many people still believe that Ugandans might face a danger if they return.''
At the University of California at Berkeley, Zhang Ruizhuang, a political science doctoral student, expressed an unease shared by many students: ''If that law had been passed, we'd be feeling safer, because the law is more stable.''
The legislation that Mr. Bush vetoed would have changed existing law requiring that most of the students, who hold visitor's visas, return to China before applying for new visas or permanent residence in the United States.
Another theme repeated by student after student was frustration, because they believed that the 62-to-37 Senate vote on Thursday to sustain Mr. Bush's veto was driven not by the merits of the bill, but by a partisan desire among Republicans to protect the President from an embarrassing defeat. 
Although the House voted against Mr. Bush on Wednesday by a vote of 390 to 25, two-thirds majorities in both houses of Congress are needed to reverse a veto.
 
'Matter of Saving Face'
''It came down to a matter of saving face - the President's face,'' said Yongchuan Liu, president of the Independent Federation of Chinese Students and Scholars, a group founded in Washington after the crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators in China.
After the crackdown, the Chinese group at Madison changed its name from the Chinese Students and Scholars Association to the Chinese Independent Union, a shift intended to show support for the protesters in Beijing.
Like students at many American colleges, the Chinese here have openly protested against the Beijing Government, fully aware that such criticism would make them easy targets of persecution if they return home.
While the students had been encouraged, indeed moved, by the expressions of solidarity among most Americans, they worry that Mr. Bush might ultimately see them as a bargaining chip in the broader foreign policy scheme.
''Why does the President want flexibility?'' asked Xingyu Chen, the 29-year-old leader of the Chinese Independent Union. 
''Because he wants to be able to negotiate with the Chinese Government. 
What will be used as bargaining chips in the negotiations?
The Chinese students.''
A 37-year-old graduate student in political science at the University of California, who did not want to be identified because he plans to return to China, said Mr. Bush's veto ''won't substantially influence the future of Chinese students in the U.S.''
''Every Chinese student can make full use of Bush's administrative order,'' he said.
But ''I don't believe Bush is really pro-democracy,'' he said. 
''He just passed that order to deal with the political situation, not with Chinese students or human rights.''
 
Overthrow Seen as the Answer
While President Bush has embarked on a strategy that seeks changes in the Beijing Government, the Chinese students contend that freedom can come to China only through the overthrow of the current rulers. 
In trying to placate Deng Xiaoping and his colleagues, the students argue, the United States is unwittingly knocking the wind out of the pro-democracy movement in China.
''The bill is more important in terms of sending a message to China than it is in terms of protecting the students,'' Mr. Tang said. 
''We think this Government will not survive. 
It will fall in the near future. 
President Bush should not help it keep from falling.''
For the students, the deepest fears center on their families in China. 
They worry that the authorities there might retaliate for the treasonous words and acts of their sons and daughters, brothers and sisters, on college campuses in the United States.
In letters and telephone conversations with their families, the students are careful to avoid any discussions that could be deemed subversive, and they try to decipher any messages about the political atmosphere at home.
Zhongdang Pan, another student, said that earlier this week he talked with his parents, who teach at a junior college in Anhui Province.
''They said, 'We are fine. 
Don't worry about us,' '' Mr. Pan said. 
'' 'And don't come home.'
''
