
China today published a 30-year-old speech by the nation's patriarch, Deng Xiaoping, in what appeared to be a call for greater attention to the economy and less concern for ideological campaigns.
The People's Daily, the official newspaper of the Communist Party Central Committee, said it had Mr. Deng's permission in publishing the speech at the top of the front page in today's issue. 
Its publication appeared to be an effort by the 88-year-old Mr. Deng to refocus the nation on economic development and restructuring after nearly two years of hard-line political and economic policies.
"If campaigns continue year-round, they will turn into superficial and exaggerated fanfare, and we will exhaust ourselves," Mr. Deng said. 
"In fact, they will breach the will of the masses, and alienate us from them."
The People's Daily gave no clear reason for publishing the speech, which was originally given to the All-China Women's Federation in December 1961. 
But China has a tradition of dredging up long-forgotten speeches to signal shifts in the political winds.
 
Full of Mixed Signals
China has been full of mixed signals since the army crackdown on dissent nearly two years ago, and it is not clear whether the reprise of the speech today indicates any major change of direction. 
Even if Mr. Deng intends to push for a more rapid move toward the market, he has given no indication he favors toleration of dissent. 
And in any case he is ailing, and must negotiate with other retired octogenarians with whom he shares power.
The focus of the speech is the need for improvement in the daily work of the party and Government, and less emphasis on grand projects and slogans. 
As in all such speeches, it is ambiguous and in places scarcely relevant to national policy -- it calls on the Women's Federation, for example, to improve relations between mothers-in-law and daughters-in-law -- but the theme is to shift the balance toward pragmatism and away from ideology.
"As for proposing this or that slogan, or this or that guideline, only when we have done enough daily, grass-roots work can we hope that they will materialize," Mr. Deng said. 
"Otherwise, our words will sink like stones into the sea, leaving not even a trace."
Correction
