
The Chinese Government said Monday that it had dismissed Culture Minister Wang Meng, a noted novelist who was exiled during the Cultural Revolution and whose rise to government power three years ago was hailed as a sign of renewed literary freedom.
Mr. Wang was the most prominent of several high Chinese officials removed at the end of a meeting of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress on Monday. 
According to today's issue of the People's Daily, the committee also dismissed Yuan Chongwu, the deputy director of the State Commission on Science and Technology, and Lin Hongru, the deputy director of the nation's central bank.
 
Campaign Against Liberals
In addition, three judges of the Supreme Court were removed. 
The newspaper identified them as Zhang Ming, Yue Qide and Gai Fengqi.
Mr. Wang is the highest-ranking official to be ousted since the crackdown on the student democracy movement in June, and since China began a campaign against the ''bourgeois liberalism'' of the West. 
Just before the crackdown, Zhao Ziyang, the General Secretary of the Communist Party, was removed for sympathizing with the student protesters.
There have been persistent reports in Hong Kong that the Governor of Hainan province, Liang Xiang, has also been relieved of his post and is under investigation for corruption. 
Mr. Liang spent five years as party secretary in Shenzhen, China's first special economic zone, and was deeply involved in China's market forays with foreign nations. 
He was also considered closely tied to Mr. Zhao, whose political allies are now all under suspicion.
Mr. Wang, who is 54 years old and was recently rumored to be ill and away from Beijing, was replaced by He Jinzhi, a poet who had been a high-ranking official in the propaganda department of the Communist Party. 
His appointment appears to signal a further campaign to keep a firm hand on books, plays, films, painting and virtually every other sphere of the arts, all of which fall under the Culture Minister's control.
While the official press here said outright that Mr. Wang had been dismissed, the Chinese television also said Monday night that he had ''repeatedly asked to be relieved of his official posts to concentrate on his writing.''
While that could not be independently confirmed, in 1986 Mr. Wang had resisted his appointment as Culture Minister, but acceded when the party leadership decided that his appointment would signal its intention to follow far more relaxed policies.
Mr. Wang has long been a powerful symbol in China. 
He was denounced in 1957 in the Communist Party's anti-rightist campaign because of a short story he had written. 
The story, called ''The Newcomer in the Organization Department,'' was about apathetic Communist Party cadres in an inefficient factory after the Communist revolution in 1949.
Accused of writing ''destructive, anti-party, anti-socialist work,'' he was assigned to manual labor on a farm outside Beijing. 
He was briefly reprieved, then banished in 1963 to a remote desert area in northwestern China, where he remained for 16 years and was forbidden to write.
The man who restored Mr. Wang's reputation and his typewriter is the same man who, presumably, was involved in his downfall: Deng Xiaoping, China's foremost leader. 
While Mr. Deng has not been seen in three months and is often rumored to be ill, he is still believed to be in firm control of the Government.
Mr. Deng invited Mr. Wang back to Beijing in 1979, allowing him to write a series of novels and short stories based on his experiences in exile. 
The novels were broadly popular, not only for their portrayals of frontier life, but also because they depicted the enormous costs of the Cultural Revolution.
Mr. Wang's appointment as Culture Minister in 1986 was hailed as a permanent turning away from the repression of the Cultural Revolution. 
Just before he was appointed, he told fellow writers that a ''golden age'' was at hand, and that writers should not ''go with the tide or follow the wind,'' but instead should follow their consciences. 
At the same time, he warned that writers could not stray too far off the socialist path or question the legitimacy of the party to rule over China.
 
Permissiveness Criticized
Presumably, he was removed for allowing literature that led to just that. 
While there is considerable debate here over what lay beneath the democracy movement - officially described here as riots intended to overthrow the Government - many in the Government have suggested recently that it was encouraged by the air of permissiveness in the society in recent years.
Under Mr. Wang's tenure, at least until the crushing of the student movement on Tiananmen Square, there was a resurgence of artistic expression. 
A far wider variety of literary works were published, and Beijing even saw a few avant garde art exhibitions. 
Mr. Wang said early in his tenure that ''neither administrative measures nor propaganda are effective in defining what is true, good and beautiful.''
But in recent months, such views have become far less tolerable within the party. 
Mr. Wang's dismissal was foreshadowed recently when he was replaced as the head of the Communist Party within the ministry.
