
China and South Korea signaled today that they would establish diplomatic relations in the next few days, turning their backs on decades of enmity dating to the Korean War and raising the possibility of a new pattern of economic and security relations throughout the region.
South Korea's Foreign Minister, Lee Sang Ock, will visit China on Sunday for three days of talks to discuss "the normalization of relations," officials announced today. 
The visit and other signals strongly suggest that the two sides will soon establish diplomatic ties, perhaps as early as Monday.
Taiwan, China's rival, angrily responded by saying that it would cut its ties with Seoul.
 
Increases in Trade Seen
While expected, the formal end to one of the last cold-war rivalries may stimulate sharp increases in trade and investment between China and South Korea. 
But the change would also raise fundamental questions about the prospects for security and peace in this region: Will the new ties further isolate North Korea, an unpredictable nation with almost no close friends in the world besides China, and drive it to intensify an effort to build nuclear weapons?
Or will China, which sent more than a million troops to fight on North Korea's side in the Korean War, now be willing to act as a broker between the Koreas, pressing the North more forcefully to forsake its ambitions of becoming a nuclear power?
Beijing and Seoul have both officially refused to confirm the prospect of new relations. 
But lawmakers and officials in Taiwan, which South Korea now recognizes as the legitimate government of China, said Beijing and Seoul would establish ties as early as Monday.
At a news conference in Taipei, Taiwan's Foriegn Minister, Fredrick F. Chien, harshly attacked the South Korean President and immediately announced that Taiwan would break relations with South Korea.
"The Government of Roh Tae-woo has violated the trust and trampled on international justice," Reuters quoted Mr. Chien as saying.
Both Taipei and Beijing claim to be the legitimate government of all China. 
China does not allow nations to maintain diplomatic relations with both Taiwan and itself.
China will continue to recognize North Korea after establishing relations with South Korea, but North Korea has strongly opposed its allies' recognition of what it calls the "puppet regime" in the south.
The North Korean Embassy in Beijing refused to comment today.
Some diplomats warn that a more isolated North Korea could be more dangerous. 
China has discouraged North Korea from developing a nuclear bomb, and it may lose leverage if it builds closer ties with South Korea.
Other diplomats say that Seoul may be able to enlist more help from China in persuading North Korea to abandon its nuclear ambitions. 
South Korea may also hope that China will encourage North Korea to agree to international inspections of more nuclear installations or at least to reduce its forces and stop digging tunnels at the border with South Korea.
 
Apology From China Mentioned
Press reports from Seoul suggest that China may have apologized to South Korea for helping the North during the Korean War. 
But so far China has given no indication of a change in its position that its participation with the North in the Korean War was a noble effort to combat American aggression.
The war began in 1950 after North Korea launched a surprise attack on the South. 
But the Chinese version of history is still that it was the South that began the conflict.
In the fall of 1950, Beijing sent forces to join North Korea in the fight against the South, embroiling the newly Communist China in a three-year war. 
Under the auspices of aiding a fraternal socialist country, China battled American-backed South Korean forces to a stalemate that led to the division of Korea into the North and South.
China sometimes has described its relationship with the North by saying it is "as close as lips and teeth."
Partly because of that closeness, China is likely to continue to emphasize its friendship with North Korea despite the recognition of Seoul.
Still, China will have to make a small but symbolic change that North Korea will not like: the redrawing of its maps. 
Current Chinese maps show one Korea with the North Korean city of Pyongyang as its capital, but presumably China will have to issue new maps showing a divided Korea with two capitals.
South Korean officials, who spoke on condition that they not be named, told reporters today that President Roh planned a visit to Beijing in October and that a return visit by a top Chinese leader was expected next January.
China's senior leader, Deng Xiaoping, is believed to have encouraged ties between South Korea and China. 
His youngest son, Deng Zhifang, who is a businessman, has visited both North and South Korea and may have played a significant diplomatic role.
For decades, China's ties with North Korea, and Taiwan's relations with South Korea, were built on ideological similarities. 
But now, the new ties seem to be dominated by pragmatism.
Economic trade between China and South Korea has surged, reaching $5.8 billion in 1991, far more than China's trade with North Korea. 
The new ties offer even greater potential, particularly in the Chinese coastal province of Shandong where South Korean investment has already developed. 
South Koreans are also likely to pour funds into Jilin Province, where many ethnic Koreans live.
 
Businesses Had Been Hesitant
In the past, South Korean businesses were hesitant to invest large amounts of money in new factories because of political uncertainty between the two countries. 
In contrast, trade between South Korea and Taiwan was slightly more than $3 billion last year, and China's trade with North Korea was far less than that.
Although Taiwan still expects to maintain strong economic ties with South Korea, it complained of betrayal and apparently will halt -- if only temporarily -- direct flights and eliminate or reduce trade preferences to South Korea. 
Severing ties with Seoul would leave Taiwan with formal ties with only 29 countries.
South Korea had been consistently denying to Taiwan that it would establish relations with China, and last year it discouraged Taiwan from selling consulates in South Korea and the land under its embassy, which some estimates say is worth $1.9 billion. 
The embassy and the land will now apparently be given to China.
