
Sometimes Wang Jie dreams of achieving her goal and making it to America, but there is just a hint of apprehension about what will happen if she is admitted to an American prep school and later to an American college.
"I think of myself surrounded by all these people with blond hair, and my parents too far away to help," Miss Wang said with a laugh, adding that her parents share her trepidation.
"My mother is a typical Chinese woman," Miss Wang added. 
"Whenever she sees some hope of me getting a scholarship abroad, she smiles. 
And then she cries."
Miss Wang, a 17-year-old student at one of China's best high schools, the Shanghai Foreign Language School, is part of a growing number of Chinese high school students who are trying to earn their undergraduate degrees in the United States.
The surge in younger applicants reflects improving standards of English among Chinese high school students. 
But most of the applicants say the prime reason is a requirement instituted a year ago that prevents Chinese from going abroad for at least five years after they graduate from a university.
While the Government has used the five-year requirement to make it more difficult for Chinese to go abroad for graduate study, it has not prevented high school students from applying to undergraduate programs abroad. 
Because the rule applies only to those who have graduated from a Chinese college, some college students are dropping out and applying to American colleges as transfer students.
Miss Wang plans to go first to a prep school, essentially repeating the last year or so of high school, but most high school graduates are trying to go directly to American colleges.
 
More Undergraduate Applicants
China already has more students in the United States than in any other country, and they are almost all graduate students. 
Only now are significant numbers of high school students applying for undergraduate programs.
Political discontent does not seem to be a factor in the yearning to go abroad; rather, some students cite a general pessimism about the future and resentment at the stifling orthodoxy and lack of academic freedom that they say now prevails at Chinese universities.
In the 1986-87 school year, 1,500 Chinese took the Toefl (Test of English as a Foreign Language) exam to apply to American undergraduate programs. 
By the 1989-90 school year, the number had soared to about 9,750. 
It is unclear how many of these are high school students and how many are college students trying to transfer to American institutions.
Only a tiny number of the high school students obtain the scholarships and the visas they need to go abroad to study. 
But their determination is sometimes staggering.
"The five-year rule makes them all the more desperate to go, to avoid the rule," said M. Elizabeth Barr, a Shanghai resident who conducts interviews for Wellesley College.
Many young people, and their parents, seem to believe that unless they escape to earn their undergraduate degrees, they will be destined to spend the next decade, and perhaps the rest of their lives, in uninspiring curriculums and careers at home.
"My niece is trying to go abroad to earn her B.A.," said a newspaper editor in Beijing. 
"It's her last chance, because otherwise she'll have to do a year of military training at the beginning of university, then four years of college, then a year after graduation working at the grass roots, and finally five years of work before she can get her passport. 
What's the point?
Why wait?"
Chinese students have grown more and more resourceful in their efforts to evade the five-year rule.
One first-year student at a Chinese university, now undergoing a compulsory year of military training, smuggled her application materials from the military camp through friends who acted as couriers. 
A student at Fudan University in Shanghai refused to go through the graduation ceremony so the requirement would not take effect.
Another student, an 18-year-old applicant to an Ivy League university, said sourly, "I refuse to take the Chinese college entrance examination, because there's nothing I can learn at a Chinese university."
If the determination of some of the students to leave is striking, so is their brilliance. 
Shen Jie, for example, is a top student at the Shanghai Foreign Language School who is applying to Princeton University and other schools.
Because China does not offer the Scholastic Aptitude Test, he took the Graduate Record Examination. 
Competing mostly against students who are already completing their American undergraduate programs, Mr. Shen earned the highest score possible in the mathematics section.
But Mr. Shen and most other Chinese applicants need more than an admission slip. 
Admission to an American university is often useless to a Chinese student without a full scholarship, and some students also need financial help even to buy the airline ticket to the United States.
