
In an indication of closer nuclear cooperation, China will provide Iran with its first nuclear power plant, the two Governments announced today.
In disclosing the agreement during a four-day visit to Beijing, President Hashemi Rafsanjani of Iran said that there were no plans for new military agreements between the two countries, and Chinese officials emphasized that Iran had agreed to allow the International Atomic Energy Agency to inspect the nuclear power plant.
China is currently building a small nuclear research reactor for Iran in Isfahan, and has provided it with a mini-calutron, a small version of the machine that Iraq was mass-producing as one component of its nuclear weapons program.
The new plant would have to be a much larger, 300-megawatt reactor to produce electricity. 
Because it would be subject to international inspection, any diversion of nuclear fuel into a weapons program would be be easy to prevent.
 
Still Closer Cooperation
But the undertaking would solidify Iran's already close technical cooperation with China, which Mr. Rafsanjani said he hoped would expand. 
"Our cooperation with China has constantly been increasing," he said at a news conference today. 
He added that his visit to China "will help to enhance our cooperation and make it more comprehensive in many new areas."
The project would also significantly enhance Iran's nuclear capability and inject dozens, perhaps hundreds, of Chinese nuclear experts into Iran. 
It could also help Iran develop related processes that could directly help a nuclear weapons program.
"The actual installation may never be misused," said Leonard S. Spector, a nuclear weapons expert at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. 
"China and Iran are both adhering to the letter of their non-proliferation obligations, but the transfer will enhance Iran's nuclear capability, create new skills and provide a cover for it."
In 1990, Iran and China signed a 10-year agreement for scientific cooperation and the transfer of military equipment and technology.
Both Governments have repeatedly emphasized that their nuclear cooperation is for peaceful purposes and an inspection of Iran's nuclear installations by the Vienna-based International Atomic Energy Agency this year found no evidence of nuclear weapons research. 
But the United States and other Western governments are convinced that Iran is intent on developing nuclear weapons with the help of technology from China.
In testimony before Congress in February, Robert M. Gates, the Director of Central Intelligence, said that Iran was looking to China to supply missiles and nuclear technology as part of an effort to develop its military capability.
The Bush Administration is opposed to any nation helping Iran develop a nuclear program, whether peaceful or not, and has repeatedly urged China to stop cooperating with Iran in its nuclear program. 
Both countries are parties to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, but the Administration has repeatedly expressed doubts about Iran's intentions to live up to the treaty.
Iran is aggressively shopping for nuclear-related technology, including equipment like computers and fuses, and has tried to attract nuclear scientists to Iran, foreign diplomats in Teheran say. 
When Iran tried to buy enriched uranium that was not compatible with peaceful nuclear purposes from Argentina, for example, the United States successfully pressed the Argentines to cancel the deal.
 
U.S.-China Ties Strained
Disclosure of the nuclear plant agreement coincides with increasingly strained relations between Washington and Beijing following a decision by the Bush Administration to sell up to 150 advanced F-16 fighter planes to Taiwan.
Mr. Rafsanjani was accompanied to Beijing by the Iranian Defense Minister, Akbar Torkan, and other military officials. 
Neither he nor Chinese officials disclosed the financial details of the deal, and some Administration officials speculated that the announcement today might represent only a vague agreement in principle.
Earlier this week, the Itar-Tass news agency reported that Russia would be willing to sign an agreement to build two to four 440-megawatt nuclear power plants in Iran.
