
In its most sweeping declaration of policy since leadership changes in June, the Communist Party acknowledged some mistakes today but called for vigilance against what it described as efforts by the West to subvert the Chinese Government and institute capitalism.
''Hostile forces, international as well as internal, are still engaged in activities of sabotage and subversion against us,'' Jiang Zemin, the Communist Party leader, warned in an 80-minute address shown on national television. 
The speech, part of the commemorations of the 40th anniversary of Communist rule on Sunday, had been circulated among the leadership and reflected not only Mr. Jiang's views but also those of all other top officials.
Giving a methodical if vague survey of China's economic, political and ideological policies, the speech was generally harsher than expected. 
While it reaffirmed the need for economic changes, some of the phrasing was more reminiscent of the 1960's and '70's than of the last decade of the open-door policy.
Maoist Phrase Resurrected
Mr. Jiang said China was engaged in ''a serious class struggle,'' a term that has occasionally been used in recent months but that has generally been out of favor since the Maoist era ended 13 years ago. 
In the past, use of the phrase often accompanied repression. 
Mr. Jiang said Beijing would ''isolate and attack the handful of hostile elements'' behind the democracy movement this spring that ended with a crackdown in Beijing on June 4.
''The disturbances stirred up by hostile forces, both internal and external, were aimed at overthrowing the Chinese Communist Party's leadership and subverting the socialist system, at turning China into a bourgeois republic and reducing it once again to a dependency of the Western capitalist powers,'' Mr. Jiang said. 
A 63-year-old technocrat who was appointed Communist Party General Secretary in June, Mr. Jiang has been designated by Deng Xiaoping, the nations' senior leader, to be the next paramount leader of China. 
The speech was perhaps his most significant opportunity yet to gain credibility and authority by speaking on behalf of the entire leadership.
China's new leadership has given mixed signals since it took power after the violent suppression of the democracy movement. 
The speech does not resolve the uncertainties, but it suggests an outline of China's directions: vigorous repression of any sign of dissent, economic retrenchment, increased central planning, but apparently modest extension of some economic restructuring programs.
 
A Split Is Acknowledged
In the most explicit statement so far of the divisions within China, Mr. Jiang warned that ''two completely different views exist on the issue of reform and opening.''
One view, he said, was the correct one, which would result in modernization and perfection of socialism. 
The other aims for ''total Westernization'' and ''constitutes transformation into capitalism and brings China into the orbit of the capitalist system of the West.''
By declaring that those who favor more aggressive change are effectively agents of Western capitalism, the party was escalating the accusations against them and serving notice that favoring ''bourgeois liberalization'' is an extremely serious offense.
With members of the Politburo and other top leaders seated behind him to underscore unity, Mr. Jiang acknowledged that the Party had made mistakes that had cost support.
''After we became the party in power, some phenomena of bureaucratism, petty tyranny, abuse of power for personal gains, corruption and degeneration, which result in alienation from the masses of the people, have gradually emerged,'' he said. 
The problems became worse in recent years, he added, and he called for extensive new ideological education to restore the Communist spirit and faith in the party.
 
Small Role for Private Sector
The struggles against foreign and domestic rivals ''will continue for a long time,'' Mr. Jiang said.
In economic matters, Mr. Jiang called for more central planning and suggested that China for the next three years at least would have to pursue its policy of economic retrenchment. 
During this period, he said, China should increase centralization and the proportion of revenue controlled by the central Government.
Apparently in response to concerns about attacks by the Government on the private sector, Mr. Jiang vigorously stressed the need for private enterprise. 
But he emphasized that it would always occupy a small role in the economy and suggested higher taxation of entrepreneurs as a way of avoiding rising disparities in incomes.
Mr. Jiang denied that the economic retrenchment amounted to a slowdown in the policy of economic change, and he said that China would maintain and further develop policies related to special economic zones and open areas along the coast. 
Apparently in a reference to China's fledgling stock markets, he said that China would continue to experiment with various ''pilot reforms.''
