
In an unexpected departure from their harsh line against private enterprises, the authorities announced new regulations today that would encourage unemployed people to establish private and collective enterprises in the capital.
The new rules, which include substantial tax breaks, were described as a pragmatic measure to lower unemployment in the capital. 
But the move was a surprise because of the sharp criticisms in recent months of private enterprises in China.
The Communist Party lately has complained that private enterprises evade taxes, violate various laws, waste raw materials and widen disparities in incomes. 
This was the first sign that some private enterprises would be actively encouraged.
The measure came as a surprise also because the new regulations were adopted by the Beijing government, which has led the nation in taking a hard line on a number of political and economic issues. 
The rules were reported late tonight by the official New China News Agency.
In recent years, private and collective enterprises have absorbed enormous numbers of unemployed and underemployed workers. 
While the authorities have been highly critical of some practices at such enterprises, the leadership knows that such companies also ease unemployment problems and thereby reduce social tensions.
The report from the New China News Agency said Beijing had 130,000 young job seekers this year, 30,000 more than last year. 
Nationally, the unemployment rate is often said to be 2 percent, but many economists have said the true figure is higher.
The dispatch also said that 200,000 to 250,000 temporary workers, who lack permission to live in Beijing, would be forced out of the city. 
Beijing has periodically tried to control the number of unregistered workers, and evicted many of them just a month ago, in preparation for the Oct. 
1 National Day holiday.
 
Tax Holiday for Some
The new regulations encourage only those private enterprises involved in ''trades needed by the city,'' like those related to food, garments and repair services.
Newly established collective enterprises that employ otherwise jobless young people would receive a tax holiday for two to three years.
The Beijing authorities have recently stepped up their campaign to ''clean up'' the free markets by making vendors pay taxes and adhere to other regulations. 
The city has also attacked ''profiteers'' and said that ''exploiters'' would not be allowed to join the Communist Party.
The unemployment difficulties have been compounded because of the present economic retrenchment program. 
The English-language China Daily reported today that Beijing has 150,000 job seekers who were laid off because of the retrenchment.
