
Ending a long-running dispute that threatened to erupt into a full-blown trade war, the United States and China reached an agreement in principle today under which Beijing would bring down barriers to American imports, Administration officials said.
Trade experts said the accord, among other things, gave American-made computers, chemicals and telecommunications equipment greater access to China's huge market.
The agreement is part of the Bush Administration's efforts to increase trade with the fast-growing markets of Asia, an effort that seeks to insure that Japan does not achieve commercial domination of the continent.
 
Vindication of Policy?
China experts also said the Administration would point to the accord as evidence that Washington's decision to maintain relations with China, notwithstanding the 1989 massacre in Tiananmen Square, was benefiting the United States -- this time, in the form of a market-opening accord.
American trade officials said they hoped the Chinese Government would give its final approval to the agreement in time to allow a signing ceremony in Washington on Saturday.
American officials have long asserted that China used an extensive web of restrictions to keep American exports out, including quotas, secret regulations and technical standards that discriminate against foreign goods. 
Aides to Carla A. Hills, the United States trade representative, refused to disclose details of the accord today.
 
Threats by Both Sides
In August, the United States threatened to impose punitive tariffs of up to 100 percent on $3.9 billion worth of Chinese goods if no agreement on removing Chinese trade restrictions was reached by Oct. 
10. Such tariffs would have effectively doubled the price of many Chinese goods in American markets.
In response, Beijing threatened to retaliate by placing steep duties on some $3.9 billion worth of American exports, including grain, aircraft, fertilizer and autos
If there had been no agreement and both sides imposed duties, President Bush could have been hurt in important constituencies just weeks before Election Day.
The Administration certainly did not want to face retaliation against American farm goods. 
Indeed, in a bid for farm state votes, President Bush last month expanded subsidies for American wheat exports to China, which is a highly profitable market for grain exporters.
The new accord also goes a few steps toward alleviating a fast-growing trade deficit problem for the United States. 
America's trade deficit with China has skyrocketed in the last six years as China has increasingly become a low-wage rival to other Asian nations.
American's deficit with China soared to $12.69 billion last year from $10.43 billion in 1990. 
That compares with a $6 million deficit in 1985. 
America's trade deficit with China, which is expected to exceed $15 billion this year, is now second only to the country's deficit with Japan.
 
Bush Vetoed Bill
Today's agreement comes 11 days after President Bush vetoed a bill passed by Congress that would have restricted China's trade with the United States unless Beijing improved its record on human rights, free trade and arms control.
The Senate upheld that veto a week ago, as it did last March. 
The White House has relied on farm state lawmakers in its recurring battle with Congress over most-favored-nation trade status for China
As it faces repeated criticisms during the Presidential election campaign for being cozy with China, the White House is expected to point to the market-access agreement as showing that it knows how to get tough with Beijing.
"The agreement will probably strengthen Bush's claims that his engagement policy is serious and effective," said Richard A. Brecher, director of business advisory services at the U.S.-China Business Council, which represents American companies with investments there. 
"He will argue that he is following through on his promises to address the many legitimate concerns that we have with the Chinese."
The Administration is also expected to point to the agreement as one that will help create jobs in the United States. 
Throughout his re-election campaign, President Bush has emphasized the importance of trade accords to economic growth.
The 44-page list of Chinese goods against which Mrs. Hills threatened retaliation was the biggest target list that the United States had ever published, American officials said. 
That list included shoes, beer, ginger, silk shirts and even hog guts, which are used as sausage casings.
 
Pointed to Consumers
Chinese officials asserted that American consumers would be the victims of the dispute because China supplies the United States with some 45 percent of its shoe imports, 31 percent of its toy imports, and 26 percent of its textile and apparel imports.
The United States published another list of potential punitive tariffs last year when it was pressing the Chinese Government to adopt and enforce new law against violations of American copyrights, patents and trademarks. 
Last January, just hours before the tariffs were scheduled to be imposed, China agreed to Washington's demands.
American officials have long complained of China's quotas against numerous American products, including computers, automobiles and chemicals.
One of Washington's demands has been for Beijing to publish its secret restrictions that often trip up unsuspecting American executives.
Representatives of American industry often cite China's Document 56, an internal document, in which Chinese officials say they will buy telephone-switching equipment from only three foreign manufacturers, none of them American.
According to one industry official, several local Chinese governments selected the American Telephone and Telegraph Company to sell them equipment, only to have those agreements blocked by the Government in Beijing.
China's Ambassador to the United States, Zhu Qizhen, said at a news conference this summer that China's modest level of American imports was caused by a slowdown in China's economy and not by discrimination against American goods.
