
The nomination of the Chinese film "Judou" this month for an Academy Award might have been a tremendous triumph for a nation that has long sought respect from the West. 
Instead, in a move that says much about the state of the arts in China today, the Government has tried to suppress the film and withdraw it from consideration.
"Judou," a beautifully filmed tragedy portraying a dye factory and the family that runs it, has become the centerpiece of a bitter drama about politics and art in China. 
If "Judou" is a symbol of the best in Chinese films, the Government's treatment of the film and of the Oscar nomination is a stark measure of the cultural repression that continues to haunt Chinese intellectuals and artists some 20 months after the 1989 Tiananmen crackdown.
Throughout China, cultural life has gone through a recession: the most acclaimed authors are in exile or are writing only for their desk drawers. 
Experimental art has been effectively banned. 
The country's most famous rock singers are tightly restricted. 
The film world, however, is perhaps the most tightly controlled of all.
"Films are the most effective way of reaching the people, and now the Government wants more films that promote socialist values," said a Chinese writer, who has seen the film. 
" 'Judou' leaves one with a sense of tragedy, of sadness. 
The Government doesn't like unhappy films."
 
Bleak Themes, Sad End
"Judou," set in a the countryside in the 1920's, is a vivid depiction of the dye factory's aging owner, who takes on a young and unwilling wife to bear a son. 
He beats her ferociously when she fails to become pregnant, and she finds solace in the arms of her husband's adopted son. 
The two young lovers produce a boy, a strangely quiet, cold-blooded child who ends up killing both the old man and his mother's lover, his real father. 
The film was directed by one of China's most talented young film artists, Zhang Yimou.
The Chinese Government's attempts to suppress the film may prevent it from being considered for an Academy Award. 
While "Judou" was one of five nominated for best foreign film, the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences could reconsider the nomination if pressed to adhere strictly to eligibilty requirements. 
Academy rules require films to have been released publicly to a paying audience in their own countries between Nov. 
1, 1989, and Oct. 
31, 1990. 
But, while "Judou" has won acclaim overseas, including the Luis Bunuel Award at the Cannes Film Festival in France, the film is effectively banned in China.
"Judou," the first Chinese film to be nominated for an Oscar, is the latest in a line of artistic Chinese films since the 1980's that have appealed not only to Chinese audiences but have captured interest abroad also. 
Such films included "Yellow Earth," "Red Sorghum" and "Hibiscus Town" and were dramatically different from the propaganda films characteristic of earlier periods.
 
Who Has Seen It
Last summer, during a brief period of cultural relaxation, "Judou" began to attract attention with reviews and commentaries in the official press telling readers that it would soon be released. 
But hard-liners in the film industry regained control and have blocked the film's release, Chinese and foreign film experts say.
In recent weeks, the Chinese Government has asked twice to have the film withdrawn from consideration for an Oscar, and reportedly even contested the film's eligibility. 
So far, the academy seems to have stood by its nomination.
Many Chinese intellectuals and officials have managed to see a video copy of "Judou" or to attend private screenings that are sometimes held for films that are deemed too sensitive for the masses to view. 
It is to open in New York on March 15.
"Aside from videotaped copies of the film or other special circumstances, the film has not been shown here," said a Chinese film official. 
"I suspect it hasn't been approved because of something to do with the sexual aspects in the film."
While the prurient interest of most Americans would doze during "Judou," for there is no depiction of sex or nudity, it is a bit racy by Chinese standards. 
The young wife bathes, her bare back to the camera, and her adulterous relationship with her lover is central to the plot.
 
China's Image Abroad
Foreign diplomats and other Chinese who have seen the film suggest that the Government may not be happy with the film's bleak delineation of rural life and its pessimistic ending. 
One Chinese connected to the film industry said the China Film Bureau is considering stricter guidelines for films made with foreign cooperation and will not tolerate extremely anti-traditional films or films that portray only the dark side or the backwardness of China to the rest of the world. 
"Judou" received Japanese financing.
The Chinese Film Bureau declined to be interviewed. 
The film's director, Mr. Zhang, said that film officials had asked for modifications but added that he had not had a chance to talk with them about specifics.
Even if the film does not win an Oscar or even retain its nomination, Mr. Zhang, who spoke cautiously in a phone interview from Tokyo, says he will not be discouraged.
"Those of use who have been through the Cultural Revolution can bear a great deal, for we have already endured many great storms," he said.
"But I still hope that someday my film can pass the censors. 
I made the film so that 1.1 billion Chinese people could see it."
