
When Miss Zhao, a junior high school student, was sold as a wife to a peasant in Shandong Province, she infuriated her husband by repeatedly trying to run away. 
Finally he came up with a way to keep her: he gouged out her eyes.
Miss Zhao's plight, which has been publicized here, is one of the more bristling examples of what some experts believe is a growing problem in China: the abduction and selling of women. 
In a sign of official alarm, the Government this month opened a campaign against the practice, declaring it one of ''six evils'' that must be eradicated from contemporary society.
There are no official statistics on how many women are sold to become wives, but unofficial estimates are in the tens of thousands at least. 
A book published this year about the practice - Miss Zhao's photo appears on the cover - reported that in Xuzhou, in Jiangsu Province, more than 48,000 women have been sold in the last few years. 
A recent Chinese news report estimated that some 30,000 women have been sold in Shandong Province.
The practice has surfaced in more than 20 of China's 30 provinces and autonomous regions, another article this week in the official Legal Daily said. 
It is particularly rife in villages in mountainous and remote rural areas of provinces like Sichuan, Shandong, Hebei and Henan.
 
Officials Avoid the Issue
Local authorities acknowledge that some peasants buy wives, but they are reluctant to discuss the practice and suggest that it is rare in their area. 
Officials refused to arrange interviews to discuss the issue on recent visits to Henan and Shandong Provinces.
''The city and the countryside all have this problem, but it is infrequent,'' said Ma Yingjun, a senior official in the Luoyang City government in Henan Province, when the topic came up in an interview about other matters. 
''We can't say the problem is solved, but the state is cracking down on it.''
Some Chinese say the sale of wives has its roots in traditional rural values about men and women. 
Earlier in this century, it was not uncommon for parents to sell their daughters to help support the family and raise a son. 
Sometimes the women are willing to be sold if it means they can escape poverty for a better life elsewhere.
How many women are sold voluntarily is unclear, but most Chinese say the great majority of those sold do not understand the perils they might face. 
Usually they are not kidnapped, but are deceived by offers of good jobs in the city. 
Too late, they find that they are being sold as wives. 
Some try to escape, but most accept their lot, Chinese say. 
In part this may be because the women are far from home and have neither money nor friends to help them get away. 
In addition, many may believe that it would be difficult to get another husband if their fate became known.
 
A Chain of Abductors
While many urban Chinese say they disapprove of the practice, and it is strictly illegal, the sale of wives is reported to have increased as social controls in the countryside are eased and more people search for ways to make money during the transition toward a market-oriented economy. 
Often, wife-selling involves a chain of abductors, with each one passing on the woman to the next link in their intricate network throughout the country. 
An essay published in September in a confidential Government document called ''Nei Can Xuan Pian,'' or ''Selected Reference Articles,'' explains some reasons for the phenomenon. 
In many areas, the rising cost of traditional rural weddings, which frequently exceeds $2,500, makes marriage expensive. 
Purchasing a wife generally costs only $500 to $800.
''Buying a wife saves money and trouble,'' the article said. 
''Peasants regard women as tools for carrying on their lineage from one generation to another.''
