
China said today that it had handed down relatively short sentences for 11 protesters tried recently in connection with the Tiananmen Square demonstrations of 1989 and subsequent democracy protests.
These are believed to be among the last cases of people who have been held without trial for more than two years after the military crackdown on June 4, 1989. 
The sentences, reported in Ta Kung Pao, a Hong Kong newspaper controlled by Beijing, ranged from immediate release to five years in prison. 
Sketchy details on some of the convictions were provided earlier this week in Beijing by people familiar with some of the defendants' families.
By the standards of the hard-line Government, which earlier sentenced two prominent democracy advocates to 13 years each, the sentences reported today were mostly on the mild side.
The disclosures come as Beijing officials are calling for faster economic change and seem to be a sign that China is finally willing to resolve many of the cases in which dissidents have been held without trial. 
Such cases have figured prominently in its discussions on human rights with Western nations.
 
Public Barred From Trials
While the relative leniency, by hard-line standards, is probably a response to Western pressure on China, there is not necessarily a specific link to the vote by the United States Senate this week to add conditions on an extension of low tariffs for Chinese exports.
The trials were held at various times, effectively closed to the public and the press, and the timing seems mostly to reflect the aim of resolving the Tiananmen cases by the time the national legislature convenes for its annual session, around March 20.
Wu Xuecan, a former editor at the official People's Daily who was arrested for distributing a leaflet during the demonstrations, was sentenced to four years. 
Zhai Weimin, whose name appeared in 1989 on a list of 21 most-wanted university students and who later tried to organize an anti-Government underground movement, was given three and a half years.
Sentences begin from the day of detention, so those who were taken into custody at the time of the 1989 crackdown have already served more than two and a half years. 
The sentences were also released in a State Council letter to John T. Kamm, a Hong Kong-based American businessman active in promoting human rights.
One dissident, Bai Chunxiang, about whom little is known, was released without punishment. 
Peng Rong, a Beijing University student who was arrested for organizing a survey about demonstrations, was sentenced to two years and is expected to be released in May. 
Li Minqi, a student arrested for his role in a commemoration on the first anniversary of the military crackdown, was also given two years and will presumably be released in June.
The Hong Kong report suggested that China had now closed all of the cases raised by the State Department in its human rights report this year. 
In fact, a number of cases remain unresolved. 
China has not given information on about a dozen other dissidents whose names appeared on a list presented to Beijing in November by Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d.
Moreover, Bao Tong, a top aide to the former Communist Party leader Zhao Ziyang, was officially arrested in January and is expected to be tried soon. 
Wu Jiaxiang, a party official as well as a writer and researcher, was also arrested recently and is awaiting trial.
Little is known about the six other people sentenced, but presumably they were workers who had taken part in the demonstrations: Li Baoqin and Wang Guoqing, five years each; Dong Huaiming, four years; Wang Zhong xian and Wei Ren, three years each, and Wang Lidong, two years.
