
Two months after the collapse of Soviet Communism, China's leaders seem increasingly edgy and divided, and there are signs that they have responded to the events in the Soviet Union by deciding to tighten their grip on the nation further.
Chinese newspapers have carried more statements about "class struggle," there are calls for intensifying Marxist education, leaders of many work units have recently warned employees not to meet foreigners without permission, and officials at one Beijing university even called on staff members to report on colleagues who have contacts with foreigners. 
The officials insisted that even private correspondence with Westerners should be reported to the authorities, a Chinese who was present said.
That person, and many others, characterize the situation as "nei jin, wai song" -- tranquillity on the surface, repression within.
The tighter controls are imperceptible at first glance, for the streets of Beijing abound these days with mountains of cabbages rather than crowds of police, and the free markets spill out as much as ever with bright jackets and lacy underwear and other emblems of free enterprise. 
But members of the urban middle class, especially those in sensitive work places or with foreign friends, are feeling the political cold front.
"I can't help worrying if my leader is going to call me aside this afternoon for seeing you," a scholar in his 30's said, laughing nervously as he bid a foreigner goodbye. 
He said the staff members of his work unit had been banned from seeing foreigners and had been warned that the Central Intelligence Agency was trying to step up spying in China.
 
Gates Statement Cited
The talk of the C.I.A. stems from a statement by Robert M. Gates, President Bush's nominee to be Director of Central Intelligence, in his Senate confirmation hearings. 
In answer to a question about China on Sept. 
17, Mr. Gates said, "I think more can be done through expanded human intelligence collection."
The statement was scarcely noticed in the United States, but it has been published in secret news summaries for Chinese officials. 
Already nervous after the Soviet events, some hard-liners are taking it as proof of their fears of a secret American conspiracy of "peaceful evolution" that would lead to replacing the Communist Government. 
The leadership takes this supposed plot so seriously that it is said to have formed an "Anti-Peaceful Evolution Working Group."
Another indication that the leaders are jittery, according to one knowledgeable Chinese, is a shuffle in the command of the Chengdu Military Region. 
Zhang Taiheng, the commander of the region, is said to have been summoned to Beijing for "study" and retirement, and will be replaced by an officer from the General Logistics Department in Beijing.
The reason for the shuffle apparently is a helicopter crash last spring in Tibet in which a number of senior military officials died. 
The central authorities reportedly complained that General Zhang had led three helicopters to inspect the border area with India, even though he had been told not to take so many top generals to the area.
"Normally it would be a minor matter, but the center is very fearful now of generals who don't obey orders, and so it wants to take a very stern action," said the Chinese who recounted the episode. 
Government spokesmen in Chengdu could not confirm whether there had been a change in the command.
It is difficult to gauge the tension in cities outside Beijing -- partly because the authorities are so tense that they are denying permission for American correspondents to travel virtually anywhere outside the capital. 
The Government has refused permission lately to visit even innocuous places such as Jilin and Hebei Provinces, where there are no known political problems.
 
Official Press Is Split
One sign of a split in the leadership lately is the divided nature of the official press. 
One line of articles recently has focused on the financial problems of state-owned enterprises and has emphasized that the main task in China is to boost economic reform and raise the standard of living. 
This line of reasoning appears to have the backing of the nation's patriarch, Deng Xiaoping.
The other line of articles in the official press argues that the most serious threat comes not from economic problems but from political enemies at home and abroad.
In a recent People's Daily article, a patron of the hard-liners, Deng Liqun, called for more "class struggle" -- a term that for many intellectuals has frightening associations with the brutality of the Cultural Revolution from 1966 to 1976. 
Meanwhile, the People's Liberation Army Daily revived another old expression with similar connotations: "You must beat a dog even when it is drowning."
The phrase was often used to justify further attacks on "counterrevolutionaries" who had already been persecuted. 
The newspaper warned that showing mercy to such a drowning "dog" is a mistake because it may swim ashore and bite people again. 
"Therefore," it said, "it should be bitterly beaten."
