
Fang Lizhi, China's most prominent dissident, said today that he planned to study in the United States for at least six months beginning in January. 
He also said that while he was there he would meet with exiled Chinese dissidents and speak out against his country's Government.
In an interview, Mr. Fang, an astrophysicist, said he might make the United States his permanent place of exile. 
He was allowed to leave China last month with his wife, Li Shuxian, more than a year after taking refuge in the United States Embassy in Beijing during the violent crackdown on dissent.
Mr. Fang's intentions seem likely to cause concern among the hard-liners in Beijing and could prove an irritant in relations between Beijing and Washington, but they do not appear directly to break any known elements of the agreement between the countries that allowed him and Miss Li to go free.
Face-Saving Measure
Although they were initially released to Britain, apparently as a face-saving response to Chinese concerns that Mr. Fang not go to the United States, there is no known agreement that prevents them from moving later on.
And while Beijing might regard Mr. Fang's speaking out against the Government as a breach of his pledge not to conduct ''anti-China'' activities while in exile, Mr. Fang was careful not to rule out criticism of the Chinese Government, as opposed to criticism of the nation itself.
In the wide-ranging interview, Mr. Fang, whose full name is pronounced fahng lee-jur (rhyming with burr), gave details of negotiations involving the United States Embassy in Beijing and the Chinese authorities that led to exile for him and his wife, who is also a physicist and a prominent dissident.
He said the authorities had asked him to agree not to participate in activities against the Government and to admit that he was a criminal. 
He said he had refused on both counts but agreed to other terms, including a demand that he say he was going abroad for medical treatment. 
Mr. Fang, who spoke in English throughout the interview, called that professed reason ''diplomat's language'' and said nothing was wrong with his health.
 
Urges Sanctions Against Beijing
Appearing relaxed and cheerful at his office at Cambridge University's Institute of Astronomy, Mr. Fang also touched on the state of the democracy movement in China, the need he saw for continued economic sanctions against the country and the role the Bush Administration could play in bringing about change.
Mr. Fang, who is here doing research into the structure of the universe, said that the Chinese authorities had allowed one of his sons, who had remained behind when the couple left, to travel to Britain a week ago and that the family, including a second son, had now been reunited.
Mr. Fang, 54 years old, said he had accepted an invitation from the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, N.J. 
- an independent institute that grants fellowships for research in various fields - and would conduct research there for at least six months.
Mr. Fang was asked whether he would meet Chinese dissident leaders while in the United States, where he would have a broader platform for his views. 
He said, ''I think so.''
Asked whether he would speak out, he replied, ''Yes, I think so.''
But he said that whether he would be willing to serve as the leader of exiled dissidents would ''depend on the situation.''
Mr. Fang said he might make his home in exile in the United States because it ''is very large and very easy to spend a longer time'' there than in Britain. 
He said he would visit various parts of the United States and had already received invitations from universities and institutes in California, Chicago, Colorado and New York.
 
Chose to Go to Britain
He said the Chinese authorities, for reasons that were unclear to him, had not wanted the United States to be his first stop after leaving Beijing. 
He said he had told the authorities he was willing to go to any developed country, and ultimately chose Britain, where he conducted research in 1979.
Mr. Fang and Miss Li flew to exile in Britain on June 25 after having been in the United States Embassy in Beijing since June 5, 1989. 
They took refuge in the embassy the day after the Communist leaders sent troops into Tianamen Square and after pro-Government demonstrators burned Mr. Fang in effigy.
Mr. Fang said he believed that the Government had allowed him to leave largely because it was feeling the pressure of economic sanctions. 
But the authorities also wanted to improve their image, he said, because ''intellectuals don't believe them and students don't like them.''
He said Western governments should relax sanctions against China only when it freed imprisoned dissidents and returned human rights to its citizens. 
He called on President Bush, whom he said he hoped to meet in the United States, to demand that pro-democracy demonstrators be released, adding that only about two student leaders had been freed.
He said Mr. Bush could not have acted to prevent the killings near Tiananmen Square because by that time, ''the Chinese Government had already become illogical.''
But he said a stronger response from the Bush Administration in the aftermath could have lessened the number of people who were detained or killed. 
He said at least 1,000 people were still in jail and gave 700 as the ''lower limit'' of the number of people who died when the Government sent troops and tanks into the square to crush the student-led demonstrations.
 
Long-Term Optimism
Mr. Fang said that world trends made him optimistic that democracy would be achieved in China but that ''we'll be waiting until the old generation'' of leadership is gone. 
He said it was difficult to determine which of the country's current leaders would become ''China's Gorbachev,'' because the autocratic system made it difficult for them to reveal ''what is really in their minds.''
For the first couple of weeks of their stay in the embassy, Mr. Fang said, he and his wife feared that the authorities would come and take them away, ''because there were still shots'' being fired.
''After the first two weeks were gone,'' he said, ''I know we are safe. 
They can't get in there. 
Even in that time, many sons and daughters of Chinese leaders applied for visas for the States. 
I know if they apply for visas for the States, I'm very safe.''
 
Life in the Embassy
Mr. Fang said he had spent most of his time in the embassy doing research and writing five scientific papers. 
Life was ''very confined'' for him and Miss Li, he said, because for security reasons, only Ambassador James R. Lilley and a few staff members were allowed to approach them. 
He said his wife taught two nurses how to cook Chinese food.
Mr. Fang said he would go back to China if the Government guaranteed ''all my rights as a citizen.''
He said he still kept his Chinese passport and would never apply for political asylum. 
''In our Constitution, citizens have many rights, including freedom of speech,'' he said. 
''If they will guarantee that, I will go back.''
 
WOULD BE WELCOME IN U.S.
WASHINGTON, July 13 - A senior State Department official said today that Mr. Fang would be welcome in the United States. 
Any plans he might have for a prolonged stay, the official said, would not contradict the terms of the agreement reached with Beijing.
