
The Government announced today that it would give the army a 13.8 percent budget increase this year, apparently a reward for helping to keep the Government in power.
The rise in the military budget is bigger than any other increase in a major spending category and comes on top of a substantial boost in army spending in each of the last few years. 
The new military budget is more than 50 percent bigger than the one for 1989.
The decision to increase military spending, particularly at a time when the threats along the nation's borders are diminishing, is sure to raise eyebrows and anxieties among some of China's neighbors. 
Not only has the principal threat to China, an attack from the Soviet Union, virtually disappeared for the time being, but tensions have also been considerably eased between China and two other neighbors with which it has fought border wars: India and Vietnam.
The announcement today by Finance Minister Wang Bingqian in a speech to the National People's Congress, the rubber-stamp Parliament now holding its annual session, did not give any clues on how the allocation to the 3.1 million-member army would be spent. 
But the military has been focusing lately on acquiring high-tech weapons and on gaining equipment to project an image of power at sea.
A stronger navy would threaten Taiwan, which China insists is an errant province that it has the right to invade. 
It would also worry several Southeast Asian nations that have competing claims with China over islands in the South China Sea.
Ever since the army was called upon in June 1989 to suppress the democracy movement in Tiananmen Square, the military has played an important role in internal security. 
Domestically, the army is particularly concerned about the possibility of unrest in ethnic minority regions like Tibet and Xinjiang.
The official military budget, which in 1992 is projected to be $6.85 billion, includes only some of the money actually made available to the military, but no more comprehensive figure is available. 
Mr. Wang put the 1992 increase at 12 percent, but that was because military spending in 1991 was over budget. 
The increase in the budgeted amount is actually 13.8 percent.
In contrast, agriculture spending will rise 7.2 percent this year, education funds are increasing 11.3 percent, and science expenditures are rising 7.4 percent.
One revelation in Mr. Wang's speech today was that the leadership plans essentially to abolish the grain subsidy this year. 
That would be a major stride to restructure prices along market lines, and it also suggests that the authorities feel comfortable that they can handle any protests over such an unpopular move.
 
Raising Both Prices
"The State Council has decided to raise the purchase and selling prices of grain at an appropriate time in 1992, basically unifying the two prices," Mr. Wang declared.
The purchase price refers to the price that the Government pays farmers for rice, wheat and other grains. 
The selling price means the price that the Government charges consumers in the cities for rice, bread and flour.
The retail prices are well below the real cost of the grain, but until now the Government has picked up the difference for fear that higher prices might provoke unrest.
The Government raised grain prices a year ago, causing grumbling but no serious protests, and the authorities announced this month that prices would rise again on April 1. 
But so far the price increases have only reduced the subsidy, and today's announcement is the first indication that it will be almost entirely abolished this year.
While the abolition of the grain subsidy would be welcomed by economists as an important reform measure, the basis for the move apparently is not so much enthusiasm for economic liberalization as it is alarm over rising Government spending. 
Mr. Wang has acknowledged that it will be difficult to avoid exceeding budget deficit targets this year.
