
China today set off the largest underground nuclear test it has ever conducted, the State Department said. 
The explosion was thought to have a yield of about one megaton, equivalent to a million tons of TNT.
The blast, which took place about 1 A.M. Eastern daylight time, had 70 times the explosive power of the atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima, and exceeded the 150-kiloton limit observed by Washington and Moscow under a 1990 treaty, scientists said.
The Bush Administration said it regretted the action by Beijing and urged restraint.
 
Limit on Underground Tests
There were sharp condemnations of China in Congress. 
Legislators from both major parties have been critical of what they see as an unacceptably conciliatory policy toward China by President Bush.
[The Chinese Foreign Ministry issued a statement confirming that Beijing had held a nuclear test. 
The statement said China was in favor of "complete prohibition on nuclear tests within the framework of effective nuclear disarmament."]
The Chinese test was only one-fifth as powerful as the largest underground test by the United States, a five-megaton blast in Alaska on Nov. 
6, 1971, the most powerful underground nuclear explosion on record. 
A megaton is 1,000 kilotons.
The largest underground test by the Soviet Union was a 2.8 to 4 megaton blast on Oct. 
27, 1973, a year before Moscow and Washington signed a treaty limiting the size of those explosions to 150 kilotons. 
The pact was ratified in 1990.
The Chinese test comes on the heels of persistent reports that Beijing is selling missile technology to Middle Eastern nations, and at a time when Beijing is rejecting all criticism of its human-rights record.
Arms-control experts also seized the chance to criticize the Bush Administration for its opposition to a comprehensive international test-ban treaty.
China's last and largest previous underground test, an explosion of between 50 and 200 kilotons, was on Aug. 
16, 1990.
The United States set off two underground nuclear explosions this year in Nevada, on March 26 and April 30. 
Both were reported to be less than 150 kilotons.
Large underground tests, even on the scale of today's blast in China, are considerably smaller than the atmospheric explosions of the 1950's and 1960's. 
On Feb. 
28, 1954, the United States tested a 15 megaton bomb at Bikini Atoll in the Pacific. 
The largest atmospheric test on record was conducted by the Soviet Union, a 58-megaton explosion on Oct. 
30, 1961.
Atmospheric tests were prohibited by the 1963 Limited Test Ban Treaty, signed by more than 100 countries.
Today's Chinese underground explosion was situated in Xinjiang Province in northwestern China by Scandinavian seismologists, according to reports from Stockholm. 
In Hong Kong, scientists at first thought they were registering an earthquake.
"This suggests that the Chinese must be trying to develop large yield, offensive nuclear warheads for long-range missiles," said Gary Milhollin, director of the Wisconsin Project on Nuclear Arms Control. 
"This is a city-buster."
But he emphasized that China was still no threat to the United States in the development of intercontinental ballistic missiles.
Richard A. Boucher, the State Department spokesman, said, "We regret that the Chinese have conducted this test and that they are not demonstrating the same restraint as shown by Russia, ourselves, or the other nuclear weapons states."
 
Cold-War Mentality
China is not a party to the Threshold Test Ban Treaty between the former Soviet Union and the United States, which came into effect in December 1990. 
Under that pact, underground tests are limited to 150 kilotons.
"It is rather ironic that the United States would criticize other countries for testing," said Dunbar Lockwood, senior analyst at the Arms Control Association, a private research organization. 
"The United States under the Reagan and Bush Administrations has been one of the major impediments to progress toward a comprehensive test ban."
Mr. Milhollin described the Chinese test as illustrative of a cold-war mentality in Beijing. 
He added: "This is the price we're paying for not having a worldwide comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty. 
It means China can improve its ability to destroy U.S cities at long range by testing."
Leonard S. Spector, a nuclear-weapons expert at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace who has recently been in China, said in an interview that Beijing's test could take the pressure off the Bush Administration to agree to a comprehensive test ban. 
Pressure has been growing internationally and in Congress for that action.
 
Moratorium on Tests
In October 1991, the former Soviet President, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, announced a one-year moratorium on the testing of nuclear weapons. 
Boris N. Yelstin, the Russian President, has suggested in public remarks that he is preparing to resume testing this fall if there is no reciprocal movement from the United States.
The French have also stopped testing to encourage international action on a comprehensive ban.
"Thoughtful advocates of testing restraint think that a comprehensive test ban might draw in India," Mr. Spector said.
Senator Alan Cranston, Democrat of California and chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations subcommittee on East Asia, reacted to reports of today's test by calling China a "renegade nation."
"This test will strongly reinforce Congressional efforts, which I once again will help lead, to deny China most-favored-nation trade staus unless China complies with international non-proliferation standards," Senator Cranston said in a statement.
