
Since the Chinese Government began its crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators last month, Chinese students and scholars in the United States who took part in similar demonstrations in this country say they have been harassed by anonymous callers as well as by Chinese consular officials.
The harassment has taken several forms, from a man watching for hours from a car parked outside a house outside Boston where Chinese graduate students operate a communications center, to telephone calls that warn students to look out for their futures, to visits by officials to university campuses, looking for names of students involved in pro-democracy activities.
Incidents have been reported from California to Long Island, and several have been reported to the Federal Bureau of Investigation and to the State Department.
Representative Tom Lantos, Democrat of California, met with Chinese students from the San Francisco area this month. 
As a result of their complaints, which included reports of telephone harassment, the Congressman sent a letter July 11 to Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, asking for an investigation of the Chinese Embassy and its five consulates around the country, an aide in his office, Bob King, said.
Denial From Consular Official
An official at the Chinese Consulate in New York, Ye Qiping, said keeping in touch with students was ''part of our normal work,'' and said no one had sought names of students who demonstrated for democracy.
''The students have no clear picture about the situation that happened in China, so they took part in demonstrations in the States,'' Mr. Ye said. 
''We can understand their feelings.''
Liu Yuan, a Brandeis University graduate student in anthropology who volunteers at the China Information Center, part of the Walker Center for Ecumenical Exchange in Newton, Mass., said the center received three or four calls a day from Chinese-speaking callers until last week, when they dwindled to one a day or less. 
An article about student harassment was published in The Boston Globe last week.
 
'A Lot of Detailed Questions'
Some of the anonymous callers ''just ask a lot of detailed questions about what we are doing,'' Mr. Liu said.
Other callers warn the person who picks up the phone to be careful, Mr. Liu said. 
''They would say things like, 'Don't do too much,' or 'Be careful about your future,' '' he said. 
They hang up quickly and never identify themselves, he added, so it is difficult to tell whether they are Government officials making veiled threats or just people worried about the students.
Gordon J. Schultz, executive director of the Walker Center, said he received several calls on July 14 in which the caller growled like an animal. 
At the end of one such call, the person snarled, ''Shut up!'' in Chinese, he said.
Other calls suggested that the students buy guns for their movement, and some were placed to students' homes, warning them to ''stop right away, we know what you're doing.''
One student was terrified when the caller said he knew many details about the student's life, Mr. Schultz said.
 
A Visit to Stony Brook
''I'm not sure I was expecting it,'' Mr. Schultz said. 
''And we don't know where it's coming from. 
It doesn't have to be the Chinese Government. 
It could be a right-wing kook, or a kook being used by the Chinese Government.''
Lan Yishen, a historian doing graduate work at the Stony Brook, L.I., campus of the State University of New York, said a Chinese consulate official named Zhao Lingshi appeared suddenly at Stony Brook last month.
''He asked about my activity,'' said Mr. Lan, who helped organize a group called Human Rights in China. 
''He asked somebody else about me, and he wanted to get the names of the students who had been taking part in the demonstrations.''
Dr. Wang Zhaozhang, 43, a researcher in physics at Princeton University, asked permission late last year from the Chinese Academy of Science to stay three more years. 
The academy said it would arrange to have his student visa extended through the consulate in New York.
 
Visa Application Pending
Shortly after students and workers were shot to death by Chinese troops in Beijing, Dr. Wang said, he helped organize a Princeton student protest over the killings. 
The group published a statement on June 13 that said in part that they no longer recognized Prime Minister Li Peng's Government.
On June 16, Dr. Wang said, his wife received a telephone call from Wang Haozhong, the educational consul in New York. 
According to Dr. Wang, whose wife taped the call, the official said:
''If you are one of the organizers of this group and you do not recognize the Chinese Government, well, we are the Chinese Government. 
You do not need us to help you do anything. 
If you have any questions, any problems, any difficulties, we will not help you.''
Dr. Wang's visa application is still pending. 
He said he did not know what would happen. 
''There are some people, I don't know who, in Princeton who reported this to the consulate,'' he said. 
''I am a scientist. 
I do not want to take part in too much politics. 
But after June 3 and June 4, I cannot keep quiet. 
I presented my political attitude.''
He is also friendly with Fang Lizhi, the astrophysicist and dissident who took refuge in the American Embassy in Beijing after the killings, and believes that may account for the Government's singling him out.
Mr. Ye, the education consul, said he had ''no clear idea'' about Dr. Wang's situation and could not comment.
Some students have not been harassed, and they theorize that those doing the harassing only bother with people they think they can intimidate.
''They dare not to call me,'' said Tang Yiming, a Columbia graduate student and poet who coordinates student groups in the New York area. 
''They maybe think I am too counterrevolutionary so it's no use to call me.''
