
The 14th annual Hong Kong international dragon boat races ended today with Indonesia dethroning the heavily favored Shun De team from China in the men's final. 
The False Creek Canoe Club of Vancouver, British Columbia, took the women's title from the similarly favored Chinese women's team.
The United States men's team from Philadelphia, which won its opening heat Saturday and its semifinal this morning, suffered the ignominy of sinking and placing last in the eight-boat final.
The American boat had high hopes going into the championship. 
Based on its semifinal victory, the United States was assigned lane 5, next to the other semifinal winner, Indonesia, which was in the fourth lane. 
Shun De, which won the Hong Kong championship the last four years, was in lane 6.
 
Perfect Position
It was an ideal draw for the United States, making it tactically possible to race the co-favorites placed on either side of the American boat.
The wooden craft used for dragon boat racing are 38 feet long, weigh close to 4,000 pounds and use a crew of up to 20 rowers plus a coxswain to steer and a drummer, seated in the bow, to beat out the racing cadence. 
A dragon's head is mounted on the bow of each boat and a dragon's tail is attached to the stern. 
The rowers sit two abreast in the boat, paddling in precise synchronization at a cadence of up to 100 strokes a minute.
Unfortunately, the United States crew, composed primarily of collegiate oarsmen, got off to a slow start. 
At 100 meters into the 640-meter race the American boat was more than half a boat length behind its neighbors, racing in the turbulence of their wash.
''The boat started to roll from side to side,'' said Rocco Inglesie, one of the American rowers, ''and with each stroke more wash, first from the Indonesian wake and then alternately from the Chinese, came over our gunwales.''
The boat progressively filled with water, and sank near the 400-meter mark. 
The officials' launch picked up the 22-man crew from the water, and brought them to the launching dock as the Indonesians crossed the finish line 2.17 seconds ahead of Shun De, ending China's hold on the Cathay Pacific International Cup.
 
'A Great Feeling'
The Canadian women, second to China in last year's final, reversed that finish order today, beating the Chinese for first place by 3.08 seconds.
''Last year we lost by five seconds,'' said Annie Bolding, one of the Canadian rowers. 
''All through our winter's practice, Don, our coach, would count to five to remind us. 
I've been competing internationally for 10 years, and today we won. 
I'm 29 and I finally got my jollies. 
What a great feeling.''
Australia finished third in the women's race, followed by Britain. 
The United States women failed to make the six-boat final.
