
Continuing a crackdown on private enterprise that began after the crushing of the democracy movement in June, China announced today that it would close a large number of privately owned companies.
The Government's lengthy announcement of the new policy on page 1 of The People's Daily said that ''too many companies have been set up'' and in many cases ''management was in great disorder.''
It also said that private salaries have soared out of control for some top company officials and charged that Government officials have taken stakes in the companies they were regulating, leading to ''embezzelement, theft, profiteering and bribery.''
The announcement appeared to focus on Chinese-owned businesses and there was no immediate indication that the Government expected or wanted it to have any effect on the foreign companies that have ventures here. 
But foreigners and Chinese alike have said the Government is adopting a more hostile attitude toward private enterprise here and is starting to reassert control over the sectors of the economy that slipped its grasp as capitalism took hold.
Private enterprises in Beijing in particular were deeply involved in the democracy movement that was crushed in June. 
There has been widespread speculation in the diplomatic community that Government officials are trying to punish shops and factories that gave student demonstrators food, money and equipment.
Some observers suggested that the move bore the stamp of Jiang Zemin, the new Communist Party leader, who is generally viewed as being more comfortable with a centrally planned economy.
The article in The People's Daily set no target for the number of private enterprises to be eliminated. 
But it suggested that some have already been ordered closed. 
It is estimated that there are about 14.5 million businesses here that each employ fewer than eight people, and 225,000 that employ more. 
They account for only 3.5 percent of China's economy, but they have been the fastest-growing sector.
Their growth has highlighted the weaknesses of many of the state enterprises. 
In July, Chinese officials said that about 20 percent of the state-owned businesses are now operating at a loss.
Earlier this month the Government said it was beginning an inspection of all individually owned businesses, because of suspicions that they are avoiding taxes. 
It was not clear whether today's announcement was related to the earlier move.
 
Process Will End in April
The People's Daily article today said that the ''screening and rectification'' of companies would be finished by next April. 
While its criteria for eliminating companies appeared vague, the Government said that the first to close would be those that were ''an unnecessary copy of another company'' or in violation of a rule prohibiting Government administrators and Communist Party officials from taking part in running the companies. 
In some cases administrators who also have a stake in the companies they oversee have been reported to be a major source of corruption in China's economy.
''Those who still hold responsibility in the companies should give up their Government and party posts,'' the article said. 
''Companies with business power and at the same time administrative power will not be approved.''
It also said that ''special privileges'' enjoyed by some companies would be revoked.
It is not at all clear that the closing of the companies will have any significant effect on foreign companies operating in China. 
In recent weeks officials here have gone out of their way to stress that foreign investment is still welcome, meeting with bankers and industrialists and stressing that the anarchy in the streets during the May and June rebellions is over.
''I think there is a consensus among the senior leadership that the policy of openness will continue,'' said A. Robert Abboud, the chairman of First City Bancorporation of Texas and the head of a joint venture with a Chinese bank. 
Speaking in Tokyo during the weekend, on his way home from a meeting with Prime Minister Li Peng, Mr. Abboud said that the Chinese were trying to make a basic realignment of their economy.
 
Debate Has Just Begun
But if the Chinese press is any indication, the debate over how to reorganize the economy has just begun.
For example, in a lengthy article in the English language China Daily today, an unidentified official wrote, ''The Government will not tolerate indiscriminate Westernization and bourgeois liberalization, but it will continue to absorb and assimilate advanced foreign technology and management techniques.''
It suggested that private companies too frequently lose sight of the public good, even if they do fuel economic growth.
