
Hong Kong stocks collapsed today after Premier Li Peng of China blamed the British colonial Government for the market panic.
The market's leading indicator, the Hang Seng stock index, dived 205.13 points, or 3.8 percent, in the first 15 minutes of trading. 
At the close of the morning session, the index was down 400.6 points, or 7.4 percent, to 5,011.05.
 
Four Days of Panic Selling
The plunge was the fourth in as many days. 
In the first three days, the index lost about 10 percent of its value.
Panic selling has gripped the market since Beijing threatened to revoke contracts with the colonial Government that it had not approved after Hong Kong returns to China in 1997.
On Wednesday, Premier Li joined China's barrage of attacks on plans by the colony's Governor, Chris Patten, to make the 1995 legislative elections a bit more democratic.
Speaking on a visit to Hanoi, Premier Li blamed Governor Patten's administration squarely for the sell-off. 
"The responsibility lies entirely in the British Government's part and not the Chinese part." he said.
The Premier said Britain was disregarding past agreements with China on Hong Kong's status through the transition period to Chinese rule.
The turmoil comes despite soaring company profits and an economy expanding an annual rate of 5 percent. 
Some dealers insisted that stocks had been oversold and were ripe for a rebound, but Barry Yates of Asia Equity said the index could fall below 5,000 points, a full 23 percent below the all-time high of 6,470 it reached last month.
The slump was likely to last as long as the fate of Governor Patten's proposals on extending democracy in Hong Kong remained undecided, Mr. Yates said.
Mr. Patten's plans lie at the heart of the dispute with Beijing. 
Pro-China newspapers in Hong Kong on Wednesday called the proposals invalid and warned the Governor not to underestimate the mainland.
 
Overseas Investors Nervous
Dealers said overseas institutions, whose investment in Hong Kong stocks earlier this year helped push the market to its record levels, were beginning to take fright along with local investors.
Lehman Brothers said a compromise between Britain and China would bring a strong rebound in share prices.
"Conversely, if the Governor remains steadfast in his attempt to introduce a greater number of directly elected officials prior to 1995, we believe that the market could move considerably lower," the firm said.
