
Just before church began one recent Sunday, nearly a dozen plainclothes security policemen swarmed around the courtyard, scrutinizing the churchgoers and eavesdropping on conversations.
"Don't create trouble!" an elderly minister whispered sternly to a young religious leader who had held illegal Bible-study sessions in his home. 
"They're all around."
The minister was nervous because only a few months earlier, he had been stripped of his right to preach and was worried that he could be expelled from his position and his church punished if a member were to get in trouble with the authorities.
Such scenes have been repeated recently in churchyards throughout China as the authorities increasingly clamp down on Christian activities not sponsored by a Government-affiliated church.
 
Students Are Warned
Just in the last few weeks, some secondary schools have disseminated a circular issued by the State Education Commission warning students against practicing religion. 
Seventh graders at one Beijing school were told that it would interfere with their studies.
The tighter control appears to be a response to a surge of interest in Christianity across the nation. 
Growing numbers of people, from peasants in the countryside to workers and intellectuals in the big cities, are turning to religion, with much of the increased interest focusing on Christianity.
The Communist Party asserts control over all religions in China, and there is a strong Muslim and Buddhist following in China, but Islam is largely confined to the northwest region and the Government finds Buddhism ominous mainly on the Tibetan plateau. 
In both areas, security officials have maintained a tight rope around the religious communities.
But partly because it believes that Western influences are trying to subvert Communist Party authority, the Government finds Christianity especially threatening. 
Religious groups in Hong Kong say the Beijing Government is particularly concerned about the role the church played in the revolutions in Romania and Poland and other Eastern European countries.
 
Overseas Ties Fought
In the anti-Christian campaign the authorities seem to have expanded a hunt for unauthorized pastors, bishops, evangelists and religious worshipers with ties to overseas Christian organizations that China views as threats to its sovereignty.
"There is an inherent conflict between Christianity and Marxism, and this will mean a confrontation sometime in the future," a Protestant believer said, as he sat with other members of an illegal Bible discussion group in an apartment in Beijing. 
"Christianity is a new faith, a new force in China. 
Now it is small, but our numbers will grow, and change will come from this force."
In the last five years, the number of official Protestant churches grew to 7,000 from 4,000 and the number of official Bibles circulating has tripled to 6.5 million, according to the official China Daily newspaper.
Deng Zhaoming, editor of Bridge, a Hong Kong-based periodic report on Christian activities in China, said: "The number of Christians, both Catholics and Protestants, is on the rise. 
There's no question about that."
 
At Most, 5 Percent of Nation
To be sure, the number of Christians in China is still minuscule in proportion to its population of 1.1 billion, and many older Christians are the products of the efforts of thousands of Western missionaries who left after 1949, when China became Communist. 
According to China's statistics, there are nearly 3.7 million Catholics and 5 million Protestants affiliated with the official churches.
Overseas religious groups say the total number of Christians, including those who do not register with the official churches, could be 20 million to 60 million, or at most about 5 percent of China's population.
The most recent effort to control religion was systematized in February 1991, when the Chinese Communist Party and the Government issued Circular No. 6, calling for stricter control over religious practices and punishment for offenders.
"The crackdown has been stepped up since 1989 and it's widespread," said Marianne Spiegel, a researcher on religion at Asia Watch, a human rights organization based in New York. 
"There is definitely a movement afoot, and it's been very intense since the end of 1990 -- to make sure that religion is clearly under the control of the Government."
 
Some Signs of Leniency
Circular No. 6 applies to all religions, but less is known about the crackdowns on fervent Buddhists and Muslims. 
As for Christians, treatment varies from minor harassment to imprisonment. 
In some areas, officials ignore the orders from above and tolerate the underground church. 
In others, the victims may be physically abused.
There are also signs of leniency, perhaps because of disagreements with the leadership over how religion should be treated, says John T. Kamm, an American businessman who has lobbied successfully for the release of Christian prisoners. 
Moreover, there seems to be a movement among some Government officials to promote the release of elderly bishops and religious figures who are in jail, according to Mr. Kamm.
Even so, a 72-year-old bishop, Paul Li Zhenrong, is said to have been missing or detained for more than a month, according to various Hong Kong accounts. 
According to Asia Watch, there are at least 70 Christians across the nation who are believed to be under detention, and the figure may be as high as 195.
China's Constitution guarantees the right to religious freedom, so long as it does not undermine the Communist Party or the Government, but preachers are not allowed to hold services at unregistered locations or use unauthorized tapes and reading materials from overseas. 
Military officers and workers are banned from practicing religion, says a cadre in a military unit.
"We must be aware that hostile forces abroad have been using religion as an important means of promoting their strategy of 'peaceful evolution,' " Circular No. 6 warns, as translated by Bridge. 
"And they are continually carrying out activities of infiltration and sabotage."
 
Bishop Is Detained
After the Vatican announced in May that the former Bishop of Shanghai, Ignatius Gong Pinmei, had been secretly elevated to Cardinal 12 years earlier, China detained Bishop Joseph Fan Zhongliang in June, in what religious groups say was retaliation against the Vatican.
China does not allow its Catholic Patriotic Association, the organization that runs the Catholic Church in China, to establish any ties with the Vatican.
"There is no difference from the West in our belief in God, but what differs is that we administer our church affairs independently and autonomously," said Laurence Shi Yukun, a pastor at the Catholic Cathedral, the largest in Beijing. 
"The Vatican also sends in many underground cardinals and underground priests to wage secret religious acts. 
They try to undermine the Chinese church."
While Catholics like Mr. Shi run the churches, the Government officials who supervise the churches are nonbelievers, and many of them are in fact party members who are required to attend regular study sessions on Marxism.
 
Clergy May Be Limited
One way the Government may control the growth of Christianity is by limiting the number of clergy.
There are now 1,000 official priests in more than 3,600 official Catholic churches, according to Mr. Shi. The Catholic Cathedral in Beijing has trained only 10 priests in the last 10 years, and there are only about 700 seminary students across the nation. 
The number of Protestant ministers has remained at about 1,000 during the last decade, according to the China Daily.
Even these ministers and priests are often regarded with suspicion by the faithful, because some regard the clergy as operating with the blessing of the Government rather than God.
"We never tell the minister our real thoughts, what we believe in our hearts," a Chinese Christian said. 
"We know he must report back to the authorities."
