
At an electronics company here, 20-year-old employees face a 73-year waiting list to get housing.
In Shanghai, a household of 12 people in three generations has devised its own solution to the housing shortage. 
The family has divided its 12-foot-by-12-foot apartment horizontally into two levels. 
The women of the family live in the upper crawl space, the men below.
Then there are China's less lucky citizens who get no housing at all and must live, according to a Government report, ''in warehouses, offices or even toilets.''
Goaded by growing dissatisfaction, the Government is undertaking a national campaign this year to turn China into a nation of homeowners.
 
To Be 'Mainstay' of Change
''We must gradually make housing reform one of the mainstays of the national economy,'' the Communist Party General Secretary, Zhao Ziyang, said recently. 
So far, ''gradually'' has indeed been the watchword: 100,000 people attended a housing fair recently, but the fair featured only 13 apartments for sale.
The decision to privatize home ownership was not taken lightly, for it challenges the underpinnings of society as it has been interpreted here. 
For the last 40 years, virtually free housing supplied by one's ''work unit,'' or employer, has been as much of a staple of urban Chinese life as rice or noodles.
''Housing used to be a kind of welfare system,'' said Tong Naiwen, the deputy director of the General Pharmaceutical Factory, which in January became one of the first companies in the nation to privatize its apartments. 
''We used to rent out very cheaply, but there was a terrible shortage. 
Now we're encouraging workers to buy houses.''
Wang Tong, a 33-year-old clerk at the same factory, which is in the northeastern city of Shenyang, said in an interview that she and her husband were delighted to buy a two-bedroom apartment for the equivalent of $1,350. 
Even though the price has been heavily subsidized by the Government and the factory, it still dwarfs Miss Wang's monthly salary of just under $30.
 
Discussed for Years
Housing reform has been discussed for several years in China, and already many farmers own their own houses. 
But privatization of urban homes has been very slow, and it seems to be taking off nationally only this year.
''Gradually, more and more people will own their own homes,'' said Ma Jinlin, director of Beijing's housing exchange center, which began operations this month and acts as a broker between developers and buyers.
As officials describe it, the method is twofold. 
First, work units will try to sell apartments to employees instead of renting. 
Second, new apartments will be built and sold on the open market to those who can afford them. 
Technically, people are buying only the right to live in the apartment, rather than the apartment itself, but in practice this seems to make little difference.
 
Protection Against Landlords
In most areas there still are restrictions to prevent the emergence of a landlord class, including the requirement that the owner also occupy the apartment and a prohibition on resale within five years. 
Even so, there are political objections.
The practical difficulty of managing a transition to the market is not so different from the challenge that faces American cities with rent control. 
Raising rents creates new incentives to build and maintain housing, but it is difficult to convince people that they are better off paying higher rents.
Yet the consensus seems to be growing in China that rents are too low. 
Rent for a family of four averages the equivalent of 60 cents a month, which covers only half the Government's maintenance expense. 
As a result, there is little money to build new apartments and shortages are acute. 
In China's large cities, per capita living space including bathrooms and kitchen is about the size of a king-sized bed.
Young couples usually must look forward to the distant day when their work unit will assign them their own apartment, even if it is tiny. 
Until then, the new employees must live with their parents - who, in some cases, are still living with their parents.
Beijing began this month to sell apartments on the open market for the first time, but the prices were so high that only a small number of entrepreneurs or those with overseas relatives could afford them. 
The 400 apartments ranged in price from about $13,000 up to $41,000, momentous sums in a country where the monthly wage averages about $25 a month.
