
April 15:  Hu Yaobang, ousted Communist Party chief and a leading advocate of change, dies. 
Students at Beijing University put up posters praising him and indirectly criticizing his opponents who forced his resignation after student demonstrations in 1986-87.
 
April 17:  Thousands of students march in Beijing and Shanghai shouting ''Long live Hu Yaobang!
Long live democracy!''
 
April 18:  About 2,000 students from Beijing head into Tiananmen Square by bicycle, continuing the protest, and hold a sit-in at the Great Hall of the People. 
They demand repudiation of past official campaigns against liberalism, press freedom, more money for education and abolition of regulations against demonstrations. 
They also want leaders to reveal their incomes and reassess Mr. Hu.
April 19:  Students demonstrate in front of the Communist Party headquarters. 
The police break up the protest.
 
April 21:  About 100,000 gather in Tiananmen Square to mourn Mr. Hu.
 
April 22:  Students defy police orders to leave the square. 
Tens of thousands join them on the square, while official memorial ceremonies are held for Mr. Hu. Chinese leaders going to the memorial observe the demonstrations from behind a wall of soldiers. 
Riots break out in Xian and Changsha.
 
April 24:  Tens of thousands of students at Beijing universities begin a class boycott, demanding dialogue with the Government.
 
April 26:  The People's Daily newspaper says in an editorial the students are involved in a ''planned conspiracy.''
Qin Benli, editor of the independent World Economic Herald in Shanghai, is suspended and his paper put under censorship.
 
April 27:  More than 150,000 students, with wide support from people on the street, surge past police lines and fill Tiananmen Square, chanting slogans for democracy.
 
April 29:  Government officials meet with student leaders, but independent student groups vow to continue a class boycott.
 
May 4:  About 100,000 students and supporters march on Tiananmen Square to celebrate the 70th anniversary of China's first student movement. 
Demonstrations are held in Shanghai, Nanjing and other cities.
 
May 5:  Students start returning to classes. 
The Communist Party chief, Zhao Ziyang, calls for dialogue.
 
May 9:  Journalists petition the Government for press freedom.
 
May 13:  About 2,000 students begin hunger strike in Tiananmen Square. 
Thousands flock to the square a day later to back the students. 
The number fasting rises to 3,000.
 
May 15:  A welcoming ceremony near the square for Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, must be moved to the airport as crowds swell.
 
May 16:  Hundreds of thousands occupy the square. 
Journalists and intellectuals join the protest.
 
May 17:  A predawn plea for students to leave from Mr. Zhao, who says the April 26 editorial was too harsh. 
Students reject his appeal, and hold mass marches that generate one million supporters in Beijing.
 
May 18:  About one million people, including many workers, again take to the streets to show their support for the hunger strikes. 
Li Peng issues a stern lecture to student leaders.
 
May 19:  A tearful Mr. Zhao makes a predawn visit to weakened hunger strikers. 
Mr. Li also visits the students briefly. 
In the evening the students decide to end the hunger strike.
 
May 20:  Mr. 
Li and President Yang Shangkun announce that the military will be deployed to end the student demonstrations. 
Mr. Zhao is reportedly stripped of power. 
Martial law is declared in parts of Beijing.
