
A day after a major leadership shuffle, the Communist Party today publicly called for a purge of members who were active in the democracy movement.
''Those party members who deviated from the correct political stand and violated party discipline during the turmoil and the counterrevolutionary rebellion should be strictly punished in accordance with the discipline, including expelling them from the party,'' an announcer said tonight on national television.
He was reading from the communique of the party's Central Commission for Discipline Inspection, adopted on Saturday and released today. 
The communique suggested that the selection of a new party leader and other top officials on Saturday may not produce a new calm or an end to the searches for supporters of the democracy movement, or the ''counterrevolutionary rebellion,'' as it is now known here. 
#47 Million in Party No new arrests or executions were announced today, and the newspapers and television news were full of enthusiastic declarations of support for the new leadership, rather than the triumphant arrests of ''thugs'' that were the main news story last week.
Yet the communique on discipline suggested that the restructuring at the highest level of the leadership - expelling two members from what used to be a five-member Standing Committee of the Politburo, and adding three new members - might now ripple through lower levels in the 47-million-member party.
It is unclear how successful such an attempt at purges would be, since the hard line that is the new orthodoxy may not enjoy majority support within the party, but it is likely to be a new source of contention and conflict in the coming months. 
What's Ahead for Zhao?
Such a stringent approach to rectifying the party fits in with the relatively harsh treatment given to the ousted party General Secretary, Zhao Ziyang, who was formally dismissed on Saturday. 
In 1981, Hua Guofeng was forced to resign as party chairman, but he has been able to keep his Central Committee seat all these years. 
Two years ago, Hu Yaobang was forced to resign as General Secretary, and he was allowed to keep not only his Central Committee seat but even his position on the Politburo until his death earlier this year.
The continuing presence of both men in the leadership was meant to be a sign of a new civility within the Communist Party, an indication that losing a power struggle no longer meant loss of all offices and even imprisonment. 
On Saturday, however, Mr. Zhao was stripped of every position he held, and although he remains a party member, the Central Committee cautioned that it will ''look further into his mistakes.''
A Chinese with access to high-level information, who had correctly identified the Shanghai party leader, Jiang Zemin, as the new party General Secretary a day before the announcement, said that this was a reference to an effort by some high officials to bring criminal charges against Mr. Zhao for ''unsuccessfully attempting a coup d'etat.''
There has been no decision on whether to try Mr. Zhao on this charge, the person said, and it is possible that the decision would depend in part on Mr. Zhao's willingness to criticize himself and renounce any interest in regaining power. 
If there were an attempt to try him, it certainly would create new strains in a party in which Mr. Zhao may well have more supporters than anyone else.
The communique, which was adopted unanimously and is certain to reflect the opinions of top leaders like Deng Xiaoping and President Yang Shangkun, calls for criminal penalties for those who violated the law. 
Many of those who actively supported the movement could be accused of criminal counterrevolutionary conduct, although it may not come to that.
 
'Unify Thinking and Action'
Party organs are instructed in the communique ''to unify the thinking and action of the whole party so as to be able to hold identical views with the party's Central Committee in cardinal questions of right and wrong.''
Among such cardinal questions, the report said, was ''opposition to bourgeois liberalization,'' as Western pro-democracy influences are called.
Calling on local levels of the party to insure that they hold the same views as the Central Committee, now controlled by hard-liners, would mean a large-scale purge of party members and officials if it is enforced. 
But it is possible that local party organizations will hold meetings, and everyone will express agreement with the Central Committee, and relatively few will be expelled.
People's Daily and other newspapers had nearly identical front pages today, all devoted to accounts of the Central Committee meeting that expelled Mr. Zhao and appointed Mr. Jiang and the other new members of the Politburo Standing Committee. 
The front pages also included prominent photos of Mr. Deng and President Yang, suggesting who the real decision makers are.
 
Apparent Lack of Unanimity
One large photo reproduced in many of the newspapers shows delegates voting on the report criticizing Mr. Zhao. While nearly everyone seems to be raising his hand, two or three delegates appear to have their hands at their sides, denying the party the unanimity it would have liked.
People's Daily published a long editorial that stressed the fight against ''bourgeois liberalization,'' but also emphasized the need to continue with the open-door policy to foreign contacts.
''Reform and opening to the outside world is a set principle of the party, which will not be changed and will even be deepened and more boldly carried out,'' the editorial said. 
This editorial is in line with a number of recent pronouncements that seem to be intended to reassure the West that China will maintain its policies and still would like foreign investment.
The television news showed citizens expressing enthusiasm for the new line and the new leadership.
A middle-aged man in a white shirt repeated the official line almost exactly: ''We know someone inside the party supported the counterrevolutionary rebellion. 
It didn't happen by accident. 
Ideological work has been too weak in recent years.''
