
China announced today that it was initiating an inspection of the nation's 14.5 million individually owned businesses, the great majority of which are accused of evading taxes, and concern is growing that the Government is adopting a more hostile attitude toward private enterprise.
The announcement appeared in an article on top of the front page of today's People's Daily. 
The article said 70 percent to 80 percent of individual enterprises were evading taxes, and indicated the inspection would last two months.
''Tax evasion not only causes losses to state revenue,'' the official New China News Agency quoted Jin Xing, director of the State Administration of Taxation, as saying, ''but also disturbs the normal economic order and aggravates social problems caused by the distribution gap.''
Over the last 10 days, there have repeatedly been articles in The People's Daily and other newspapers accusing private enterprises of evading taxes, engaging in illicit activities like selling pornography, and causing growing income disparities in China.
Few people seem to expect a campaign to uproot private enterprises, which employ more than 26 million people for whom the state would then have to find other employment. 
But some foreign economists worry that the leadership could make life much more difficult for private enterprises.
''It does seem to be another step away from the reform direction,'' a Western diplomat said today. 
''The central leadership may just want to clear up some of the abuses. 
But without a clear line of support from Beijing to private enterprises, there is the potential that low-level officials will see this as a chance to settle scores: to impose new taxes, to demand kickbacks and in general to make life more difficult for them.''
 
Backing for Democracy Effort
Private enterprises in Beijing were deeply involved in the democracy movement this spring, and a crackdown could be a way of reducing their influence. 
Such enterprises, ranging from clothing shops to restaurants to small factories, gave student demonstrators money, food and equipment, and those entrepreneurs with motorcycles raced around the city to alert citizens about troop movements.
Economists and diplomats say that any crackdown would be difficult to enforce. 
Most private enterprises are family owned, and with bookkeeping still something of a novelty, it is very difficult even for China's 500,000 tax inspectors to prove tax evasion. 
Many enterprises, like the watermelon vendors now found throughout Beijing, are not even registered.
Likewise, the fate of the private enterprises will depend at least as much on the attitude of local officials as on the policy in Beijing. 
Those enterprises that have worked out mutually beneficial arrangements with local authorities are unlikely to face difficulties.
 
A Growing Private Sector
The private sector is the fastest-growing part of China's economy, but it is also by far the smallest. 
Officially, private enterprises account for only 3.5 percent of industrial production, compared with 63 percent from state enterprises and 33.5 percent from collectives.
But those figures underestimate the size of the private sector, both because many private enterprises call themselves collectives in the belief that it is safer politically, and because many entrepreneurs are involved in retailing and other services that are not measured in the industrial production statistics.
Formally, China distinguishes between privately owned enterprises employing eight or more people, of which there are 225,000 employing 3.6 million, and ''self-employed'' or ''individual businesses'' that employ fewer than eight people. 
There are 14.5 million of these businesses, with a total employment of 23 million people. 
Informally, both categories are normally referred to as private enterprises, and although the new tax inspections are said to be directed at the self-employed category, most experts expect all private enterprises to be affected.
 
An Easy Target
A Western economist working in Beijing cautioned that if the Government is trying to appease public anger about widespread corruption, it could find private enterprises an easy target. 
They are a tiny constituency without political muscle, and everyone believes that they, like other enterprises, are often corrupt.
''For now, I don't think any serious policy decisions have been made,'' he said. 
''But I think it's worth watching this space very carefully.''
There is no indication that a crackdown on private enterprises would directly affect foreign interests. 
Those officials who have been promoted to top positions since the democracy movement was crushed in early June have long histories of supporting joint ventures and welcoming foreign investment.
These officials - particularly the new Communist Party leader, Jiang Zemin, and a new member of the Politburo standing committee, Li Ruihuan - are generally viewed as supporters of continued economic change and development. 
But their background suggests that they are most comfortable with growth that is centrally planned and subject to strict control and that they may have reservations about private businesses.
 
Warning by New Party Leader
''Self-employed traders and peddlers cheat, embezzle, bribe and evade taxation,'' Mr. Jiang wrote in an article published in today's China Daily newspaper. 
His article warned against rising disparities in income distribution because of the wealth in the private sector, although he also cautioned against rigid egalitarianism.
Businesses that employ eight or fewer people are supposed to pay 52 percent of their profits in taxes, to reinvest 30 percent of the profits, and to pay only 18 percent to the owner. 
Businesses that employ more than eight people have 10 different tax rates, and many of these enterprises are supposed to pay a majority of profits in taxes.
On Saturday, the New China News Agency warned that ''China will soon inspect and clean up all individual businesses and private enterprises in the country.''
The dispatch warned that the Government would crack down on private businesses that produced pornography or shoddy or dangerous merchandise, or that were engaged in speculative investments that drove up commodity prices.
