
In an effort to rekindle Communist values, the authorities disclosed today that most college graduates will have to work for a year or two in villages or factories before being permitted to enter graduate school.
The new policy, reported by the official China Daily, appears to be part of what well-placed Communist Party officials describe as a wider program to compel college graduates generally to put in at least a year at manual labor on farms or in factories before taking up their comfortable white-collar jobs.
The Chinese officials said that in the aftermath of the student unrest this spring, the leadership felt that one way of combating ''bourgeois liberalization,'' as Western democratic influences are now labeled, was to send students to rural areas to teach them to endure hardship, work hard and appreciate the daily difficulties faced by China's mostly rural population.
 
Cultural Revolution Recalled
The steps are reminiscent of the practice in the Cultural Revolution of the 1960's and 70's, when youths and others were sent to the countryside by the millions for re-education.
''Instead of going to graduate school this September, students, especially those in the social sciences, will have to work for a year or two,'' The China Daily reported today, citing a circular issued by the State Education Commission.
While some top leaders apparently would like all college graduates to get experience toiling in the countryside, it is not clear how rigorously the policy will be put in place. 
Resistance among young people is certain to be immense, and employers may also be less than enthusiastic about losing new recruits for a year.
 
Administration Headaches
If it comes about, the policy would not only deepen the alienation among university students, but could create vast administrative headaches for universities and for the villages that are supposed to be the hosts of the graduates.
China already has a surplus of labor in the countryside, and villages are unlikely to welcome intellectuals who speak with urban accents and are unenthusiastic about wading barefoot in the rice paddies all day.
Although there has been no announcement of the new policy requiring those who graduated since 1985 to work at manual labor, word already is spreading among young people, who are scrambling to avoid it. 
Most are convinced that the policy is retribution for the student-led democracy movement this spring, which the authorities violently suppressed, or at the least a reflection of the new-found enthusiasm for revolutionary values that the leadership is trying to foster in the society.
''This is part of the brainwashing now going on,'' said a young businessman who graduated from university a half-dozen years ago. 
''They want to send you to a horrible place so that when you get back to the city you'll appreciate it and won't cause them any problems.''
 
Information in Report
The businessman, who has access to information about high-level party decisions, said the policy on sending students to the countryside before giving them white-collar jobs was contained in the party's Central Committee report No. 5 now circulating among senior officials.
Today's article about requiring work experience before young people can enter graduate school did not indicate how the policy would be administered, nor how rigorously it was expected to be pursued. 
While the article seemed to say that the change would take effect immediately, that would require a degree of swiftness and cooperation among authorities that would be highly unusual in the Chinese bureaucracy.
The article suggested that it would apply in particular to graduate schools in social sciences, presumably because students of politics and history and related subjects were at the center of the democracy movement.
Under the new program, young people will have their household registration transferred to the rural area where they will work. 
In theory, there should be no problem in transferring it back to the city a year later, but many people are suspicious that they will be forever exiled in the countryside. 
Those people who tried to return to the city without also having their registration transferred would find it difficult to get jobs, housing, ration coupons and perhaps even to get married.
While most young people are appalled by the new policy, a university teacher who was sympathetic to the democracy movement said that most students had been coddled and would benefit from a year learning the value of responsibility and hard work.
 
'Take Out the Garbage'
''Most students don't even know how to take out the garbage for themselves,'' the teacher complained. 
She added that in any case the policy was unlikely to be pursued widely, and said that at her institution no steps had been taken toward putting the policy into effect.
A senior party official said the policy initially had been agreed upon in 1984 but was never implemented, and would apply to students who had graduated from college in 1985 and subsequent years. 
Throughout the country, about 1.8 million people have graduated from institutions of higher learning since 1985 and apparently would in theory be subject to the new policy.
''Many of them are very arrogant,'' the party official said of college students. 
''This will be very good for them, by teaching them how most Chinese people live.''
The official said he was sending the newly hired college graduates in his department who have no experience in manual labor to work either in the fields or in a factory. 
In some cases, his department will pay them a subsidy to make sure they do not suffer hardship, he said.
The official said this can't be compared to the Maoist method of sending people to the countryside. 
He said that except in extreme cases of people who performed very badly, graduates would be allowed to transfer their household registrations back to Beijing and begin assigned white-collar work after a year.
