
The "people's court" today sentenced a former high official to seven years in prison, an unexpectedly long term, for political crimes he is said to have committed during the Tiananmen democracy movement three years ago.
The length of the sentence given to Bao Tong, the most senior official to be tried in a decade, is a reminder that for all the economic experimentation and recent talk of "reform," China's leaders remain ready to purge and punish those who challenge to their authority.
Not since the Gang of Four were tried for their role in the Cultural Revolution has the Government prosecuted such a senior political figure. 
Mr. Bao was convicted of leaking state secrets and spreading counterrevolutionary propaganda.
Mr. Bao was a member of the Communist Party Central Committee who had been one of younger men and women in the leadership trying to restructure China economically and politically. 
A tall, lean man with gold-framed glasses, Mr. Bao had been the right-hand man to Zhao Ziyang, the Communist Party leader who was ousted from his post after the Tiananmen Square crackdown in June 1989. 
At that time, Mr. Bao was political secretary to the Politburo Standing Committee and head of a high-level Party institute to examine political change.
The trial, which began at 9 A.M. this morning, was videotaped but closed to the general public, even his family. 
Family members were allowed to attend the 10-minute sentencing shortly after 2 P.M., the only time they were allowed a glimpse of Mr. Bao.
He walked into the courtroom at a slow gait, turned to face the panel of judges -- his back to the audience -- as the verdict and sentence were read and then was escorted out again, according to his daughter, Bao Jian. 
She said that her father wore a T-shirt and dark-colored slacks, and he appeared to have had a haircut recently.
 
Right of Appeal
Mr. Bao appeared calm, and he nodded when he was told that he would be allowed to appeal the court's verdict, his daughter said. 
The family members said that they were given a place to stand in the middle of the courtroom and that because they were surrounded by many people, it is unlikely that Mr. Bao saw them.
The authorities said that about 200 members of the public were given tickets to attend the trial, but some of these members of the public arrived at the courthouse in cars belonging to the Public Security Ministry and others returned to work after the sentencing in offices within the courthouse.
Mr. Bao was sntenced to five years for leaking state secrets, although the verdict did not explicitly mention what secrets he is accused of leaking. 
He was then also given four years for inciting and spreading counterrevolutionary propaganda, but the sentences were merged for a total of seven years.
After the military crackdown in June, a report by Beijing's mayor accused Mr. Bao of leaking information about the declaration of martial law. 
Others have suggested that Mr. Bao may have spread word about the house arrest of Mr. Zhao.
Some hard-liners in the leadership are believed to suspect Mr. Bao of investigating the possibility of rallying military support for Mr. Zhao to stage a countercoup against the hard-liners.
Many people had been looking to Mr. Bao's trial as a barometer for political change in China. 
The seven-year sentence is harsher than sentences given to most students and intellectuals who marched on Tiananmen Square during the spring of 1989. 
It suggests that the Government has no intention of encouraging political change.
 
--------------------
House Votes Restrictions
WASHINGTON, July 21 (Reuters) -- The House of Representatives passed two bills today to restrict China trade with the United States.
Both bills passed easily but face a veto threat from President Bush. 
The first bill, which passed by a 258-to-135 vote, overturned President Bush's one-year extension of preferential trade treatment for Beijing.
The second measure would let the "most favored nation" trading status for China run through next July but then impose conditions on its renewal. 
It passed by a 339-to-62 vote.
