
China's leadership is beginning preparations for a Communist Party congress next year that is expected to provoke a major power struggle among officials hoping to serve on the next Politburo and Central Committee.
Already, the hard-liners appear to have taken the initiative to insure that the 14th Party Congress goes as they would like. 
Two Chinese knowledgable about party activities said that a committee had already been formed to begin work on the congress, and that two hard-liners were heading it.
No date has been set for the congress, but it is expected some time between next spring and fall.
Song Ping, one of the six members of the Politburo's standing committee, heads the committee to prepare for the congress, the Chinese say. 
They said his deputy is Lu Feng, an associate of Mr. Song's who heads the party's organization department.
Mr. Song and Mr. Lu are said to be charged with helping localities and provinces arrange their own party congresses, where delegates to the national congress will in theory be chosen. 
In fact, almost everything is decided from the top down, and their work will give Mr. Song and Mr. Lu an excellent opportunity to select hard-line local officials to be delegates.
A party congress is supposed to be held every five years, bringing together about 2,000 delegates to determine national policy and choose a new Central Committee. 
The Central Committee then chooses a new Politburo and General Secretary.
In fact, nearly everything is decided ahead of time among various factions in the party. 
While the congress would be an opportunity for the Communist Party to change course, few people now believe that that will happen. 
General Secretary Jiang Zemin and most members of the Politburo standing committee are expected to retain their posts.
The last party congress, in 1987, was a disaster for the hard-liners, who were outmaneuvered in the preparations for it by Zhao Ziyang, then the General Secretary.
It set the tone for the next year or two as a time of unparalleled political and economic liberalization in China. 
That was reversed when Mr. Zhao was ousted at the time of the army crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators in June 1989.
