
China's growing trade surplus with the United States, expected to be surpassed only by Japan's next year, is emerging as an important irritant in relations between the two countries.
Administration officials and some members of Congress say China's surplus, which is expected to overtake Germany's and Taiwan's, is in part a result of unfair trade practices.
The Americans complain that the Chinese are "dumping" products, or selling them at below cost, and are circumventing United States import quotas by shipping goods through other countries.
"The surpluses mean we're headed for trouble with our economic as well as political relations with China," said Senator John Heinz, Republican of Pennsylvania.
"And when you engage in unfair trade practices, you lose friends fast," said Mr. Heinz, a member of the Senate Finance Committee, which has jurisdiction over trade issues.
The growing trade gap is expected to figure prominently in the Congressional debate next year on trade with China. 
The issue before Congress is whether to strip China of commercial privileges and raise tariffs on billions of dollars of toys, apparel and other Chinese exports here. 
Chinese textiles represent one-fifth of its United States surplus, and China manufactures about half the toys imported by the United States.
Each June, China's "most favored nation" treatment, which keeps its tariffs as low as for most other countries, is subject to review by the President. 
President Bush decided this year to continue the special treatment.
On Oct. 
18, the House, still mindful of the crushing of the democracy movement at Tiananmen Square in 1989, voted to punish Beijing by removing the trade privilege the Chinese have enjoyed since 1980. 
But , the House's 247-to-174 vote was short of the two-thirds that was needed to override the President's decision.
Next year, lawmakers say, the concern over trade surpluses and trade fairness could tilt the balance. 
Chinese surpluses have soared from $6 billion last year to an expected $11 billion this year, with Japan expected to come to more than $40 billion and Taiwan and Germany to around $12 billion each. 
Next year, a $15 billion surplus is forecast for China.
In an increasing number of cases, the Chinese are being accused of dumping, or selling exports below cost, in the United States in order to raise market share. 
Under American trade law, duties on dumped products can be raised to offset the unfair advantages.
A number of cases have been brought by the textile industry, which has taken the brunt of the Chinese export offensive. 
China shipped two billion square yards of textiles here last year -- everything from cotton nightwear to wool sweaters -- compared with 325 million square yards in 1980.
The textile industry has won dumping duties against products like cotton print cloth and industrial wiping cloths. 
Other dumping cases involved axes and sledgehammers and small electric fans.
 
Using Other Countries
Textile industry and customs officials insist that the Chinese are circumventing American textile import quotas by moving goods to the United States through Macao, Singapore, Indonesia, the Philippines and other countries.
"In our opinion, the Chinese are engaged in massive quota fraud," said Carlos F. J. Moore, executive vice president of the American Textile Manufacturers Institute, an industry trade association.
What makes the issue potentially explosive is that China is one of the few remaining non-market economies. 
Far from reflecting a lack of American competitiveness or supply-and-demand forces of the marketplace, its trade surpluses result from targets, quotas, administrative guidance and other calculated decisions by Beijing authorities.
"This is somewhat alarming," noted Roger W. Sullivan, president of the United States-China Business Council, "because until recently, China was making the point that it was not a mercantilist nation and not seeking to pile up foreign exchange."
 
Restatement of Doctrine
Mr. Sullivan, whose organization represents American companies doing business in China, said the change in Beijing's thinking could be seen in a recent statement by its Soviet-educated Prime Minister, Li Peng, that China's policy was not only to push exports but also to limit imports and bring in only necessary goods. 
In effect, it was a restatement of the old Communist doctrine of economic self-reliance.
Before the 1989 crackdown, more liberal policies had allowed for a rapid increase in imports and resulted in a large drain on hard currency reserves.
American officials say they have raised the issues of surpluses and trade unfairness in virtually all recent discussions with the Chinese.
The latest was a meeting in Washington on Dec. 
10 and 11 of senior Chinese trade officials led by the Vice Minister for Trade, Gu Yongjiang, and Americans led by the Under Secretary of Commerce, J. Michael Farren.
 
Warning of Political Problem
American officials say they warned the Chinese that the surpluses could become a significant political problem if not addressed.
"Our objective," said a senior Administration official, "is to get the Chinese to go back again to reforming their trading system toward more market-oriented operations."
American officials raised both the issues of creating trade surpluses -- through quotas, import substitution programs, export subsidies and other measures -- and of circumventing textile and apparel quotas through third countries.
Although the Chinese officials promised to investigate the accusations of irregularities, one American official said the Chinese were "not very sympathetic to our problem."
This official added, "They will pursue their interests and get away with anything they can."
Tien Mingwang, Minister Counselor at the Chinese Embassy here, denied that his Government was trying to create trade surpluses by closing its market to imports. 
He cited a special mission to the United States last October that bought $700 million of wheat, chemical fertilizers, timber, and other products.
"This was the first purchasing mission in our history," he said, adding that others may follow. 
"This is to show our desire for further expansion of imports from your country."
He said his Government would investigate all the trade accusations. 
"We would like to put the trade in textiles on a healthy basis," he stressed.
