
China has sharply escalated its dispute with the British and Hong Kong authorities by threatening to scrap the 1984 agreement that promised Hong Kong continued political and economic freedom for 50 years after the colony returns to Chinese control in 1997.
The threat was made on Monday night by Deputy Prime Minister Zhu Rongji, who was in London for talks with British officials.
"People cannot help but ask whether we still have to stick to the joint declaration between us, whether the important understanding and agreement that we have reached should go with the wind," the official New China News Agency quoted him today as saying.
China itself would suffer enormous diplomatic harm and economic damage if it repudiated the agreement, so such an action is widely regarded as unlikely. 
Instead, the threat appears intended to put new pressure on Hong Kong and force Britain to back away from its recent proposals to introduce more democracy in its final years of rule over the territory.
Still, the bluff -- if that is what it is -- is so threatening to the existing economic order in East Asia that it creates fundamental new uncertainties that may hang over the region for years to come. 
Mr. Zhu's remarks sent share prices tumbling by more than 3 percent on the Hong Kong stock market, where the Hang Seng Index fell 206 points to close at 6,089.
If the threat were carried out, Hong Kong, a British colony for 150 years, would still revert to China on July 1, 1997. 
A 99-year lease on most of the territory expires then, and Britain has decided that it will return the entire colony at that time. 
In its negotiations with Beijing, London tried to get the best conditions it could for Hong Kong's residents, but the decision to hand over the territory is considered final.
A Chinese takeover without the international guarantees for Hong Kong's future would have a devastating impact on confidence and investment in the territory, would trigger waves of emigration by the middle class, and would crush the spectacular economic boom in both Hong Kong and southern China.
Given the enormous stakes, the threat is an indication of the outrage that Beijing feels over the British-backed proposals that would make Hong Kong more democratic -- and thus more difficult for China to govern -- at the time of the handover in 1997.
The proposal that most irritates Beijing calls for a vast expansion in the number of people who can vote for certain kinds of legislators. 
China is also opposed to a proposal to lower the voting age to 18, and is infuriated that it has not been given a veto over the changes.
The joint declaration confirms that Hong Kong will be returned to China on July 1, 1997. 
But it says that the territory will have "a high degree of autonomy" and that Hong Kong people can continue to practice capitalism and enjoy freedom of speech and other civil rights for at least 50 years.
The agreement is the framework and guarantee for Hong Kong's future, and paradoxically for China's as well, since China gets about 55 percent of its foreign investment from Hong Kong and nearly 35 percent of its trade passes through the territory's ports. 
China does not want to scare off investors and businesses.
In addition to the joint declaration is the "basic law" that China has promulgated for Hong Kong after 1997. 
The basic law, a mini-constitution, promises that Hong Kong can enjoy its autonomy and prosperity after the handover, but there is deep apprehension in the territory about whether Beijing will honor the basic law after the takeover.
The Hong Kong Government had no official reaction to Mr. Zhu's remarks, but a Government official who asked not to be identified said, "It's a new ball game now, and quite a serious one."
Martin C. M. Lee, a Hong Kong lawyer who for years has been the leader of the territory's democracy movement, said in a statement today, "Any threats made by the Chinese Government not to honor the joint declaration will cause the international community to doubt China's commitment not only to this agreement but to all its international agreements."
"Threats of this nature by the Chinese Government often have a countereffect, in that they serve only to encourage the people of Hong Kong to stand up for their interests," Mr. Lee added at a news conference in Hong Kong.
The comments by Mr. Zhu came as a surprise to many in Hong Kong because he is one of the most pragmatic of China's top leaders.
"We want cooperation, not confrontation, but no one should expect confrontation to force us into concessions from our stand on the matter of principle," he was quoted as saying by the New China News Agency, which released a translation. 
He reiterated the Chinese argument that the proposed steps toward democracy violate British promises, threaten Hong Kong's prosperity, and run contrary to the desires of the people in the territory.
In fact, public opinion polls show overwhelming support for the steps toward more democracy.
Britain for years did what it could to suppress the indigenous democracy movement in Hong Kong, but since the middle of this year has been far more assertive in supporting democracy despite objections from Beijing.
The change came when Prime Minister John Major appointed Christopher Patten, the former leader of the Conservative Party, to take over as Governor of the territory beginning in July.
