
The head of China's Communist Party, Jiang Zemin, arrived in Tokyo today, seeking what the Beijing Government still seems unable to get from most other industrialized nations: technology, aid and at least the formalities of a welcoming reception.
Mr. Jiang is the first senior Chinese leader to visit Japan since the democracy movement was crushed in June 1989, and his visit here is part of a careful effort by the two countries to rebuild economic ties gradually. 
Last summer, Toshiki Kaifu, when he was still Prime Minister, was the first leader of an industrial power to visit China since the killings in Beijing.
Though Japan is easily China's largest source of aid, in recent months relations between the two countries have been strained by a variety of new conflicts. 
They include arms control, a territorial dispute over a small island chain, and growing demands in China for Japanese compensation payments for damage involving World War II.
 
Unofficial but Major Visit
The ostensible reason for Mr. Jiang's trip -- which is officially described as a "good will visit" because he has come here as a party chief, not a Government official -- is to mark the 20th anniversary of the restoration of diplomatic relations.
"Japan has achieved a level of economic development that has attracted attention from the rest of the world, and has had many experiences China can learn from," Mr. Jiang said on arrival for the five-day visit.
At a time when the Chinese leadership is struggling over how much capitalist influence in its economy to allow, Mr. Jiang seemed to be dwelling on those qualities of Japan that China most admires: the mixture of free markets and a strong central Government long dominated by a single ruling party.
Chinese officials have repeatedly asked that Emperor Akihito visit their country this year to mark the diplomatic anniversary. 
But Tokyo has yet to respond officially.
At a meeting today at the Akasaka Palace, Japan's official guesthouse, Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa declined to make a commitment about whether or when the Emperor might visit.
News reports said Mr. Miyazawa did not dwell on many of the irritants that have recently developed between the two countries. 
There were apparently few discussions about nuclear proliferation in Asia or Japan's objections to China's thriving trade in conventional weapons. 
In addition, Japanese officials have viewed China as being slow to press North Korea to abandon nuclear-weapons development.
There was some discussion of the Senkaku Islands, a small chain in the East China Sea that is claimed by Japan, China and other nations. 
China calls the island group the Diaoyutai. 
In recent weeks, the Chinese leadership has indicated that it would probably not press the issue, leaving the question of the islands' sovereignty for a future generation to decide.
Tensions have also grown over claims by some in China for war reparations. 
Beijing formally waived those claims 20 years ago, but it has hinted that it may not block individual Chinese from seeking reparations.
