
Western diplomats and experts are concerned by indications that China is seeking to increase its share of the world market for missiles.
The Chinese military, the experts say, may begin shipments of two new kinds of missiles to Syria and Pakistan, and perhaps to other countries as well. 
The new missiles, which are said to be more accurate than the Soviet-designed Scuds used by Iraq in the Persian Gulf war, are thought to be at the end of the development stage and could be deployed soon.
Short of money and therefore eager to sell weapons, China, the experts say, may be on a collision course with Western nations that say they want to slow the international arms race.
With the decline of the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe as arms merchants, China, in the view of some, is emerging to fill the void.
 
What of U.S. and Soviet Sales?
For its part, China points out that it sells far fewer weapons than either the United States or the Soviet Union. 
If Washington can sell arms to the Middle East, it asks, why can't Beijing?
Still, China's weapons sales are becoming a growing source of friction with the United States, and a factor in the debate about whether to cut off China's most-favored-nation trade benefits. 
In a sign of American concern, Reginald Bartholomew, the Under Secretary of State for Security Assistance, is scheduled to visit Beijing June 17 to 19 to discuss weapons proliferation.
Apparently intending to ease the friction and improve its image, China has reportedly accepted an invitation from President Bush to attend a July conference of major powers to discuss limits on arms sales to the Middle East.
 
For China, Business as Usual
But whether China will agree to do more than talk may depend on the outcome of disagreements between China's Foreign Ministry, which would like to curtail proliferation to improve the nation's image, and the army, which wants to raise funds through the sale of weapons, and regards the Foreign Ministry as weak-kneed.
Diplomats and experts say that the new international interest in China's arms sales reflects changes not so much in China as in the rest of the world. 
For most of the last decade, the Chinese Army eagerly pursued arms deals, but now there is far less sympathy for China than before. 
In addition, the United States and other Western nations are talking about curtailing the arms race in the Middle East and elsewhere, and China could upset such plans.
"They are doing things that they've been doing all along, but we have a lower level of tolerance than we did a few years ago," said a Western diplomat in Beijing. 
"In addition, what they were doing all along now seems to be coming to fruition in a number of cases."
What is coming to fruition appears to be the development of the M-9 and M-11 missiles, and plans to sell them to Syria, Pakistan and probably other nations as well.
The missiles apparently have not been delivered so far, but launchers for the M-11 have been spotted in Pakistan and diplomats expect that the missiles themselves will follow. 
The M-11 is said to have a range of about 180 miles and can carry a nuclear warhead.
 
Pakistan and Nuclear Arms
Pakistan is widely believed to be close to achieving a nuclear bomb. 
If Pakistan were able to build a nuclear device in the form of a warhead for the M-11 missile, it would be able to launch a nuclear strike that India could not easily defend against.
The Western diplomat said he doubted that China could be prevented from transferring the M-11 missiles to Pakistan, but that there was a somewhat better chance of preventing shipments of the M-9 to Syria. 
The M-9 is thought to have a range of about 375 miles, and so would be able to hit targets throughout Israel.
There have been some indications that China struck a deal several years ago to sell M-9's to Syria, and the missile may have been developed in part with Syrian financing.
When the national security adviser, Brent Scowcroft, visited Beijing in December 1989, he received pledges that China would not sell medium-range missiles to the Middle East, and that "at the present time, China is not planning any sales of the M-9 missile to Syria."
These days, Beijing is no longer repeating that "at the present time" it will not sell the M-9, and the promise not to sell medium-range missiles may not be useful because of the way Beijing defines medium range.
 
A Question of Definition
The Missile Technology Control Regime, an agreement that China has not joined, defines medium-range missiles as those that go about 188 miles. 
But a Chinese military encyclopedia defines a medium-range missile as one that can travel 625 miles. 
If that is the definition that it is using, its promise not to sell medium-range missiles would cover neither the M-9 nor the M-11.
Diplomats are also concerned about China's capacity to transfer nuclear technology, and there was concern recently when China was found to be building a nuclear reactor in Algeria that experts suspected might be used to produce plutonium for nuclear weapons. 
China and Algeria responded by saying that the reactor was intended only for research, and Algeria has now indicated that it will allow international inspections, alleviating much of the concern.
China is also widely believed to have assisted Pakistan with its nuclear program, although there is no firm public evidence to confirm allegations that Beijing provided Pakistan with a design for a bomb. 
There is also evidence that some Chinese provided India with "heavy water" for its nuclear program, but this may have been an unauthorized profit-making venture that did not have the central Government's approval.
