
A year after the Communist Party announced a purge of members who were involved in the democracy movement, party members say, with relief and a bit of surprise, that the purge has fizzled.
Hard-liners who ordered the purge succeeded in making life miserable for many of their opponents, and in forcing a significant share of the nation's 48 million Communist Party members to go through a complex process of ''re-registration'' that was intended to weed out those who ''deviated from the correct political stand.''
But after months of meetings, self-criticisms and essay writing, virtually everyone has managed to stay in the party.
The ineffectiveness of the purge suggests the extent of the deadlock that has brought the Chinese political system to a virtual halt, officials say. 
The hard-liners have been pre-eminent for more than a year, but they have been unable to consolidate their gains by eliminating large numbers of their antagonists.
A Stalemate in the Party
''Neither side can overcome the other,'' said an official with first-hand experience in China's power struggles. 
''There's a sort of agreement reached now: you don't do anything, and I won't do anything either.''
The leadership called for the purge on June 25 last year, and the entire party membership in Beijing was obliged to re-register to retain party membership. 
Outside the capital the process was far looser and generally involved only party officials, party members say.
The re-registration is now completed or nearing completion in most work units, and party members say that the vast majority - perhaps 99 percent or more - have been approved to remain in the party, even in certain sensitive departments under the Central Committee that are hotbeds of quiet opposition to the hard-liners.
Officials say privately that only a few prominent liberals have been prevented from re-registering so far. 
Among them are Zhu Houze, a former director of the Central Committee's propaganda department; Du Runsheng, the head of an influential research center, and Li Rui, Li Chang and Yu Guangyuan, all members, along with Mr. Du, of the party's powerful Central Advisory Commission.
 
Five Left in Limbo
Although these five people have not been allowed to re-register, they have not been expelled from the Communist Party either. 
Nor has there been a definitive judgment on their cases; instead they have been labeled ''registration postponed,'' officials familiar with their cases said. 
The result has been to leave them in limbo.
Despite reports to the contrary, another prominent liberal - Yan Mingfu, nominal head of the Central Committee's United Front Department, who has been removed from decision-making - has tentatively been allowed to re-register, an official said. 
And the most prominent person to fall from power last year, Zhao Ziyang, the General Secretary, remains in the party although investigations into his conduct are continuing.
Even those in the ''registration postponed'' category may receive a favorable decision soon. 
Chen Yun, the 85-year-old mastermind of central planning, has recently argued against expelling people from the party for political reasons, Chinese officials said. 
Mr. Chen is said to have cited the case of Wang Ming, a rival of Mao Zedong. 
Mr. Wang lost a power struggle with Mao in the 1930's but not only kept his party membership but also retained a seat on the central committee.
Holding onto party membership can be important for senior officials who still hope to make a comeback. 
Deng Xiaoping, the senior Chinese leader, was dismissed from all his posts in 1976, but his return to power a couple of years later was facilitated by the failure of his enemies to strip him of his party membership.
 
'The Purge Isn't Working'
''The conservatives would like to kick out a lot more people,'' a young worker said. 
''But they are too high up, and they don't control the re-registration at the grass roots. 
That's why the purge isn't working.''
Others say the purge fizzled because the hard-liners lost their nerve and were afraid of creating enemies of large numbers of people by expelling them.
''What could they do?'' a university teacher asked. 
''Expel all intellectuals?
That would just make them more unpopular than ever.''
Of course, with 48 million members, the expulsion of even a tiny fraction adds up to a large number of individuals. 
In 1989, 33,400 party members were expelled - a modest increase over the figure in previous years, but still less than one-tenth of 1 percent of the national membership.
Those who have not been allowed to re-register seem to fall into several categories. 
Some are party members whose involvement in the democracy movement was so flagrant that it could not be overlooked, as in the case of people who were imprisoned. 
Others tried to resign from the party, but found themselves expelled instead. 
Some people have also been purged for reasons that have little to do with politics: they took bribes, engaged in sexual misconduct or were otherwise judged unfit.
