
China's newspapers today show little trace of the independence and pluralism that they displayed last month before the Government cracked down on pro-democracy demonstrators.
Now the newspapers have reverted to a single voice, with little reliable domestic news, and if the reporters and editors are not satisfied, the only hint of it is the absence of bylines and an occasional indirect jab at the Government in articles on foreign news.
In the week after the military crackdown in China on June 4, a prominently placed headline in People's Daily read, ''The North Korean Labor News Criticizes Roh Tae Woo's Fascist Regime, Which Indiscriminately Kills Innocent Students and Citizens.''
 
Finding a Hidden Message
The reporter criticized Roh Tae Woo of South Korea, saying, ''The state of affairs makes clear that if Roh Tae Woo's military fascist regime is not overthrown, then the South Korean people will have no way to break away from bloodshed and death.''
But it was not farfetched to imagine that many Chinese would find a hidden message: that China's own military Government, which killed innocent students and civilians, needs to be overthrown, too.
Chinese newspapers have habitually been rife with such subtleties as reporters and editors try to work around the curbs ordered by the Government.
 
News More Constrained
The course of press freedom in a sense illustrates the trajectory of the entire democracy movement. 
There were tremendous initial gains, resulting in a relatively independent press, but then there was a crackdown that left news organizations even more constrained than before the protests.
Before the crackdown, criticisms were a bit more obvious and political analysts did not have to examine the international news so carefully.
About two months ago, readers found the front pages blanketed with national articles written by a newspaper's own correspondents, with perhaps a Government news item or two written by the official organ, the New China News Agency. 
But now, as part of a chorus of Government indoctrination, newspapers have yielded the front page to the official propaganda committee so that page 1 of each newspaper looks practically identical.
In bolder moments in the student movement, multiple perspectives were printed on the front pages, and some editors were openly sympathetic to the hunger-striking students. 
Just as the students had pushed their demands further than anyone expected, so, too, it seemed that news organiations had achieved much more independence and ''toumingdu,'' or ''openness,'' than anyone anticipated.
 
Propaganda Committee
But the swiftness with which the Government seems to have wrested control again over news organizations raises the concern that perhaps the newspapers will be indefinitely muzzled and that ordinary people will again have almost no source of information other than the official line.
For now, at least, newspapers are tightly controlled by a special propaganda committee that was formed after martial law was declared. 
In the absence of such committees, top editors and chief advisers, many of whom are elderly, were usually prestigious enough to defend a paper's decision to publish a particularly bold article.
''The passing of that generation might have several effects, and one is that people with very distinguished histories within the party are going,'' said Lynn T. White, a professor of Chinese politics at Princeton University.
''The independence or the social prestige of that kind of person can be very important in determining whether committees like this can make everything uniform,'' said Professor White, who is now doing research in Hong Kong.
 
'Concerned About Events'
''I'm concerned about the recent events because they might result in a structural change to some extent in the Chinese press by making the heads of newspapers less prestigious at least in normal times and so less able to have published what they feel is O.K.''
In the large protests at Tiananmen Square, where hunger-striking students had camped out before military soldiers forced them out on June 4, many journalists demonstrated to support the students and to demand greater press freedom.
Reporters at many large newspapers, including People's Daily, marched under their own banners. 
Moreover, thousands signed a petition to the Government protesting the dismissal of the editor in chief of China's boldest newspaper, World Economic Herald, based in Shanghai.
Journalists have been forced to abandon their demonstrations, and now they seem to be concentrating on retaining their jobs. 
While no reporters are known to have been arrested, there are fears that many will be.
 
'Subtle Passive Resistance'
If journalists are more careful now, that does not mean that they are satisfied, and there are signs they are resisting.
One possible indication of resistance is simply the near absence of staff-written articles in most newspapers. 
While it could mean that editors are ordered to publish mostly articles by the New China News Agency, that is not what the newspapers were originally intended to do. 
If it were, there would be no point in having so many newspapers, or in the newspapers having so many reporters of their own.
''There is obviously some kind of subtle passive resistance,'' said Byron S. J. Weng, a China scholar at Chinese University in Hong Kong. 
''I'd be surprised if there were none.''
In one sign of the continuing uncertainty at People's Daily, the Communist Party newspaper, a spokesman turned down a request to interview the editor in chief, Qian Liren.
 
Contacts Are Impossible
''Mr. Qian is in the hospital,'' the spokesman said. 
''And everyone else is too busy to receive you now.''
In China, when a senior official is unreachable because he is in the hospital, it usually means he is in political trouble, at least for the moment.
Before, it was relatively easy for foreign journalists to get to know counterparts on People's Daily and other newspapers; now it is impossible.
Recently, People's Daily has been publishing a string of articles that seem to be intended as subtle rebukes of the leadership.
The newspaper wrote about about President Raul Alfonsin of Argentina, ''President Alfonsin announced today that in order to prevent the nation from falling into a deeper crisis and to prevent the people from further suffering, he would leave his post early.''
 
Comparison With Argentina
The reporter for the newspaper continued: ''Now, the Alfonsin Government has already completely lost administrative ability. 
The majority of people in the ruling party propose that he should retire early from his political post to prevent the entire party from further loss of reputation.''
The suggestion seemed to be that China's Prime Minister, Li Peng, should resign.
When Prime Minister Nikolai I. Ryzhkov announced changes recently in the Soviet bureaucracy, a bold headline in People's Daily read, ''Three special characteristics of the new Government: Number of ministries and commissions reduced; Experts increase to some extent; The average age is 55.''
The subtle hint appeared to be that the Chinese Government bureaucracy could use similar trimming, more expertise and younger people.
 
Signs of Resistance
The article itself was written by the official New China News Agency, the Government organ through which most of the print propaganda has been disseminated. 
But the editors of People's Daily placed the article in the main position and wrote the headline.
There are also signs of resistance at other newspapers.
An article a few days ago in the China Youth News reflected on the death of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, saying, ''After the Iranian leader died on June 3, he left behind him a nation of feudal subjects in a state of utter stupefaction.''
In referring to the Iranian leader, the article seemed to be really describing Deng Xiaoping, China's senior leader: ''Whenever a contradiction of political power suddenly became apparent, all that was required was a few words by him and calm would be restored.''
In another reference, the article said, ''The new Iranian leader was also decided by the word of Khomeini.''
