
A Chinese court today sentenced the nation's leading human rights advocate to seven years in prison and its foremost student leader to a four-year term for "counterrevolutionary propaganda and incitement" during the Tiananmen democracy movement.
Six other democratic militants were sentenced to terms ranging from two to five years, the official New China News Agency said, while 66 others were apparently released. 
By Chinese standards, the sentences were relatively lenient as counterrevolutionary offenses can bring the death penalty.
"The court, after hearings, confirmed that some of the eight defendants, resorting to various means, wantonly conducted public agitation to subvert the people's Government and the socialist system during the 1989 turmoil and rebellion, and others made Molotov cocktails to attack the armed forces enforcing the martial law and helping safeguard public order," the press agency said.
Ren Wanding, an accountant and determined spokesman for human rights, received the seven-year sentence, the stiffest handed out in the latest wave of trials. 
Mr. Ren played a relatively minor role in the 1989 democracy movement, but the leadership regards him as a troublemaker because he refuses to admit wrongdoing and because he has a history of agitation for democracy.
 
Student Is Given 4 Years
Wang Dan, the Beijing University student who was No. 1 on a most-wanted list published after the crackdown, was sentenced to four years in prison. 
The press agency said he had committed serious crimes but showed repentance.
Another student leader, Guo Haifeng, was also sentenced to four years. 
Bao Zunxin, a historian and advocate of greater democracy, was sentenced to five years. 
A person named Yao Junling, whose background is unknown, was sentenced to two years in prison.
Mr. Ren was a leader of the 1978-79 Democracy Wall movement, and while others called for democracy it was Mr. Ren who focused on human rights. 
His efforts won him a four-year spell in prison, from 1979 to 1983, but this had no effect on his iron will.
Prisoners are normally expected to write self-criticisms while in their cells; instead, Mr. Ren wrote a two-volume attack on the Government, etched painstakingly with the nib of a pen on his supply of toilet paper.
In the fall of 1988, Mr. Ren emerged in public again to call for greater democracy and human rights. 
He acknowledged the risk to himself and to his wife and daughter in an interview at the time.
 
'Frightening Experiences'
"I went through some very frightening experiences," he said then. 
"But China has no democracy and no human rights, and its living standard is too low. 
These are even more frightening."
Mr. Ren was arrested shortly after the crackdown on June 4, 1989, and since then has not been allowed to see his wife or daughter, now 14 years old.
In explaining the sentence, the New China News Agency said that Mr. Ren "was found guilty of grave crimes and showed no repentance."
Among the 66 who apparently were released was Liu Xiaobo, a prominent literary critic and spokesman for democracy. 
Mr. Liu's release was a surprise, as the newspapers had published vituperative essays about him.
"The sentences were very light, especially for Liu Xiaobo and Wang Dan," said a diplomat in Beijing. 
"I think that's very much due to their consideration of their relations with the U.S."
In contrast to today's sentences, a half-dozen leaders of the 1978-79 democracy movement received terms of 10 to 15 years in prison. 
And in the immediate aftermath of the June 1989 crackdown, some very harsh sentences were announced. 
A 42-year-old man named Xiao Bin, for example, was sentenced to 10 years in prison for making exaggerated statements in an interview with a foreign television correspondent, even though the interview was never roadcast.
 
Trials Called a Sham
The sentences run from the time of detention, which for most of those sentenced was the summer of 1989, the press agency said. 
Thus two-year sentences will expire this summer.
Many ordinary criminal offenders in China have up to half their sentences reduced for good behavior, but this provision is not normally applied to political prisoners.
Hu Ping, chairman of the New York-based Chinese Alliance for Democracy, said in a telephone interview that the trials were a sham and that the punishments could not be regarded as lenient.
"The arrests and entire judicial process were closed and arbitrary, reflecting the caprice of the authorities, so that they can terrorize the population," Mr. Hu said.
The New China News Agency asserted that teachers, students and family members of the accused attended the trials. 
Friends and family members of the defendants, however, were often unable to find out when trials were scheduled, let alone attend them.
