
P. V. Narasimha Rao and Li Peng, the Indian and Chinese Prime Ministers, concluded two days of talks here this week with China gaining an Indian statement of support for Chinese sovereignty over Tibet, and India apparently getting little in return.
Mr. Li, who left here on Friday, was the first Chinese Prime Minister to visit India in 31 years. 
The trip raised high expectations in the Indian Foreign Ministry, coming at a time when India, long a close ally of Soviet Union, and China are both ill at ease with the collapse of Communism in Europe. 
Both say they are seeking to create a new structure of relations in Asia and among developing countries generally.
Yet after two days of conversation, Mr. Li on issue after issue secured accommodations from the Indians without yielding on any significant points of his own.
The talks also brought some angry oratory against the United States and other wealthy nations. 
The two sides denounced what they called "the emerging international oligarchy," in the words of an Indian Foreign Ministry spokesman, and called for the creation of a world order where no country can "manipulate world affairs and play power politics."
Mr. Li, facing international opprobrium for his Government's policies toward Tibet, elicited an unequivocal Indian declaration that Tibet was a part of China. 
In the past, India has provided asylum to hundreds of thousands of Tibetan refugees.
For the Chinese Prime Minister's visit, though, Mr. Rao's officials rounded up hundreds of Tibetans and forcibly -- at times brutally -- halted protest marches to the Chinese Embassy. 
The harshness of police action against the Tibetans provoked an outcry in Parliament, and late Friday the Supreme Court ordered that all detained women and children be released from jail by today.
Even with that, India, which has been seeking support for its policies in Kashmir, a predominantly Muslim northern region seeking independence, obtained no commensurate declaration from the Chinese. 
Mr. Li merely repeated China's position that India and Pakistan, which also claims Kashmir, should resolve the issue peacefully.
Even India's concern about China's close relationship with Pakistan evidently did not come up in the two days of talks. 
The New Delhi Government, which charges Pakistan with arming Kashmiri separatists and harboring aggressive intentions, did not raise the matter of Beijing's significant weapons shipments to Pakistan, according to a Foreign Ministry spokesman.
Likewise, India failed to extract any concessions from the Chinese over its territory occupied by China after a fierce border war in 1962. 
The Government, Indian newspapers report, had been seeking some movement on the dispute, but Mr. Rao and Mr. Li simply agreed to let talks between lower-level working groups continue.
Mr. Rao did raise the issue of human rights with the Chinese leader, a Foreign Ministry spokesman said. 
But even then, he couched his remarks in terms that implied no criticism of China.
"The Indian Prime Minister said we give central importance to the issue of development," the spokesman, Aftab Seth, related at a briefing. 
"We pointed out that India's system was fully transparent, open and democratic with an independent judiciary. 
He said it was not desirable to use the question of human rights as a condition for denying aid to developing countries."
A senior Foreign Ministry official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, expressed frustration. 
"We don't know how to deal with the Chinese," he said. 
"We've always been a little afraid of them. 
Remember, Rao learned at the knee of Nehru. 
We Indians have never learned the art of tough negotiations."
Mr. Seth rejected the idea that the Chinese Prime Minister got the better of Mr. Rao. "The visit should be seen in a broader context," he said. 
"It is a factor for progress and stabilityI."
Three agreements were signed: one calling for resumption of some border trade, a second establishing consulates in Bombay and Shanghai, and the third providing for greater cooperation in space-related research and technology.
Correction
