
The Communist Party is preparing for a rare congress that will convene next week to shuffle the national leadership and establish a party line that is supposed to last for the next five years.
The party congress, the first to be held since 1987, is expected to confirm the rise of more pragmatic, change-minded officials within the leadership and to launch a new slogan: the building of a "socialist market economy."
No one knows just what a "socialist market economy" is, and that may be part of the attraction: the term is vague enough to be acceptable to all groups, while still sounding bold and reform-minded.
The authorities have given few details about the party congress, the 14th since the Chinese Communist Party was formed more than seven decades ago, except that it will begin on Monday. 
Still, they have hailed its importance, with Prime Minister Li Peng describing it last week as "a major event in our country's political life."
"We are sure that it will give a fresh impetus to reform, opening up and our economic development, and become an important milestone in the history of the Chinese Communist Party and China's socialist modernization," Mr. Li said.
The party congress will approve a work report that is supposed to set the tone for the next five years, and it will also choose a new Central Committee. 
The Central Committee, in turn, will choose a new Politburo.
In fact, all the crucial decisions have been made in advance by the handful of octogenarians who hold ultimate power in China, and the congress is less a forum for decisions than a platform for self-promotion -- a Chinese version of a national political convention in the United States. 
Among the key differences are that party congress speeches can last for hours, many of the proceedings are secret, and there is no election afterward to put it all in perspective.
The 14th party congress is expected to be important in that it will presumably anoint the team of leaders who will preside over the transition after the death of Deng Xiaoping, the ailing paramount leader. 
But the same was said of the 13th party congress in 1987.
 
Deng Not Expected to Appear
Mr. Deng appeared at the 1987 congress but there is no sign that he will turn up this time. 
He is 88 years old and rarely appears in public now.
Since the beginning of this year, Mr. Deng has been pressing behind the scenes for more rapid economic growth and restructuring, to the point of borrowing some elements from capitalism. 
The congress may be his last hurrah, and it is expected to endorse his preferred combination of free markets and one-party rule.
"There seems no question that the congress is intended to be a strong reaffirmation of the Deng Xiaoping line of reform and openness," said a Western diplomat in Beijing. 
"We expect that the new Central Committee and the new Politburo in particular will basically reflect that, in the sense that there will be a strengthening of the reform and moderate forces."
While the personnel decisions have presumably already been made, the rumors about who will be promoted vary considerably. 
By almost all accounts, the Politburo will be expanded from its present membership of 14, and most of the likely candidates are relatively young and enthusiastic about markets -- for goods if not ideas.
The most powerful rulers of China, all octogenarians like Mr. Deng, are nominally retired and will not be shuffled. 
Among the younger leaders who hold formal positions, the two most important -- Prime Minister Li and General Secretary Jiang Zemin -- are generally expected to hold onto their posts, at least for now.
 
Small Role for Delegates
The 1,991 delegates to the party congress, which will last about a week, will be entrusted with a minor role in addition to approving decisions already made. 
They will elect a Central Committee from a list of names that is a bit longer than the number of positions, so that a small percentage of candidates will lose the election.
