
China threatened today to withdraw from international arms-control talks if President Bush goes through with his decision to sell 150 fighter jets worth $6 billion to Taiwan, but the White House brushed off the warning.
China's Deputy Foreign Minister, Liu Huaqiu, summoned the American Ambassador, J. Stapleton Roy, to the Chinese Foreign Ministry and told him that if the United States proceeded with the sale, "China would find it difficult to stay in the meeting of the five on arms-control issues," the state-run New China News Agency reported.
The United States, Britain, France, Russia and China have been holding talks on how to limit the transfer of conventional weapons to the third world. 
The American planes, F-16's built by General Dynamics of Fort Worth, Tex., are far more advanced than anything in the Taiwan Air Force's arsenal.
Even though relations between Beijing and Taipei have improved in recent years, China has opposed any sale of arms to Taiwan or any improvement of relations that might enhance Taiwan's international acceptance.
 
Decision Made With Relish6,000 Workers in Texas
Administration officials concede that the decision to sell the aircraft to Taiwan was largely timed for the political lift it would give President Bush in Texas, where 6,000 workers are involved in the F-16's manufacture. 
But they also made clear that the decision was taken with some relish.
Ever since their crackdown on the Tiananmen Square democracy movement in June 1989, China's leaders have generally ignored Congressional appeals for an improvement in their human-rights behavior. 
With President Bush running China policy and opposed to the use of trade sanctions or other punitive actions to try to modify their behavior, the Chinese appeared to believe they could afford to spurn criticism from other quarters, American officials said.
But when Mr. Bush found himself in need of political help in Texas, the arms sale to Taiwan got a new look. 
This time almost no one in the bureaucracy argued against antagonizing the Chinese by ending the United States' 10-year ban on weapons sales to Taipei.
"They came to me and asked what I thought about selling planes to Taiwan and I said to them, 'Hey, where do I sign?'
" a senior White House official said. 
"I couldn't check off on it fast enough."
 
Interpreting a Communique
A State Department spokesman, Joseph Snyder, went through various rhetorical contortions today as he tried to explain why the arms sale was "fully in keeping with the spirit and the letter" of a 1982 Chinese-American communique that pledged that United States arms sales to Taiwan "will not exceed either in qualitative or quantitative terms the level of those supplied in recent years since the establishment of diplomatic relations between the United States and China, and that it intends to gradually reduce its sale of arms to Taiwan."
Mr. Snyder said that because Taiwan's aging air force consisted of out-of- date F-5's and F-104's, the only way to maintain the quality of its air force was by obtaining new planes. 
The 1982 communique, he said, also spoke about the need to maintain peace and stabilityI in the region, and that was consistent with maintaining a certain balance of power between Taipei and Beijing.
White House officials said that China was responding pretty much as they expected -- loud complaints up front, but no concrete steps that might actually threaten relations.
Bush Administration officials have repeatedly pointed to China's participation in the conventional-arms negotiations as evidence that their policy of "constructive engagement" with Beijing has been working. 
The officials also said that the Chinese have been keeping their promises not to sell missile and nuclear-weapons technologies to Iran, Syria and Pakistan.
But the officials said today that the Chinese threat to withdraw from the talks does not particularly concern them.
"The Chinese are only in those talks for fear of embarrassment at being outside," a senior Administration official said. 
"They have been the biggest obstacle up to now to any progress and have been looking for any pretext to leave."
While the sale to Taiwan was clearly made with an eye on American domestic politics, Administration officials argue that it also has a strategic rationale. 
Administration officials say they have grown increasingly concerned in the last year that China has being buying arms from the states of the former Soviet Union. 
Those include a recent purchase from Russia of 12 SU-27 high-performance fighters. 
The F-16's would be an effective counterweight to the SU-27's.
"We have been getting all kinds of reports about the Chinese going into the former Soviet Union and picking the shelves clean at fire-sale prices," said an Administration China expert. 
"They are buying not only weapons, but advanced technologies so that they can upgrade their own weapons and make them more exportable. 
They are the ones who have started the arms race in the region."
The official continued: "I guarantee you that our allies in Asia were very relieved after they heard about this sale. 
It restores a little bit of geopolitical balance at a time when the Chinese have really been throwing their weight around."
