
Companies producing books, records, films, computer software and other so-called intellectual property contended today that 12 countries, headed by China, are depriving the United States of more than $1.3 billion a year of foreign earnings through piracy of copyrighted material.
The International Intellectual Property Alliance, representing 1,600 companies that generated $270 billion in revenues in 1988, placed losses in China, with a population of a billion people and no copyright law, at $418 million, or about a third of the total of the 12 countries.
In a report to Carla A. Hills, the United States trade representative, the group said the problem was particularly acute in textbooks.
 
Collier Macmillan Loss in China
One example the report cited was English 900, a Collier Macmillan basic textbook used extensively around the world. 
It has had print runs in China of more than one million copies, yielding no income for Collier Macmillan, the report said.
American book publishers put their losses in China ''conservatively'' at $100 million a year, the report said.
In Saudi Arabia, the report said, 16 companies specialize solely in the distribution of pirate copies of Michael Jackson's music.
The alliance, which makes periodic assessments of piracy losses for the trade representative, named these other countries as the leading offenders: South Korea, India, the Philippines, Taiwan, Indonesia, Brazil, Egypt, Thailand, Nigeria and Malaysia.
Although the group has been providing data since 1984 on its members' losses, this year's report is getting unusual attention because of a requirement in the new United States trade law that the worst violators of intellectual property rights be identified for special Government action that could result in trade sanctions.
Trade officials noted that most of the countries named by the alliance are in some form of negotiation with the trade office to try to prevent their designation as a ''priority'' country under the Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988.
Mrs. Hills is required to inform Congress by May 30 of what countries she has designated. 
After the designation, her office must enter intensified talks with those countries. 
If the situation has not improved in a period of 18 months, the President may curb imports from those countries.
The United States has already taken action against one of the countries for intellectual property violations. 
On Jan. 
19, the last day of the Reagan Administration, President Reagan denied duty-free entry to $165 million of Thai imports because of what he said was Thailand's failure to protect copyrighted works.
Most of the 12 governments have agreed to try to correct abuses. 
''The question is how quickly or how resolutely,'' said Eric H. Smith, general counsel of the alliance.
China, for example, is working on the 19th draft of a copyright law, American officials said, and hopes to have one completed by year-end. 
Saudi Arabia is also drafting a law.
 
Statement by Chinese Embassy
''China is now actively accelerating legislation for the protection of intellectual property,'' a spokesman for the Chinese Embassy in Washington said. 
He noted that not long ago in the port city of Sheng Chen, a company that was found to have infringed on trademarks of the International Business Machines Corporation had been required to pay the highest such fine ever in China.
South Korea's Minister of Trade, Sung Soo Han, said at a news briefing here that his country had ''drastically overhauled and strengthened'' its intellectual property laws and had engaged 900 additional prosecutors and police officers to enforce them.
A report by the alliance in 1984 called Singapore ''the world's capital of piracy,'' but in the current survey Singapore is described as a ''success story.''
The 1984 losses from Singapore were put at $358 million, but they had been whittled to $10 million last year, the report said.
 
SOVIET COPYRIGHT PLAN
LONDON, April 19 (Reuters) -The Soviet Union will soon officially subscribe to the Bern Convention on literary copyrights and royalties, a Soviet official said today.
''I can inform you that our country is finalizing the necessary preparatory work which will soon enable us to accede to the Bern Copyright Convention,'' the Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister, Vladimir F. Petrovsky, told the London Information Forum of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.
The Bern Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works has existed for more than a century.Last month the United States became the 78th nation to join.
