
A score of grubby, lanky men marched into the cavernous and crowded Big Sheep Gully market, hauling buckets of potatoes, bricks and cloth on poles across their shoulders.
These men, who earn 64 cents a day for winding through the tangle of carts and peddlers and pungent smells, are part of the human migration of millions of Chinese peasants.
For the sake of a livelihood, they stream from their rural villages to cities far and near, like Chongqing, a sprawling metropolis on the Yangtze River in Sichuan Province.
"There's no need for me to work in the fields so much, and you can't produce money anyway, just grain," said a bucket carrier who must support his wife and three children.
 
100 Million Jobless Peasants
Throughout China's countryside, where three-fourths of the nation's population lives, there are an estimated 100 million jobless peasants, looking for odd tasks, chatting among each other, or standing around watching their crops grow.
Peasant restlessness has not led to major unrest in China in recent years, but serious underemployment in the countryside, let alone the vast numbers of those underemployed in China's state-run enterprises, poses a significant threat to social stabilityII. 
China's history is full of peasant rebellions, including the Communist revolution of 1949.
Peasants have a number of legitimate complaints, for despite the revolution's rural origins the Chinese Government discriminates in a number of ways against villagers. 
Most fundamentally, the Government pays an artificially low price to farmers for their grain, and then gives it at a subsidized price to urban workers -- who already have a substantially higher standard of living than the villagers.
Moreover, peasants generally do not receive financial support from the Government, while city dwellers are given subsidized food, health care, housing and many other benefits.
More and more peasants seem to realize that their work is helping the city slickers enjoy a comfortable life, and they resent it.
"The city folk get so many subsidies, and so do the cadres in the countryside," said a peasant doctor from the eastern province of Shandong. 
"But we get nothing. 
We even lose money when we grow grain."
Costs for farming, school and medicine are rising in the countryside, and if there is a bad harvest, if the economy falters, or if the Government goes so broke that it cannot afford to pay farmers for their grain, then a huge army of peasants could descend upon the cities in demand of jobs.
 
Projection of 300 Million Idle
According to some accounts, by the end of this century China will have 300 million idle peasants scouring the towns and cities for work outside their farming tasks. 
Already, peasants from China's relatively poor areas who migrate in giant waves to the cities are creating numerous headaches for the authorities. 
More than three million peasants, for example, have already come from other areas to work in the Pearl River Delta in southern China, according to a Chinese press report.
"We are under a lot of pressure," said Xiao Yang, Communist Party Secretary of Chongqing, a city with 14.5 million people. 
Mr. Xiao said the workers put it this way: "You give me a job. 
If you don't, how can you call yourself the people's government?"
There is virtually no labor mobility in China, and the Government restricts unplanned migration by forbidding its citizens to live in a place unless they have residence permits or official consent. 
But peasants flout the rules, and young women who want to become maids, young men seeking construction work, or people simply seeking a better life trickle out of the countryside into the cities.
Sichuan, China's largest province, with 108 million people, is particularly sensitive to unemployment problems because about a third of its rural work force -- 14 million farmers -- are idle, "surplus" laborers.
 
Unemployment Officially at 4%
China officially says its nationwide unemployment is about 4 percent, but those statistics exclude underemployment both in the cities and among the more than 800 million people in the countryside.
While jobs are tough to find, peasants say it is still worthwhile to go to the cities to look for work. 
There they join the "floating" population of workers without permanent residence permits.
In Bao An Village, about 60 miles north of Chongqing, Fang Qiong, 28 years old, does the family farming and child rearing on her own because her husband has gone off to the remote, northwestern province of Xinjiang to look for a job.
"About a dozen of the men went together to Xinjiang," Ms. Fang said as she was weeding her field. 
"He wanted to go, and I let him. 
What can I do about it?"
At a neighbor's house, four of the family's five daughters have gone to Shenzhen to work, while the parents look after their grandson.
"My daughters send money," said Yang Shengui, the 48-year-old mother. 
"Otherwise, we couldn't survive."
