
Citicorp, the largest banking company in the United States, yesterday gave Hong Kong one of the strongest votes of confidence it has received since the upheaval in China in June shook its markets.
Citicorp said it would arrange $5.2 billion (Hong Kong), or $667 million (United States), in loans to build two office towers in the territory's central district and may take an equity stake in the project. 
Citicorp plans to buy office space in the complex, and one tower may bear its name.
''We wouldn't have made the announcement at this time if we did not want to display in a dramatic way a vote of confidence and the fact that we intend to stay,'' said Steven Baker, Citicorp''s chief corporate officer in Hong Kong and division executive for East Asia.
Analysts noted that this also is a time to find property bargains in Hong Kong.
 
'A Very Good Price'
''Now is not a bad time to pick up assets,'' said Cheah Cheng Hye, head of research at Morgan Grenfell (Hong Kong) Securities. 
''If you don't think Hong Kong is going to fall apart after 1997, you're going to get in at a very good price.''
The invitation to participate in the project came from the Great Eagle Company, a major Hong Kong property developer that recently bought the last prime building site in the downtown business district.
The price Great Eagle paid at a Government auction, $2.7 billion, was well below expectations and about half the valuation placed on the site when Hong Kong's market was at its peak.
The territory's real estate market has been hard hit since the Chinese Government, which is scheduled to assume control of Hong Kong in 1997, suppressed pro-democracy demonstrations in June.
 
Completed in 1993
This is not the first time fears over Hong Kong's return to Chinese sovereignty have contributed to slumps in the local property market. 
Prices were notably weak in the early 1980's.
The high-rise project on Garden Road is to be completed in 1993. 
The site is next to the towering new Bank of China building, a highly visible reminder of Beijing's presence in the territory.
Citicorp's involvement in the development could be three-pronged: arranging a $1.9 billion bridge loan and a $3.3 billion term loan; possibly taking a 5 percent equity stake, which could be about $250 million dollars at the estimated development cost, and purchasing up to 400,000 square feet of office space.
At market rates for the district, that space would cost about $22 million, but Lo Ka Shui, managing director of Great Eagle, said office space in the development would be sold or leased to Citicorp below the going price.
 
Three Major Locations
Citicorp is one of the busiest foreign banks in the territory, with about 2,200 employees. 
But Hong Kong represents a small percentage of its worldwide business.
The bank now has three major Hong Kong locations: the stylish Exchange Square complex next to Victoria Harbor, Citicorp Center in Causeway Bay and Hopewell Center in Wanchai.
Mr. Baker said the planned move to Garden Road fits a ''two-building strategy'' that would group the bank's operations while expanding its existing Hong Kong office space of about 300,000 square feet.
Under the plan, the bank would have operations in one building in the central business district to house corporate and private banking businesses and a second, less-expensive site out of the central district to house its retail banking and credit-card operations. 
One alternative is to keep its Hopewell Center offices for that purpose.
In addition to the equity stake offered to Citicorp, Great Eagle said it had offered a 10 percent equity interest in the new project to the Singapore-based Robert Kuok Group, 5 percent to Wing Tai Exporters Ltd., 10 percent to Manhattan Garments Ltd., 7 percent to Sung Foo Kee Ltd. and 5 percent to a Japanese conglomerate.
Great Eagle will maintain about a 60 percent interest in the project, Mr. Lo said.
