
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev has sent President Bush a message supporting the changes taking place in East Germany and expressing hope that the situation will remain ''calm and peaceful,'' the White House spokesman said today.
Marlin Fitzwater, Mr. Bush's press secretary, disclosed the message, which was received on Friday while the President was here to dedicate a memorial to soldiers killed in the Vietnam War.
The cable from Mr. Gorbachev was described by Mr. Fitzwater as ''an informal message.''
Although its text was not released, the spokesman said the Soviet leader spoke of ''the importance of the changes'' in East Germany and ''expressed the hope that the situation will remain calm and peaceful.''
Mr. Gorbachev also told Mr. Bush that he supported the actions of the new East German leadership to open its their country's borders.
 
U.S. Response Is Promised
Mr. Fitzwater said later that ''the President will respond, and he will repeat many of the things he said, as well as offering encouragement for the continuation of political and economic reforms.''
Mr. Bush, addressing thousands today at an emotional Veterans Day ceremony in which he dedicated a new Vietnam War memorial, said that the perforation of the Berlin wall shows ''a great truth shining brighter with each passing day.''
''The quest for freedom,'' he went on, ''is stronger than steel, more permanent than concrete.''
Recalling that his Administration had not foreseen the suppression of blossoming dissent in China, President Bush said in an interview published today that he has acted with ''prudence'' toward the developments in Eastern Europe because of concern that bolder action could ''contribute toward an unforeseen disorder'' in the Soviet bloc.
 
Inside View
In the interview, conducted on Friday with Texas reporters, Mr. Bush said he was prepared to discuss ''a wide array of economic questions'' with Mr. Gorbachev. But, in his first detailed response to the rapidly unfolding events of recent days in East Germany and other nations of the Warsaw Pact, Mr. Bush reflected the deep uncertainty within his Administration about how much the United States can become involved.
He seemed frustrated both at criticism that he has been reluctant to take the kind of leading role in Europe that the United States has pursued for four decades and at the limitations on American action created by the current upheavals.
Mr. Bush said his advisers believe that Mr. Gorbachev is irrevocably committed to his reforms. 
''They can't go back to Square One,'' the President said. 
But he and his aides are still uncertain, and debating among themselves, how the Kremlin will respond to the growing rift amomg its neighboring countries. 
What About Prague?
With Friday's change of leadership in Bulgaria, Mr. Bush went on, the Administration is eager to assess the possibilities for change in a remaining hard-line Communist country, Czechoslovakia. 
Mr. Bush said that Prague is now among ''the most egregious offenders of human rights, those that resist change the most clearly.''
Asked if he was concerned that the rapidity of events could lead to instability in Europe, he said, ''I think that's why I keep using the word like prudent.''
Still, he said, ''I am convinced, given not just the events of yesterday, but the cumulative set of events that have taken place, that this change is real.''
The President and his advisers have repeatedly insisted that China and Eastern Europe cannot be compared in political terms. 
But Mr. Bush would not disregard the Chinese crackdown on dissent that culminated in hundreds of deaths in Beijing in June, and he used that event to explain his seeming anguish over policy toward Eastern Europe.
 
'Keep Our Eyes Open'
''I think many of us felt that what happened in China set back the relationship there,'' he said. 
''I hadn't seen anybody predict that was going to happen.''
''And so we keep our eyes open, and we keep acting prudently so as not to exacerbate tensions but to encourage that democracy is whole and free. 
If we continue to do that, we can hopefully not contribute to an unforeseen disorder.''
Mr. Bush said he would like to return to Berlin ''to see it with the wall down, not just with holes in it.''
But he said he did not plan to stop there after his meeting with Mr. Gorbachev on ships off the coast of Malta on Dec. 
2 and 3 ''unless there were something that developed between now and then that would make the presence of the U.S. 
President catalytic for peace or for evolution of democracy.''
 
Possible Economic Help
Turning to questions about economic aid, the area in which the Administration has been especially reluctant to engage the Soviet Union, Mr. Bush said: ''I think the time is right, should the Soviets want to discuss how to improve their economy, that we do that. 
I'm perfectly prepared to talk to Mr. Gorbachev on a wide array of economic questions, and will be ready to do that.''
He added that he had had two ''interesting seminars'' with his advisers on economic issues to prepare for the meetings with the Soviet President.
Despite some conflicting statements in recent weeks about the Soviet-American relationship, Mr. Bush said he and his advisers agree on the substance of policy toward the East bloc. 
Still, they ''sit and argue back and forth - How quick will this happen?
Or, What will be next?
Or, what do you think is going to happen to Mr. A. or Mr. B.''
''Will Gorbachev remain committed to perestroika and indeed to glasnost?''
Mr. Bush said. 
''Absolutely.''
