
Newspaper readers in China learned of the remarkable resignations of East German leaders this week, but they also picked up another bit of news: two East Germans who had fled more than a month ago to the West found the new society too disorderly and so returned home.
Chinese official newspapers have regularly, if sparingly, reported the developments within the East German leadership this week. 
But the brief reports included no explanations of the pressures that led to the unusual collective resignations. 
Lately, there has been little coverage of the mass demonstrations for democracy or the exodus to the West.
Such matters are presumably regarded as too delicate, too reminiscent of the democracy movement in China in the spring. 
Instead of giving in to some of the demonstrators' demands, as the East German leadership has done, the Chinese authorities called in troops and crushed the movement.
Today, there was no mention in the press or the national television about East Germany's opening of its borders to the West, although the trip to Poland by Chancellor Helmut Kohl of West Germany was reported.
 
'Period Full of Contradictions'
The recent articles - about one every two days, carried on the international news pages - have confined themselves to reporting excerpts from speeches by the new East German leader, Egon Krenz, about the necessity of reforming the party so that it can better exercise its leadership role.
''Democratic Germany is currently in a tense period full of contradictions,'' People's Daily today quoted Mr. Krenz as saying. 
''To make it through the difficult period, it is necessary to first carry out reform in the party itself.''
''The state economy is still the foundation of the socialist economy,'' Mr. Krenz was quoted as saying. 
''It is imperative to combine the superiority of the socialist planned economy with the regulation of the market.''
Chinese news outlets have tended to convey the impression that the ferment is coming from the top down, from a Communist leadership seeking to improve itself, rather than from a beleaguered party seeking to respond to enormous popular pressures. 
Still, many Chinese intellectuals listen to ''Voice of America'' or BBC radio programs, and often regard the changes in the Eastern bloc as a sign of the pressures that China could also face.
 
German Exodus Is Played Down
The newspapers have played down the exodus to the West, and have emphasized that some refugees found that capitalism was not as delightful as they had believed.
''When they first arrived, they were well treated,'' said a report in People's Daily early this week. 
''Yet they soon were given the cold shoulder and were treated unfairly.''
''Their general feeling is that society in West Germany is full of chaos, and there is no guarantee of life and property,'' the article said. 
''According to reports, quite a number of people have returned home.''
