
In a belated expression of sympathy, several thousand Czechoslovak students marched here today to protest the violent suppression of China's pro-democracy movement in June.
When troops attacked and killed demonstrators in Beijing, students here said they were horrified but powerless to respond. 
Their own repressive Government supported the Chinese authorities, thwarting any chance of a student show of solidarity.
But after their own Government sent troops in to violently disperse a peaceful student demonstration here on Nov. 
17, prompting a backlash of protest that has caused the collapse of the Communist regime, Czechoslovak students decided to hold the demonstration they were prevented from holding months ago.
''It's important to stand up and say that what happened in Tiananmen Square and what happened here on the 17th should never be repeated,'' said Vera Krincvajova, a 20-year-old journalism student, who said she learned of the Chinese student uprising and the crackdown by monitoring foreign news reports on the radio.
 
'Dialogue - Yes!
Tanks - No!'
The students gathered in the freezing cold under threatening gray skies in a square opposite the philosophy department of Charles University, a center of the student movement.
They carried banners saying, ''Freedom for Prague and Beijing,'' ''Democracy Is Not a Crime'' and ''Dialogue -Yes!
Tanks - No!''
They wore headbands, as the Chinese students had, bearing the same messages.
The example of China has haunted the students of Czechoslovakia ever since they declared a strike two weeks ago and began working with leading dissidents to organize daily mass demonstrations and a two-hour general strike last week to force change on the Government.
This was the first large-scale demonstration in Prague in more than a week, because mass rallies were temporarily called off after the opposition group Civic Forum began negotiating with Prime Minister Ladislav Adamec over the formation of a new Government. 
For 10 days those protests had brought hundreds of thousands of people to Wenceslas Square.
 
'Guilty That I Was Silent'
Disappointed by the Government restructuring announced today, Civic Forum has called for a mass protest rally on Monday, a move the students say they endorse.
Students here have also said it is difficult for them to ignore that what happened in China might happen here.
''The possibility is in the back of everyone's mind,'' said Vladimir Kropacek, an 18-year-old math and physics student. 
''In the spring, I did not have the courage to express my sympathy, and in truth, I feel a little guilty that I was silent.''
The students had originally planned to march from the square to the Chinese Embassy, but Chinese diplomats protested to officials here.
After discussions with the authorities and among themselves, the students decided to avoid a confrontation by marching from the square through the winding, cobbled streets of an old section of Prague called Mala Strana, or the small quarter, and to a compound of dormitories for foreign students of Charles University.
''The most important thing to us was to show students' unity,'' said Simon Panek, a 22-year-old biology student and one of the leaders of the Student Strike Committee, who addressed the students after their hour-long march. 
''The world has been standing up for us, and now that we have the chance -it is late, we know, but it is our first chance - we are standing up for our fellow students.''
