
Fifty years ago Jimmy Doolittle, then a lieutenant colonel in the Army Air Forces, flew to a small air base south of here seeking volunteers for a World War II mission that he described only as top secret and extremely hazardous.
Nearly 140 men base volunteered, and 80 of those were selected. 
Their mission: bomb Tokyo.
It was daring and seemingly suicidal. 
The five-man crews, aboard 16 heavily loaded B-25 bombers, were to take off from an aircraft carrier 450 miles from their target, knowing there was no turning back. 
The bombers could not land on the carrier; instead, after dropping their bombs they were to continue on, hoping to land at two primitive landing strips in Chinese territory that was not controlled by the Japanese.
On April 18, 1942 -- four months and 11 days after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor -- Colonel Doolittle's Raiders accomplished their mission.
Flying low, they approached Japan undetected and dropped 16 tons of bombs on factories and military installations in Tokyo and four other cities. 
The bombs caused little material damage, but they sent shock waves through Japan and lifted the morale of a dispirited America.
Somehow, 73 of the 80 crew members survived that historic mission. 
And on Thursday, 36 of the 40 who are still living will, for the first time, return to Columbia to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the raid. 
Their leader, who was promoted to general and awarded the Medal of Honor for the raid on Japan, is now 95 years old and living in Monterey, Calif. 
But he is unable to attend the three-day celebration.
Since World War II ended, the Raiders have met every year except one, said Brig. Gen. Richard Knobloch of San Antonio, the chairman of the Doolittle Tokyo Raiders Association.
As with all extraordinary events, the raid serves as the defining moment of their lives. 
They were young and, as one of the navigator-bombardiers, James Macia of San Antonio, said, "full of spit and vinegar."
They had been at the Columbia Army Air Base only two weeks when Colonel Doolittle sought their help. 
Few remember much about this city, but they did know the colonel, who had been a World War I flier and had a reputation as a daredevil.
Colonel Doolittle was counting on surprise. 
He knew the Japanese felt secure from an air attack because Japan was beyond the range of Army bombers.
"The old man," as his raiders call him, also knew that a B-25 could do the job from a Navy carrier. 
But his plans went askew on the rainy morning of April 18 when, some 800 miles at sea, a Japanese boat was spotted. 
The Americans sank the boat, but they did not know whether their whereabouts had been reported. 
The mission was quickly launched, but the Raiders knew they lacked the fuel to get to the landing strips in China.
They took off from the carrier Hornet at 8 A.M., hit their targets about noon and soared away to the west. 
They flew for nine hours more, but as the fuel tanks emptied, the crews of 11 of the planes parachuted out. 
Four other planes crash-landed near the Chinese coast, killing four crewmen, and the remaining plane landed in Vladivostok, Siberia.
Seven crewmen who parachuted out over Japanese-occupied China were captured, and three of them were executed. 
They were William G. Farrow, of Darlington, S.C.; Dean E. Hallmark, of Robert Lee, Tex., and Harold Spatz, of Lebo, Kan.
Columbia and local businesses have planned and paid for the $115,000 Raiders celebration, which includes a state dinner, a ball, an exhibit at the South Carolina State Museum and the premiere of a play about the raid.
But the raid has already been documented in the 1943 movie "Thirty Seconds Over Tokyo," which was based on the book by Ted Lawson, a pilot who died earlier this year.
"I would do anything for these guys," said Marvin Chernoff, whose Columbia-based advertising and public relations firm coordinated the reunion. 
"I got very emotional the first time I met them. 
I'm told in '42 they were crazy, and they're crazy now. 
They are a great bunch of guys."
