
Executives of several corporations expressed guarded optimism yesterday about the potential benefits of the accord signed by China and the United States to remove a broad range of trade barriers to American goods, including computers, chemicals and cameras.
"It sounds very encouraging to us," Paul Allen, a spokesman for the Eastman Kodak Company, said of the agreement, which was signed Saturday.
Kodak, based in Rochester, has three offices in China, where it has sold film for both consumer and professional uses for several years. 
Mr. Allen said he did not know the specifics of China's current restrictions on film and other Kodak products. 
Even so, he said, "it's welcome news."
His comments were echoed by other executives, who said that even though they were not sure precisely how the trade agreement would affect their operations, the agreement signaled an opening of the Chinese market that would more than likely represent added business.
"It gives A.T.& T. the opportunity to compete in the Chinese market," a spokeswoman for the American Telephone & Telegraph Company said. 
A.T.& T. is likely to benefit from an agreement by China to eliminate by next March 31 all restrictions on purchases of digital switching equipment made by American telecommunications manufacturers.
Many American businesses will be examining the complex agreement this week to learn exactly how their particular industries are affected. 
Many companies will probably be formulating strategies for the Chinese market from a standing start, Ira Wolf, the assistant United States trade representative for Japan and China, said yesterday.
"The Chinese market has been so closed and opaque for so long, nobody is going to sell something tomorrow because of this," he said.
 
Trying to Curb Huge Deficit
Under the agreement, China committed itself to eliminating a vast majority of the quotas, import-licensing restrictions and secret rules it has used to impede imports.
Michael H. Moskow, the deputy United States trade representative, said at a news briefing on Saturday that the accord would mean hundreds of millions of dollars in extra United States exports in the short term and billions more within several years.
