
A Hong Kong company signed a $30 million contract today to fire an American-built satellite into space on a Chinese rocket - the first time China will launch a foreign-built satellite.
''This marks China's first step in the international satellite business,'' said Terry Seddon, chief executive of the Asia Satellite Telecommunications Company, or Asiasat, which signed the deal with the state-owned China Great Wall Industrial Corporation.
Asiasat 1 is to be launched in April 1990, and China will be sending two other American-made satellites into space in July 1991 and February 1992 for an Australian satellite company, Aussat, Chinese officials said.
In addition, negotiations are under way for the Chinese to launch a second satellite from Asiasat and a weather satellite from Sweden. 
Asiasat 1 and the two Aussat satellites were made by the Hughes Aircraft Company.
The launchings on an unmanned rocket will provide China with much-needed foreign exchange and, if successful, help cement its position in the world of international aerospace.
Since 1984, China has successfully launched four of its own communications satellites. 
It started launching satellites in 1970 and has had 23 successful firings and one failure.
In December the United States agreed to allow China to launch American-built communications satellites after Beijing promised it would neither steal American satellite technology nor undercut private American companies.
China said it would limit itself to launching nine foreign communications satellites in the next six years.
According to some estimates, China's state-subsidized rocket industry charges 30 to 50 percent less per launching than its American or European competitors.
The Chinese launching will be Asiasat 1's second trip in space. 
In 1984, under the name Westar 6, it was sent up on the American space shuttle, but a rocket motor malfunctioned and the satellite was not delivered into orbit.
It was retrieved in a spectacular salvage operation in 1985 and sold to Asiasat, the company owned by a consortium consisting of Cable and Wireless of Britain, the state-owned China International Trust and Investment and Hutchison Whampoa, one of Hong Kong's biggest companies.
