
The General Motors Overseas Corporation announced today that it had formed a $100 million joint venture with a Chinese vehicle manufacturer to assemble pickup trucks for sale in China.
The joint venture represents General Motors' effort to enter a vehicle market that is expected to be one of the fastest growing in the world. 
China's 1.1 billion people now get around mostly on bicycles, but very rapid industrial growth rates are likely to mean enormous growth in the numbers of cars, buses and trucks on the roads in the future.
Volkswagen, Peugot and Chrysler are already active in China, mostly assembling passenger cars from parts imported from abroad. 
While there are enormous problems with quality control, high tariffs make imported vehicles frequently uncompetitive in China.
"We've been trying to do business in China since 1978," David Bodkin, a company spokesman, said in Beijing today. 
"We finally got an agreement."
The venture agreement, in which General Motors will take a 30 percent equity stake, will produce 600 to 1,000 trucks by the end of this year after the production line starts up sometime around June, Mr. Bodkin said. 
By 1998, the joint venture is expected to produce 50,000 trucks a year.
General Motors will provide mainly capital, while the Gold Cup Automobile Company will provide the production plant and about 5,000 workers. 
The workers, in the northeastern city of Shenyang, will assemble partial knockdown kits imported from General Motors S-class truck plants in the United States. 
These kits will be paid for in hard currency, a G.M. spokesman in Detroit said. 
Over time, the venture is expected to increase the portion of locally made parts.
There is also a provision in the agreement for G.M. to take profits out of China in a variety of ways including hard currency and currency exchanges, the spokesman said.
The agreement comes amid a recovery in China for automobile makers, including joint ventures, with the top seven or eight companies now turning profits after an austerity policy seriously hurt business in 1989 and 1990. 
Gold Cup lost the equivalent of about $11 million in 1990, according to an Associated Press report from Shenyang last year.
 
Company's Financial Innovations
Gold Cup, which in Chinese is known as Jinbei, attracted national renown a few years ago for its effort to become the first company in China to issue Western-style shares to domestic and foreign investors. 
Its shares were even peddled in a central Government compound, provoking sharp criticism from hard-liners that this practice was unbecoming in a Communist country.
Still, Gold Cup was better known for its financial innovations than for the quality of its trucks and mini-vans. 
Like most Chinese manufacturers, it is far behind Western standards.
Gold Cup recently spent $35 million to purchase a production line from the Toyota Motor Corporation to assemble 15-seat vans, and the two companies had considered further cooperation, according to a recent report in the official China Daily. 
It is not clear whether this cooperation will deepen, as had been intended, now that Gold Cup has formed the venture with G.M.
 
No Passenger Cars
Mr. Bodkin said there were no immediate plans to produce passenger cars, which several other foreign-financed operations, including Chrysler's well-known Beijing Jeep joint venture, have focused on. 
He added that the proposal to produce pickup trucks had come mainly from Gold Cup, which currently specializes in minivans and trucks and produced 20,000 light trucks in 1990. 
The two companies began discussions in 1988.
General Motors will have "operating and management responsibility," Mr. Bodkin said, and the president of the new company will be a General Motors representative. 
The joint venture will not have full autonomy in setting the prices of its cars, but it will make price proposals for approval by the Chinese Government.
General Motors currently is also installing an engine-manufacturing line that it has sold to the Beijing Engine Factory. 
These engines will be used in the pickup trucks.
