
The chairman of the McDonnell Douglas Corporation, John F. McDonnell, said today that China wanted to negotiate a deal that could lead to the co-production of 150 more MD-80 jetliners.
"We have been notified by the Chinese that they want to proceed with detailed negotiations for that program," Mr. McDonnell told reporters after the aircraft manufacturer's annual meeting. 
"We expect we will in fact begin those negotiations."
McDonnell Douglas and the Chinese Government jointly produce MD-80 jetliners in Shanghai, but a new agreement may call for as many as 150 additional aircraft to serve domestic flights within China.
Mr. McDonnell also said the company would not rule out a partnership in the company's commercial airliner business. 
But he said no specific talks were under way concerning a possible equity partner for the company's Douglas Aircraft unit.
Shares in McDonnell jumped $1.125 today to close at $50.125 on the New York Stock Exchange.
To remain competitive in the commercial aircraft business, the St. Louis-based company is planning a number of new aircraft programs that may require additional capital and a partner, possibly from Asia.
Douglas Aircraft is currently looking for risk-sharing equity partners on its proposed MD-12X airliner.
"We are talking with different manufacturers about lots of different arrangements; I don't care to comment beyond that," Mr. McDonnell said. 
"We're looking for what's the best long-term strategic way we can be a leader in the commercial transport business. 
I'm open to whatever makes sense."
Mr. McDonnell also told shareholders that American Airlines had taken delivery of its second MD-11 jetliner. 
The airline had temporarily halted MD-11 deliveries after receiving its first plane because it was not satisfied with the MD-11's fuel consumption. 
John Capellupo, deputy president of Douglas Aircraft, told shareholders that American Airlines was satisfied with the progress being made on improving the fuel consumption of the MD-11.
