
More United States companies rushed to pull personnel out of Beijing yesterday as the Bush Administration urged all Americans to leave the embattled city.
Northwest Airlines, which has two flights a week to Shanghai, said its flight yesterday left about half full but that its flight scheduled to leave tomorrow was fully booked. 
The airline uses Boeing 747's with a seating capacity of 400.
United Airlines has three regularly scheduled flights a week from Tokyo to Beijing, with its flight on Mondays routed through Shanghai. 
It also uses 747's. 
Sara L. Dornacker, media relations manager, said that yesterday's flight left Beijing with 85 empty seats, but that the carrier expected all seats to be filled today.
Some companies were trying to arrange for charter flights to move large numbers of employees. 
McDonnell Douglas, which has had a joint venture since 1985 to produce MD-80 planes for commercial use in China, said yesterday that it was trying to evacuate 43 workers and their families from Shanghai, where it has a plant that employs several thousand workers. 
James Reed, a spokesman for the company, said he did not know the status of the plant, although he said there had been no problems reported at it.
The Chrysler Corporation said it was watching the situation in Beijing, where it has a plant employing 4,500 Chinese workers who manufacture Jeep Cherokees and BJ-212's, which are Soviet-style jeeps.
 
Supplies Arriving
Anne H. Lalas, manager of international public relations for Chrysler, said the plant operated on Monday and yesterday with two-thirds of its work force. 
She said supplies were arriving normally as of yesterday. 
The company evacuated its eight non-Chinese workers on Sunday.
At Coopers & Lybrand, Sue-Jean Lee, the accounting firm's China desk manager in Washington, said the manager of the Beijing office was scheduled to leave for Hong Kong, but there had been no confirmation that she had made the trip. 
The company had not been able to reach its personnel in Shanghai, Guangzhou and Shenzhen, she said.
''Once the situation settles down a bit and we know who will be in charge, I'm sure we will continue our presence in China,'' Ms. Lee said. 
Most of the firm's business is with American, Canadian and British companies in China.
Richard M. Hammer, national director of international tax services for Price Waterhouse, said the firm had sent eight to ten employees to Hong Kong from Beijing in the last few days.
 
'Real Convulsion' Expected
''China is in for a real convulsion,'' Mr. Hammer said. 
''I don't think its leaders can put the lid on this.''
He added that he thought the situation was a disaster because companies that pull out now will not go back soon.
Peter P. Mullen, executive partner at Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom, said the international law firm had put on hold plans to open an office in Beijing in October. 
He described the situation in Beijing as ''highly charged and very dangerous at this point.''
Mr. Mullen said the Chinese companies represented by his firm were continuing yesterday with their business ventures. 
One, for example, which has bought a steel plant in upstate New York, continued to dismantle the plant and make arrangements for its shipment to Shanghai.
Another client continued the process yesterday of buying assets in the Midwest to ship back to China, while one actively pursued fund raising to make investments in the United States.
Yet another company, he said, that owns part of a plant that makes polypropylene, a plastic, is continuing to take shipments destined for China.
 
Insurance Coverage
In Washington, the Overseas Private Investment Corporation, which insures American companies against expropriation, war damage and other political risks overseas, said it had written policies covering 29 projects in 15 localities in China, but that it was too early to know if it would have to make any payouts.
Among the projects are the Cabot Corporation's carbon black factory in Shanghai and a Warner-Lambert plant in Suzhou.
OPIC, which is a United States Government corporation holding $1.2 billion in reserves, said its maximum liability was $95 million.
Robert L. Jordan, director of public affairs, said, ''Whatever reactions we get in the form of potential claims will be down the road.''
