
A Congressional move to impose higher tariffs on China involving billions of dollars of exports collapsed today when the Senate missed a voting deadline, thereby enabling China to continue getting low duties at least through the end of next June.
To protest the repression of pro-democracy student demonstrators, the House of Representatives voted 247 to 174 on Thursday to rescind President Bush's decision last May renewing for China the favorable tariff status known as most-favored-nation treatment.
Under a measure enacted in August, both chambers faced a deadline of midnight Thursday for action to reverse the Administration move.
In a statement early today, the Senate majority leader, George J. Mitchell, Democrat of Maine, officially pronounced the effort dead, but he said he continued to believe that given the current condition of human rights in China, Mr. Bush was wrong.
 
Bush Promised Veto
The Congressional move was largely symbolic, since Mr. Bush, a former Ambassador to Beijing, had promised to veto any resolution of disapproval, and most estimates said the two houses lacked the two-thirds voting strength to override a veto.
Mr. Bush said the higher tariffs would hurt American business and consumers, reduce American influence with China on global issues and damage the Hong Kong economy, which is heavily dependent on China trade.
Eliminating the favored status would mean up to a 10-fold rise in tariffs on the apparel, electronics, toys and other products that China sells here.
The two countries do about $18 billion in two-way business. 
Although China buys wheat, high-technology products and machinery and other capital goods from the United States, it has a large trade surplus with this country.
Signaling the importance of the Chinese market for American farmers, the Agriculture Department announced today that China has bought an additional 449,370 metric tons of wheat, its second purchase this week. 
At current prices the wheat would have a farm value of around $40 million.
