
Members of the first Congressional delegation to visit China since the military crackdown of June 1989 said today that they had warned Prime Minister Li Peng that unless China improved its human rights record, it risked losing important trade benefits.
The five House members said at a news conference that they thought they had conveyed to the Chinese Government the importance of rights issues in determining trade relations.
But while they were conveying their message, the Chinese authorities werebusy sending a very different message to the nation's people.
Film clips of the smiling Congressmen meeting Prime Minister Li and shaking his hand were the lead item on the television news, and an article about the meeting was published on the front page of People's Daily today.
Neither television nor the Communist Party newspaper indicated that the visitors had expressed any criticism or complaints, and the message to the Chinese audience seemed to be that Americans have returned and are happy to meet with Mr. Li.
"We are confident of the future of China," People's Daily quoted Mr. Lias telling his visitors.
The publicity, which was apparently intended to use the Congressional visit to bolster the legitimacy of the hard-line Government, also quoted Mr. Li as saying, "We Chinese should not observe the U.S. from the viewpoint of our own ideas and norms, while the Americans should not observe China's affairs according to their views and values."
Members of the delegation, which was led by Representative Michael G. Oxley, Republican of Ohio, said they were not particularly surprised by the Chinese attempt to put a "spin" on the visit. 
But they said the trip was worthwhile because they were able to impress upon Mr. Li that unless China improves its human rights record, it risks losing most-favored-nation trade advantages.
"We hope that our visit conveyed the strong message that there is a major concern about human rights violations," Mr. Oxley said.
Representative John J. Rhodes 3d, Republican of Arizona, said the group had emphasized that Congress would again consider at its next session whether to renew most-favored-nation status, and that an important factor would be China's handling of prisoners seized during the crackdown on the democracy movement last year.
"A final resolution of that situation is extremely important to future trade relations," Mr. Rhodes said. 
"I don't think they can have any doubt that thatlinkage exists."
Three of the five Congressmen said it was their impression from Mr. Li's comments that the fate of the prisoners would be resolved soon, but the two others said they did not have that impression.
The other members of the delegation were Representatives George Darden, Democrat of Georgia; Jim Lightfoot, Republican of Iowa, and E. Clay Shaw Jr., Republican of Florida. 
The delegation, which left Beijing today for Shanghai, is the first group of Congressmen to visit since the crackdown, although on two occasions, individual members of Congress have come for brief visits.
