
Members of Congress introduced amendments today that could severely curtail exports of computers, weapons, satellites and financing to China.
The legislators acted out of outrage over China's execution of pro-democracy demonstrators and disappointment with the Bush Administration's measured response.
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, testifying before the House Foreign Affairs Committee, appealed to the legislators for restraint, reminding them that human rights concerns have to be balanced against the strategic and economic importance of the Chinese-American relationship. 
He also warned of the dangers of any split between the White House and Congress on how to deal with Beijing.
Baker Defends Bush's Response
''We've seen examples in the past where we have not spoken with one voice in the conduct of our foreign policy and we've always, almost without exception, failed in those instances,'' Mr. Baker told the legislators. 
''I believe that the President's response has been properly measured.''
Mr. Baker said the President had adopted ''carefully targeted actions, while not being inflammatory in his rhetoric and preserving his options for the future.''
He added: ''Human rights has got to be a fundamental keystone for American foreign policy, but there are also other considerations that must be taken into account. 
The geopolitical economic relationship between China and the United States is important.''
But the Secretary's remarks came at a time of a growing clamor on Capitol Hill for additional sanctions that would give substance to the outrage over the crackdown of the pro-democracy movement.
 
Anger on Capitol Hill
While none of the amendments being introduced may ever find their way into law, members of Congress said they are certain to increase the pressure on the President to adopt additional sanctions and more forceful language toward the Beijing authorities.
The anger on Capitol Hill was encapsulated by the Senate majority leader, George J. Mitchell, who issued a statement saying, ''I am saddened by the President's refusal to give outlet to the feelings of the American people about these executions which have now reached the point which can only be described as organized murder - terror by a Government against its own people, seeking to intimidate them, to permit that Government to remain in power.''
''I understand and appreciate the delicate situation in which the President finds himself,'' the Maine Democrat added, ''and I support his stated desire to maintain, if possible, some relationship with the Chinese Government. 
But I ask - I urge - the President to condemn these actions personally and in the strongest possible terms.''
To put teeth into those sentiments, a variety of amendments were introduced to the Foreign Aid Authorization Bill for fiscal years 1990-91 currently being debated on the floor of the House.
 
An Omnibus Amendment Planned
Representative Stephen J. Solarz, the Brooklyn Democrat who is chairman of the House subcommittee on Asia and the Pacific, said all the amendments will be sifted out, coordinated and then put together into one bipartisan omnibus amendment on China to the foreign aid bill, which should come up for a vote on Wednesday or Thursday. 
He said the Congress hoped to work closely with the Administration in forging the amendment.
Foreign aid authorization bills, however, often fail to be passed into law because they are weighed down with too many amendments, and no one could guarantee that will not be the fate of these measures as well.
The proposals introduced included these:
* Representative Mel Levine, Democrat of California, introduced an amendment that would cut off all high-technology exports to China for six months. 
Mr. Levine said he was moved to action after a meeting he and a bipartisan group of legislators held Tuesday with the Chinese Ambassador, Han Xu. 
Mr. Levine said he was ''deeply troubled'' by Mr. Han's remark that ''any country in the same situation'' would have behaved as China had.
* Representative Benjamin A. Gilman, Republican of New York, offered an amendment that would prohibit issuance of export licenses of items on the munitions control list.
* Representative Theodore S. (Ted) Weiss, Democrat of Manhattan, introduced an amendment prohibiting the Government-sponsored Overseas Private Investment Corporation, which provides risk insurance and financing for companies doing business abroad, from writing any new policies related to China.
* Representative Gerald B. H. Solomon, Republican of New York, brought an amendment prohibiting export licensing for American-manufactured satellites that are scheduled to be launched on Chinese rockets under an agreement reached last year.
* Representative Tom Lantos, Democrat of California, introduced a separate bill to end China's most-favored-nation trading status.
The House voted 416 to 0 to approve a resolution backing the President's call for clemency for pro-democracy demonstrators and calling on the Chinese Government to stop executing those arrested in its ''murderous crackdown'' adding, ''To the Government of China we say: You can muffle the voices of change for now, but you cannot silence them forever.''
 
THATCHER OPPOSES SANCTIONS
LONDON, June 22 (Reuters) -Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher ruled out trade sanctions against China today, telling Parliament that such action could cause great panic in Hong Kong.
The Labor Party Leader, Neil Kinnock, had asked Mrs. Thatcher to back up her condemnation of Beijing for executing pro-democracy demonstrators by leading a European sanctions drive.
