
ENGLISH HOUSES
Blickling Hall, built in 1620 in Norfolk, England, is one of numerous historic houses in East Anglia to be discussed by Christopher Hanson-Smith, a staff member of the National Trust in Britain and a resident of East Anglia for the past decade. 
He will talk about Wimpole Hall near Cambridge, where rare breeds of livestock are bred and preserved, and a wide variety of smaller manor houses, elegant town houses, thatched cottages, half-timbered guildhalls and a Georgian theater still in use.
Mr. Hanson-Smith has written several books about historic homes and gardens in Cumbria, Lancashire and East Anglia. 
His talk will be followed by a formal tea. 
The event takes place at the Bruce Museum in Greenwich beginning at 1 P.M. Wednesday. Reservations at $10 may be made by calling 869-0376.
CRAFTS SHOW AND SALE
The Wilton Historical Society is again sponsoring a Celebration of American Craftsmanship show and sale from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. Saturday and from 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. next Sunday at the Wilton High School Field House on Route 7.
More than 100 professional artists and artisans from 16 states will display their work in room settings, focusing mainly on 19th-century folk art and furniture. 
As a special feature a group of Amish women from Indiana will complete one of their traditional quilts to be sold in a raffle, and a selection of clothing, jewelry, leather goods, children's items and Christmas decorations will be available.
Those who wish to participate in workshops may sign up for bandbox-making with Edwina Chomley-Jones, scheduled from noon to 4 P.M. Saturday, theorem painting with Linda Brubaker from noon to 4 P.M. Sunday, and grain painting with Petra Haas from 1 to 1:30 Sunday. 
Fees are $55 for each of the the first two, and $35 for the last. 
Admission to the show is $4 a day. 
Call 762-7257 for more information.
 
CHINESE MOVIES
The differences and similarities of American and Chinese cinema will be discussed in two programs this week by Chen Mei, a critic, writer and lecturer currently teaching at the State University of New York at Stony Brook, L.I.
''Film and Society in China'' is the subject of her talk at 7 P.M. Monday in Davies Auditorium at Yale and ''Hollywood and the Chinese Cinema'' will be the topic at 4:15 P.M. Tuesday in the Academic Center at Quinnipiac College in Hamden.
''Chinese films are a more direct reflection of society than American films,'' said Miss Chen. 
For that reason she believes that ''Star Wars'' and ''Superman'' were not hits in China while ''On Golden Pond'' and ''Look Who's Coming to Dinner'' were. 
After her talk at Yale, Miss Chen will show the 1986 Chinese film ''Black Cannon,'' a dark comedy in which an engineer in a Chinese-German company sends a telegram to a friend inquiring about a missing chess piece - a black cannon. 
The message is intercepted and interpreted as part of a spy plot. 
The engineer is dismissed and his replacement, while politically pure, is so incompetent that he brings the company to the brink of ruin.
There is no charge for admission. 
For more information at Yale call 432-3429. 
At Quinnipiac call 288-5251, extension 307.
 
AMERICAN MUSIC
Connecticut is doing its part for the fifth annual American Music Week celebration with at least six events. 
The nationwide festival of new works by established and new composers was initiated by the American Music Center in Manhattan. 
Founded in 1940 by Aaron Copland, Otto Luening, Howard Hanson, Marion Bauer, Quincy Porter and Harrison Kerr, the center is dedicated to making the works of American composers available to performers all over the world.
Music by Winifred Keane, including scenes from her opera ''Antigone'' will be performed by the Gregg Smith Singers, soloists and the Young People's Creative Dance Theater at 4 P.M. today in the Greens Farms Church, 71 Hillandale Road, Westport. 
Admission is $10.
Viviane Bertolami, violinist, and David Korevaar, pianist, will play music by Mr. Korveaar, Quincy Porter and John Corigliano at 8:30 P.M. Saturday in the Westport Unitarian Church, 10 Lyons Plains Road. 
Admission is $11, the elderly $8 and students $7. 
Other events includes the Three Slender Fellas New Music Ensemble, 12:30 P.M. Wednesday, Yale Center for British Art, a Faculty and Friends Concert at UConn's recital hall in Storrs at 8:15 P.M. Monday, and a screening of the film ''Bird,'' a biography of Charlie Parker, at 8 P.M. Friday in the recital hall. 
Call 486-2260 for other programs and more information.
 
COUNTRY BYWAYS
''Country Walks in Connecticut'' is a guide to back-country byways for dedicated hikers. 
Susan D. Cooley, the author and a member of the Board of Trustees of the Connecticut Forest and Park Association, will give a free slide presentation based on her book at 3 P.M. today in the art gallery of Jorgensen Auditorium at UConn in Storrs.
Published by the Appalachian Mountain Club and the Connecticut Nature Conservancy, the book describes 17 short and 24 long hikes in the conservancy's preserves around the state. 
While most of them are open to the public without restrictions, Ms. Cooley believes that major hikes should not be undertaken without at least rudimentary training. 
It is all too easy to get lost in a forest, and weather conditions can produce life-threatening situations. 
In addition, each sanctuary has its own sets of regulations that should be respected by hikers for environmental as well as safety reasons. 
For more information call 486-4460. 
$90ELEANOR CHARLES
