
SEAL CARVINGS
The small square markings, or seals, that one sees in the corners of Chinese works of art are the subject of an exhibition at the Yale Art Gallery. 
Conceived by Qianshen Bai, a graduate student in the history of art and a practitioner of the art of seal carving, the exhibition highlights an obscure but important element of Chinese culture.
"The World Within a Square Inch," which will remain on view through July 31, consists of 50 handscrolls, hanging scrolls, album leaves, tile rubbings, bronze and porcelain objects, a set of seal carver's tools and magnified impressions of seals that permit the viewer to appreciate their intricacy.
The seals are carved on stones selected for their color, texture and markings in a tradition of inscription that dates to 1400 B.C. The examples on view, mostly from the 19th and 20th centuries, were donated by seal carvers from China andby private collectors.
Widely regarded as antique stamps of ownership and links to China's long history, seals are gaining acceptance as a contemporary art form by young carvers who are developing innovative techniques. 
A lecture, "Seals and Seal Carving in Chinese Culture: From Symbol of Office to Scholarly Art Form," will be delivered by Colin C. Mackenzie, associate curator of Asian art, on Tuesday at 2 P.M. and again on Thursday at 1 P.M. Admission is free.
The gallery, at Chapel and York Streets in New Haven, is open free of charge Tuesday through Saturday from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., and on Sunday from 2 to 5 P.M. For information, 432-0600.
 
ROCKY HORROR SHOW
The "Rocky Horror Show," an audience participation show that was first presented at the Royal Court Theater in London in 1973, continues to be performed in London as well as in the United States. 
Its latest venue is the Downtown Cabaret Theater in Bridgeport, where it may be seen live through Aug. 
8; the show should not be confused with "The Rocky Horror Picture Show," a cinematic version usually shown at midnight, in deference to the Frankenstein legend on which the scenario is based.
The cabaret has suspended its bring-your-own-refreshments policy for the duration of the run, and advises patrons that children should be left at home. 
For that matter so should adults who might be offended by some of the scenes and language, which might be described as lunatic or raunchy. 
But for most audiences "Rocky Horror" is just good fun.
Performance times this week are Friday at 7:30 and 10 P.M. and Saturday at 7 and 10 P.M. Starting June 5, performances are scheduled on Thursday, Friday and Saturday at 10 P.M. only. 
Tickets are $16.50 to $20. 
For reservations, 576-1636.
 
QUILTS FROM 1840
More than 30 quilts dating to 1840 will be on display at the East Haddam Historical Museum on the Moodus Green beginning tomorrow from 9 A.M. to 1 P.M. and continuing through June 21 on Wednesdays through Sundays from 1 to 5 P.M.
Fifteen quilts have been hung, the rest are folded on tables, too fragile to hang. 
The patterns include Irish Chain, Flower Basket, Feathered Star, Double Wedding Ring, Victorian Crazy Quilt, Flower Garden, Log Cabin, Mosaic and Shoo-Fly. 
All were created by women who lived in the area up to about 1910; the quilts have been kept in excellent condition, and lent to the museum for this exhibition.
Admission will be $2; more information may be obtained by calling the museum, 873-8144.
 
KALEIDOSCOPE IMAGES
"Kaleido Sight" is the first of several permanent exhibitions to be completed before the opening of a 130,000-square-foot Science Museum of Connecticut in 1995. 
The exhibits will be shown to the public in the existing building at 950 Trout Brook Drive in West Hartford, then moved to the new complex in East Hartford.
The Kaleido Sight is a 30-foot computerized kaleidoscope that delivers some startling images. 
The viewer stands at the front, where the eye would be on a hand-held kaleidoscope, then picks up a wand and waves it. 
The wand, hand, face, and movements are picked up by a camera that sends the pictures to the computer, which in turn adds color and motion. 
Dual mirrors then create symmetrical hexagonal images, increasing dramatically in size as the viewer walks toward the center of the tunnel.
In 1985 the museum changed its name from the Children's Museum of Hartford, and began to expand into a complex that would be of interest to adults as well as children. 
The museum, which received part of a $13 million grant to Connecticut by the National Science Foundation, has embarked on the building program at a two-acre site on the Connecticut River, at the end of East River Drive. 
An additional seven acres of adjacent wetlands will be at the disposal of the museum for environmental programs.
A committee of advisors from Yale and Wesleyan Universities, United Technologies and other science-oriented companies are working on ideas for exhibition themes based on robotics, biotechnology, computer applications, energy systems, the Connecticut River environment and other elements important to the state's future.
The museum is open Tuesday through Saturday from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., Sunday from noon to 5 P.M., and admission is $5, $4 for children and the elderly, free to children under five. 
More information: 236-2961.
 
POSTER ART
Posters are a relatively new form of expression, beginning in the 19th century and elevated to high art by Toulouse-Lautrec and other painters of the period. 
Political posters were introduced later, in the early part of this century, generated by World War I and the Russian Revolution.
An exhibition of more than 500 German and Russian posters from around 1915 to 1925, priced from $40 to $3,000 depending on their rarity, is on display in Ridgefield through June 13 at the Antique Poster Collection, 17 Danbury Road.
Perceived as early examples of the use of art as propaganda, political posters have become collector's items. 
Executed as caricature, realistically or heroically, they were calculated to command attention. 
The artists who created them considered the task to be a duty to the state, whether to garner support for a political party, increase productivity, or crush the enemy.
The gallery is open Tuesday through Saturday from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. More information: 438-1836.
