
Gu Jibao, her eyes sparkling beneath a soft shadow of purple on the eyelids, fussed with a small jar of face cream, frowned, smiled, and then plunked nearly a week's worth of her salary on the counter.
Miss Gu, who the month before also spent the equivalent of $22, or half her salary, on a tiny bottle of French perfume, is considered a bit extravagant by her female colleagues in the accounting office of a textile company here. 
But ever since she finished a three-month course at a beauty school late last year, they have been quietly coming up to her, one by one, for tips on how to spruce up their faces.
''I was a little self-conscious at first about wearing makeup,'' said the 37-year-old Miss Gu, whose recently purchased skin cream, tailored for summer use, came from London. 
''But now I'm used to it. 
As women get older, they ought to wear makeup to shape their appearance.''
For months, the Communist leaders have been urging the Chinese to cultivate the socialist spirit, put aside glorification of the self and tighten their belts to prepare for spartan days ahead.
 
Government Doesn't Like It
Government propaganda, its harsh language reminiscent of the political campaigns of the 1970's, has criticized the influence the West has had on the way of life in China, particularly on pornography and politics. 
Yet while some authorities seem to be trying to turn the clock back to the years when Communism guided nearly every aspect of people's lives, some of the most blatantly capitalistic mores are still blossoming.
Newspapers, television news broadcasts and billboards exhort people to live by the spirit of Lei Feng, a model worker who gave his money to the poor and drank water instead of soda pop, but the commercials and department stores are pushing an increasingly indulgent way of life, full of beauty, wine, fashion, romance.
A commercial on national television, for example, features a beautiful man and woman, far more elegantly dressed than most Chinese can afford to be, cozily sipping from wine glasses in a dimly lit, Western-style restaurant. 
Newspapers publicize Chinese fashion shows, and beauty parlors, even an etiquette school, are opening up in the cities.
In the last few years, cosmetics from Europe, Japan, Hong Kong and America have been selling briskly in major Chinese cities, and although the Government has restricted such imports recently, it hardly seems able to curb the feminine appetite for Western-style makeup and perfume, even if they are made in China.
 
Where the Money Goes
This concern with appearance is particularly pronounced in Shanghai, which has always fancied itself as the most cosmopolitan and sophisticated of Chinese cities. 
Before the Communist revolution in 1949, Shanghai was the most decadent city in the country and some young people seem eager for the city to regain that reputation.
Some women interviewed there said they spent up to one-quarter of their salary on makeup alone. 
In 1985, spending on cosmetics averaged the equivalent of two cents a year per person in China. 
In 1988, it was 32 cents, according to one Chinese manufacturer, Shanghai No. 4 Daily Chemical Products Factory. 
The company says that figure could more than double in the next five years. 
In contrast, a typical monthly salary is about $30.
''Before, it was just face cream, but now the whole concept of makeup is changing,'' said Zhu Hongxian, manager of the cosmetics branch of the Shanghai General Merchandise Company. 
''Now, even young men are wearing perfume and putting mousse in their hair.''
In the department stores these days, women crowd around the counters that sell cosmetics. 
At the state-run department store Hualian Commercial Building, a set of five sample-size French perfumes sells for the equivalent of about $75. 
In the Friendship Store in Beijing, an eye shadow set by Christian Dior sells for $130, and saleswomen say local Chinese have bought it.
 
The Trend Is Clear
Women who do not wear cosmetics still far outnumber those who do, and Western-style makeup is seen much less frequently in the countryside. 
But the trend is clear. 
A growing number of women are wearing makeup every day, especially employees in joint venture hotels, who have been taught by experts how to dress and make themselves up.
Hotel clerks and ''ladies of the skies,'' or flight attendants, who must dress neatly for the foreign clientele, are among the most envied of young women.
''Now women know how to draw lips, shape eyebrows, shadow eyelids and even make their hair stand up on end,'' said Zhu Qianrong, director of Shanghai No. 4 Daily Chemical Products Factory, which supplies cosmetics all over China.
For decades, Chinese cosmetic makers churned out the same simple moisturizers like the ''Butterfly'' brand cream, which the Shanghai No. 4 company still makes. 
These and other Chinese medicinal treatments, like a face cream made of pearl dust or ginseng root, are still selling well, but domestic makers are trying hard to imitate the Western-style lipsticks, eye shadows, rouges, perfumes, mousses and hair sprays.
Often, however, the poorly designed packets are ignored by urbane Chinese women, who huddle around the glossy boxes of the imports.
Mr. Zhu added, ''Some women even buy a cosmetic just because it has foreign words on the package.''
