
Groups planning to visit China, ranging from a high school chorus in the Bronx to a group of specialists on the American Presidency, have postponed their trips as a result of the violent crackdown in Beijing.
At the same time, relatives and friends of Americans traveling in Beijing reported incidents of violence and told of concerns about getting out of China. 
Andre Smith, the 17-year-old son of a couple visiting China, said his parents had spent a harrowing 12 hours with Chinese soldiers who prodded them with guns and sticks.
The couple, Jill Suitor and Scott Feld of Setauket, L.I., left for vacation a week ago. 
Their son said they were seized by soldiers as the firing in Tiananmen Square began.
Marjorie Leopold of Brooklyn said she had spoken to American friends in Beijing who were frustrated about not being able to get out of the country. 
She said that her friends, a couple who have been in China for almost a year as teachers at the Beijing Institute of Tourism, were afraid to leave a hotel to get to the airport. 
''The State Department has not done anything to help them out,'' Ms. Leopold said.
 
Declined to Heed the Warnings
State Department advisories warning against travel to China have been in effect since martial law was declared two weeks ago, but many planning to travel there declined to heed the warnings until the events of the last few days unfolded.
''They held out until shots were fired,'' said Susan Rhodes, assistant director of the U.S.-China Arts Exchange, a private group that was working with the chorus, the Horace Mann School Glee Club in the Riverdale section of the Bronx. 
The glee club of about 40 singers had planned to leave for Beijing on June 15, but on Saturday decided to postpone the trip.
The group on the American Presidency was to leave for Beijing on June 29. 
It was to hold talks with Chinese Communist Party members about how transitions from one American administration to another are made. 
The trip was also called off Saturday.
''It seemed ludicrous for us to be talking about our presidential succession process while people are getting shot on the street fighting for their own government change,'' said Jan Berris, vice president of the National Committee on U.S.-China Relations, the organizer of the group.
An estimated 150,000 to 200,000 Americans visit China each year and about 500 American students are currently studying in Chinese universities.
Jim May, executive vice president of CET, a Boston tour operator that specializes in China study programs, said that the departure of two groups scheduled to leave tomorrow had also been postponed.
Like others organizing tours, Mr. May emphasized that the programs were being postponed rather than canceled.
