
Four blue balloons flew over the martyrs' monument in Tiananmen Square on Friday morning, apparently intended to promote a mood of celebration about the ''quelling of the counterrevolutionary disturbance'' that the propaganda machine has been proclaiming.
A few hundred school children could be glimpsed from a distance seated in ranks in front of the monument. 
They had to be viewed from a distance because the entire area was sealed off by rows of soldiers.
The schoolchildren's gathering -the young people were all Young Pioneers, wearing knotted red scarves and giving salutes - was the second item on the national evening news, presented as yet another indication of the gathering support for the Government's action against the democracy movement.
And yet by Chinese standards it was a strangely tepid and small show of support, one that seemed created largely for the television cameras. 
Previous national crises have been followed by supposedly spontaneous exhibitions of popular approval for the Government and party.
When the radical faction known as the Gang of Four was ousted in 1976, for example, hundreds of thousands paraded through the square beating drums and marching under red banners. 
Similar mass shows of support had been organized a few months before when the same Gang of Four suppressed the first genuine protest demonstration to take place in Beijing, an episode known as the Tiananmen Incident.
Today, the sight of a few hundred schoolchildren raised the question of why the approach this time has been different. 
The presence of the armed soldiers on the border of the square, and those who patrol the streets at night, provided a possible answer.
In the view of many here, the Government is not at all confident, given the mood of the people, that a mass demonstration at Tiananmen could be prevented from turning into a renewed mass protest.
 
A Voice Breaks Through
In fact, the mood of the people is difficult to gauge in this country where there are no votes and no opinion polls, only articles in newspaper and constant broadcasts on television portraying the recent protest movement as a disturbance supported only by a ''very small number of people.''
Occasionally though, someone speaks.
''Look at them in there,'' said a 40-year-old man, referring to the lines of soldiers.
''The old hundred surnames are oppressed by them,'' he said, using the common term, laobaixing, for the common people. 
''My boss is angry at me because I'm trying to get out of work early. 
Why?
Because if you go home after dark the soldiers are always delaying you, examining your identity papers, asking questions. 
It's a nuisance.''
Unprompted, the man, who spoke in the accent of a Beijing native, went on: ''You know, they are saying on television that nobody was killed here, nobody injured. 
If they didn't kill anybody, how do you explain that the people got so angry that they burned hundreds of tanks and attacked soldiers with their bare hands?''
''The slogan not so long ago was 'Seek truth from facts,' '' he said. 
The phrase, which accompanied the return to power of Deng Xiaoping, China's most powerful figure, has for many years been a symbol of policies of moderation, particularly after the heavily doctrinaire last years of Mao Zedong.
''That's a joke,'' the man said. 
''There are no facts in what the Government is saying, so how can you seek the truth there?''
 
Shedding Some Light
The man's comments shed some light on one of the burning questions of the day: Do the Chinese people, inundated by propaganda, believe the official version?
On Friday, Yuan Mu, the official spokesman of the State Council, was interviewed on American television. 
Mr. Yuan's answers, repeating the claim that nobody was killed or injured at Tiananmen, came as no surprise.
But the fact that the interview, which was broadcast twice here, was seen on Chinese television seemed satisfying to people in Beijing.
A man encountered outside a barbershop today was asked whether the Chinese people believed Mr. Yuan's contentions.
''Maybe the people in Inner Mongolia believe them,'' he said. 
''And there are some people in Beijing, especially older people, old Communist Party members, who believe that what the army did was correct. 
But in Beijing not a single person believes the army did not kill or wound a large number of people.''
 
Persuasion by Television
So many people have been shown on television supporting the Government's version that the list amounts to a kind of who's who - except that conspicuously missing are all of the well-known intellectuals, who in years past came up with plans for political and economic reform.
The evening news reports have shown 21 professors from Beijing University expressing gratitude to the army for crushing the protests. 
Fei Xiaotung has also been named by news reports as supporting the use of troops. 
Mr. Fei, who went to school in the United States in the 1930's, is one of China's best-known sociologists. 
During the Cultural Revolution he was attacked by Red Guards, and, afterward, told foreigners visiting the country that he renounced his entire body of work.
The technique of the television news is an old one here. 
It is designed to give the impression of a groundswell of support among the people. 
And so, a couple of days ago, a meeting of 137 members of China's officially recognized national minority groups was shown on television. 
They too were supporting the decision to use the army to crush the protest movement.
Among them was the Imam An Shiwei, a member of the Hui minority, identified as a leader of the Beijing mosque. 
There was a Tibetan dressed in saffron robes and identified as Na Cang, a living buddha.
