
Administration officials say the Chinese Army put party loyalty and internal stabilityI above all else when it fired on unarmed civilians around Tiananmen Square earlier this month. 
But specialists on the Chinese Army say that in doing so, it created problems for itself that will take a long time to solve.
According to one official, the aging leadership felt threatened by the student demonstrations and held the army to its pledge of loyalty to the Communist Party, when it imposed martial law and ordered the army to break up the demonstrations.
Despite hesitation and misgivings by Chinese officers of every rank, the army felt compelled to carry out its orders, the official said. 
A former American defense attache to China said Chinese soldiers have been required to swear allegiance to the party since 1982.
Blow to Modernization
But according to Paul Godwin, of the National Defense University in Washington, the army paid a price for its heavyhandedness. 
''The legitimacy of the army was discredited in the eyes of the Chinese people, and the army's goal of becoming an apolitical and modernized, professional army was dealt a serious blow,'' he said. 
Most Washington-based analysts interviewed agreed with this assessment.
But while these specialists agree on the motivation for the army's actions and its immediate consequences, they are uncertain about what happens next. 
Harry Harding of the Brookings Institution doubts whether the Chinese military leaders themselves know. 
''There is great turmoil within the army over what happened, what it means and where things are going,'' he said.
Experts in and out of government say they still do not know what went on within the army during the days leading up to the crackdown on the pro-democracy demonstrators. 
The Chinese Army appeared initially split over how to deal with the demonstrators. 
A Bush Administration official said that elements of warlordism and of special personal loyalties exist among Chinese Army leaders and their units identify with specific party leaders.
 
Splits Were Papered Over
This divided loyalty led to early speculation that civil war might erupt between factions favoring moderation and those committed to crushing the demonstrations. 
''If the top political leadership openly split, the army would have followed suit,'' the official said.
While some units refused to use force, in the end they did not oppose those who did, despite some minor skirmishing between different units.
According to Kenneth Lieberthal, a China expert at the University of Michigan, who recently returned from China, senior leaders in the army are cautious and conservative men and while many of them them shared the views of the students, he said, domestic disorder was more abhorrent to them than suppression of the pro-democracy movement. 
Mr. Lieberthal did not believe that Deng Xiaoping and other senior leaders of the party were overly concerned by the domestic and international reaction to the crackdown.
It is generally accepted that fundamental differences still exist within the Chinese officer corps over the role of the army in putting down the demonstrators. 
Experts agree that there is little likelihood of civil war, but they say that the situation is still too confused to tell if the army will seek a greater role in determining the future political leadership of the nation or whether it will want only to return to the barracks.
 
Younger and Better Educated
According to Mr. Lieberthal, any analysis of current events is also difficult because the Chinese Army is in transition. 
''Army leadership is shifting from those brought up in the Maoist tradition of a loyal, unquestioning peasant army to a younger generation of better educated, urbanized officers, who assert themselves.''
How much they will assert themselves in the near future is still unclear, he said.
Specialists on China believe that all factions of the army are concerned about the prospects now for military modernization. 
The Chinese Army was well along the road to modernization and was developing strong professional ties with the United States military when it was called upon to crush the demonstrations. 
Anticipated American arms sales to the Chinese this year amounted to about $625 million.
The United States was also providing technical assistance and professional training to all branches of the army. 
All this came to an end when President Bush cut off arms sales and military-to-military contacts on June 5 as a result of the Tiananmen Square massacre.
Most experts believe that it will take years before the modernization program gets back on track. 
This, they say, will increase the substantial discontent with China's aging leaders that already exists in the army.
According to the experts, it will also take a long time for the army to recover its pride and restore its reputation in the eyes of the Chinese people, who, since the days of Mao Zedong, have had a close association with the People's Liberation Army. 
The fact that the army fired on Chinese citizens not only shocked the Chinese people but also large segments of the army, according to Mr. Lieberthal.
