
As the crackle of automatic weapons filled the air today on the Avenue of Eternal Peace, tens of thousands of Beijing residents, even elderly men and women, rushed out to see what they could do to turn back the troops.
''The citizens have gone crazy,'' said a driver watching as a tank plowed its way down the main thoroughfare. 
''They throw themselves in front of the tank, and only when they see it won't stop, they scatter.''
The driver himself was shaken by what he had seen: A tank had rammed into an army truck used as a barricade. 
As the truck turned over, it crushed a man to death. 
Elsewhere, he had seen three bloodied bodies lying in the street. 
Several soldiers still standing in their trucks were crying.
Students and workers threw beer bottles, gasoline bombs, lead pipes, whatever they could find, at the tanks and armed personnel trucks, which nevertheless continued rumbling down the avenue. 
One truck drove back and forth along the east side of the Changan Avenue, as the Avenue of Eternal Peace is known in Chinese, and did not stop when people stood in its path.
Amazement had already turned to fear and defiance earlier in the evening as citizens saw the military convoys entering the city. 
Some troops from other provinces practically paraded their AK-47 rifles as they stood in their trucks, stranded by the human blockades that had formed around the trucks.
By dark, tensions had soared throughout the city. 
Hundreds of thousands of people were impelled outdoors by their disbelief and anger, yet brought back to their homes by fear of the violence. 
The sound of tanks whizzing by and reports of open firing fanned their fears.
''You beasts!
You beasts!'' shouted the people at the troops.
 
'We Have to Obey Orders'
Around a convoy of about 45 military trucks in the eastern part of the city, people pushed and shoved their way to the troops, shouting and urging them to consider their role as fellow citizens. 
But the sympathy that had characterized the troops last week was gone; the soldiers seemed to have a certain resolve.
''Will you shoot at us if they order you to?'' was a question asked by many of the people surrounding the truck. 
The soldiers gave weak assurances to the people that they would not fire, but they also admitted that they had to follow orders.
''We have to obey orders because we are soldiers,'' said one uniformed trooper who was driving a truck. 
''Otherwise, we will be punished. 
In any case, there's no way they will order us to shoot the people.''
His platoon commander was firm. 
''We don't fear being beaten by you people,'' he said as he climbed out of the truck. 
''We just fear that our guns will be taken and then we will have chaos.''
Everywhere in the vicinity of the convoy was the sound of hissing, as people let out the air from the tires of as many trucks as they could.
''Why do you have guns?'' shouted one man.
''A man is not a soldier without his gun, is he?'' came the reply of a soldier carrying an Ak-47 automatic rifle.
 
Citizens Plead With Soldiers
An old man took up the cause. 
''I tell you, there will be no good end for you if you follow your order loyally,'' he screamed as though his life depended upon it. 
''You have parents, you have brothers and sisters. 
You should not beat your fellow citizens under any circumstances.''
The nearly crazed citizens were climbing onto the trucks, trying to intimidate the soldier. 
But everywhere in the vicinity, anger was mixed with horror as the people saw how the soldiers handled their rifles and watched as several tanks pulled up.
''Is this the way Li Peng shows how martial law protects the people?'' said an old man sitting on a rail.
Another young man said, ''When they shoot with real bullets, it will be doomsday.''
Only hours later did the troops open fire.
In the afternoon, the scene near the walled-in Communist Party compound, where about 30 tear-gas bombs were released, had been the first site of violence. 
But now that seemed tame. 
A 20-minute conflict between 300 to 400 riot policemen and hundreds of citizens seemed to have galvanized the citizens. 
They began to believe that the Government was willing to use force - rubber bullets, broken bricks, truncheons - against the people.
 
Chaotic Swirl of People
''I couldn't keep my eyes open because of the dense tear gas,'' said Lu Baochun, a 26-year-old assistant engineer. 
''It was the troops that first used bricks and tiles to attack, and the citizens fought back.''
Mr. Lu had rushed back out to the scene, a chaotic swirl of thousands of people darting back and forth inspecting broken bricks and glass and examining the white powder-like splotches on the street apparently from the tear gas.
''When I went into the house of a nearby citizen to wash my eyes with fresh water, I saw several children lying on their stomachs on a bed,'' said Mr. Lu, whose own face and neck were reddened from the gas. 
''They had wet towels covering their mouths, and an old woman was beside them weeping.''
He was standing at the Communist Party headquarters shouting with rage now at the two-dozen military troops with long truncheons and green helmets, sweating in their heavy green uniforms under the pelting sun.
Some citizens gathered in small huddles around people they thought had been witnesses to the attack. 
Others crowded together discussing the event, many apprehensive about how far the Government would go.
''They are simply ruffians and bandits,'' said a young well-dressed woman who had gotten caught in the cross-fire of bricks and stones as she was on her way to the office. 
''They bit people just like mad dogs.''
A Chinese journalist was trying to comfort her. 
''We are shocked,'' he said. 
''We thought that this kind of thing only happened during the reign of the corrupt Government of the Kuomintang. 
Yet this happened in our People's Republic. 
The troops and the police, they are supposed to be our brothers.''
