
Twelve days after soldiers machine-gunned civilians on the streets, the Government seems to have willed the capital back to normal life, with buses and bicycles rolling down streets and markets filled with the latest harvest of watermelons.
But beneath a surface of calm and behind the official story about the events of the June 4 massacre, there are small reminders that indicate it may take some time for a more profound peacefulness to settle on the capital.
''Martial law has had a drastic effect on our business,'' said a clothing vendor who awoke from an afternoon nap in front of his stall. 
''The Chinese come out only for work. 
A lot of people don't dare browse about the streets anymore.''
Few Customers Now
A few weeks ago, foreign tourists would have been wandering among the stalls, paying hefty prices for the clothing. 
But now foreigners are very scarce, since the evacuation ordered by many embassies.
''We must pay 300 yuan in taxes every month'' - about $80 - ''but because of martial law, we aren't making any money,'' the vendor complained bitterly. 
''How can we pay so much tax?''
Still, life is gradually returning to the way it was before. 
Ten or twelve days ago, stray bullets kept pedestrians off the streets, but now the main thoroughfares in the capital have begun to fill up again with cars and people.
There are other signs that daily life is almost normal: A crowd has gathered around one stall where a pretty woman in a rather revealing yellow dress is showing off tablecloths that she is trying to sell. 
A man dashes across Changan Avenue, the Avenue of Eternal Peace, his baby nearly spilling from his arms as a car passes by. 
Bicycles jam up at intersections, waiting for lights to turn green or for pedestrians to cross. 
Lines form at bus stops during rush hour, with people jockeying for the spot where the bus will open its doors.
Yet, for a city of about 10 million people, the streets are practically empty, the crowds are small, the traffic is too orderly. 
During a three-hour tour around the capital, only five foreigners were spotted on the streets - a pointed reminder that the capital is short of tourists, who normally pour out of their air-conditioned buses into popular sites like the Forbidden City or the Mao Zedong Mausoleum.
Now only troops march out of the Forbidden City, the old palace built in the early 15th century. 
The Mao Mausoleum is off limits to passers-by. 
More than 200 troops stand guard on Tiananmen Square, where students camped out until June 4 when they were forced out by soldiers who marched into the center of the city firing their submachine guns at crowds of demonstrators.
In places along the Avenue of Eternal Peace, where most of the shooting took place, soldiers are stationed about 10 feet apart, and at major intersections, sometimes 10 soldiers with submachine guns guard a single corner.
At many large crossroads, in fact, traffic officers direct what is normally a whirl of cars, buses, pedestrians and bicycles. 
Now, however, bicycles wait, almost too passively, at the street corners to be told when they may proceed.
People do not seem to push their way onto buses, many of which are surprisingly empty at rush hour. 
And their are fewer cars than normal on the streets.
''No one comes out,'' a bystander said sarcastically. 
''All the officials are inside studying the speech of senior leader Deng Xiaoping.''
The Avenue of Eternal Peace is bumpy, because of the tread marks left by tanks and armored personnel carriers. 
The lanes on many streets have been freshly painted white, and many dividers that had been damaged by tanks still have not been replaced.
 
Taxi Driver's Lament
There are almost no taxis on the streets, but there are even fewer people seeking rides. 
One taxi driver was disappointed this morning when a foreign visitor who emerged with his suitcases only wanted to change hotels. 
When the driver found that he was not going to be taking his passenger to the airport, he pleaded with the foreigner to hire the cab for the entire day.
''There's no sense in my waiting around at the hotel for a fare because I won't get one for another five hours,'' he complained.
A sports stadium has been taken over by thousands of soldiers. 
During the heat of the afternoon, crowds of the troops, all in dress uniforms, tried to rest under the shade of trees, and they played cards or just chatted.
''Long live the Communist Party,'' read one banner that hung outside a building. 
Just two weeks ago, pro-democracy posters seemed to hang on every major lamppost and public wall space. 
Now, throughout the city, official red banners with messages favorable to the Government hang outside hotels or other large buildings.
At Beijing University, the banners of mourning from last week have been torn down, as have all the pro-democracy posters that went up more than two months ago when the former Communist Party leader, Hu Yaobang, died on April 15. 
The triangle where students gathered to read posters and listen to broadcasts over a loudspeaker is empty. 
All classes have been canceled, and students have gone home for a lengthened summer vacation.
Authorities have transformed several spots in the city into memorials for soldiers, who are hailed for sacrificing their lives to fight the ''counterrevolutionary rebellion.''
A bridge in Chongwenmen district has been turned into a martyr's shrine to commemorate a soldier whom the Government said was beaten, thrown off the bridge, hanged and burned. 
Civilians have said that the soldier was killed after shooting a child to death.
 
87 Colorful Wreaths
Now, the bridge overflows with 87 colorful wreaths sent by large state enterprises and military units. 
In the center of the bridge, one work group set up a small offering of fruit and bread, tea leaves, cigarettes and rice wine.
Yet, if the shrine is to honor the soldier's death, it also inspires fear.
Several soldiers carrying AK-47 submachine guns patrol the bridge, as a platoon commander records the names of the work groups that have sent wreaths. 
Plainclothes Government workers wearing red armbands like badges of honor scrutinize the handful of people who come to the bridge.
Unlike the television scenes where weeping citizens come to lay their wreaths, many now seem to come out of curiosity, and they rarely utter a word as they examine the messages on the wreath.
Wreaths adorning an overpass from which soldiers were hanged during the recent violence in China are among the reminders of strife and confusion that penetrate the veneer of calm in Beijing (Agence France-Presse); soldiers from one of the units still occupying Tiananmen Square in Beijing jogging in formation yesterday (Reuters); map of Beijing (pg. 
4)
