
The future of student- and teacher-exchange programs that have brought tens of thousands of Chinese to the United States and sent smaller numbers of Americans to China has been thrown into doubt by the events in China.
American colleges and universities are not sure how many Chinese students will be allowed to travel here for classes in September, and they do not know how many American students will be granted visas by the Chinese Government to study in China.
The American Field Service, the largest of 49 student-exchange programs, last week suspended plans to send 130 teachers from the United States and several other countries to China this summer and is unsure about the fate of larger exchange programs starting in September that would bring Chinese teachers here. 
Administrators of those programs fret that what has taken them years to carefully build up may have been torn down by the unrest.
Many of the 40,000 Chinese students already here are afraid to travel to China, even to visit their families. 
Many of those who have completed their studies are scrambling for jobs and fellowships that would extend their stays here.
''It is not possible for Chinese students to go back,'' said Li Shinei, 31 years old, a graduate student in physics at New York University. 
''They could be killed. 
Even if you didn't do anything, didn't demonstrate, if you came from the United States you know about the massacre.''
Many Chinese students have lost their incentive to return. 
Two years ago, Xia Kangsen of Wuhan in China chose to study law at New York University in the hope of using what he learned to improve his homeland's legal system. 
Now he wonders if his efforts were pointless.
 
Disillusionment With Beijing
''After the massacre and bloodshed, and the following roundup there, I doubt that what I learned here will be badly needed and useful in that country in the near future,'' he said.
Students say they are disillusioned with a Government that they say broke its own laws in shooting student protesters and then used propaganda techniques to conceal what happened.
''Some people are losing confidence in the future of China,'' said Wang Ran, a student at Macalester College in Minnesota.
 
Ties to High-Ranking Officials
''Most of the Chinese students here realize we have no hope in the current Government,'' said Mr. Li, who works as a teaching assistant. 
''They are not the Government of the people.''
Many students are children or grandchildren of high-ranking officials, intellectuals and businessmen who are taking advantage of educational programs not available in China. 
At least one Chinese student here is the daughter of a member of China's Politburo.
Qiao Xiao Xi has been a postdoctoral student at Baylor College of Medicine since July. 
Her father, Qiao Shi, has been rumored as a likely candidate for general secretary of the Communist Party. 
Ron Ozio, a spokesman for Baylor, said Miss Qiao has remained at the school even after the unrest. 
She declined to be interviewed.
Kui Xu, a 28-year-old graduate student in industrial engineering at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst, is a granddaughter of the Hu Yaobang, the late Communist Party general secretary whose death April 15 helped set off the Chinese student protests. 
She took part in a rally June 9 in nearby Northampton to protest the military crackdown.
 
Confusion on Exchanges
The 49 organizations that handle direct exchange programs and the college offices that deal with thousands of Chinese students who come here on their own seem uncertain and confused. 
Programs that had been meticulously established in a decade of wider freedom in China have unraveled.
Officials at the American Field Service are unsure of what to tell 61 Chinese high school teachers who have spent a year here and are due to leave Thursday for China. 
For now, the teachers have been advised to return home, but the large-scale arrests of dissidents have stirred concern about the teachers' safety.
''What's taken us a good five or six years to develop has been undone in a matter of five or six days,'' said Scott Ramey, a spokesman for the service. 
''But we don't see that as permanent. 
We are keeping our ties open with the Chinese Government.''
There are 29,000 Chinese students studying at accredited American colleges and universities - the largest contingent from any country - and more than 10,000 Chinese who are visiting scholars or students at unaccredited universities.
 
Fear of Reprisals
Most are clustered in graduate science and engineering departments at leading research universities, who generally finance the Chinese students' education. 
Some students receive financing from the Chinese or United States Governments; there are, for example, 61 Chinese here with Federally-financed Fulbright scholarships.
Several Chinese students have taken part in demonstrations in the United States in support of student protesters in Tiananmen Square, and they say they are now afraid of reprisals. 
Others like Mr. Wang have been using facsimile machines to send American news articles and photographs to Chinese companies and agencies so that people in China can learn what occurred in Beijing in recent weeks.
All the students seemed anxious about the welfare of parents, brothers and sisters, and many have been unable to find out how their relatives are doing. 
Few Chinese residents have telephones in their homes, and so most overseas calls must be made to workplaces, many of which have been closed during the unrest.
This academic year there were more than 1,000 Americans students enrolled in Chinese universities, with most studying Chinese language and culture. 
Almost all have returned home, according to Peggy Blumenthal, vice president for educational services at the Institute of International Education, which operates the Fulbright program and keeps tallies of foreign students here.
 
'The Situation is Chaotic'
The situation of another 1,000 American students who are scheduled to travel to China in the next academic year is confused. 
Many were relying on Chinese support for tuition and living expenses. 
Princeton University annually sends 40 of its graduates to China through a program called Princeton in Asia, but officials do not know what will happen to the group scheduled to leave in September.
''As far as the future of the program, it's kind of an amorphous situation,'' said Justin Harmon, a spokesman for Princeton. 
''A lot depends on what Chinese decide to do, whether they will issue visas. 
We're watching and waiting.''
The program, he said, may continue ''if the Chinese decided they wanted to have students back and the political situation was conducive.''
For Chinese students here, Ms. Blumenthal said, ''the situation is chaotic.''
Some Chinese students who obtained passports before the recent unrest are arriving in the United States, she said. 
But, she said, ''We don't know what will happen to those who have not gotten passports and are uncertain about the flow.''
If more Chinese students come, American campuses may find themselves overtaxed by furnishing additional support for Chinese students extending their stays while trying to muster assistance for a new wave of incoming students.
 
Physics and Math Scholars
A pivotal factor is the kind of visas the Chinese students have. 
A J-1 visa requires students to return to the home country after completing their studies. 
An F-1 visa permits students to remain here and apply for changes in visa status without having to leave. 
One measure of relief has been the Bush Administration's recent decision to extend expiring visas for one year until June 5, 1990.
Since 1979, when Communist China first permitted students to study in the United States, 73,000 students and scholars have studied here, according to Ms. Blumenthal. About two-thirds of those, she said, have held J-1 visas.
Ms. Blumenthal said most schools are eager to support Chinese students, who are among their strongest scholars in subjects like physics and math. 
Richard B. Tudisco, acting director of Columbia University's international students office, said he hoped the State Department would allow students whose visas are expiring to work so that they can support themselves.
What may be lost because of the disarray, supporters of the programs said they feared, is precisely the firsthand knowledge and experience that taught Chinese students about America and Americans about China. 
Such experiences have changed many students irrevocably.
''I feel free everywhere,'' said Mr. Xia of New York University. 
''I have never been restricted. 
I have never been forced to tell the Government, to tell the party what I'm doing.''
''It certainly will be a great loss,'' said Hu Sen, 26, a graduate student in mathematics at Princeton. 
''Americans and Chinese have learned a lot from the other country, what really the other country is. 
It's very difficult to establish a democratic system but here in the United States we really learned the principles of democracy.''
Xia Kangsen, a law student who hoped to return to China to help improve the legal system. 
''After the massacre and bloodshed,'' he said, ''I doubt that what I learned here will be badly needed'' (The New York Times/Marilynn K. Yee)
