
Administration officials today dismissed China's allegations that Washington was interfering in Beijing's internal affairs by harboring two Chinese dissidents, and the Speaker of the House declared that Washington should consider further sanctions if the Chinese crackdown on the pro-democracy movement continues.
Speaking of the death sentences handed down Saturday by the Chinese Government to eight pro-democracy demonstrators, and Beijing's denial that its army opened fire on students in Tiananmen Square, the Speaker of the House, Thomas S. Foley, told the NBC News program ''Meet The Press'': ''There are people who feel we ought to speak out more loudly and more clearly. 
I think the President probably needs to do that.
''We are outraged as a country about the death sentences, about the suppression, and about the enormous big lie that the Chinese Government is attempting to tell about this story.''
Mr. Foley, Democrat of Washington State, added that the Administration should consider further actions against Beijing ''if matters turn toward the worse, as they apparently are doing.''
 
Doubts of a Quick Resolution
Administration officials said that hopes have faded for a quick resolution to the case of the Chinese dissident Fang Lizhi and his wife, Li Shuxian, who have been in the United States Embassy in Beijing since June 4. 
Washington had suggested to the Beijing authorities that the couple be allowed safe passage to a neutral third country, but given the cool Chinese attitude, that is no longer a ''live option,'' and, as a result, the couple could find themselves staying in the embassy for a while, the officials said.
After several days in which the Chinese authorities seemed to be playing down the Fang affair, Beijing has once again turned up its polemics, with the official People's Daily newspaper for the first time accusing the United States today of breaking Chinese and international law by harboring the couple. 
The official New China News Agency also labeled as ''ridiculous'' recent White House condemnations of Beijing's military crackdown.
Reacting to these latest broadsides from Beijing, the State Department spokeswoman, Margaret D. Tutwiler, said, ''In 200 years, the United States Government has never shied away from speaking out for basic human rights, freedom of speech, freedom of association and freedom of the press.''
Administration officials say they now expect that it will be six months to two years before the situation in China stabilizes enough to get a clear picture of where the country is headed -whether it will continue on a course toward greater repression or return to its previous reform-oriented, open-door policy.
 
The Polish Example
Administration officials say they are hoping that events unfolding in China today will follow the same cycle as in Poland after the emergence of the Solidarity trade union. 
Solidarity began as a grass-roots pro-democracy movement, was suppressed by martial law in 1981, but eventually emerged in a more powerful and now officially sanctioned form several years later after the Communist authorities in Warsaw found that they simply could not rule, or maintain a sufficient level of economic development, without sharing power.
For now, the Bush Administration has decided to continue its low-key, wait-and-see approach toward Beijing.
The Chinese authorities ''are now as isolated in world affairs in some respects as they were eight to 10 years ago before their open-door policy began,'' said Michel Oksenberg, a China specialist at the University of Michigan who formerly worked on the National Security Council under President Jimmy Carter. 
''The hope is that once they face up to that fact, it will temper their behavior internally and they will recommit themselves to policies of economic and political reform. 
Having mass executions, though, is no way to begin.''
