
Tens of thousands of Chinese troops retook the center of the capital early this morning from pro-democracy protesters, killing scores of students and workers and wounding hundreds more as they fired submachine guns at crowds of people who tried to resist.
Troops marched along the main roads surrounding central Tiananmen Square, sometimes firing in the air and sometimes firing directly at crowds of men and women who refused to move out of the way.
Early this morning, the troops finally cleared the square after first sweeping the area around it. 
Several thousand students who had remained on the square throughout the shooting left peacefully, still waving the banners of their universities. 
Several armed personnel carriers ran over their tents and destroyed the encampment.
Casualties Reports Sketchy
Reports on the number of dead were sketchy. 
Three Beijing hospitals reported receiving at least 68 corpses of civilians and said many others had not been picked up from the scene. 
Four other hospitals said they had received bodies of civilians but declined to disclose how many. 
Students said, however, that at least 500 people may have been killed in the crackdown.
Most of the dead had been shot, but some had been run over by armored personnel carriers that forced their way through barricades erected by local residents.
The official news programs this morning reported that the People's Liberation Army had crushed a ''counter-revolutionary rebellion'' in the capital. 
They said that more than 1,000 police and troops had been injured and some killed, and that civilians had been killed, but did not give details.
[President Bush called for an end to the violence. 
''I deeply deplore the decision to use force against peaceful demonstrators,'' he said. 
Page 20.]
Changan Avenue, or the Avenue of Eternal Peace, Beijing's main east-west thoroughfare, echoed with screams this morning as young people carried the bodies of their friends away from the front lines. 
The dead or seriously wounded were heaped on the backs of bicycles or tricycle rickshaws and supported by friends who rushed through the crowds, sometimes sobbing as they ran.
The avenue was lit by the glow of several trucks and two armed personnel carriers that students and workers set afire, and bullets swooshed overhead or glanced off buildings. 
The air crackled almost constantly with gunfire and tear gas grenades.
 
'General Strike!'
''General strike!'' people roared, in bitterness and outrage, as they ran from Tiananmen Square, which pro-democracy demonstrators had occupied for three weeks. 
''General Strike!''
While hundreds of thousands of people had turned out to the streets Saturday and early today to show support for the democracy movement, it was not clear if the call for a general strike would be successful. 
The Government had been fearful that a crackdown on the movement would lead to strikes, but its willingness to shoot students suggested that it was also capable of putting considerable pressure on workers to stay on the job.
The morning radio news program reported that it would be ''very difficult'' to hold a meeting of the National People's Congress standing committee as scheduled. 
The committee, which had been scheduled to meet June 20, has the power to revoke martial law and oversee the Government, and many members of the panel are known to be deeply upset by the crackdown.
The announcement by the Beijing news program suggested that Prime Minister Li Peng, who is backed by hard-liners in the Communist Party, was still on top in his power struggle for control of the Chinese leadership. 
The violent suppression of the student movement also suggested that for now, the hard-liners are firmly in control, and that those who favor conciliation, like party leader Zhao Ziyang, at least temporarily have little influence on policy.
It was too early to tell if the crackdown would be followed by arrests of student leaders, intellectuals who have been critical of the Party, or members of Mr. Zhao's faction. 
Blacklists have been widely rumored, and many people have been worried about the possibility of arrest.
Students and workers tried to resist the crackdown, and destroyed at least 16 trucks and 2 armored personnel carriers. 
Scores of students and workers ran alongside the personnel carriers, hurling concrete blocks and wooden staves into the treads until they ground to a halt. 
They then threw firebombs at one until it caught fire, and set the other alight after first covering it with blankets soaked in gasoline.
The drivers escaped, but were beaten by students. 
A young American man, who could not be immediately identified, was also beaten by the crowd after he tried to intervene and protect one of the drivers.
 
Many Troops Reported Hurt
Clutching iron pipes and stones, groups of students periodically advanced toward the soldiers. 
Some threw bricks and firebombs at the lines of soldiers, apparently wounding many of them.
Many of those killed were throwing bricks at the soldiers, but others were simply watching passively or standing at barricades when soldiers fired directly at them.
Two groups of young people commandeered city buses to attack the troops. 
About 10 people were in each bus, and they held firebombs or sticks in their hands as they drove toward lines of armored personnel carriers and troops. 
Teen-age boys, with scarves wrapped around their mouths to protect themselves from tear gas, were behind the steering wheels and gunned the engines as they weaved around the debris to approach the troops.
The first bus was soon stopped by machine-gun fire, and only one person - a young man who jumped out of a back window and ran away - was seen getting out. 
Gunfire also stopped the second bus, and it quickly caught fire, perhaps ignited by the firebomb of someone inside. 
No one appeared to escape.
 
Casualty Figures in Doubt
It was also impossible to determine how many civilians had been killed or injured. 
Beijing Fuxing Hospital, 3.3 miles to the west of Tiananmen Square, reported more than 38 deaths and more than 100 wounded, and said that many more bodies had yet to be taken to its morgue. 
A doctor at the Beijing Union Medical College Hospital, two miles northeast of the square, reported 17 deaths. 
Beijing Tongren Hospital, one mile southeast of the square, reported 13 deaths and more than 100 critically wounded.
''As doctors, we often see deaths,'' said a doctor at the Tongren Hospital. 
''But we've never seen such a tragedy like this. 
Every room in the hospital is covered with blood. 
We are terribly short of blood, but citizens are lining up outside to give blood.''
Four other hospitals also reported receiving bodies, but refused to say how many.
In addition, this reporter saw five people killed by gunfire and many more wounded on the east side of the square. 
Witnesses described at least six more people who had been run over by armored personnel carriers, and about 25 more who had been shot to death in the area. 
It was not known how many bodies remained on the square or how many people had been killed in other parts of the capital.
It was unclear whether the violence would mark the extinction of the seven-week-old democracy movement, or would prompt a new phase in the uprising, like a general strike. 
The violence in the capital ended a period of remarkable restraint by both sides, and seemed certain to arouse new bitterness and antagonism among both ordinary people and Communist Party officials for the Government of Prime Minister Li Peng.
 
'Maybe We'll Fail Today'
''Our Government is already done with,'' said a young worker who held a rock in his hand, as he gazed at the army forces across Tiananmen Square. 
''Nothing can show more clearly that it does not represent the people.''
Another young man, an art student, was nearly incoherent with grief and anger as he watched the body of student being carted away, his head blown away by bullets.
''Maybe we'll fail today,'' he said. 
''Maybe we'll fail tomorrow. 
But someday we'll succeed. 
It's a historical inevitability.''
On Saturday the police had used tear gas and beat dozens of demonstrators near the Communist Party headquarters in Zhongnanhai, while soldiers and workers hurled bricks at each other behind the Great Hall of the People. 
Dozens of people were wounded, but exact numbers could not be confirmed.
It appeared to be the first use of tear gas ever in the Chinese capital, and the violence seemed to radicalize the crowds that filled Tiananmen Square and Changan Avenue in the center of the city. 
The clashes also appeared to contribute to the public bitterness against the Government of Prime Minister Li.
The violence on both sides seemed to mark a milestone in the democracy movement, and the streets in the center of the city were a kaleidescope of scenes rarely if ever seen in the Chinese capital: furious crowds smashed and overturned army vehicles in front of Zhongnanhai, and then stoned the Great Hall of the People; grim-faced young soldiers clutching submachine guns tried to push their way through thick crowds of demonstrators near the Beijing train station; and the police charged a crowd near Zhongnanhai and used truncheons to beat men and women disabled by tear gas.
 
A Changing View of the Army
''In 1949, we welcomed the army into Beijing,'' said an old man on the Jianguomenwai bridge, referring to the crowds who hailed the arrival of Communist troops at the end of the Communist revolution. 
Then he waved toward a line of 50 army trucks that were blocked in a sea of more than 10,000 angry men and women, and added, ''Now we're fighting to keep them out.''
Most Chinese seemed convinced that the tanks and troops had been ordered into the city to crush the pro-democracy demonstrations once and for all. 
The immediate result of the first clashes was to revitalize the pro-democracy movement, which had been losing momentum over the last 10 days, and to erase the sense that life in the capital was returning to normal. 
But the use of tanks and guns came later,and it was not clear if they would succeed in ending the movement or would lead to such measures as a general strike.
The tension was exacerbated by an extraordinary announcement on television Saturday night, ordering citizens to ''stay at home to protect your lives.''
In particular, the announcement ordered people to stay off the streets and away from Tiananmen Square.
 
Warnings of Coming Crackdown
''The situation in Beijing at present is very serious,'' the Government warned in another urgent notice read on television. 
''A handful of ruffians are wantonly making rumors to instigate the masses to openly insult, denounce, beat and kidnap soldiers in the People's Liberation Army, to seize arms, surround and block Zhongnanhai, attack the Great Hall of the People, and attempt to gather together various forces. 
More serious riots can occur at any time.''
There were some reports that the Communist Party's ruling Politburo had met Friday and given the Beijing municipality the authority to clear the square and end the protests. 
The People's Daily and the television news on Saturday took a hard line against the unrest, and the evening news warned that ''armed police and troops have the right to use all means to dispose of troublemakers who act willfully to defy the law.''
The clashes and enormous outpouring of support for the students were an unexpected turnaround for the democracy movement. 
Just a few days ago, the number of students occupying Tiananmen Square had dropped to a few thousand, and students seemed to be having difficulty mobilizing large numbers of citizens to take to the streets. 
The Government's strategy, of waiting for the students to become bored and go home, seemed to be leading to the possibility of a resolution to the difficulty.
 
Cyclists Killed
Then a police van crashed into four bicyclists late Friday night, generating new outrage against the Government. 
One cyclist was killed instantly, and two died in the hospital Saturday, while the fourth seemed less seriously hurt.
Rumors were less meticulous about detail, and word spread early Saturday morning through the capital that four people had been killed by the police. 
Tens of thousands of people took to the streets to protest, and immediately found themselves confronting more than 2,000 unarmed troops who were marching toward Tiananmen Square.
The troops retreated, but that confrontation seemed to set the tone for the massive demonstrations later Saturday and early today.
