
A small but growing number of Chinese diplomats are reported to have sought refuge in the United States and several other countries as a result of the crackdown on the pro-democracy movement in their homeland.
As many as 13 Chinese diplomats in Canada, Japan, Australia and the United States were said yesterday to have asked for political asylum or refugee status in the last few days, Government spokesmen and news-agency reports said.
In addition, the United States, Britain, Canada and other countries have promised to look sympathetically upon requests by thousands of Chinese students for extensions of their visas or more permanent status as political refugees.
A day after China sentenced three protesters in Shanghai to death, at least two more Chinese diplomats were reported to have sought protection in the United States. 
Two officials of the Chinese Consulate in San Francisco were granted permission last week to remain in this country.
A State Department official confirmed yesterday that more Chinese diplomats had asked for protection in the United States. 
They did not ask for political asylum, but could do so later, he said.
The official declined to say how many Chinese diplomats had asked for refugee status and said he could not confirm a report that two Chinese Embassy officials in Washington had sought protection. 
Chinese diplomats are protected by President Bush's recent order granting any Chinese permission to stay here for at least a year.
In Canada, up to nine Chinese representatives were said to have defected. 
Officials in Ottawa, citing a fear of reprisals against defectors' relatives in China and Canada, declined to identify those seeking refuge, or even to cite their number.
 
Little Sympathy for Beijing
''I can confirm that there have been approaches by some officials of the Chinese Embassy indicating a desire to stay in Canada,'' the Minister of External Affairs, Joe Clark, told Reuters. 
China has 35 diplomats or consular officials in Ottawa, 14 in Toronto and 10 in Vancouver.
Since the killing of hundreds or possibly thousands of demonstrators in Beijing in early June, Canada has been sharply critical of China and has recalled its Ambassador, frozen $50 million in development projects in China, canceled all diplomatic visits and banned military trade with China.
Canadian immigration officials also say they have been flooded with inquiries from fearful Chinese students who want to stay as refugees, and Prime Minister Brian Mulroney has said that those completing their studies may remain as long as they wish.
In Tokyo, Japanese officials said yesterday that a Chinese consular official reported to have defected will probably be given asylum or a chance to leave for a third country. 
Foreign Minister Hiroshi Mitsuzuka said the case would be handled ''from a humanitarian viewpoint.''
The Japanese Government has refused to confirm that the 27-year-old consular official, Ma Qiuyun, a native of Beijing who has worked at the Chinese Embassy in Tokyo since March 1988, had asked for asylum. 
But Japanese newspapers say she was the first Chinese Embassy official in Tokyo to defect since the crackdowns in Beijing.
Australia granted asylum to a Chinese diplomat, Vice Consul Dong Qi, yesterday and said that because of the Beijing crackdown, none of the 15,000 Chinese in Australia would be deported, The Associated Press said.
Britain said it would grant a six-month extension to Chinese who do not want to return home while their country is in turmoil, Reuters reported. 
The Home Office said 6,500 Chinese citizens, 3,500 of them students, live in Britain.
