
EMBROIDERED serpents with long fangs prance and grimace on 19th-century silk robes from China in a dazzling exhibition, "Dragon Threads," at the Newark Museum.
The five-clawed dragon was designated as the official emblem of the emperor in 206 B.C. Through the centuries, this sign has been emblazoned on everything that belonged to the emperor and his immediate family. 
The Chinese regime became known as the Dragon Throne.
Although dragon robes were de rigueur for all court functions, only the imperial family could wear clothing with five-clawed dragons. 
During the last era of empire, the Ching Dynasty (1644-1912), the colors of the royal family's silks also signified their high rank: lemon yellow was reserved for the emperor, apricot yellow for the first-born prince and and golden yellow for the other sons.
One princely robe, in an apricot hue, is stitched with eight golden dragons, which twist and snarl across the front, back and sleeves. 
Other "auspicious symbols" include billowing waves and rocks along the lower border, to signify the earth and seas, while wispy blue and green clouds, bright blossoms and flames float across the heavens.
Iris Barrel Apfel, who collected the textiles in this exhibition, said that "this symbolism is only complete when the coat is worn" and that "the human body becomes the world axis and the neck opening, the gate of heaven."
At the time of marriage, even a village bride could become an "empress for a day" by wearing clothing emblazoned with a four-clawed imperial dragon. 
Brides represented yin, the female force that must combine with the masculine yang to insure human survival.
In this show, a wedding jacket is decorated with butterflies, the Chinese equivalent of Cupid. 
And these brides wore red, the color of virtue, joy and festivities.
During her engagement, a young women was secluded in her family home. 
What did she do?
Embroider, of course. 
A trousseau usually consisted of elaborate collars, 12 to 100 pairs of decorated shoes, and the cover and canopy for the bridal bed. 
Guests at the wedding felt free to critique a display of the bride's skill with needle and thread, Mrs. Apfel said.
After marriage, the embroidery tasks continued. 
Wives were expected to decorate their own wardrobes, wall hangings, tablecloths, canopies and covers for beds, the altar and mirrors.
If sons were born, their garments were usually bright and trimmed with grimacing creatures. 
The two tiger-head hats with fangs and flowery ears would entice even today's Ninja Turtle devotees. 
But a young girl's robe, trimmed with bunches of grapes and butterflies, is more refined. 
Her playtime activities must have been restricted, since this embroidered and appliqued silk dress is in perfect condition.
Antique textiles are fragile, so these sumptuous robes are rarely exhibited. 
"They need time to rest," Mrs. Apfel said.
Approximately one-third of the more than 100 robes and accessories on display have been donated to the Newark Museum's Asian Collections by Mrs. Apfel and her Attata Foundation (an acronym created from the words "antique textiles" in English, French and Italian).
Mrs. Apfel's search for these fabric treasures, which began in 1953, led her "into noisy street markets, dank cellars, dusty attics and into expensive auction rooms and elegant antique shops," she said.
A stylized version of a crimson Chinese garden pavilion with a royal yellow roof and short picket fence dominates the gallery. 
The atmosphere is of another place, another time, without the artifice of a re-created period room. 
Flat, headless figures display the robes with outstretched arms so that details are not hidden among the folds.
And these details are intriguing. 
The side closing, which always buttons under the right arm, is usually edged with a decorative border or two, replete with flowers or animals. 
Cuffs echo the symbolic motifs and colors of a robe. 
One processional robe is dotted with the "shou" character, meaning long life.
A patient and careful inspection can enrich the viewer's enjoyment of this exhibition. 
One woman's jacket features miniature scenes, no more than an inch and a half in any direction. 
Each one depicts a garden with one or two women holding a lute or potted plant. 
Others show courtiers crossing arched bridges. 
The perfection and charm of this minute workmanship is spellbinding.
Mrs. Apfel said that ancient Ching archives estimated the time required to complete a single robe. 
Drawing the designs took two weeks; 13 months were spent stitching the gold threads; another year passed before the embroidery was finished.
The legendary long fingernails of Chinese women did not interfere with their fine needlework. 
"They only had one or two long nails, and those were not on both hands," she said.
But another legendary account is true: about the age of 6, little girls did have their foot bones broken and bandaged. 
This torturous process produced grown women with "lotus bud" feet, which gave them social status. 
Although the practice was outlawed, it continued until the end of the Ching Dynasty. 
Some of the decorated shoes on display are barely four and a half inches long.
A group of jewelry, hair ornaments and a headdress all gleam in a heavenly shade of iridescent blue. 
The source of this exotic hue: feathers of the tiny kingfisher bird, which were cut to shape and set in gold and silver with semiprecious jewels. 
As with the egret, the popularity of the plumage of this bird nearly caused its extinction.
Displays of hand and stick puppets portray the nobility in their full regalia, plus some sweet-faced or evil-looking characters who must have added drama to the plots. 
Mrs. Apfel said that Ching puppeteers carved, painted and embroidered the clothing of their puppets and then performed all the parts. 
These artistic traditions and puppets were passed down from father to son.
A small side exhibition explains sericulture, the silk industry. 
Millions of Chinese were once employed in the raising and feeding of silkworms and the reeling and weaving of their precious filaments. 
There are cocoons, wound with the long delicate threads, and a skein of white silk strands.
There will be a Chinese Festival in the Junior Museum on Dec. 
30 from 1 to 4 P.M. "Claws and Panther Paws," for ages 3 to 15, will include hands-on workshops, noodle-pulling demonstrations and performances by the Asian American Dance Theater.
"Dragon Threads" will continue through Jan. 
3. The Newark Museum, at 49 Washington Street, is open from noon to 5 P.M. Wednesday through Sunday, but closed on Christmas and New Year's Day. 
Admission is free.
