
LET'S assume you don't want to hear another word about Kitty Kelley. 
Let's take it for granted that if this is your summer to finish "War and Peace," you're on your own. 
But in between overexposed gossip and obviously great works, you'll find the most engaging, entertaining and stimulating books of summer -- a lavish assortment of novels, biographies and both serious and satirical takes on politics. 
By coincidence, most focus on that nagging little issue, American identity. 
And they prove that beach reading is a state of mind. 
Any of these books is absorbing enough to block the sound of the radio on the next blanket or to give you a good excuse for ignoring pesky house guests, but they are also perfect for those of us to whom summer weekends mean a glorious escape into air-conditioning and a carefully cultivated library pallor.
THE KITCHEN GOD'S WIFE. 
By Amy Tan. 
G. P. Putnam's (mid-June), $22.95. 
Amy Tan combines the eloquence of literary prose with the irresistible narrative pull of commercial fiction. 
The Chinese-American family tale of "The Kitchen God's Wife" echoes her first novel, the 1989 best seller "The Joy Luck Club," but the new work is richer, deeper and more poignant.
Winnie Louie, an elderly San Francisco woman, tells the story of her past to her grown daughter. 
It is a heartbreaking but unsentimental remembrance of her life in China during World War II: a brutal first marriage, the deaths of children, escape from the Japanese bombings, an unexpected love, secrets kept and betrayed. 
Winnie's voice is perfectly pitched, veering comfortably between her belief in the slightly sinister Chinese kitchen god and her account of buying shoes at Macy's.
Winnie, Auntie Helen and Grand-Auntie Du are warm, triumphant characters, likely to make this one of the season's biggest novels.
O'KEEFFE AND STIEGLITZ: AN AMERICAN ROMANCE. 
By Benita Eisler. 
Nan A. Talese/Doubleday. $29.50. 
Despite the subtitle, this is less an American romance than an American merger, and a telling, absorbing one. 
The liaison between Alfred Stieglitz, the eminent photographer, and Georgia O'Keeffe, the young painter whose career he helped create, was what Benita Eisler calls an emotional and professional "collusion" from the start of their affair in 1917 through their marriage to his death in 1946. 
Ms. Eisler's clear-eyed, nonjudgmental portrait shatters the romantic myths without debunking the artists' accomplishments. 
She reveals Stieglitz's emotional cruelty to his first wife and daughter, and his manipulation of the press to inflate artists' prices. 
She does not flinch from noting O'Keeffe's increasingly "imperial" manner or taking on the controversial issue of her "varied sexual appetites" for both men and women. 
There are no surprises about art here, but the way these artists forged volatile lives and stellar careers is presented in vibrant, enthralling detail.
HUNTING MISTER HEARTBREAK: A DISCOVERY OF AMERICA. 
By Jonathan Raban. 
HarperCollins. $25. 
Yes, it's another travels-through-America book, but don't be put off. 
Jonathan Raban's is an unusually generous and sardonic view of the United States, like a vicarious summer vacation with a smart, pleasant English friend. 
He meets a Ukrainian emigre who sells bird whistles on Broadway and hobnobs with high-rise dwellers ("Air People") in New York City. 
But he is at his best when he rents a cabin and a dog and settles down in Guntersville, Ala., a place where, he observes, folks seem to be saying, "You want to find our town quaintly amusing?
We know how to play along with that."
Few writers are so savvy and witty about Americans' self-images, or so engaging.
THE COMMANDERS. 
By Bob Woodward. 
Simon & Schuster. 
$24.95. The latest book by the Watergate superstar Bob Woodward reads like the authorized biography of Gen. Colin L. Powell, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. 
That kind of inside information is its strength; the largely one-sided perspective is its weakness. 
Readers may want to dash through Part 1, about the 1989 invasion of Panama (intriguing, though not presented as high drama), to get to the book's second half, about the decisions that led the United States to enter the Persian Gulf war. 
That part is tailor-made for audiences primed by television coverage of the conflict. 
"The Commanders" turns into a lively behind-the-scenes docudrama featuring the familiar cast of Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, and of course General Powell, who emerges as the country's conscience and cautious voice of reason. 
As always with Mr. Woodward's anonymous sources, you either believe him or you don't. 
Filled with accounts of secret Pentagon meetings, political maneuvers, second guesses and roads not taken, it is a fascinating, accessible treatment of a story still coming to light.
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES: A LONE HUMORIST ATTEMPTS TO EXPLAIN THE ENTIRE U.S. 
GOVERNMENT. By P. J. O'Rourke. 
Atlantic Monthly Press . $19.95. 
Being a politically conservative baby-boomer and the White House correspondent for Rolling Stone magazine would guarantee P. J. O'Rourke a pretty strange perspective to begin with. 
Add to that his quirky, revealing turns of phrases and a healthy nonpartisan irreverence, and these collected articles are remarkably fresh, even when they're about the 1988 political conventions. 
The Democratic convention, he reminds us, was held in Atlanta, "that place where bad malls go when they die."
If the author doesn't quite decipher the misworkings of Congress, at least he goes a long way toward figuring out why the country's two-party system so often produces a mess. 
Democrats are "the party that says government can make you richer, smarter, taller and get the chickweed out of your lawn," he writes. 
"Republicans are the party that says government doesn't work, and then they get elected and prove it."
WOODY ALLEN: A BIOGRAPHY. 
By Eric Lax. 
Alfred A. Knopf. $24. 
This detailed biography is based on years of interviews and access to editing rooms, the kind of privileged insight authors dream of. 
Eric Lax faithfully, if uncritically, relates the facts, anecdotes and jokes that make up Woody Allen's life and career, from his babyhood in Brooklyn to his own baby with Mia Farrow. 
The best surprises come early on, when Allan Konigsberg was becoming Woody Allen: the youthful gags he ghostwrote for newspaper columnists, letters from Los Angeles (signed "Al") when he was a television writer for "The Colgate Variety Hour," and his miserable depression and stubborn determination while breaking in as a stand-up comic. 
The author wisely lets Mr. Allen speak for himself a great deal, so a Woody-ish voice runs through the book.
MAO II. 
By Don DeLillo. 
Viking. $19.95. 
This short, fluent novel is fraught with explosive implications about mass-produced art and society. 
The characters include an aging reclusive novelist, his caretakers -- a young male hanger-on and his girlfriend, a former Moonie -- and a famous middle-age female photographer. 
Although they seem mere vehicles for the author's ideas, they serve as a frightening distillation of American identity gone haywire. 
The title refers to an Andy Warhol portrait and to Mao Zedong's brilliant use of public relations, but nothing is quite so chilling as the novel's opening scene, the mass wedding of thousands of Moonies in Yankee Stadium.
 
Also Recommended
YOU'LL NEVER EAT LUNCH IN THIS TOWN AGAIN. 
By Julia Phillips. 
Random House. 
$22. Even if you already know the good parts, this is the perfect beach book: high-spirited, gossipy fun in which a Hollywood producer gets back at Steven Spielberg, Goldie Hawn and all the suits and drug-dealers who done her wrong.
IMMORTALITY. By Milan Kundera; translated by Peter Kussi. 
Grove Weidenfeld. 
$21.95. Written in the meditative style of "The Unbearable Lightness of Being," Milan Kundera's fanciful novel explores the nature of fame and immortality in a story that roams from a middle-aged Parisian woman to a heavenly meeting between Goethe and Hemingway.
LOS GUSANOS. 
By John Sayles. 
HarperCollins. $22.95. 
The film director's novel about a Cuban-American woman planning an anti-Castro rebellion in 1981. 
A half-dozen major characters, flashbacks to Fidel Castro's takeover, and snippets of untranslated Spanish (the title means "The Worms") create a peculiar blend of literary ambition and stock commercial style.
A LIFE OF PICASSO: VOLUME I, 1881-1906. 
By John Richardson. 
Random House. 
$45. A serious, elegantly written biography that follows the artist from his macho Spanish origins to the verge of creating "Les Demoiselles d'Avignon."
Profusely illustrated, unfortunately in black-and-white.
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS. 
By Tom Clancy. 
G. P. Putnam's (August). 
$24.95. For fans who can't get enough, nearly 800 pages in which the C.I.A. agent Jack Ryan tries to prevent a nuclear war set off by a crisis in the Middle East.
IF YOU CAN'T LIVE WITHOUT ME, WHY AREN'T YOU DEAD YET?
By Cynthia Heimel. 
Atlantic Monthly Press, $19.95. 
Sharp, smart comic essays by the author of "Sex Tips for Girls."
She hates Marilyn Monroe for playing "lamebrains" all the time, and she posits "Heimel's Law: Anything you fantasize about won't come true. 
So just cut it out."
MUHAMMAD ALI: HIS LIFE AND TIMES. 
By Thomas Hauser. 
Simon & Schuster. 
$24.95. Although written with the subject's cooperation, this is a rounded oral history told by family, friends, critics and men he has beaten up in the ring.
BEAST. By Peter Benchley. 
Random House (July). 
$21. It lives in the sea, it smells like ammonia, and when we're not watching it eat people in boats, we hear the creature's thoughts. 
This novel is goofier than "Jaws," but recognizably by the same author.
