
Huang Dani giggled nervously at the mention of the turmoil in Beijing, and then inched her way as far back as she could against her living room wall near a large old portrait of Mao.
''Oh, it was very bad,'' said the 37-year-old woman, who says she was busy harvesting her wheat on June 4 when troops were firing on demonstrators in the capital, 400 miles to the northeast.
''Some bad people made revolution in Beijing. 
If the society is not stable, people will suffer. 
If the rebellion spreads, then we peasants can't farm the land and get the harvest.''
Here in Henan Province, in the heartland of China, where travel rarely takes a villager beyond the field and television is the only window to the world outside, Miss Huang's comments seem to reflect the only concern of many Chinese peasants: Will the Government be stable enough to pay for our grain and let us till the land?
 
Larger Stake in System
The word ''democracy'' is hardly ever spoken on these dirt roads that are shared by people, pigs and chickens alike, and few peasants here or elsewhere were involved in the protest movement.
But these peasants understand very well the language of money, corruption and even nepotism. 
In the village next door to Miss Huang's, the son of the village party secretary runs the lucrative carpet-making factory.
It is difficult to gauge peasant attitudes precisely because officials always accompany reporters on interviews. 
But most peasants seemed sincere when they worried aloud about instability, and it is noteworthy that since the land policies of the early 1950's and especially since the land distributions of the early 1980's most peasants have seemed to feel a larger stake in the system and have been a more conservative force in society.
Some peasants ventured to say they supported the students in calls against Government corruption. 
But they added, invoking the party line, that the students were manipulated by a small handful of people. 
If the terminology did not come from the Government's television propaganda, it probably came from the politically astute, fast-talking village leaders.
 
Rural Incomes Rise
''The students were not mature, and they were cheated by a small number of people,'' said Hu Zhonghe, the party secretary in the nearby village of Xia Zhuang.
There is less reason for peasants than for city residents to be dissatisfied with the Government. 
The authorities have given peasants the right to use their own plots of land, and rural incomes have risen even faster than those in urban areas.
What concerns peasants most now is whether their fall crops will turn out well and whether prices will remain stable so they can save quickly enough to build a new home and buy a cow or a pig. 
Many hope someday to be rich.
Hu Xianzhou, the only dentist for the township of Li Cun, is already rather wealthy. 
With a 14-room house, two television sets, including a color one, two pigs, a dog and several cats, he made more than $1,000 last year.
The gap in the living standard between the rural and urban areas is narrowing, according to official statistics. 
The average peasant earns the equivalent of $147 a year, or 45 percent of the average urban income. 
In fact, because the cost of living is far lower in the countryside, the real gap in incomes is much less than the figures would suggest.
Li Yukun, a 28-year-old peasant in Huai Shujie village in the northwest of Henan Province, admitted that the Beijing demonstrations were the talk of the village in early June, but added that since nobody really knew what happened the people believed it was best to stick to their farming or there would be nothing to eat.
He added, ''The Government's method in cracking down was correct.''
