
FAR north of China's Great Wall, a city of crystalline sculptured ice emitting colored light transforms long frozen winters into a fantasyland. 
The annual Ice Lantern Festival in Harbin, capital of the northeastern border province of Heilungkiang and once a city of many Russians, celebrates the lunar new year like no other place in China.
While the rest of the country frolics with paper lanterns, Harbin's vast Zhaolin Park is transformed into a city carved of ice. 
From Jan. 
1 through the end of February, fanciful creatures and giant animals inhabit a world of icy palaces and tall pagodas, snowy flowers, pavilions and frozen tableaus from Chinese legends. 
In daylight the scene takes on a silvery cast. 
At night it blossoms in rainbows of light that blaze from inside the sculptures. 
The peacock struts his multicolored tail, a volcano erupts with red light, the stout-hearted climb a bluish replica of an ice-covered Great Wall, and children scramble up the tail of an elephant to slide down its icy trunk.
Ice sculpture is a part of life in the Harbin (Harb-EEN), the industrial city and river port about 800 miles northeast of Beijing. 
Here, in the region still known as Manchuria, the largest Russian settlement outside Russia was established after World War I, and some of the city's architecture still reflects that time. 
Later, Harbin had one of the largest European populations in the Far East, until the Communists took over after World War II. 
And on a visit there last winter - before the harsh crackdown on pro-deomcracy demonstrators in Beijing and other cities - I noticed among the ice sculptures, along with other foreign themes, an exhibit inspired by Disney and a carved dolphin representing Alaska.
Throughout the city ice-covered pandas, prancing horses and tigers and creations of frozen falling water adorn traffic circles and the entryways of hotels and government buildings. 
In midwinter days that peak around zero degrees Fahrenheit, the high energy level of the Harbinese is noticeable, and perhaps it can be attributed to food portions fit for a giant, or to the fact that all buldings are superbly heated. 
Temperatures can sink to minus 20 at night yet no one seems to mind. 
The Harbinese leave their television sets and do what northerners everywhere do in winter - put on another layer. 
They stroll about eating ice cream clutched in mittened hands. 
They claim it melts too fast in the summer.
Reminiscent of a misty Oriental painting, a deceptively pleasing lavender pall hangs over city and countryside. 
Rather than bits of delicate cloud, the haze is a false curtain of polluting smoke from industrial coal and heating wood fires. 
''Black snow,'' said a visitor from Pennsylvania sweeping up a handful. 
''Just like Pittsburgh when I was a kid.''
The ice carvings are swept clean daily of snowfall and pollution.
A bustling city of some three million, Harbin is an exception in a land crammed with ancient sites. 
Until the turn of the century a mere village whose name meant ''where the fishing nets are dried,'' its character was forever altered by Russians and by Japanese. 
Russian architecture, especially old Orthodox churches and the railroad station, brought fame and the sobriquet, Moscow of the East. 
Japanese warlords imposed the birth of Harbin's thriving heavy industry.
The history of Heilungkiang plays a major role in the clamorous events of 20th-century China. 
In 1896 Russia negotiated a contract to build a railroad to Vladivostok through the province that has developed since into the Texas of China. 
(The nation's largest oilfields begin 62 miles northwest of Harbin. 
In 1914, following an agreement that extended Russian rights along the rail line to Britain as well, several European countries and the United States signed up for equal privileges, sending a swarm of foreign entrepreneurs to Harbin and turning it into an international city. 
In 1917 White Russian refugees surged into Harbin, which grew into alarge Russian settlement. 
Then in February 1932 Japanese troops occupied the city, renaming the province Manchukuo.
Throughout World War II, under the oppressive rule of Japan's Manchuria-based Kwantung army, the heavy industrial trend was begun with forced production in a province rich in coal and other largely untapped resources. 
The Soviet Army took back Harbin in 1945 and withdrew when Chinese troops were installed by agreement.
THE Russians are long gone from Harbin, leaving onion-domed churches and little trellised street kiosks that perk up the drab square buildings of newer vintage. 
The most interesting aspect of the provincial museum, built in 1923 as the commercial center, is outside, where symmetrical domes and spires rise at each end. 
The immense railroad station, built when the Russians projected a great northern transport hub in Harbin, is no longer large enough.
In the Daolichu district not far from Zhaolin Park, the skyline is studded with cupolas, spires and scalloped turrets. 
St. Sophia's Church is a fine example, its great onion bulb a tinge of old Moscow. 
While numerous churches were ravaged during the Chinese Cultural Revolution in the late 1960's and turned into warehouses, several remain. 
In the Nangang district the vaulted Orthodox church (Church of China Eastern Orthodox) is always open, and elderly devotees come and go. 
Services are conducted in Russian. 
The church was reopened in 1984. 
Nearby, the Gothic Church of the Christian religion (Lutheran), built in 1911, is locked except Sundays. 
Services are conducted in Chinese; the church was reopened in 1980.
The deep frozen Songari River is the soul of the Ice Lantern Festival. 
Winding through the northern part of the city, it provides the building blocks. 
Work begins in late November when metal stakes are driven into the ice. 
By hook, crane and truck, ice blocks are moved to the park where carpenters using electric saws slice them into smaller chunks. 
The last three weeks of December are a flurry of carving as more than 2,000 artisans and electricians leave factory jobs to apply skills and fancy to the ice.
By Jan. 
1 the entrance walk is lined with birds and animals on pedestals, leading to an icy cauldron with leaping red streamers simulating the Olympic torch. 
Pathways with whimsical creatures and ice railings curve toward a transparent Moorish palace with colored lights, a multilevel pagoda with 10 100-foot-tall pavonine spires, ice bridges and gardens, a frozen onion-domed church, or a glowing ice rink for dancing. 
Chinese and Western music hoots from speakers while frolicking lighted deer and rabbits, penguins, dragons and a phoenix accompany Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs.
Beyond a tall gateway of horseshoe-shaped ice blocks on the high road, the Sungari River turns into a huge playground. 
At an ice-walled slide that shoots down the steep bank, revelers sit on woven mats or stand in street shoes for careening descents to the frozen water. 
A bone-chilling wind accompanies merrymakers who hire ice boats to sail the wide river, or one-horse gigs mounted on sleds and decorated with colored streamers. 
Throughout the winter members of a little troupe of outdoor sports fanatics named the Harbin Penguins jump into the frigid water to swim where the three-foot-thick ice has been hacked away.
The festival, first held in 1963 in the tottering days of economic recovery from the Great Leap Forward, collided with the Cultural Revolution but restarted in 1978 and has been picking up size each year. 
International competition in ice carving began three years ago and in the winter of 1989, France took the gold. 
Circling a nearly full-scale Arc de Triomphe, shiny transparent sculptures included a glistening Liberte (first prize), a great fat sumo wrestler (third prize, Japan) and a fighting Australian kangaroo. 
Harbinese clustered at Alaska's entry, a totem-style dolphin with a placard in Chinese describing the Aleutian fairy tale of the dolphin god.
It's a sure bet that a visit to Harbin will include too much food. 
Winter meals are piled on platters in at least seven courses. 
The Chinese dishes are sour, mildly hot, fresh, salty and substantial; some are crisp and many are oily. 
Western fare has a bit of old Russia clinging to it, especially in pastries and braised dishes. 
The Harbinese favor sausage snacks - white-meat and red sausages are popular, stuffed in wheat buns, with pancake or steamed bread, or sauerkraut noodles. 
In street markets, fresh vegetables from southern provinces are kept under heavy quilts to prevent freezing. 
About the city, streamer flags on single poles announce restaurants - red for local, blue for Mongolian food and neither very clean. 
In addition to beef and mutton, pork is abundant. 
It is said that all leftovers go to the pigs and I believe it - the porkers wandering around country villages are enormous. 
Group travelers can arrange for a banquet serving the so-called four dainties of Harbin: stewed bear's paw, one of the oldest delicacies in Chinese recipes; braised moose's snout in brown sauce; fei-long (grouse) soup, and white houtou mushrooms served with shredded chicken.
Dancing is another diversion on winter nights. 
To Chinese popular music performed by a six-piece band and solist, throngs of dancers swirl around ballroom floors in a smooth adagio-like step. 
Western cassettes blast during the intervals when the dance floor takes on the look of a crowd of beginners trying to learn unrestrained disco movements. 
For an entrance fee of 6 yuan (50 cents), whether the music is live or canned, everyone dances (usually 200 to 300) - couples, men and men, women and women, threesomes and singles. 
(The regulars' boots were stashed neatly under tables.) There are about 20 dance halls in Harbin.
During Harbin's winter, Manchurians offer advisories on keeping warm outdoors. 
We wore the recommended down clothing, played amid frozen creations and always remembered the final admonition: after staying out for some time, don't drink hot water until your teeth get warm.
 
PLANNING A TRIP TO HARBIN
 
Getting There
Air China (formerly C.A.A.C.) operates many domestic flights to Harbin: from Beijing, Changchun, Shanghai, Shenyang and Guangzhou (Canton). 
Travelers can reach Harbin by rail from any province. 
The Chinese say that travel on the Trans-Siberian Railroad offers better service on the run from China to the Soviet Union, with Chinese staff, than in the other direction with Russian personnel.
Travel in China is controlled by China International Travel Service (C.I.T.S.), the government wing concerned with all foreign visitors. 
It provides English-speaking guides and has the final say in hotel choice. 
The best prices are in packages from travel agents specializing in mainland travel; they have Beijing branch offices. 
There are agencies in Hong Kong that arrange personalized itineraries and simplify the sometimes difficult visa procedures. 
They have a wide knowledge of hotels and arrange everything in 24 hours. 
An all-inclusive week in the north is about $1500 round trip from Hong Kong. 
One experienced agency is Lap Ming International Travel Service, East Ocean Center, 98 Granville Road, T.S.T. 
Kowloon, Hong Kong; telephone, 3-723-8803.
 
Currency and Customs
China's two-tier money system is confusing. 
Renminbi (R.M.B.) is People's Money and foreign exchange certificates (F.E.C.'s) are Tourist Money, both issued in denominations of yuan (pronounced wan). 
In exchange for cash or traveler's checks from international banks, visitors receive exchange certificates; a dollar equals about 3.71 yuan. 
Tourists must pay for purchases in F.E.C.'s; if you want to buy something at a street market, you'll have a small amount of R.M.B. 
Stay clear of the black market in currency; the penalties are stiff.
 
Where to Stay
Harbin is oriented to international trade and there is no shortage of hotels; reservations required. 
While cleanliness standards are not up to those in the United States , the hotels are are adequate, with restaurants and shops and English-speaking staff. 
Good are the Swan Hotel (Tian E Fandian), which was crammed with Russian buyers attending a trade fair when we stayed there (73 Zhongsang Road; telephone, 54041); and the Guoji Fandian (International Hotel, 124 Dazhi Street; 31441). 
Doubles with baths and TV from about $20.
Top of the line is the new wing of the Friendship Hotel. 
Full of marble, it is considered the best in Harbin. 
Doubles with baths and TV from $21 (57 Youyi Road; 47132). 
Opened this year, the new Milky Way Hotel charges from $21 for doubles with baths and TV.
 
Other Advice
Practical winter clothing is essential; fancy dress unnecessary. 
Take a down jacket, lined boots, warm slacks, a cap with earflaps, sweater, mittens and silk longjohns, which can be bought cheaply in China (though not in extra-large sizes). 
Women need warm slacks; a skirt or dress should be worn only indoors and not in transit.
The common cold with lingering cough is a hazard of China travel in any season. 
Known as Peking throat and caused by pollution, it happens anywhere, anytime. 
Take your own remedies and prescription drugs. 
Drink only boiled water (tea) or bottled liquids. 
No special innoculations are necessary for China, but a gamma-globulin shot to prevent hepatitis is recommended.
 
Dining and Shopping
Unless you have an iron stomach, hotel dining rooms are the safest bet, as well as restaurants recommended by C.I.T.S. 
It is said that Huamei in Zhongyang Street is the best in Harbin for Russian food. 
When you go to outside restaurants, don't plan on using the toilet facilities - they are not clean and flushes seldom work. 
Street markets are everywhere in the city, as well as two large department stores crammed with merchandise and always crowded. 
The Friendship Store, on the top floor of the Second Department Store, offers curios and toys. 
The Xiangyang Fur Store has a large selection of leather and fur, with coats of fox, squirrel or sable from $67; quality is mediocre.    - M. 
T.
A bridge with pavilions and pathways all carved from ice is big enough for visitors to walk on. 
At night, a towering ice palace glows with the light of lanterns placed inside (pg. 
7); a palace courtyard of ice. 
An incense burner supported by carved fish; and a sumo from Japan (pg. 
8) (Moana Tregaskis)
