
The Dalai Lama, the exiled Tibetan spiritual leader, says the arrests and executions set in motion by the Chinese Government will fail to wipe out aspirations for liberty and democracy.
''It will never work,'' the 55-year-old Buddhist leader said in an interview on Saturday in Manhattan. 
''It will never suppress real human determination.''
He was in New York on a one-day stopover on his way to a Costa Rican conference on the meaning of peace.
The Dalai Lama, who is venerated by Tibetans as a divine reincarnation with godly compassion, was himself chased from Tibet by Chinese troops when they crushed an uprising in 1959. 
Since then he has lived in India.
The Dalai Lama, dressed in his customary monk's robe during an interview at his hotel, said the Chinese invasion of Tibet in 1950 was followed by harsh repression and rigors that abated only in the last decade.
''You can see from what has happened in Tibet that violent suppression will not succeed,'' the Dalai Lama said, speaking in fluent, Indian-inflected English. 
''Today in Tibet there is more national feeling and more national cohesion than there ever was before the Chinese came.''
The Dalai Lama said he was aware of the reports from China of relatives turning in brothers and sisters for punishment, and he noted that this reflected ''an old Communist tactic.''
 
'Situation Has Changed'
''They really implement the policy of divide and rule,'' he said. 
''They brand people with suspicions. 
This has been the past experience, but now I think the situation has changed.
''In the last 10 years, Chinese people have had much contact with the outside world. 
There are a large number of sudents in the outside world. 
Also, these people have access to telephones and fax machines. 
They have much information. 
The regime will want to control this, but now it will be impossible to control.''
He observed that Buddhism teaches that every event and action has many aspects, both positive and negative. 
But he went on to say that the recent Chinese action was ''very negative, very harmful.''
''It is very bad for the Chinese themselves and for the Chinese Communist Party and very bad for the leaders,'' he said. 
''Without this their name would have remained in history signifying something wise. 
Now that has been damaged.''
Asked how the crackdown might affect initiatives by the Government to reach an agreement with him over the status of Tibet, he said that over the last two years the Chinese had rejected his proposal for negotiations on Tibetan autonomy.
''The Chinese disagreed with the proposal but at the same time they still insist they want dialogue,'' he said. 
''Just before the students were crushed they indicated that they still wanted to discuss the issue, sending me a message through the Chinese Embassy in New Delhi.
 
'Humans Love Freedom'
''But now, you see, we feel a bit reluctant to carry out dialogue because in a very real sense the Chinese Government may not be the people's government. 
Obviously we also want to remain in solidarity with those Chinese brothers and sisters who want to have more freedom.''
The Dalai Lama turned to a broader discussion of changes in he world that he said are causing totalitarian systems to place less reliance on force.
''Humans love freedom,'' he said. 
''Humans love democracy. 
Now at the end of the century this human spirit seems to be getting the upper hand, though of course in China for the time being there is a setback.''
After his visit to Costa Rica, the Dalai Lama is to return to the United States to officiate at Buddhist ceremonies in California and to receive the Raoul Wallenberg Human Rights Award from the Congressional Human Rights Foundation, the private-sector arm of the Congressional Human Rights Caucus.
