
Yang Yanru, a middle-aged woman who keeps her 11-room house spotless, could have been standing on a typical street in an affluent American suburb, bidding her guests goodbye after a luncheon.
Except for her crooked teeth, and a collar that suggested her man-tailored shirt was made in the 1960's, there was little to suggest that Ms. Yang was once a peasant who got her eggs from the chicken coop in the backyard. 
Now she is one of China's new rich, a woman who says she doesn't have to hold down a job because her husband makes so much money. 
She can spend her afternoons entertaining visitors, she said, or playing mah-jongg with friends.
About 45 miles down a narrow, bumpy road from the heart of Tianjin city, Daqiuzhuang has earned a reputation as a village that got rich through a strange blend of Communism and capitalism.
Factories here operate 24 hours a day, seven days a week, paying salaries of $800 to $900 a year to most village residents. 
Most of the rest of the money is plowed back into businesses or is spent on communal projects or perks for bosses and model workers.
"Even in my dreams, I never thought life could be so good," said Ms. Yang, who knits when she is not watching one of her three color televisions or talking on one of her two telephones.
 
Scores 0f Luxury Cars
This village of 4,400 people has 13 Mercedes Benzes and nearly 140 other imported luxury cars. 
In 1990, Daqiuzhuang's per capita income was $3,400, 10 times China's national average; last year, officials say, it soared even higher, to an estimated $8,400.
The village runs the factories that make the money -- 226 enterprises in all. 
Factory managers receive a share of profits in addition to their salaries, and their incomes can be enormous. 
In 1990, the last year for which figures are fully calculated, Ms. Yang's husband, who manages a construction business, was entitled to $9,300, though she said he took only a part of that and returned the rest to the enterprise.
No Daqiuzhuang citizen pays a cent for housing, electricity, hot water, gas, medical care or the 11 years of education to which every child is entitled. 
The village also invests about $3.7 million a year in building houses and apartment buildings for its 1,300 families. 
If an employee is rewarded as a model worker, as Ms. Yang's husband was, he receives one of 300 furnished, nicely painted two-story brick houses.
"Here we have reached the perfect form of socialism: Communism," said Sun Guiqiu, a senior official in the village.
But capitalism seems to be the major factor in the village's business success. 
Factories keep careful track of costs, pay their employees by the piece rate and use complex systems of incentives to increase production.
Despite detailed questioning, officials never made clear just how their village had managed do so much better than others. 
Perhaps there are further secrets here, or special benefits conferred by higher authorities.
One factor that surely helped is that Daqiuzhuang started earlier than most. 
More than a dozen years ago, the village established its first enterprise, a mill that processed rolled steel, and began selling the steel across the country.
Unlike most villages, which have a Communist Party Secretary as well as a village leader, Daqiuzhuang combined the two positions into one. 
That official is also chief executive of the holding company owning all village enterprises, suggesting that the village is actually one giant company.
 
$5.5 Million in Savings
The chief of Daqiuzhuang, Yu Zuomin, a 62-year-old native of the village, lives more like a tycoon than a Communist official. 
When his son married recently, the wedding and gifts, which included a beautiful new house, reportedly cost about $275,000.
After visiting the United States last year, Mr. Yu remarked that Daqiuzhuang residents were "much better off than the middle-class" of America, Mr. Sun said.
The village bank holds about $5.5 million in savings, the official said. 
As economic expansion has created work beyond what Daqiuzhuang's residents can manage themselves, the village has by official count added at least 7,000 laborers from across the nation; there may be many more.
These laborers are paid by the piece for their work. 
While they are also given housing, they have fewer opportunities for advancement than local people.
At Wanquan Industrial Company, a steel processing enterprise that reported earnings of nearly $5.5 million last year, 10 percent of the 2,100 employees are from Daqiuzhuang, and most of them hold positions in senior management. 
Liu Yunzhang, a villager who studied mathematics at Tianjin University and returned to become a senior personnel officer, is only 27 years old.
Mr. Sun is only 22 years old. 
While his annual salary is only $890, he negotiates high-powered business deals over elaborate lunches and lives in a spacious four-bedroom apartment.
Salaries are perhaps kept low to avoid taxes. 
Last year, the village's profits from its enterprises came to nearly $15 million, with one-fourth of that amount going to the Government in business taxes. 
Yet only a small handful of the 4,400 villagers paid any personal income tax, for a total of about $55,500. 
Income is sometimes distributed in the form of special perks like free cars for executives.
Perhaps because "guanxi," or business connections and relationships with powerful officials, are so important in China, the village also made big donations to flood-stricken areas last year. 
Such contributions may also be intended to ease criticism that Daqiuzhuang is too capitalist or too rich.
