
ENOUGH of this kid stuff. 
Now that peanut butter is 100 years old, let's face facts and stop beating around the bush. 
Isn't it time for peanut butter to grow up?
It is almost embarrassing to admit. 
But this country is still serving most of its peanut butter with jelly when so many other parts of the world are using it subtly to enhance stews, thicken soups, or top grilled fish.
Isn't it time to start thinking of peanut butter in terms of finesse and fine crystal?
''Beyond the cookie,'' commanded Ellen Brown, a food consultant, who as part of peanut butter's 100th anniversary celebration, will be optimistically unveiling 30 new recipes on Friday at the International Association of Culinary Professionals in Atlanta in the hopes that a more sophisticated image will emerge. 
Her creations include recipes for peanut butter salad dressing, sauces, stews and soups.
There is disagreement about the origin of peanut butter. 
Some attribute its creation to a St. Louis physician whose identity is not known; others to a man named Joseph Lambert, who ran a nut business out of Battle Creek, Mich. 
But both are said to have emerged with their creations in the year 1890 and the process was patented seven years later. 
It became commercially available around the turn of the century.
George Washington Carver, who in 1925 published a paper at Tuskeegee Institute titled ''Bulletin No. 31, How to Grow the Peanut and 105 Ways of Preparing It for Human Consumption'' is credited with having been among the first to have concocted the peanut butter sandwich.
Now peanut butter is among this country's most popular foods with annual sales of an estimated 800 million pounds a year, said Mitch Head, a spokesman for the Peanut Advisory Commission, a trade association based in Atlanta. 
An estimated 85 percent of American households have a jar stashed away in a cupboard, according to the commission.
But to keep this in perspective, America is a mere child when it comes to the use of the peanut.
The peanut was believed to have been first cultivated 2,000 years ago in South America. 
It was eventually taken to Africa and Asia in the 16th century by the explorers of Europe.
Today the peanut and peanut butter are prominently featured in many cuisines. 
In Thailand, for example, they are used in the preparation of sauces and noodle dishes. 
In Indonesia, they are the base for a dipping sauce served with chicken and pork dishes. 
It is served in soups and stews in various African countries like Ghana where it is combined with tomatoes, onions, eggplant and okra in a stew-like chicken preparation and in Senegal where it is combined with sweet potatoes and cabbage. 
In the Sichuan province of China, it is commonly served in sauces that top noodles and cold chicken.
It is not that these more sophisticated uses of the peanut, which has long been appreciated as an inexpensive source of protein, never occurred to an American. 
Indeed, Evan Jones, the food historian and author of ''American Food: The Gastronomic Story'' (Vintage Books, 1981), said George Washington Carver tried valiantly to show Americans the many subtle joys of the peanut. 
But for some reason these uses never caught on. 
Americans resisted. 
Today the majority of Americans - 58 percent - continue to prefer their peanut butter on bread, according to consumer research done by CPC International, which manufactures Skippy brand peanut butter. 
Some 14 percent prefer it on crackers, according to the research, while another 10 percent eat it out of the jar.
It is not surprising then to discover that Dr. Peter McCann, a 37-year-old orthopedic surgeon living in Manhattan, an otherwise sophisticated diner and exacting food aficionado, prefers his peanut butter on white bread with jelly so thick it leaks through to the other side.
He only eats the creamy style, he said, because he doesn't like to chew peanut butter but instead prefers to be able to slosh it around with his tongue.
Interviews with peanut butter lovers around the country revealed that not unlike Dr. McCann, Americans share a similar, rather uninhibited childlike delight in the spread.
Larry Zisman, for example, who is co-author with his wife, Honey, of the ''The Great American Peanut Butter Book'' (St. Martin's Press, 1985), said he, too, often eats his peanut butter on bread. 
His favorite combination, he said, is ''putting some peanut butter in your mouth, adding chocolate chips and chewing them together.''
Frank Treadway, 61, of Fort Meyers, Fla., prefers it ''with meat loaf, bacon, cheese and cold baked beans.''
Norma Carpenter, a 45-year-old homemaker of Orofino, Idaho, routinely eats peanut butter mixed with margarine on popcorn.
''It's a sticky, gooey mess,'' she said. 
''But it's really good. 
You want to lick your fingers.''
Ethel Bonollo, who owns a telephone-answering service in Santa Barbara, Calif., keeps a jar by her desk.
''When you're working it's easier to stick a spoon in your mouth than to have to chomp on peants,'' she observed. 
''There's something smooth and settling about it.''
Other common ways of eating peanut butter in this country are with apples, celery sticks and bacon, and combined with mayonnaise, pickles, pretzels, corn chips, chocolate pudding, grilled cheese, graham crackers, saltines and whole wheat toast.
''When no one is looking, I simply stick my finger in the jar,'' admitted Sue Huffman, a former food editor, who now helps develop recipes for Best Foods.
There are, however, some Americans who do maintain some modicum of self-awareness and reserve about their passion for peanut butter.
David Haspel, for example, a 40-year-old film producer living in Los Angeles, admits to being addicted to crunchy-style peanut butter ever since he was sent away to summer camp. 
His wife, Jane, keeps at least one jar tucked away in a kitchen cupboard because he just ''needs to know it's there.''
''But I don't talk about it in public,'' Mr. Haspel said, pointing out that peanut butter and jelly on crackers is ''not like discussing French wines.''
All this may simply mean that peanut butter has just not been around long enough in America. 
Maturity, after all, has as much to do with experience as age; not to mention the desire to grow up.
Perhaps it should come as no surprise that one of the leading brands of peanut butter in this country is called Peter Pan.
 
Adding Texture to a Sauce and a Stew
 
Pang Pang Sauce
(Adapted from ''Chinese Seasons'' by Nina Simonds, Houghton Mifflin Company, 1986)
 
Preparation time: 15 minutes
 
1/4 cup chunky peanut butter
3 tablespoons soy sauce
1 tablespoon sugar
2 tablespoons sesame oil
2 teaspoons Chinese black vinegar
1 teaspoon chili paste
4 to 6 tablespoons chicken broth or water
1 tablespoon minced garlic
1 tablespoon minced ginger root
1 tablespoon minced green part of scallion
1.In a blender or food processor, combine the ingredients except for the minced scallion. 
Blend until smooth. 
Add the scallion. 
The sauce should have the consistency of lightly whipped cream. 
Serve with cold noodles, sliced cold poached chicken, cold sliced beef or as a salad dressing for cucumbers and red peppers.
Yield: About 3/4 cup.
 
Groundnut Stew
(Adapted from ''The Africa News Cookbook: African Cooking for Western Kitchens,'' Penguin Books, 1985)
 
Preparation time: 45 minutes
Cooking time: 30 minutes
 
1 chicken, 4 pounds, cut into serving pieces
1 one-inch piece ginger
1/2 medium-size onion, peeled
2 cups water
2 tablespoons tomato paste
1 tablespoon peanut oil
1 cup finely chopped onions
1 cup chopped tomatoes
Z cup peanut butter
2 teaspoons salt
2 hot chilies, crushed or 1 teaspoon cayenne pepper
1 medium-size eggplant, peeled and cubed
2 cups fresh or 1 10-ounce package frozen okra.
1.Boil chicken with ginger and onion half in water. 
Meanwhile, in a separate large pot, heat tomato paste in the oil over low heat for about five minutes. 
Add the chopped onions and chopped tomatoes to the paste, stirring occasionally until the onions are translucent.
2.Scoop out the partly cooked chicken pieces and add along with about half the broth to the tomato mixture. 
Add the peanut butter, salt and chilies. 
Cook for five minutes before stirring in the eggplant and okra. 
Continue cooking until chicken and vegetables are tender. 
Add more broth as needed to maintain a thick, stewy consistency.
Yield: 4 servings.
