
The Bush Administration today granted a three-month extension of a Presidential order that voided the sale of a company based in Seattle to a Chinese Government agency with ties to the military, officials said.
The extension delayed a policy decision in hopes the Chinese would rid themselves of the company before the new deadline of Aug. 
1. If that does not happen, the Administration would face a difficult choice. 
It could either revise Mr. Bush's original order or take on a protracted and diplomatically sensitive legal battle to force China to sell its interest in the company.
The move was requested by the China National Aero-Technology Import-Export Corporation, and granted by an eight-agency task force assigned to review foreign investment in the United States, according to an official of the Treasury Department, which supervises the task force.
It did not change the conditions of Mr. Bush's original order, which required the Chinese agency, known as Catic, to sell all of its interest in Mamco Manufacturing Company, the official said.
Catic purchased Mamco on Nov. 
30 for an undisclosed sum. 
The Seattle company makes metal parts for civilian aircraft, primarily for Boeing of Seattle, including tail and wing assemblies and small parts like brackets.
 
No Explanation Offered
The Treasury Department did not offer a public explanation for why it granted the extension, which the official said was requested last week.
Administration officials said Catic had unsuccessfully sought to have Mr. Bush's original order voiding the sale revised.
''The extension decision doesn't in any way change their obligations to divest themselves of the company,'' the official said.
The president of Mamco, Kenneth A. Keller, said the extension had been requested because ''three months is a very short period of time and there is a lot to digest.''
Options Open to U.S. 
Mr. Bush's original order, issued on Feb. 
2, included a provision for a three-month extension.
Should Catic fail to sell Mamco by the new deadline of Aug. 
1, the Administration could seize the company and force the sale through the courts. 
But that would mean a legal battle at a time when the Administration is trying to tread lightly on Chinese-American relations.
Another option would be to revise the original order to void the sale, perhaps by allowing Catic to retain some ownership, official said. 
But the original order was based on a recommendation that the sale was a potential threat to national security and changing it could be difficult.
Administration officials said the Chinese agency had violated security agreements in the past and that Washington suspected it might want to use Mamco as a base for industrial espionage.
Catic is the purchasing agent for the Chinese Ministry of Aerospace Industry. 
Although it deals primarily with buying civilian aircraft and other technology in the United States, it is involved in research and development of military aircraft, missiles and aircraft engines.
