
The opposition Democratic Progressive Party today expressed strong satisfaction with its showing in elections on Saturday, and said its performance would have been more impressive if it were not for vote buying and election fraud.
Final results available today showed that the party won 21 seats in the legislature, while the ruling Nationalist Party won 72. 
Independents won eight seats.
The Government denied charges of misconduct in the election, the first in which an opposition party was legally allowed to compete.
In the competition for 21 postitions of county magistrate and mayor, the Nationalists won 14 positions, the Democratic Progressives won 6, and an independent took 1.
There were no official results for the percentage of the popular vote received by each party. 
The Government spokesman, Shaw Yuming, estimated that the Nationalists had received 65 percent to 70 percent of the vote, with 20 percent to 25 percent going to the Democratic Progressive Party and the rest to independents and other parties.
 
Party Does Well at Local Level
But Tsai Shihyuan, deputy secretary general of the opposition party, said it had received 38 percent of the vote in the mayoral and county races and 45 percent of the vote when counting only those races in which it fielded a candidate. 
''It was a big victory for the opposition,'' Mr. Tsai said.
''They can say whatever they want,'' Mr. Shaw, the Government spokesman, replied later. 
He noted that the Nationalists still won a considerable majority of the votes and the seats.
A number of journalists and business executives, including some sympathetic to the opposition, said today in interviews that the Nationalist Party is so linked to the Government and to the press that the election was skewed. 
They asserted that vote buying, while practiced by candidates on both sides, is more prevalent among the Nationalists. 
But they said it was unlikely that significant fraud took place during voting or the counting of ballots.
Five members of the United States Congress who were here to observe the election gave it a qualified endorsement. 
''Our key judgment is that this year's election was the most free and fair in Taiwan's history,'' they said in a statement today.
But the delegation, which was led by Representative Stephen J. Solarz, Democrat of Brooklyn, added that Taiwan should take further steps to create fairness in the way that political parties can compete.
 
A More Benign Solarz
Mr. Solarz has sometimes offended officials here because of his support for dissidents, but on this trip it seemed that the authorities would be delighted with the contrast he drew with China.
''The entire world can see the contrast between Taiwan and the P.R.C.,'' Mr. Solarz said, referring to the People's Republic of China. 
''In the P.R.C., when the people ask for democracy, they are greeted with a hail of bullets, and Beijing is drowned in a river of blood. 
In Taiwan, when people demand democracy, they are given an opportunity to participate in an electoral process and can vote for the candidates of their choice.''
The Democratic Progressive Party's gains in the legislature are particularly significant because, for the first time, the party will have enough members to introduce legislation. 
Mr. Tsai, the party official, said it planned to propose bills that would cut the military budget, attack corruption and broaden health-care coverage.
In the past, Taiwan's legislature has sometimes resembled a forum for debate less than a barroom. 
With no hope of either introducing or passing bills, frustrated opposition members have sometimes resorted to publicity stunts like smashing microphones and grappling with Nationalist legislators.
There has been a deep hostility between the two parties, with each regarding the other as untrustworthy. 
However, some Chinese here said they hoped that the election would mark the beginning of an evolution of the Democratic Progressive Party into the kind of loyal opposition found in the West.
