
Unrepentant and defiant as ever, a well-known campaigner for democracy walked out of prison today after completing an eight-year sentence for editing a journal that called for greater human rights in China.
''I never gave in,'' Yang Jing told family members and friends who had gathered in his house to see him. 
''The officials said I had a bad attitude.''
During the ''Democracy Spring'' movement a decade ago, Mr. Yang was an editor of the ''April Fifth Forum,'' a mimeographed magazine that won acclaim as one of the most influential of the unofficial magazines calling for greater democracy and human rights. 
After some of his friends were arrested beginning in early 1979, Mr. Yang published numerous appeals for their release. 
In April 1981 he, too, was arrested.
Mr. Yang, who is 44 years old and was working as a steel worker at the time of his arrest, seemed in good health and fine spirits. 
He joked with the throng that crowded his home, including ''Democracy Spring'' dissidents who had been released from prison earlier, such as Ren Wanding and Xue Mingde. 
While prison was always grim, he said, the worst experience was an 11-month period early in his sentence when he was punished with solitary confinement for trying to get in touch with friends who were also in the prison. 
During that time, he was locked in a tiny, windowless cell, scarcely bigger than a bed, and for much of the time he was locked in handcuffs and leg irons, he said.
The left side of his body still suffers from a muscular ailment because of the conditions during that period, he said. 
But Mr. Yang, a slight man who wears black-rimmed glasses, seemed not at all daunted by his experiences. 
''I didn't shed a single tear during eight years in that place,'' he said.
Mr. Yang said he planned to find a job.
Some other ''Democracy Spring'' campaigners are still in prison, but Mr. Yang said he had little news of them. 
He said that he and other prisoners were not allowed to meet their most famous fellow resident of the Beijing No. 1 Prison, Xu Wenli. 
Mr. Xu, who is Prisoner 001, was the editor in chief of ''April Fifth Forum,'' and is serving a 15-year sentence.
Mr. Yang said that Mr. Xu, who apparently has been in solitary confinement since 1985 and has not been allowed family visits since then, has had two teeth knocked out. 
However, Mr. Yang said he did not know how the teeth had been knocked out.
While Mr. Yang's release was expected today on the expiration of his sentence, it was not certain. 
Mr. Yang said that he had been visited by four security officials two weeks ago and warned: ''You should change your attitude. 
Don't think we have to let you go.''
 
Yang Told to Avoid Friends
His family also was visited by security officials and advised that it would be best if he did not see his old friends.
Mr. Yang quoted one of the security officials as telling him: ''When we imprisoned you, it was for political reasons, and now that we release you, it also is for political reasons.''
On Friday, in another sign of the changes in the last eight years, China treated another dissident much differently than it treated Mr. Yang and his colleagues. 
Chen Jun, a 31-year-old democracy campaigner who in the last few months had openly confronted the Government and called for release of political prisoners, was escorted to the airport and put on an airplane to Hong Kong. 
The incident seemed to indicate both that open challenges will not be tolerated for long, and that the challengers at the moment may fare better than those who took on the system a decade ago.
In the meeting with security officials two weeks ago, Mr. Yang recalled, one of them said with a hint of reproach: ''You were ahead of your time; you thought too far ahead.''
''But if a nation has no one who thinks ahead,'' Mr. Yang told his friends tonight, ''our society would not progress and we would be finished. 
We would still be apes.''
