
Results from the first direct legislative elections ever held here sent a resoundingly clear message to China and Britain today that Hong Kong's people want greater democracy as this British colony reverts to Chinese control in 1997.
Liberal pro-democracy candidates won 16 of the 18 seats contested on Sunday, according to the results announced today.
Not one pro-China candidate was a winner, despite a barrage of warnings from pro-China newspapers here and an impressive election effort by Beijing-backed unions and businesses.
 
Little Real Power
While little real political power was at stake in the voting for a largely rubber-stamp legislative council, the elections were seen as an important gauge of public sentiment as the economically powerful colony moves toward Chinese Communist control.
Buoyed by their victory, the liberal politicians vowed today to press their campaign for greater political freedom with both Britain and China. 
London has been embarrassed by the politicians' calls for democracy, and China has been angered by the demands.
"There is no doubt that the people wish to have democracy now, like any other people in the world," said Martin Lee, a leading liberal politician whose party, the United Democrats of Hong Kong, won 12 of the 18 seats.
China has had no official comment on the election results.
Only 39.2 percent of the 1.9 million registered voters turned out for the election, much less than the 50 percent predicted by Hong Kong officials. 
The elections were part of limited moves toward democracy promoted by Britain and China as 1997 approaches.
Britain and China signed an agreement in 1985 under which Hong Kong would be allowed to keep its capitalist system for 50 years after 1997, the year a 99-year British lease on Hong Kong territory expires. 
Calls for democratic safeguards against Beijing have grown in Hong Kong since June 1989, when China used troops to crush its own pro-democracy movement.
 
18 of 60 Directly Elected
The 18 directly elected representatives will be part of the 60-seat Legislative Council. 
All the other council members are appointed by the Governor or indirectly elected by constituency groups approved by the Government -- groups representing interests like the tourism, medical and legal professions.
Real power in Hong Kong resides with conservative businessmen and professionals, who counsel deference to China, and with officials of the New China News Agency, Beijing's representative here.
Looking at the results, Ian Scott, chairman of the political science department of Hong Kong University, said, "Voters have been pretty emphatic in declaring they want more say in the policy-making process here."
Mr. Scott said the election represented "a triumph for the Hong Kong middle class, which has been excluded from power by traditional business elites," who receive virtually all the key government appointments.
He said that "what we have now is a small, vocal opposition party whose members speak with moral authority" because they are the only ones in the legislature who are directly elected.
 
Waiting for Change in China
But he added, "Everyone knows nothing much will change about the way Hong Kong is governed or the amount of democracy here until the leadership in China has changed."
The voters' choices Sunday included leading liberal politicians like Mr. Lee and Szeto Wah, both of whom have been branded "subversive" by Beijing; Lee Wing-tat, a teacher and grassroots politician who made news in 1989 when he publicly rebuked a visiting British Foreign Secretary, and Lau Chinshek, a popular union leader whom one political analyst characterized as the kind of man "the Government would most hate to see elected because they don't think he will compromise with them."
Britain had vowed to help the colony establish a strong working democracy before it handed Hong Kong back to China. 
But many say Britain, yielding to pressure from China, has produced watered-down reforms, agreeing to permit only half of the legislature to be directly elected.
British politicians, including Prime Minister John Major, who visited the colony recently, have promised that if this first direct election is a "success," they might try to negotiate with Beijing for more democracy for the colony, though no one has defined what would constitute a success.
Mr. Lee, who has been persistently critical of Chinese interference in the territory, gathered the largest number of votes in the election, which saw 54 candidates vying for the 18 seats.
With its landslide victory, his United Democrats, the largest political party here, is already assuming the mantle of the "majority" party in Hong Kong.
Mr. Lee told reporters today that he had requested and been granted an interview tomorrow with the colonial Governor, Sir David Wilson. 
Many political analysts believe the Government will try to dilute the liberal victory by appointing very conservative members to the new lesilature. 
Those appointments will probably be announced within 10 days.
But Mr. Lee said the United Democrats and its allies had won the right to present their own list of candidates for appointed seats not only in the legislature, but also in the Executive Council, the Governor's top advisory body.
The two seats that did not go to the United Democrats and their liberal allies were taken by a conservative pro-business candidate and an independent.
