
Democratic leaders in Congress are divided over whether to deny China favorable treatment on trade or to fashion more moderate legislation that may prove acceptable to the Bush Administration.
Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine, the majority leader, is trying to define sharp differences between the Democratic Party and the Administration on China policy.
He has introduced tough legislation that would sever most-favored-nation status - which gives China normal treatment on tariffs - if President Bush cannot certify within three months of enactment that China has released all political prisoners, established freedom of press and speech and ended restrictions on Chinese students living abroad.
But Thomas S. Foley, Speaker of the House, is ushering through his chamber a more moderate bill that would renew China's most-favored-nation status. 
It would give Beijing until next June to comply with stiffened human rights criteria - like the accounting for the thousands of pro-democracy students who are missing or imprisoned - before tariff advantages could be extended. 
But the President would be permitted under the House approach to waive these conditions on the ground that such a waiver could further encourage China to improve human rights.
The Democratic division is disheartening to Chinese students living in the United States. 
President Bush was widely perceived as having taken an overly tolerant view of the Beijing Government after the crackdown on dissent last year.
''Foley's position is disappointing,'' said Zhao Haiching, a Harvard University science student and chairman of the National Committee on Chinese Student Affairs. 
''With no conditions attached to the renewal of M.F.N., China would continue to suppress human rights without any fear of international pressure.''
Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, said Congressional Democrats should avoid sending ''mixed signals'' on China policy. 
''We should be sending a clear message on human rights.'' he said, adding that he did not think the Senate would accept a ''watered down'' bill because political repression continues and China did ''not measure up'' to a Federal law called the Jackson-Vanick amendment.
Under Jackson-Vanick, countries with nonmarket economies cannot be granted favored status unless the White House certifies that they are permitting free emigration. 
Annual renewal of the status had been routine since 1980, but it ignited controversy last May after the crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators in June 1989.
Representative Nancy Pelosi, Democrat of California, who has offered an amendment that seeks to toughen the House bill, said one reason for the rare difference of opinion between the Congressional leaders on an important foreign policy issue was the geographical location of the states Mr. Mitchell and Mr. Foley represent. 
Coming from a Pacific state, Mr. Foley's district is heavily dependent on trade with Asia.
Mr. Foley worked behind the scenes last week to block the Rules Committee from allowing the attachment of amendments similar to Mr. Mitchell's approach for consideration by the full House. 
Mr. Mitchell's bill, widely supported in the Senate, is being considered by the Senate Finance Committee.
