
China's senior leader, Deng Xiaoping, told a small group of top officials that they should not listen to him if he starts to say ''crazy things'' as he gets older and becomes less clear-minded, according to a transcript of a speech he made in September.
Mr. Deng also acknowledged that his intended heir, the Communist Party leader, Jiang Zemin, has had little experience in military affairs and called on other leaders to offer their assistance to him and not to bicker among themselves.
Mr. Deng's remarks were made on Sept. 
4 in a speech that was recorded and is now being disseminated among party and Government officials. 
The contents of the speech were confirmed by three officials who had read the document or had had it read to them.
Mr. Deng's speech laid down guidelines for the meeting of the Central Committee that concluded 10 days ago and which approved the reshuffle of the leadership of the Central Military Commission and the establishment of new measures for managing the policy of economic retrenchment. 
#39 Economic Measures The Central Committee meeting did not discuss the question of the Zhao Ziyang, the Communist Party leader who was ousted in June, apparently because in the speech in September, Mr. Deng said that the leaders must focus on solving the country's economic difficulties and not debate controversial issues. 
The implication was that China's leaders, for now, should not debate the fate of Mr. Zhao.
The Central Committee meeting also issued a list of 39 economic measures to be followed as part of the retrenchment program. 
They are being studied now by various Government and Party officials.
Two of the officials familar with the Deng document also said that a senior party leader, Yan Mingfu, has effectively been purged from his position as head of the United Front Department. 
The department played the role of mediator between the Government and students in the spring demonstrations.
In addition, Mr. Yan, who is respected abroad, has played a leading role as a liaison between the party and intellectuals, and between the mainland and Hong Kong and Taiwan. 
His dismissal is likely to raise new concerns about the party's relationship with overseas Chinese.
 
A Time to Retire
Mr. Deng's talk was given to the six members of the Standing Committee of the Politburo and three other top leaders, President Yang Shangkun, Vice President Wang Zhen and Wan Li, Chairman of China's legislature, the National People's Congress.
In his speech, Mr. Deng raised the prospect of his resignation, saying that he had waited long enough for a suitable time to retire and such a time had never presented itself. 
He said now was as good a time as any to resign, the officials said.
Mr. Deng officially retired from his last party post as chairman of the Central Military Commission at the Central Committee meeting earlier this month and named Mr. Jiang to succeed him.
Mr. Deng acknowledged in his talk that Mr. Jiang has not had much experience with the military. 
According to the officials who read the transcript of Mr. Deng's remard, Mr. Deng said that building prestige would take time, and that he would be very pleased when Mr. Jiang is capable of managing the nation's military decisions.
 
On Yang's Retirement
The officials said that in his talk, Mr. Deng mentioned that Mr. Yang also wanted to retire, but that Mr. Deng did not agree to the retirement because he believed there should not be too much rapid change in the leadership.
Mr. Deng said that Mr. Yang was concerned that if his brother, Yang Baibing, were promoted to Secretary General of the Military Commission, it would reflect badly on the family, but Mr. Deng said he insisted on the appointment and it was approved at the Central Committee meeting.
The relationship between Mr. Yang and Mr. Deng has puzzled many foreign diplomats and some Chinese. 
Some political analysts have argued that Mr. Yang wants to increase his influence and power, even if it leads to a conflict with Mr. Deng, while others say that the two are extremely close.
Mr. Deng's remarks and the distribution of them to party cadres seemed intended to allay fears that Mr. Yang was making a bid for power and trying to build a family dynasty. 
It is impossible to determine if Mr. Deng's recounting of the events was a true one, or if Mr. Yang kept his position and his brother was promoted as part of a complex bargaining process.
