
Appearing healthy and lucid, Deng Xiaoping, China's senior leader, today made his second public appearance in four days today and laughed at rumors that he had been ill.
''Some people said I died or was seriously ill,'' Mr. Deng told a leading Japanese politician, Masayoshi Ito. 
''That caused fluctuations in the financial markets in Hong Kong. 
A few days ago I met Professor T. D. Lee, and when the news reached Hong Kong, the stock market there picked up. 
Actually, I've been very well the whole time.''
Mr. Deng's meeting on Saturday with Professor Lee, a Nobel laureate in physics from Columbia University, was shown briefly on television and was the first time in more than three months that the leader had been seen in public. 
No foreigners were present at the meeting aside from Mr. Lee and his wife, and they refused to talk to reporters afterward.
The meeting today was attended by Japanese Embassy officials, who confirmed that the 85-year-old leader seemed in good health. 
''He looked great,'' one Japanese said. 
''And he didn't change at all over the course of the hour of conversations.''
Most of the meeting involved discussions of Chinese-Japanese relations, which both sides said should be preserved.
 
'Some Difference' Noted
Mr. Deng said the Chinese had noticed ''some difference'' in attitude between Japan and other nations at a Paris summit meeting of seven industrialized nations this summer. 
The conference condemned China's military suppression of the democracy movement, and Mr. Deng's remark was likely to embarrass the Japanese by suggesting Japan was not taking a firm position against the crackdown. 
Mr. Deng said the summit meeting's resolution on China was ''too superficial'' and was based on lies and distortions. 
Apparently referring to American economic sanctions that may be carried out later this year against China, he added that ''China is not afraid of sanctions, which in the long run will rebound on those imposing them.''
Mr. Deng also said he had great respect for former President Richard M. Nixon and former Prime Minister Kakuei Tanaka of Japan, both of whom helped normalize relations between their countries and China. 
Both leaders, he said, took a long-term view in weighing international relations - a hint that the West should not disrupt its long-term relationship with China because of the violent suppression of the democracy movement.
