
China's senior leader, Deng Xiaoping, meeting the first high-level American officials to visit here since the June killings in Tiananmen Square, said today that the two countries must restore and improve their strained relations in the interest of world stabilityI.
''We share common desires and common needs,'' Mr. Deng told Brent Scowcroft, national security adviser to President Bush, and Lawrence S. Eagleburger, American Deputy Secretary of State. 
''In spite of the disputes and the differences between us, after all, Chinese-American relations have to be improved. 
That is something necessary for world peace and stabilityI.''
Mr. Scowcroft replied that the United States agreed, ''and we are interested in working with you to promote that.''
The visit of Mr. Scowcroft and Mr. Eagleburger was announced by the White House only after they arrived in Beijing early yesterday morning as special envoys of President Bush.
The Chinese have regularly said that relations with the United States, deeply strained since the crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators in Tiananmen Square in June, could only be improved by American initiatives, and this daylong visit appears to have been such a gesture.
While the Chinese have focused attention on the visit with much pleasure and publicity, American officials have treated the affair gingerly, providing little information about the meetings or their substance.
For example, the official New China News Agency said tonight that Mr. Scowcroft had ''described his visit as positive, constructive and beneficial,'' but American officials showed no willingness to make such characterizations.
 
Steps Taken by Bush
After the Chinese killed hundreds of protesters in June, President Bush imposed an embargo on high-level exchanges, ordered some economic sanctions and suspended all military and civilian weapons sales to China.
He has also allowed Chinese students in the United States who fear reprisals on their return home to remain in America, an action that has drawn Chinese objections, most recently on Friday.
Mr. Deng, 85 years old, formally retired from his last official post last month, but he said it would be ''impolite and unreasonable for me not to receive a personal emissary of my friend President Bush.''
''I think we should say it is the common desire of our two sides to put an end as soon as possible to the disputes between China and the United States prevailing ever since June of this year,'' Mr. Deng added. 
''Because we share common desires and common needs, I think in the end we can find a solution.''
Mr. Scowcroft and Mr. Eagleburger left this afternoon for Tokyo to brief Japanese officials on the Malta talks.
An American official said only that the two days of discussions here had laid ''good groundwork'' for better relations. 
The Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman, Li Zhaoxing, called the conversations useful and constructive.
''I think both sides are happy about the discussions,'' he said. 
''Both sides expressed willingness to overcome their differences.''
 
The Nixon Relationship
Mr. Deng - working with the Nixon Adminstration, in which both Mr. Scowcroft and Mr. Eagleburger held high posts - rapidly forged a close Chinese-American relationship as a counterbalance to Soviet influence.
Despite significant changes in the Soviet Union under President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, including a conciliation of sorts with China, Beijing and Washington officials both seem happier to be on speaking terms again.
When Mr. Deng met former President Richard M. Nixon here a month ago, he accused the United States of having promoted the Chinese democracy movement and added that Washington had been ''involved too deeply.''
There were no such comments today. 
Mr. Scowcroft and Mr. Eagleburger, though wary of commenting on the substance of today's discussions, did describe Mr. Deng as weaker and less able to concentrate than in his February meeting with President Bush.
''There has been some slipping,'' an official said. 
''Deng was jovial as ever, but seemed to have some difficulty focusing on people. 
While he usually looks people directly in the face, his eyes sort of glazed over Scowcroft.''
The officials said that one of Mr. Deng's daughters sat behind him and retranslated the English with his native Sichuan accent, which created an echo effect, and that she touched him on the arm when it seemed appropriate for him to speak.
Mr. Deng began the meeting, the American officials said, by saying in Chinese, ''I'm so glad President Carter sent you,'' but corrected himself after having been nudged by his daughter.
 
Criticism by a Top Senator
WASHINGTON, Dec. 
10 (Special to The New York Times) - Senator Claiborne Pell, chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, today criticized the White House mission to China, saying the Administration should have waited until China improved its human rights policies before seeking closer ties.
''At the very time that freedom is sweeping through Eastern Europe, we should be sure the United States stands for freedom and democracy in Asia as well,'' Mr. Pell, Democrat of Rhode Island, said in a prepared statement.
