
Wobbly but beaming, China's senior leader, Deng Xiaoping, appeared on television tonight for the first time in five months, casting a vote in local elections conducted throughout the city.
More than five million people were expected to go to the polls today in Beijing to elect representatives to local councils, the only Government institution elected directly by the Chinese people.
At some polling stations, there was great fanfare, with firecrackers and streamers, but for the most part, many citizens privately expressed their indifference to the process.
"I'm sure there will be a lot of abstention votes this time," said a worker who helped organize voters in her district. 
"We are given so little information on the candidates. 
The people never meet them and so it's nearly impossible to tell them apart. 
None of them share my views, so I'm just going to abstain."
 
Complaints on Information
Indeed, many voters complained privately about the lack of information on the candidates and about their doubts that the candidates would ever voice the real views of the people. 
Still, the Government was promoting today's elections, which occur once every three years, as an example of China's political openness and democratic process.
The 86-year-old Mr. Deng was shown on television filling out his ballot and, escorted by his daughter, walking carefully over to the red ballot box. 
He gingerly stuffed his ballot into the box.
"That's all, right?"
Mr. Deng appeared to say, and then he walked away from the box. 
Mr. Deng was last seen on a publicity trip to the Asian Games village, where Beijing staged a mini-Olympics in the fall.
His television appearance at the polls today indicates that Chinese leaders want to stress the importance of the elections -- and perhaps rebut rumors that Mr. Deng is on his deathbed.
National television also showed the Communist Party General Secretary, Jiang Zemin, Prime Minister Li Peng and President Yang Shangkun casting their votes at the polls.
"The system of the People's Congress is the fundamental system of China," the official New China News Agency said in a paraphrase of comments by Prime Minister Li. 
"While continuing its economic reform, China will also carry out political reform."
Voters today elect representatives to the local People's Congress, which then elects deputies to a higher level people's congress. 
The congresses convene annually as a rubber stamp for the Government's legislation.
More than 90 percent of eligible voters were expected to turn out at the polls, but many people say they are going to the polls because it is their duty, and they do not want any repercussions from their work units, which keep a roster of the voters.
 
Biographies Are Posted
There are competing candidates in the election, normally four candidates for three positions, or three candidates for two positions. 
But all the candidates are officially approved, and often there is little difference among them.
At Beijing University, where brief biographies of the candidates were posted, many students still said they knew nothing about the candidates. 
The candidates apparently were carefully screened, and the popular former president of the university, Ding Shisun, withdrew his nomination, students at the university said. 
Mr. Ding was dismissed by the Government after the 1989 army crackdown on the democracy movement.
Some students scanned the biographies just before they entered the polling halls.
"I have no idea who these candidates are," a second-year student said. 
"It doesn't mean much anyway. 
Elections here are not like in America."
Candidates rarely appear at the polling stations. 
Most citizens vote through their work units, which distribute materials about the candidates.
At Fengsheng election district in west Beijing, the three candidates had videos of themselves distributed throughout the local work units, poll organizers said. 
But more than a dozen people approached at the poll today said they had not heard about a video.
At Jianguomen election district in east Beijing, poll organizers tried their best to portray the great respect that voters had for the election process.
But several voters said they selected candidates at random. 
One woman exclaimed to her friend that she did not know any of the candidates.
"Just put a mark next to any of the names," the friend said, as the woman began drawing a circle next to two of the names. 
The friend added, "It's all the same anyway."
