
As a battle looms in Washington over whether to end normal trade relations with China, many Chinese are finding themselves reluctantly siding with their hard-line rulers in hoping that the status is maintained.
While they appreciate the concern for human rights in their country and hope that the debate will force the Government to become less repressive, some worry that a cutoff of so-called most-favored-nation status would hurt their standard of living, harm the most reformist segments of the economy and prompt the hard-liners to restrict contacts with the United States.
It is impossible to be sure of public opinion in so vast and tightly controlled a country as China. 
But in informal conversations with dozens of Chinese in several parts of the country over recent months, most of those who were aware of the issue did not favor American economic sanctions and hoped that most-favored-nations benefits would be extended.
President Bush's annual recommendation on whether to renew the preferential trade status for China is required by June 3. 
He is expected to favor renewal, and opponents in Congress are expected to introduce legislation to overturn the decision.
In their first breath, urban Chinese intellectuals typically tell their trusted American friends how much they detest their leadership. 
In their second breath, they express affection for the United States and inquire about getting visas. 
And in their third breath, they worry that harsh American sanctions would hurt the Chinese people rather than their leaders.
"If I were President Bush, I would extend most-favored-nation status to China," said Zhang Weiguo, a Shanghai dissident who was unusual only in that he was willing to have his name published. 
"The U.S. should support China's economic development and social exchanges."
Mr. Zhang's anti-Government credentials are not in doubt. 
He was arrested after the 1989 Tiananmen crackdown and spent 20 months in prison before being released earlier this year, still unrepentant and fuming at the Government.
Mr. Zhang said the best result would be for a tough battle over Chinese trade in Washington, ending in an extension for another year. 
Such a close call would encourage China to make concessions on human rights and would leave the issue open for another fight next year, he said.
"Every year it's discussed, and that's very good," Mr. Zhang said. 
"It puts new pressure on China each year."
A downgrading of American trade links with China would mean a large rise in the tariffs imposed on Chinese goods shipped to the United States, and would hurt its thriving export sector. 
The south of China, which has the most developed private economy in the country, would be particularly affected, as would Hong Kong, through which Chinese goods usually pass for packaging or transshipment.
Many dissidents say they would like the United States and other countries to be even more outspoken in supporting Chinese human rights. 
Above all, they would like Prime Minister Li Peng and other hard-liners to lose "face."But they worry that economic sanctions are the wrong method.
"People are very torn inside," said a university student in Beijing. 
"They want pressure on the Government to change its policies, and they want the leadership to eat bitterness. 
But on the other hand, they're afraid that if sanctions are imposed, it's the ordinary people who would suffer. 
So we want America to threaten sanctions to pressure China, but we don't want sanctions themselves."
 
Peasants Seem Less Aware
Among Chinese peasants and workers, especially outside the capital, there seems to be much less awareness of the issue of sanctions, as well as less anger at the Government. 
Consequently, many people do not have clearly formed ideas on the subject, but frequently seem vaguely opposed to any sanctions that might compound the economic difficulties of the last couple of years. 
And some wealthier people fear that sanctions would make it more difficult to buy foreign products.
"The fear is that if M.F.N. were cut off, the price of a pack of Marlboros would go up," said an entrepreneur.
 
--------------------
Bush Picks Envoy to China
WASHINGTON, May 14 (AP) -- President Bush said today that he would nominate J. Stapleton Roy, a State Department officials, as Ambassador to China, succeeding James Rodrick Lilley.
Mr. Roy, 55 years old, of Bethesda, Md., is special assistant to Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and executive secretary of the State Department. 
A former Ambassador to Singapore, he was deputy chief of the United States liaison office and later the American mission in China from 1978 to 1981.
He was born in Nanjing of missionary parents.
