
Of all the criminal cases in China involving advocates of democracy, perhaps the most mysterious -- certainly the most titillating -- concerns a leading official here who was sentenced to four years in prison for engaging in an overly dynamic sex life.
Pan Weiming, the 42-year-old former chief of propaganda in Shanghai, China's largest city, was sentenced on Jan. 
24 for "hoodlum offenses."
"The defendant Pan Weiming, between August 1986 and February 1991, aimed to philander with women," the official Liberation Daily reported after the sentencing.
"In his home and in an isolated love nest he cajoled and seduced seven women," Liberation Daily reported. 
"One of them was a young woman whom he invited to his home to watch a pornographic video, before seducing her. 
In addition, Pan Weiming patronized a prostitute in a Sichuan hotel."
The disgrace of Mr. Pan, who had helped ease controls on artists and writers when he held the propaganda post in the late 1980's, was regarded as a triumph for China's hard-liners, and his escapades were widely reported.
Yet, as often in China, there may be more to the story.
Mr. Pan's friends do not dispute that he had several women companions after his wife left for Europe several years ago. 
Indeed, Mr. Pan is believed to have admitted to the police that he had 17 sexual partners in that time. 
(The number apparently so scandalized the authorities that they dropped the first digit.)
Yet many people in Shanghai apparently believe that it was breaking political rather than sexual taboos that got Mr. Pan in trouble.
"Shanghai is a sophisticated city," said an intellectual here. 
"And the authorities are sophisticated about how they destroy people."
Mr. Pan earned the wrath of the hard-liners because of his close association with other pro-democracy figures around the country. 
When the army shot thousands of Tiananmen protesters in June 1989, killing hundreds, Mr. Pan was in Beijing, visiting leaders who were later purged.
Although the authorities reserve the right to imprison Chinese for adultery or even premarital sex, prostitution is widely tolerated and extramarital affairs are not uncommon.
Mr. Pan was detained a year ago in the central Chinese city of Chengdu. 
Even his friends acknowledge that he was in bed with a prostitute.
According to Mr. Pan's friends, however, it was a setup. 
They say a pro-democracy acquaintance encouraged Mr. Pan to avail himself of a prostitute whom the acquaintance would pay for. 
The acquaintance, they believe, had been forced by the police to help entrap Mr. Pan in exchange for clemency in his own case.
The friends say that the police not only burst into the hotel room at the right moment but also turned out to have a video of the liaison, indicating that the authorities had prepared in advance. 
And once Mr. Pan had been brought back to Shanghai, his friends say, the interrogation concerned not his sexual dalliances but his contacts with other pro-democracy officials.
Officials in the Shanghai Public Security Bureau and the People's Court declined to comment on the case.
