
Prime Minister Li Peng of China is scheduled to visit the Soviet Union in April, in an effort to improve relations between the two nations, foreign diplomats in Beijing say.
Moscow announced last month that Mr. Li would visit, but did not give a date, and the Chinese authorities so far have declined to comment. 
But the diplomats, from a Communist country and a Western country, confirmed that both Moscow and Beijing were now making preparations for a visit by Mr. Li at the end of April.
The visit would be the highest-level exchange since President Mikhail S. Gorbachev visited Beijing in May to normalize relations after the three-decade Chinese-Soviet split. 
Since then, Chinese-Soviet relations have not developed very rapidly, partly because of Chinese suspicions that the Soviet Union is straying from Communist orthodoxy and is inciting change in Eastern Europe.
 
Relations Still Cool
While border trade has increased and there is growing interest in cultural and business exchanges, relations between the two Communist parties are cool. 
Chinese hard-liners increasingly view the Soviets not as brothers in Communist solidarity, but as a potential source of instabilty. 
These days, for example, some Chinese seek independent news about Eastern Europe not just from Voice of America but also from the Moscow radio.
In December, the Communist Party circulated a document about the upheaval in Eastern Europe, and it said one factor was the change under way in the Soviet Union, the diplomats said. 
This was widely regarded as an implicit criticism of Soviet policy, and in political study sessions some officials apparently made this explicit. 
But foreign diplomats and other Chinese officials dispute foreign news reports that the party specifically rebuked Mr. Gorbachev and his policies.
Rumors of a power struggle, in which Mr. Li might leave the post of Prime Minister, have been circulating in Beijing for weeks, but the diplomats said planning for the trip did not shed any light on the rumors. 
In response to Soviet inquiries, the Chinese side has said the visit will be by the Prime Minister acting in that capacity, the diplomats said.
Thus if there was a change, Mr. Li's successor would presumably make the trip.
