
A committee in Beijing today ratified its final version of the constitution that will govern Hong Kong after the Chinese takeover in 1997, prompting an outcry from liberal and moderate politicians and angry protests by several thousand college students.
But even as the Hong Kong students demonstrated, burning a copy of the draft, some conservatives said they found the limited level of democracy included in the so-called Basic Law to be acceptable.
Hong Kong's local Government issued a statement saying the blueprint would ''allow for a smooth transition of Government in 1997,'' when the British colony will come under Chinese rule.
The constitution, which will be formally approved next month by China's national legislature, was drafted by a 51-member committee appointed and dominated by Beijing. 
Eighteen of its members are Hong Kong residents.
Far Short of Free Elections
The final version of the draft law was marginally more progressive than an earlier draft. 
But it fell far short of the proposal by local lawmakers and the Hong Kong Government for a fully elected legislature.
Although China says it will allow Hong Kong ''a high degree of autonomy'' after 1997, the large middle class here has demanded that a solid democratic framework be established to protect its rights and liberties. 
The calls for speedy adoption of democratic safeguards reached a peak here last June, when the Chinese Government brutally suppressed protests for democracy in a military crackdown.
As confidence in Hong Kong's future dwindles, thousands of educated professionals have been emigrating each year. 
The politicians who criticized the new draft of the Basic Law today said it would simply accelerate the exodus.
Hong Kong lawmakers, who are now appointed or indirectly elected, had united behind a plan that would permit half of the legislature to be directly elected by 1997, and all of its members by 2003.
But the final version of the Basic Law would mandate direct elections for only one-third of the 60 seats by 1997, and for half of the seats in the year 2003. 
It also would establish separate voting systems for bills introduced by lawmakers and legislation proposed by the Government.
 
'Indirect' Balloting
The draft constitution calls for some legislators to be indirectly elected through constituency groups such as doctors and lawyers, with others chosen by an electoral college whose members would be appointed by the Government.
The lawmakers chosen through this highly complicated system would vote in 2007 on whether Hong Kong should have a fully elected legislature.
T. L. Tsim, a leading political commentator, expressed the disappointment of liberals in Hong Kong who have marched and lobbied in favor of a more democratic system.
He said, ''I am reminded of what one of his friends once said about the movie star Errol Flynn: 'You know where you stand with Errol. 
He always lets you down.'
China is like that too.''
Thousands of students boycotted classes today to protest the future constitution. 
After demonstrations at colleges and universities, several thousand students gathered for a rally in Chater Garden, a park across from the legislative office building downtown.
Carrying red banners that denounced the draft law in bold Chinese characters, they marched later to the offices of the New China News Agency, China's de facto embassy here, which was heavily guarded by the police.
But Vincent Lo, a member of a conservative group of businessmen who had criticized an earlier version of the Basic Law, said the amended blueprint was acceptable.
Mr. Lo noted that the Governments of Britain and China had agreed on the Basic Law in private negotiations. 
''That can help insure a smooth transition,'' he said.
 
'A Shameful Act'
Martin Lee, a liberal legislator, denounced the blueprint as ''a shameful act of surrender'' by British officials, who accepted the latest version only after last-minute talks with Beijing.
''Could you imagine how the people of Czechoslovakia or even Lithuania would respond if their Governments told them they could not elect so much as half of their Parliament until 13 years from now?'' he asked.
A senior Hong Kong official who asked not to be identified said the Government was ''pleased with the draft, with reservations.''He said that Britain hoped to see ''at least 50 percent of the legislature directly elected by 1997, and that's what we will be working toward.
''We will continue our efforts to persuade the Chinese Government'' to change the plan, he added.
Hong Kong representatives on the drafting committee said that they found the final version acceptable for the most part. 
''It's the best we can get,'' said Li Ka-shing, a billionaire businessmen on the panel.
A statement issued by Omelco, a group that represent all of Hong Kong's legislative and executive counselors and and lobbied for a more liberal plan, said that the final decision on Hong Kong's political framework in 1997 ''will be made between the British and Chinese Governments.''
''For our part, Omelco have conscientiously reflected the views and wishes of the Hong Kong people,'' the statement said. 
''We have done this all the way to the British Prime Minister.''
 
'Everyone a Loser'
Joseph Cheng, a former professor of government at the Chinese University of Hong Kong, said that the latest version of the draft constitution would leave ''everyone a loser.''
''Even China loses because the whole consultative and drafting process was suppose to legitimize the Basic Law, and it hasn't,'' he said. 
''This is not the government Hong Kong people said they wanted.''
In its statement, the Hong Kong Government also announced that it would permit 18 seats in the Legislature to be directly elected in 1991, two short of the 20 proposed in a consensus plan backed by most major political groups.
Britain, which proposed several years ago that 10 seats be opened to direct elections in 1991, promised recently to begin instituting democratic changes at a faster pace. 
During a visit to Hong Kong last month, Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd said that Britain was prepared to enact safeguards alone if China would not agree to a faster pace of change.
One political analyst said that the proposal for limited direct elections in 1991 ''obviously has Beijing's stamp of approval. 
I don't think you would call this an heroic act on Britain's part.''
Students in Hong Kong protesting the law that will govern the island after it is turned over to China in 1997. 
The document, known as the Basic Law, was ratified yesterday in Beijing. 
(Agence-France Presse)
