
With his friends in high places and a record as an influential theorist of the Communist Party, one might expect Wu Jiaxiang to be at the center of power in China.
Instead, Mr. Wu is in a cell of Qincheng Prison outside Beijing. 
For two years, the 35-year-old Mr. Wu has languished there without being charged with any crime. 
The Government has apparently been afraid to release him or sentence him. 
His Kafkaesque fate is an indication of how quickly a high-flying career in China can change trajectories and plunge into disgrace.
Perhaps more important, his case is a measure of the degree to which the hard-line Government has isolated itself from the younger generation of Communists. 
Mr. Wu is representative of a group of young and middle-aged professionals who sought to reform the party rather than overthrow it.
 
Many Are Alienated
A small number of such party members were arrested, and many others found themselves forced to pledge allegiance to a hard-line orthodoxy they found odious. 
By turning on such people, the hard-liners alienated a broad spectrum of mid-level officials in the central Government. 
The Government has not said a word about Mr. Wu since he was arrested on July 17, 1989, six weeks after the army assault on protesters in Beijing left at least several hundred dead and thousands wounded.
"I have not heard of this case," said a spokesman for the Beijing Intermediate Court, which is in charge of sentencing political offenders.
From interviews with Mr. Wu's friends and associates, it is possible to piece together an account of his career and of his present fate. 
But many are still puzzled about why he has been punished so harshly. 
"No one really knows why he's still in prison," said a Chinese with first-hand knowledge of the case. 
"People say that maybe it's because he knows too much."
While Mr. Wu clearly took a strong stand against Prime Minister Li Peng and the use of force to suppress the democracy movement, he was not a leader of the protests. 
His world was Zhongnanhai, the central leadership compound where he worked, rather than Tiananmen Square next door.
Wu Jiaxiang (whose name is pronounced approximately woo jyah shyahng) is a small, lean man who speaks the refined patois of Beijing intellectuals and yet conveys something of the earthy poverty of rural Anhui Province, where he grew up.
 
Backed 'New Authoritarianism'
A poet and graceful writer, Mr. Wu became a prominent essayist. 
In particular, he attracted attention for his promotion of "new authoritarianism."
This theory held that enlightened despotism was necessary for the time being to promote economic growth and prepare China for democracy later on.
Some young intellectuals were furious with these essays, regarding them as apologies for repression. 
Nevertheless, Mr. Wu shared their impatience for more rapid reform. 
When the Tiananmen democracy movement began in April 1989, Mr. Wu supported the students and opposed Prime Minister Li.
Mr. Wu is believed to be accused of "counterrevolutionary" slogans accusing Mr. Li of a "coup d'etat."
The difficulty for the courts in prosecuting him is that the first of his four slogans reportedly called for supporting the leadership of the Communist Party.
