
A petite Chinese woman, with a skimpy skirt and a blouse revealing more than it covered, walked daintily across the lobby of the best hotel in this city. 
A few yards away, several smartly clad women sipping tea in the coffee shop smiled alluringly at the male guests.
It is an open secret that here in Shenzhen, a special economic zone just across the border from Hong Kong, economic progress has brought with it the seedy side of the free market: prostitution, corruption, smuggling and even drug trafficking.
Shenzhen is China's best-known boomtown, and it is renowned throughout the country for its economic growth, high salaries, modern fashions and adherence to "bourgeois" morals, if any. 
To many people in the rest of China, Shenzhen is a lawless place.
The Government is reluctant to disclose information on activities that are not supposed to occur in a Communist country, and police officials declined to be interviewed. 
Still, the underside of Shenzhen has become an explosive factor in the debate over how fast China should develop and how much capitalism should be brought in.
The Government's hard-liners argue that the capitalist influence is responsible for the decline in morality and the growth in pornography, bribery and drug smuggling. 
Some elderly conservatives would prefer to see Shenzhen's development proceed with more careful monitoring. 
In Shenzhen, some disagree.
"Prostitution, drugs and smuggling, yes, all these have appeared here," said Zhong Yaohua, an official in the Shenzhen Economic Development Bureau. 
"But slowing down economic development won't solve these problems."
Other defenders of Shenzhen admit that the bribes may be higher than in the rest of China and there may be a buoyant black-market economy, but they say the city is not entirely lawless. 
One law prevails even here, they say: the law of the market.
Shenzhen, designated a special economic zone more than a decade ago, has only in the last few years matured into a vibrant business center. 
But as trade links expand between Hong Kong and China's southern coastal areas, the entry points become more difficult to patrol and many goods slip out of the reach of border guards.
Last year, Chinese customs authorities confiscated $125 million worth of goods in 11,600 incidents of smuggling, a significant rise over the previous year, China's official press reported.
Shenzhen officials insist that only a small portion of smuggling occurs across its closely monitored borders. 
Still, more than $19.8 million worth of goods were seized by Shenzhen's police in 1990, and in the first quarter of this year, more than $5.2 million in merchandise was confiscated.
All sorts of items -- from antiques to cigarettes to guns to computer parts -- are smuggled into China. 
More than 90 percent of an estimated 10 million videocassette recorders sold in China are brought in illegally, and about 40,000 boxes of cigarettes, worth $14.6 million, were seized by police in 1990, official Chinese press reports said. 
The aim is to evade high import duties.
Greater contact with Hong Kong and Taiwan businessmen has cultivated a booming prostitution industry. 
A prostitute can make anywhere from $25 to $250 a customer, amounting to several times more than the average worker makes in a month.
Of course, most Chinese women would be scandalized at the thought of selling their bodies. 
But many apparently are not, for there are about 20,000 prostitutes in this city of nearly 1.9 million, according to one police estimate.
Drugs are also sold here, although much more secretly than other smuggled goods. 
While these social ills virtually disappeared for the first few decades of Communist rule, they are hardly new to China. 
Prostitution and drug trafficking, in particular, were rampant before the 1949 revolution.
"The Communist Party got rid of these seedy professions, but the sickness was still there," said Wang Xinkuo, a senior manager at Catic Shenzhen Enterprise Group. 
"Some of the black-market practices came in with the open-door policy, but some are simply the vestiges of the old society."
