
SECRETIVE power struggles have been a way of life here for millenniums, but now the jousting is growing particularly intense. 
China's octogenarian rulers must decide within the next few months on a political platform and a roster of leaders to be approved at the crucial 14th Communist Party Congress late this year.
Deng Xiaoping already has launched his campaign -- a virtual road show -- for swifter change across the nation, and he remains the single most important political figure in China even though he no longer holds any official posts. 
But there are a half-dozen other octogenarian leaders who collectively also have great influence. 
The result is a protracted bargaining process, now under way behind the scenes, to determine the outcome of the party congress.
A party congress occurs just once in five years or so, and this one may be the last that China's octogenarians will be able to control. 
Mr. Deng will be 88 next month, and his main rival, Chen Yun, has just turned 87. 
Both are frail. 
"This is the old man's last effort to push reform," a senior Chinese official said of Mr. Deng.
Mr. Deng has committed himself to the position that China can avoid the fate of the Soviet Union only by hastening economic restructuring and improving the standard of living. 
But his elderly colleagues, who include one nonagenarian, Peng Zhen, don't all agree. 
So Mr. Deng, who for years had virtually confined his movements to a few spots in China, has been traveling around the nation for support for his policies and proteges. 
"Deng doesn't really have any of his own people in the leadership now," said a Chinese economist. 
"He may have control, but he doesn't yet have full control. 
He has to fight against all the other old hard-liners to get the people he wants into the leadership."
Mr. Deng launched his campaign in January with a trip to the southern province of Guangdong, setting off a wave of enthusiasm across the nation for greater economic restructuring. 
But Mr. Deng himself has been frustrated at the ability of hard-liners to block his directives, and he is said to have scolded the younger leaders -- who hold the formal titles -- for failure to follow through on his speeches.
"Everyone says that I am the master planner for economic reform," Mr. Deng reportedly said during a two-hour visit in May to Capital Corporation, a steel mill in Beijing. 
"But no one seems to be carrying out anything."
The intrigues now under way were apparent a day after Mr. Deng's visit to the steel company. 
His comments there were recorded on videotape by the company, but the next day the Central Committee General Office sent an envoy to confiscate the tape, according to a Chinese with access to top officials. 
It is not clear what one should make of this: perhaps Mr. Deng's enemies were trying to block the distribution of the tape, or perhaps his supporters were planning to edit it for television. 
Or perhaps the Politburo members simply wanted to know what Mr. Deng was saying behind their backs.
There are many signs that Mr. Deng is gaining in the power struggles, although the disputes certainly are far from over. 
One such sign is that Ding Guangen, his bridge-playing partner, apparently is overseeing the preparation for the report that will be presented at the 14th Party Congress. 
Mr. Ding is believed to have peppered the draft with reformist phrases, such as "market economy" instead of the previously used "commodity economy."
Another sign that Mr. Deng is pushing ahead is that the Government has eased controls in many areas, such as prices, rents and stock ownership. 
Many intellectuals are also rejoicing at reports that He Dongchang, the hard-line party secretary and deputy director of the State Education Commission, is being pushed out. 
Still, while the political system is tilting toward Mr. Deng, there have been no purges of major hard-liners yet.
Mr. Deng himself is said to have three prominent hard-liners in his sights: Propaganda Minister Wang Renzhi, Acting Culture Minister He Jingzhi and the director at People's Daily, Gao Di. 
Mr. Deng criticized them by name in January, yet they remain in their jobs. 
Apparently they have support from other octogenarians.
The 14th Party Congress will approve the report, a platform for the next five years, and choose a new Central Committee. 
The Central Committee will then choose a Politburo to serve until 1997. 
Some reshuffling is expected, but the two most important figures -- Prime Minister Li Peng and General Secretary Jiang Zemin -- are generally expected to retain their Politburo seats. 
Mr. Li may be vulnerable, however, to being "promoted" out of his Government job next March when the National People's Congress meets.
Mr. Deng appears to be supporting two Deputy Prime Ministers, Zhu Rongji and Tian Jiyun, and they are among the possible candidates to succeed Mr. Li if he is pushed out as Prime Minister. 
Mr. Deng went out of his way to say that while he and most other leaders do not understand economics, Mr. Zhu does know something about the subject. 
Mr. Zhu was picked recently to head a new super-ministry called the Economic and Trade Office.
As part of Mr. Deng's campaign to boost reform-minded officials and promote economic change, the Politburo recently released a document that says Yangtze River cities and border areas will be opened up to the outside world in the same way that coastal cities already have been.
"Clearly at the moment we are in a Deng-ist high tide," said a Western diplomat. 
But no one knows whether the tide will go out again, particularly after Mr. Deng's death, leaving the landscape unchanged.
