
WHAT are the economic implications of the turmoil in the Communist world?
President Bush said this week that China remains a country of strategic importance to America but that a ''normalized relationship'' is impossible as long as the harsh crackdown on dissent continues. 
And Japan's decision to suspend aid to China dramatized the vulnerability of the Chinese economy to the shocks felt by both foreign government and business.
Capital from Hong Kong had been flowing so heavily into China that twice as many people are employed in Guangdong Province by Hong Kong manufacturers as in Hong Kong itself. 
That inflow of capital and technology from Hong Kong and other capitalist democracies could now cease, causing the collapse of Deng Xiaoping's efforts to modernize the economy.
His modernization drive was built on the theory that economic reform had to be combined with political discipline. 
Economic and political experts on China, from both capitalist and Communist countries, had long warned that the Chinese Government would not tolerate dissent. 
Silviu Brucan, a professor of social science at the University of Bucharest in Rumania, said two years ago, ''It is not a good sign that of Deng's four cardinal principles of modernization, the most frequently cited lately has been the people's 'democratic dictatorship.'
''
Mr. Brucan contended that ''while Gorbachev feels secure to advocate more democracy, having attracted most of the intelligentsia, scientists and engineers (numbering almost 15 million in the Soviet Union), Deng is fearful that the Chinese people, still beset by widespread illiteracy, are insufficiently prepared to withstand Western ideological influences.''
This refusal to countenance political dissent stemmed from fear of the unruliness of the Chinese people, as manifested in the Cultural Revolution; the wide disparity between living standards in rural and urban areas; anxiety about the speed with which the people could turn capitalist and reject their rulers, and the enormous development tasks Mr. Deng believed would require continued state capital and controls.
Yet, as one found on visiting China two years ago, the political ferment was as palpable, especially among young people, as the economic progress. 
Chinese leaders insisted that their repressive political actions - they had just cracked down on students protesting the removal of Hu Yaobang, a liberal, as General Secretary of the Communist Party - would mean no reversal of China's drive to reform the economic system. 
Today Chinese leaders are holding to that line - and the Bush Administration is trying to hold the door open to continued relations with China, apparently hoping that economic modernization will in the end bring political liberalization in its train.
In the Soviet Union, Mikhail S. Gorbachev is trying to carry out economic and political reform simultaneously. 
But he is trying to use political reform - especially the opening up of the system to the voices of economic criticism and dissent - as the lever for a deeper reconstruction of the Soviet economy.
But if the Soviet Union does not make faster progress in restructuring and improving its economy, Mr. Gorbachev's effort at political liberalization could fail. 
This week Leonid Abalkin, an economist who will be playing a leading role in the Soviet leadership, warned that there could be a ''right-wing swing'' unless rapid economic progress is made within two years.
Vladimir Tikhonov, another leading economist, said there could be ''famine in the very near future'' unless radical changes are made in farmers' ownership of the land. 
And a third economist, Gennadi Lisichkin, criticized the Government for printing money with little of value behind it - ''like putting an alcoholic in charge of a liquor shop.''
The huge budget deficit, amounting to 11 percent of the gross national product, is the heart of the Soviet plight. 
That deficit results in the profligate creation of money to support an inefficient industrial structure and vast misuse of labor - really just unemployment in disguise. 
The effort to use price controls has produced a vicious suppressed inflation, which results in worsening shortages of consumer goods including food.
Viktor Belkin, an economist at the Academy of Sciences, this week publicly called the Soviet system ''a cannibalistic economy, feeding on itself.''
It devours its capital stock, wastes its human resources and breeds corruption. 
These root causes of Soviet failure also apply to China, where, despite the initial successes in farming and industry, inflation and corruption helped bring on the recent popular uprising.
The turmoil in the Communist world creates both hazards and opportunities for the United States. 
Foreign capital, cut off from China by fears of repression and economic retrogression, is flowing to the United States, putting upward pressure on the dollar. 
Unless the Western countries reunite to stabilize the dollar, it could worsen the United States trade deficit and add to recessionary pressures.
On the other side, Mr. Gorbachev's efforts to restructure the Soviet economy by cutting military outlays and trimming the budget deficit to eliminate concealed inflation creates the parallel opportunity in this country for lower budget deficits, lower interest rates, stronger growth and a strengthened international trade position.
