
An American graduate degree program that teaches Western-style capitalism to students in China is in peril. 
But it is unclear whether the threat comes from Federal budget cutters or a White House sensitive to hard-liners in China.
Officials at the State University of Buffalo, which offers a master's degree in business administration in a program financed by the Chinese and American Governments, were notified on Feb. 
5 that $400,000 in United States Commerce Department money for the program was in jeopardy and would probably be canceled April 1. 
The Chinese Government provides the remaining $200,000.
Instead, university officials were told, the money would be diverted to Eastern European countries.
But The Buffalo News, quoting an unnamed diplomatic source, reported Sunday that the White House had ordered the program terminated because its free-enterprise curriculum had been increasingly criticized by hard-liners in the Chinese Government.
The diplomat said the Chinese Government had singled out the business course as ''highly subversive'' and a ''Western-oriented operation incompatible with the aims of the present Chinese leadership.''
 
Not Yet Canceled
A senior Bush Administration official said today that the program had not yet been officially canceled, but that the Administration was considering switching it to the more politically compatible ground of Eastern Europe.
''Given the atmosphere in China, with the Chinese reform movement not proceeding well,'' he said, ''and given the fact that there is a great need for similar programs in Eastern Europe, and given the fact that the Commerce Department is stuck holding the bill for this program, it might be better suited to change it to Eastern Europe.''
University officials have mounted a letter-writing campaign to the Commerce Department to protest the cuts and received support from some corporations represented on the degree program's board, including the Xerox Corporation, the General Electric Company and the Union Carbide Corporation.
''One could conjure up a scenario that the Chinese want to terminate the program but do not want to say so,'' said Dr. Joseph Alutto, head of the university's School of Management. 
''It's not any information we have received. 
Our continuing contacts with the Chinese Government say that is not the case.
''All the information we have says there are two issues involved. 
One is the budget problem in the Department of Commerce and the desire to respond to initiatives in the Eastern bloc. 
The second is a sense, perhaps, in the Department of Commerce that China may no longer be a primary area of interest.''
 
Temporary Halt in Classes
Dr. Alutto said Chinese Government officials have been questioning him about how soon the degree program would be back in full operation. 
The university had temporarily halted classes following Beijing's crackdown on students in Tiananmen Square last June. 
Students have recently returned to classes, but are expected to lose about a year of course work altogether.
The program, the only one at college level financed by both Governments, has awarded 131 M.B.A. degrees to Chinese students since 1984.
Currently 89 students are enrolled in the program, offered at the National Center for Industrial Science and Technology Management Development in Dalian, a seaport community in Lyaoning province. 
The classes, which originally were taught by both American and Chinese professors, are now taught by Chinese faculty, many of whom have done postdoctoral work at the Buffalo University.
 
Breach in Protocol, Some Say
University officials said a cut in financing by the United States would represent a breach of the protocol signed by the two Governments when the program was established in 1984. 
It stipulates that if a country withdraws from the agreement, it must pay to complete the educations of those students currently enrolled.
''I feel it would be unfortunate for all parties concerned to precipitously cancel the program,'' said Dr. Steven B. Sample, the university president. 
''Educationally, it would be a grave mistake.''
Dr. Alutto said: ''My only hope is that the long-term issue is kept in mind here. 
If the United States is at all serious about the modernization of China, it has to continue supporting programs like that. 
Essentially our graduates are providing the future economic leaders of China.''
