
Among the contacts being renewed between China and groups in the United States is a collaborative effort in which American educators are to help China remodel its higher education system.
A five-member delegation from the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching visited China recently and found the Chinese still eager to proceed with a three-year agreement between the foundation and the Chinese Government.
The accord, signed in Washington last year, touched on China's major concerns. 
In talks at the time, Chinese officials said they were prepared to examine dramatic innovations like charging tuition and imposing some sort of education tax.
After Government soldiers killed demonstrators in Tiananmen Square in June, many contacts between the United States and China were suspended to protest China's suppression of human rights. 
The Bush Administration has come under heavy fire because of the secret trip to China in July by the national security adviser, Brent Scowcroft, and the Deputy Secretary of State, Lawrence S. Eagleburger, and a second visit, on Dec. 
8, to mend relations between the two countries.
Nevertheless, some dealings between the Chinese and nonprofit American groups have been warily resumed.
 
Links 'Worth Maintaining'
''The cultural and academic view is that whatever the political atmosphere, these links which generally represent progressive forces for reform are worth maintaining,'' Winston Lord, former Ambassador to China, said yesterday. 
''However, there are some who feel that these contacts can be exploited, making it look as if it's just business as usual.''
Ernest L. Boyer, president of the Princeton-based Carnegie Foundation, said his group's trip from Nov. 
26 to Dec. 
6 was primarily a fact-finding one to test the political climate and see if the agreement on higher education should be sustained.
''We felt it was important to talk directly and received strong encouragement not only in the State Department but even among our China scholars that the agreement should not be discontinued,'' Dr. Boyer said.
The punitive aftermath of Tiananmen Square was evident to the Carnegie delegation at Beijing University. 
The freshman class is not taking an academic program but spending time in political indoctrination and military training. 
Departments in politically sensitive areas like political science and sociology have not been permitted to enroll new students.
Dr. Boyer said high Chinese officials expressed a desire to resume the Fulbright Scholarship program, which had been suspended after the Tiananmen Square killings.
 
Issue of Handling Diversity
He said Chinese officials wanted to talk about how to handle the diversity that exists among the two million undergraduates in Chinese universities. 
They were particularly interested in American institutions like the City University of New York with its numerous senior colleges and community colleges.
The Carnegie delegation visited half a dozen universities and met with officials, educators and scholars. 
Some meetings were formal, while others resembled the typical get-togethers of scholars all over the world.
''I was struck even more than in the past how completely American colleges and universities have penetrated that nation,'' Dr. Boyer said. 
''In every conversation, you talked to people who had been to one or more campuses here and who could talk about why Yale was better than Stanford or what were the top 10 universities in America with as much intelligence as you would find in any faculty club in America.''
The upshot of the visit is that the agreement will go forward and that Carnegie will develop a follow-up strategy.
Dr. Boyer said he told Chinese officials that if the Government was serious about sustaining a higher education system Chinese students must be reassured that they would be able to move back and forth in academic disciplines in a free climate.
 
'Respectfully Received'
''I'm sure I was being heard and respectfully received,'' he said. 
''I do not pretend to know the politics, but no one argued about this.''
