
What is the source of student power?
What, in the latest dramatic example, gave China's students the power to temporarily paralyze the Government and perhaps, despite the bloody rout by military firepower, change their country's course?
Some 30 years after American students marched in the forefront of the battle against racial discrimination, campuses across the nation are experiencing racial divisions and racist incidents.
Numbers alone are not what gives students power, even though the events in Beijing's Tiananmen Square were driven by the very mass of the protesters. 
Still, in China as in the United States and elsewhere, university students constitute only a fraction of the entire population. 
They command little economic power. 
Nor are they a significant part of their countries' political apparatus. 
What then is the source of their power?
Most likely, their power derives in large part from the advantages of youth: great energy and enthusiasm, faith in a better future (which many of their elders may think admirable but naive), fewer family obligations, none of the restrictions that will later be imposed by the economic establishment, which rules over jobs and careers.
All this gives students greater freedom for action; but despite this, the successful use of their power depends in large measure on support from the majority of the citizenry. 
It does not detract from the bravery of China's students that their sudden show of power depended, in addition to their own remarkable discipline and adherence to nonviolence, on open and tacit support from many quarters, even within a faction of the Communist Party and the Government.
All this does not automatically mark the Chinese students as by nature always virtuous. 
After all, another generation of Chinese students, a little more than 20 years ago, served as Mao Zedong's brutal shock troops of the Cultural Revolution.
History thus suggests that students reflect powerful trends in their society, sometimes taking the lead, perhaps because they consider themselves less vulnerable or because their idealism has not yet been dulled by adult caution. 
When the students interpret social and political trends accurately, their power is considerable.
If students' attitudes can shift so dramatically between generations, there is good reason for a critical look at the past and current mood among a vocal group of American students and what inspired it.
In the 1960's, the student voice rang out in support of civil rights. 
White and black students linked arms in the battle against discrimination. 
Faced by what seemed like an unyielding force of prejudice, backed by the sheriffs' guns and dogs, students drew strength from what had been the dream of rebellious youth through the ages: to be on the side of righteousness, while at the same time challenging the authorities.
Like today's students in China who are fighting for greater freedom and justice, they had joined, or even marched in the vanguard of, the noble cause of civil rights which, they sensed, was also the cause of the majority of righteous citizens.
In the late 1960's and early 70's, American students opposed the Vietnam War and incidentally also learned that governmental power can turn violent, though fortunately not in the manner of the Chinese troops this week. 
Still, when challenged by campus protesters, the police bloodied students at Columbia and Harvard and, in 1970, gunfire by the Ohio National Guard killed four students at Kent State University.
All of this stands in marked contrasts to current reports of new racial divisions and even harassment of minority-group students on American campuses.
Student demonstrations against apartheid in South Africa, which were prominent on the campuses and captured the media spotlight only two years ago, have been replaced by news of hostile incidents against minority-group students.
Student voices seem to echo new racist sentiments off-campus. 
Instead of Dr. Martin Luther King's non-violent drive for civil rights and a more perfect democracy, growing numbers of students now seem to reflect an era in which politicians shun the taint of liberalism. 
The students once again appear to mirror society's changing sentiments.
Some educators and civil rights advocates say those American students who use their power to protest affirmative action programs seem to reflect an adult neo-reactionary backlash that appears to say that democracy has gone too far. 
It is difficult not to judge their actions against those of the Chinese students who captured the world's admiring attention by mirroring a changing society's search for more democracy.
