
Scholars and universities around the world are setting up archives to collect pamphlets, posters and other items created during the democracy movement in China last spring.
At least seven universities, including Yale, Harvard, Columbia, and the University of Chicago, are putting out calls for the material. 
Scholars involved in the effort say their aim is to collect materials of great historical significance and prevent the Chinese Government from denying the uprising ever happened. 
Outside the United States, the University of Leiden in the Netherlands, the University of Toronto and Australian National University have joined in the effort.
''The Chinese are trying to systematically stop their own people from knowing anything about it,'' said Jonathan Spence, the George Burton Adams professor of history at Yale University and a pre-eminent scholar of modern Chinese history. 
''They are denying any sort of witness to their own people. 
So in a sense, it might be the foreigner who becomes a custodian of Chinese information if they refuse to keep it themselves.''
 
Closing Off the World
China has a long pattern of closing the outside world from events within its borders, Professor Spence said. 
During the Great Leap Forward in 1958 and the subsequent famines, as well as during the Cultural Revolution, the Chinese Government tried to prevent news about the social upheavals from leaking out.
Despite the extensive foreign television coverage of the student demonstrations and the June 4 violence in and around Tiananmen Square, said Professor Spence, the Chinese Government has branded the students as hoodlums and insisted that they, not the troops, initiated the killings.
But material collected for the archives will show otherwise, the scholars involved said. 
The universities want to document the scope of the pro-democracy movement. 
In addition to pamphlets and posters, the archives will contain photographs, videotapes, bloody clothing and eyewitness oral histories.
Scholars have moved quickly to get the material, for much of the written record of the movement is ephemeral, said Katharine Morton, the head of manuscripts and archives at the Sterling Memorial Library at Yale. 
While official Chinese newspapers wrote straightforward accounts of the demonstrations for a few days in May, debate was primarily carried out in pamphlets, placards and wall posters, which can easily be destroyed.
 
Various Approaches Used
The material has been collected in different ways. 
Professor Spence at Yale and Prof. Timothy Brooke of the University of Toronto sent letters to newspapers around the world and have received some material.
Marsha Wagner, the director of the C.V. 
Starr East Asian Library at Columbia University, was in Beijing during the pro-democracy movement. 
She took photographs of many of the wall posters and carried the film out with her, she said.
Other foreigners in China at the time smuggled out political pamphlets. 
Some continue to make their way to the West through Hong Kong, said Qiu Zhong, who is involved with the archive set up jointly by the University of Chicago and the Chicago-based center for Psychosocial Studies. 
Oral histories of tourists and the survivors will also be important.
While the various archives are still in their early stages, the scholars involved already know security is a major concern. 
Some of the photographs and videotapes show Chinese in ''counterrevolutionary'' acts, which could be dangerous to them. 
Balancing the need to protect people's identities with the openness usually associated with academic projects will not be easy, the scholars said.
''We have to be extremely careful about who gets access to these materials,'' said Kandice Hauf, an associate in research at the Fairbank Center for East Asian Research at Harvard University. 
''People are still being arrested.''
