
YUE-SAI KAN, a 43-year-old celebrity television host who produced "One World," a Western life-style magazine broadcast in China from 1987 through 1990, is about to wield yet another potential tool of cultural revolution.
It was 9 o'clock one recent morning, just two days before Ms. Kan would leave Manhattan for China to introduce her own line of cosmetics, a line that will, she promised an Asian-American visitor, "make you gorgeous."
As she opened the door of her six-story town house on the Upper East Side -- which is equipped with an office, a sound studio, television monitors, two secretaries, one housekeeper (who makes chiao-tzu, or dumplings) and a husband (the industrialist James McManus) -- she apologized for not being dressed.
She was lying. 
Even in a most casual outfit, a bright red ("my favorite color") floral T-shirt and matching leggings, she was camera-ready. 
The skin, covered by her own foundation, was pale and blemish-free. 
The lips and fingernails were the same shade of red as her outfit. 
Her hair gleamed. 
In six hours, she would have a haircut. 
A casual observer couldn't imagine why.
She opened the first Federal Express delivery of the day. 
It was a photo of herself, which will soon be emblazoned on advertisements, shopping bags and, blown up to four feet high, window displays.
"It's a digital photo," she said, waving the picture. 
"It's expensive. 
But I think it's beautiful, don't you?"
She was happy. 
It seemed that yet a few more dollars of the $5 million she and her husband had invested in her new venture had been well spent.
A S she scampered up a staircase to her second-floor office, past a hallway hung with framed photos of her on the covers of Western and Asian magazines, she apologized yet again. 
"You are the only one privileged to see this mess," she said.
Ms. Kan (whose name is pronounced you-sigh con) may be personally tidy, but her suitcases were, indeed, pretty chaotic. 
Unzipped tote bags sprawled on the floor. 
Letters in English and in Chinese were strewn all over the sofa. 
Wads of paper blew about under a coffee table and chairs. 
She looked at the mess in dismay, picked up the telephone and, in Chinese, summoned Annie Xu, her housekeeper, to sweep up and make coffee.
The chaos was deceiving. 
In Shanghai, she plans to introduce her cosmetics line with the precision of a military general.
On Sept. 
28, she will hold a press conference in a hotel yet to be named, to announce the line of cosmetics and her new television show, "Yue-Sai's World," which will have 15-second commercials for the cosmetics. 
On Sept. 
30, the show will hit the air amid a blitz of the star's personal appearances on television talk shows, radio shows and interviews in magazines and newspapers. 
On Oct. 
1, she will formally introduce the line of 32 items: foundations, lipsticks, rouges, moisturizer, nail polishes, day and night creams (made with Chinese herbs) and a perfume called First Love. 
The line, most of it manufactured in China, will be sold at 10 department stores in Shanghai, a city of 14 million.
At each store, windows 12 feet wide by 8 feet high will be filled with the enlarged photographs of Ms. Kan and her products. 
The windows will be designed by Rolando Seinhart, creative director of cosmetics and fragrances for Bloomingdale's in Manhattan. 
Inside the stores, Ms. Kan will divide her army of 44 sales clerks, handpicked from 1,200 young women who sent resumes, photos and letters in response to a single advertisement in a Shanghai newspaper.
Ms. Kan plucked an applicant's letter from a suitcase and read it aloud: "I, Miss Chen, was born 1968, am 1.6 meters tall. 
I have a pretty good-looking face. 
My skin is nice, and since 1987, I graduated from high school, can speak some English and I work now in a clothing store since 1986."
The letter was covered with a half dozen pictures of Ms. Kan, who said, "She says she has collected every picture she has seen of me in different magazines."
The letter ended, "I hope Yue-Sai is my idol, and it would be my greatest pleasure in life to work for her."
Ms. Kan tossed the letter back into the suitcase. 
"We're not hiring her," she said.
LIKE Estee Lauder, Ms. Kan is selling her own image, as transformed into sophisticated products, packaging and advertising. 
Given the success of "One World" -- which she produced for China Central Television and which garnered an audience of 400 million people, many of whom still push, tremble and faint at the sight of her -- the sell shouldn't be a difficult one.
She is also waging a beauty price war. 
She has positioned her $6.50 lipstick above the Lifei brand ($4), which is made in China, and Avon (nearly $4), and below Max Factor (more than $35) and Christian Dior (more than $40).
"How can they sell the same stuff in Asia that they sell in the United States?" she asked, glaring at a segmented Avon eye shadow stick in varied shades of blue and green.
"Whatever's good for whites is wrong for Asians," she added. 
"We have puffy eyes; they have deep-set eyes. 
We have flat noses; they have tall noses."
"We call them 'big noses,' remember?" she said with a laugh, then continued: "Is it that they have the audacity for us to use the same products?
Or do we have the stupidity to use the same products?"
Her line offers nine lipsticks and matching nail polishes, divided among a red-orange family and a pink family, and a choice of two foundations. 
The brown eye shadow, she said, "extends the eyes and emphasizes the black of my eyes, not the blue of my eyes."
She named the colors after cities: Tokyo Pink, New York Red, Venice Orange.
"I gave them the world on TV," she said, "I'm giving them the world again."
"One World" traveled to 17 countries in the course of 102 broadcasts. 
One episode, titled "Denmark: Love, Marriage and Women's Roles," showed a dizzying array of couples being married and then, almost as rapidly, being divorced.
"Twenty-five thousand people get married every year," Ms. Kan said on the show. 
"Fifteen thousand get divorced every year."
In an episode of the new show, "Yue-Sai's World," she will introduce the Chinese to Michael Jackson's music video "Black and White," the whole six minutes.
Ms. Kan, who works 18 hours a day and is away from home a third of the year, is nothing if not global in her sensibilities.
Still, her sense of what becomes the Chinese woman is quite specific. 
Ms. Kan does make-overs with a fervor that is messianic.
She whipped out a bottle of foundation, and with the expert hands of someone who has spent 20 years in front of the camera (she first volunteered on a local-access cable show in Manhattan's Chinatown in 1972), smoothed the foundation on her visitor's face, chatting all the time. 
She took out a lipstick pencil and started outlining.
"The lips have to be balanced," she said. 
"God gave us two of everything, and they must be balanced."
Her visitor laughed, somewhat hysterically.
"Oh, I'm serious," Ms. Kan said, studiously working away. 
"Don't you feel beautiful?
You're going to be gorgeous!"
T HE idea for the line was born in 1986, after Ms. Kan had become friends with other Chinese television celebrities in the United States. 
Since 1980, she had been producing "Looking East," a cable television show that presented Asian life-styles to Western viewers, first in Manhattan and eventually across the United States. 
When she was sitting around with Kaity Tong, the Manhattan newscaster, Emerald Yeh, an anchor in San Francisco, and Linda Yu, an anchor in Chicago, the conversation didn't revolve around the fate of Deng Xiaoping.
"We talked about makeup," Ms. Kan said. 
None of them could find one brand that made everything they needed. 
But Ms. Kan didn't start her new empire then. 
"The time wasn't right then," she said, because "the people's living standards weren't high enough" in China.
She also had not yet met James McManus. 
In 1989, she was introduced to him by Mortimer Levitt, the owner of the Custom Shop chain of men's clothing stores in Manhattan. 
They married in February of the following year. 
"He proposed to me after six months," she said, giggling.
Ms. Kan was born to a wealthy family in Guilin, China, and moved to Hong Kong as a child. 
She went to college at the branch of Brigham Young University in Laie, Hawaii, and went to New York City after graduation. 
In 1971, she and her sister Vickie started Kanjin, a import-export concern doing business with China.
Her first show was "Looking East," and "One World," which showed Western life-styles to the Chinese, had its debut in 1987. 
She dated men like Ted Turner and George Lang, the Manhattan restaurateur. 
But it was Mr. McManus, who owns 12 companies, who put her in a position to become the cosmetics queen of China.
The wedding (her first, his second) took place at the Silver Palace Restaurant in Chinatown, where she hired 85 waiters ("from uptown") and rented silver, linen and crystal for 520 guests. 
"We chartered 100 limos to take people home," she said. 
"The logical thing is to rent buses, but my husband didn't want it, so what can I do?"
Soon after, she told him her dream. 
"If there's anything I want to do it's to design cosmetics," she said, "and he said, 'But, of course.'
"
For her trip to Shanghai, Ms. Kan was packing 32 suitcases. 
During her three-month stay, her husband will commute from Manhattan to Shanghai every two weeks.
But Shanghai is only the first market.
"I have 400 million potential buyers," she said.
Each one of them she wants to make gorgeous.
