
MOST OF MY 240 graduate and undergraduate students at the Beijing Institute of Chemical Technology were witty, wise, sweet and highly intelligent - sometimes brilliant. 
They were patriotic, with a deep-rooted love of their homeland, its ways and its people.
They also seemed to love America - and Richard Nixon, about whom they said with simple logic: ''He was a great man because he made our countries friends.''
''The heart of a teacher and the heart of a student are always linked to each other,'' one student wrote to me recently. 
He and others - Chinese university students, the men and women of Tiananmen Square of June 1989 - write to me still, their professor of English from September 1987 to July 1988 in the Chinese Government's ''foreign expert'' program.
As a teacher, I had few resources to carry forth a foreign-language program, having quickly discovered that these university students could speak little English despite years of studying it at middle, secondary and undergraduate levels.
Chinese education is archaic, relying mainly upon rote. 
Locked in my students' brains were a warehouse of English vocabulary and a wellspring of English grammar that had never been opened for regenerative speech.
I realized that we had to spend the year talking to each other and thinking in English. 
Consequently, our two-hour classes took on a simple format: They would tell me about China, and I would tell them about America.
They puzzled over America, the commonplace and the conceptual. 
I would describe an American scene, say a supermarket, and then ask them to enter it, walking down imaginary aisles to imaginary checkout counters. 
One student inevitably asked, ''But why would I need so much food?''
Helping my students overcome their shyness was a constant struggle. 
Initially charmed by their modesty, I resigned myself to their tradition of self-effacement when trying to get them to form ''English corners,'' groups of eight students that would meet after class on campus once a week to practice English. 
''Teacher Charles,'' one student explained, ''you must understand why we do not have English corners as you wish. 
No one wants to show off.''
They loved American music, especially tapes of Willy Nelson and folk rock, like Paul Simon's ''Graceland.''
They flocked to American films. 
The movie ''Breakdancing'' was big in Beijing that year and, thinking that all Americans could do breakdancing, they asked me to perform. 
I deferred to a student who, having seen the film many times, had perfected the slithering movements.
They added more and more Western touches to their clothing, which was already heavily denimed - loud shirts for the men, rather than the prosaic white ones, and sundresses or miniskirts for the young women, which must have made hearts jump even among the old men in the Politburo.
And they loved to talk. 
But because each of my classes was attended by an official ''class monitor,'' discussion of political topics was reserved mainly for office hours, which my students had not previously encountered. 
Though the office that was provided for me had little light and no heat, it had two couches, several chairs, a daily Thermos of boiled water for tea - and scores of students stopping by, eager for a word or two.
It was during these times that I, usually a nonpolitical person, inadvertently became a symbol and spokesman for democracy, a misty concept firing the students' imaginations.
To them, it was primarily a way of gaining a few choices in their lives. 
They wanted something to say about where they would be assigned to work, for example, complaining that too frequently students are sent to remote areas and jobs unrelated to their training, with nothing to do. 
One confessed: ''I fear that I will spend the rest of my life in Xinjiang Province only drinking tea and reading newspapers.''
They wanted choices, too, about basic conditions, such as where they could live and when they could marry; they had to reach prescribed ages - 23 for men and 20 for women - for government permission. 
Marriage was also prohibited while they were students, although some had been married before starting their programs.
They wanted to be free of corruption and profiteering of the kind I discovered when one student promised to invite me to the tiny apartment that he and his wife were scheduled to get from her work unit. 
With sadness and quiet anger, he later informed me that they were disgraced, being unable to fulfill their invitation: They could not afford the payoff for the apartment demanded by the Communist Party official in the work unit.
They wanted to be free to do as they wished in their own homes. 
That they weren't became clear when another student invited me home, saying that his family had decided it was time for Chinese people to be allowed to have foreign guests. 
When the head of his mother's work unit learned of the plans, however, the family was warned that the visit would bring heavy penalties, like the loss of both apartment and jobs.
My students desperately wanted more than their meager portion of books, ill-stocked libraries and ill-equipped laboratories; more than a small dormitory space where they had to live eight to a room and were permitted only one shower a week; more than their ration of food -rice dishes mainly, with occasional shreds of pork. 
(During the Tiananmen Square hunger strikes, I wondered how such undernourished men and women could survive.) Never did their limited vision of democracy call for changing China's form of government, and though they showed no love for the Communist Party, they expressed no desire to replace it.
The reforms they wanted seemed to them a natural progression within the many economic reforms already in motion. 
''It is a good time to be in China,'' one student told me. 
When I asked if a Cultural Revolution could happen again, they said that was not possible. 
''Chairman Mao is gone,'' they chided, ''and the party is no longer our parents telling us what to do.''
They misjudged the dragon.
''The younger generation has completely lost hope with our regime,'' says a letter delivered just a few weeks ago. 
''Almost every one of my friends intends to go abroad through different channels. 
Please don't think we are not patriots. 
On the contrary, we hope to save our homeland. 
If we remain here, no one knows what will happen to us. 
So if you are willing to and capable, help me please!''
