
WERE YOU FOLLOWED?"
LIU XIANG ASKED anxiously, by way of greeting. 
It was a bright September day last year when we met for dinner at a restaurant in the center of Beijing. 
He hardly touched his food, spending much of his time looking over his shoulder. 
A fugitive from the law, Liu was very different from the easygoing physics student who, the year before, was at the center of the democracy movement at Tiananmen Square.
"They're closing in," he said in a whisper. 
"The police have been asking around town about me, and I've got to leave very soon. 
But this time I've got to get to Hong Kong safely. 
Otherwise, it's all over."
Liu Xiang (pronounced lee-o shahng) was haunted by the memories of the prison from which he had just escaped. 
Each night he had the same nightmare. 
"In my dream, they beat me, and I try to explain that I didn't really mean to escape, and they just keep on beating me and beating me."
Each night he would wake, his body in a cold sweat, his heart pumping wildly.
IT ALL BEGAN WITH A MIDNIGHT SNACK. 
LATE ON THE evening of April 18, 1989, Liu Xiang went out with some friends to eat and ran into a crowd of Beijing University students marching toward Tiananmen Square. 
Caught up in the excitement, Liu joined the march. 
That decision changed his life.
Gangly, with close-cropped hair, Liu was then a 23-year-old senior at Qinghua University, one of China's premier colleges. 
A member of the Communist Youth League, he was at the time a firm supporter of the Communist Party. 
He remained a supporter even as the democracy movement sucked him in, as it did millions of others around the country. 
But then came the crackdown, and Liu found to his horror that the Communist Party had no compunctions about declaring war on him and his fellow students.
Fleeing to southern China, Liu entered a world he scarcely knew existed -- a free-for-all zone of bribery, smuggling and criminal gangs. 
He escaped to Hong Kong in April 1990, requesting asylum from the British authorities. 
Instead, he was returned to China some days later. 
Thrown into prison, he learned to rely on his fists as well as his brains. 
He managed to escape and make his way back to Beijing. 
By then it was summer and the police were on his heels. 
He fled south once more and again sneaked across the border to Hong Kong. 
Last month, he arrived in New York to start a new life.
Liu Xiang's two-year odyssey affords an unusual glimpse of China's underside, where the regime's repressive apparatus is sometimes more pathetic than terrifying. 
Corruption, greed and passive resistance conspire to frustrate the hard-liners' ability to capture democracy movement fugitives like Liu Xiang.
In Maoist times, it probably would have been impossible for a political fugitive to escape China once, let alone twice. 
In past campaigns of repression, the party was able to mobilize the masses to turn in their neighbors, even their family. 
This time, ordinary Chinese sided with the fugitives.
Escape stories of the democracy movement activists may differ in the details but they all share one point: none of the activists would have been able to escape if it were not for the assistance of a range of people along the way, from peasants to Communist Party officials. 
Liu Xiang found that acquaintances everywhere were willing to lie for him, bribe for him and forge identity papers for him. 
These acquaintances showed him that, particularly in southern China, the security network is tattered. 
Liu found his way out through the holes.
What Liu's two-year ordeal also underscores is the way the British overseers of Hong Kong sometimes seem to be doing Beijing's bidding. 
Sending a democracy movement activist back to China, to face the possibility of a long prison sentence, is hardly in keeping with the professed British ideals of fair play and common decency. 
However, the British authorities hold the view that the best way to manage Hong Kong is not to vex China but to maintain stabilityI and allow for a graceful exit in 1997. 
Liu seems to have been a victim of that policy.
It was in Hong Kong, while hiding as an illegal immigrant after his second escape, in December 1990, that Liu recounted details of his life after the June 1989 crackdown at Tiananmen Square. 
Speaking mostly in Mandarin, his words punctuated here and there with prison jargon, sometimes drifting into the functional English he learned in school, Liu Xiang gave a Dantean account of his journey through the many circles of a Chinese Communist hell.
QINGHUA UNIVERSITY, A SPRAWLING CAMPUS nestled in the northwestern outskirts of Beijing, is the M.I.T. of China. 
In China, only a tiny elite pass the examinations to get into any university, and those who succeed tend to find higher education a liberating experience.
After slaving away in high school and struggling to pass college entrance examinations, they finally have the chance to fall in love (romance is banned in high schools) as well as the time to reflect on life and politics. 
One of the few burdens foisted on them is that of history: students have played an important role during China's major upheavals of the last 100 years, and they sometimes hold themselves responsible for the direction of their nation.
My wife and fellow New York Times correspondent, Sheryl WuDunn, met Liu Xiang while she was interviewing students at Tiananmen Square shortly after the democracy movement began. 
Liu was bright and articulate, one of a handful who would phone us with information about plans for demonstrations and other student activities. 
We met with him often, and he impressed us as courteous, gentle and eager to be helpful. 
Without appearing manipulative, Liu Xiang charms those around him.
One of his greatest skills is in cultivating guanxi (connections) -- a critical talent in China. 
China is not so much a market economy or a socialist economy as a guanxi economy. 
Everything from jobs to cars to videos is distributed largely on the basis of guanxi. 
Knowing this is how the system works, Liu would collect guanxi the way some people collect postage stamps.
Back in the spring of 1989, in his ramshackle dorm, with books and clothing strewn about, Liu and his five roommates complained about hard-line policies, but not about the system itself. 
On one visit, I asked Liu if he was anti-Communist. 
"Of course not," he said, a bit horrified. 
"We all support the Communist Party. 
We want to reform it."
Liu Xiang's father, an officer of the People's Liberation Army, had been killed during a gun battle in the Cultural Revolution and was later declared a martyr by the Government. 
Liu grew up in the ancient city of Xian, in north-central China, and was raised as a believer in Communism.
When the 1989 student democracy movement began, he didn't want to get involved. 
"It's very tough to get into Qinghua University," he explained, "and if you get in trouble then it's all down the drain."
Yet it was impossible to stay away from Tiananmen Square. 
First he watched from the sidelines. 
Then he helped carry to waiting ambulances those classmates who had gone on hunger strikes and had fainted. 
He stayed with them as they were revived, and he saw them pull the IV tubes from their arms to resume their fast. 
Liu was moved in a way he had never been before.
A radio buff, Liu was asked by several of his friends -- student leaders -- to help set up a loudspeaker system at Tiananmen Square to air news about their movement. 
Liu helped run the "broadcast station," as they called it, and also served as a liaison with a number of foreign journalists.
Then, in the early morning hours of June 4, his world was shattered. 
"We had expected tear gas that evening, but nobody thought the soldiers would fire on the people," Liu Xiang recalls. 
"We were shocked, and that was when my attitude toward the Communist Party changed. 
Everything we believed in suddenly collapsed."
At 4 A.M., heading with some friends for the area around Tiananmen Square, Liu found tanks burning and the People's Liberation Army behaving like an invading force. 
The students spent much of the next few days harassing troops and playing a dangerous cat-and-mouse game with them along the alleys around the main roads. 
Twice, bullets narrowly missed Liu, and once, he says, he helped set fire to an armored personnel carrier -- a capital offense in itself.
The Army quickly consolidated its control over the capital. 
Many students and workers were detained, and the security forces began daily interrogations of Liu Xiang on the Qinghua campus. 
Obliged to write day-by-day accounts of his activities during the democracy movement, Liu omitted any mention of his involvement in the broadcast station or his role in setting fire to the personnel carrier. 
The authorities knew nothing about those matters, and grilled him instead on his contacts with student leaders and with me and Sheryl.
The university refused to allow Liu to graduate, and the questionings continued all summer. 
The authorities were sure he wasn't telling the complete truth, but he had one advantage over them: they didn't know what he had actually done.
"I figured if I lied, I'd be able to get a diploma and resume a normal life," he says, and so he lied about almost everything. 
He denied any role at Tiananmen and insisted he had met my wife and me only casually and briefly. 
Yet even during that terrifying time, he managed to outwit the police, who were keeping us under partial surveillance, to meet with Sheryl and to brief her on the crackdown and the interrogations on the campuses. 
Beneath his affable exterior was clearly an iron resolve, a courage that sometimes bordered on the reckless.
As in almost every part of the country, the investigations at Qinghua were subverted by a massive cover-up by students, professors and even Communist Party officials. 
At the risk of their careers and their freedom, officials intervened and lied to protect those involved in the Tiananmen movement.
At Qinghua, some well-placed individuals secretly met with Liu and other students who were under investigation. 
"They would tell us, 'The authorities know this much, so tell them that, and no more,' " Liu says. 
One sympathizer helped Liu obtain a photocopy of his university diploma, so that he could pretend to have graduated.
There was, however, no sign that the investigation was drawing to a close. 
As the summer wore on, Liu Xiang began to worry that time was running out. 
When the regular Qinghua students returned to campus for the fall semester, the authorities would be able to question more people and might learn that he had been lying about his democracy movement activities.
After a number of student acquaintances were arrested, he became even more nervous and finally obtained some false documents from a friendly official. 
He then secretly arranged to flee to the southern city of Shenzhen, adjacent to Hong Kong.
TWELVE YEARS AGO, Shenzhen was little more than a farming community. 
But as soon as it was declared a special economic zone -- an area modeled on the frenetically capitalistic Hong Kong -- it was transformed almost overnight into a boom town. 
Hong Kong entrepreneurs found that they could save on labor costs by transferring their garment and toy factories across the border. 
Today, Hong Kong companies employ some 2 million Chinese workers in Shenzhen, which has a population of 1.9 million, and the surrounding towns of Guangdong Province.
In most of China, jobs and apartments are assigned. 
In Shenzhen, and to a lesser extent elsewhere in Guangdong, it is possible to find a job and rent an apartment on one's own. 
This has corroded the Government's control mechanisms and created a wealth of new opportunities -- for criminals as well as more conventional entrepreneurs. 
Among the concrete-block apartment houses and thriving shops are people who will supply ID cards to those who want a new identity. 
In Maoist China, there was nowhere to hide; now there is Guangdong.
Criminal gangs have also moved in. 
The gangs, known as Triads (derived from the Cantonese name for the Three in Accord Society, the "three" being heaven, earth and man), have a long history in China. 
Triads fled after the 1949 revolution to Hong Kong and Taiwan; there, in close proximity to China, they have remained powerful, providing "protection" to nightclubs, for example, and periodically getting into terrifying turf battles in which hoods go after one another with cleavers.
With the weakening of Communist controls over the last dozen years, the Triads set up branches in Shenzhen and other parts of Guangdong, running smuggling, gambling and prostitution rackets. 
(According to the Shenzhen authorities, in just the last five months of 1990 more than 60 criminal gangs were broken up.)
Liu Xiang thought that in such a free-for-all he could get a job with no questions asked. 
Ordinary Chinese are not allowed to enter Shenzhen without a special certificate, but Liu was able to go through guanxi and get the necessary documentation. 
Liu's new papers, which were under his own name, proclaimed him a worker who had never participated in the democracy movement and who was going to Shenzhen as a buyer for a factory.
Shortly after arriving in Shenzhen, in September 1989, Liu Xiang found a temporary position in an office assigning Chinese sailors to jobs on foreign ships. 
Liu told his employer he had not taken part in the democracy movement, showing the bootleg photocopy of his diploma as evidence. 
"If I had been involved," he declared, "how would I have the diploma?"
Struggling to rebuild his future, Liu systematically went about cultivating guanxi in Shenzhen. 
Through a network of new friends, he found someone with connections to the Public Security Bureau, and he managed to extend his length of stay in Shenzhen.
He also made connections with the criminal underworld. 
Those gangsters whom he met were not caricatures out of a kung fu movie. 
Some were well-educated and ambitious young people alienated from the system and were drawn to the easy money to be had from smuggling and other illegal activities.
As a final backup, in case the authorities caught up with him, Liu used his job to obtain an ID card in the name of a sailor whose papers he was handling for the agency.
Unfortunately, Liu Xiang did his job so well that his boss decided to hire him permanently. 
While on a trip to Beijing in early 1990, the boss dropped by Qinghua University to check Liu's file (all Chinese have a personnel file, whose contents they are not allowed to see) and was horrified to learn that his star employee was being sought by the university authorities for fleeing in the middle of investigations.
Upon returning to Shenzhen, the boss promptly dismissed Liu Xiang. 
Liu then joined the gangs, helping them trade currencies on the black market. 
"We made a lot of money in a short period," he says, grinning at the memory.
Meanwhile, Qinghua officials had informed the Public Security Bureau in Beijing that Liu was working in Shenzhen. 
Soon, two Beijing policemen were in Shenzhen, questioning people about Liu's whereabouts. 
Liu Xiang felt the net tightening around him. 
It was time to leave for Hong Kong.
OVER THE NEXT FEW weeks, Liu borrowed maps of Hong Kong, memorizing the street names and geography of the border area. 
He got Hong Kong currency, and he went to places frequented by Hong Kong tourists, to see what set them apart from mainland Chinese.
"I decided that the head and feet were most important," he says. 
"Hong Kong people have fancy haircuts and they wear imported shoes. 
Plus a lot of them wear blue jeans."
So Liu invested in a pair of imported athletic shoes and an expensive haircut. 
The only giveaway was a chipped and rotten front tooth, an obvious product of Chinese dentistry.
Hiring a boat to take him all the way to Hong Kong was too expensive, so Liu arranged to make his escape on Zhong-Ying Street, a shopping district straddling the border. 
One side of the street is China; the other, Hong Kong. 
It is an area crammed with shops selling everything imaginable, from gold jewelry to traditional medicines to pornographic magazines.
Residents of China need special permission to visit the street, but Liu and two friends used their guanxi to pay a bribe equivalent to $106 (several months' salary for a factory worker) so that the Chinese People's Armed Police would look the other way. 
Hong Kong police are stationed along the street to prevent residents of China from slipping into the British territory, and Liu and his friends sneaked through back entrances and alleys until they got to a gulf of water separating them from Hong Kong.
"We found a private boat that would take us across the water," Liu says. 
"When the marine police were changing shifts, we crossed the channel."
On April 22, 1990, after being dropped off on shore, Liu and his companions hiked across some hills and then flagged a minibus. 
They went immediately to Chinese University, whose student union had sent delegates to Tiananmen Square during the democracy movement.
Liu Xiang's problems seemed to be over. 
At Chinese University, he was treated as a hero, and he and his friends were put in touch with the Hong Kong Alliance in Support of the Patriotic Democratic Movement in China. 
The three subsequently turned themselves in to the Hong Kong Government and requested asylum.
Although Liu and his friends were kept at a detention center, they were treated courteously, and there seemed to be no problems. 
Liu had documents, including photographs and testimonials, confirming his role at Tiananmen.
On their seventh day in Hong Kong, immigration officers told the three to get their belongings ready, shook their hands and wished them well. 
Liu was elated. 
But then a long bus pulled up, and he froze. 
It was not the van used to take people back to the center of Hong Kong. 
Instead, it was the bus used to repatriate illegal immigrants to China.
"There must be some mistake," Liu protested, but the police forced him and his friends on the bus. 
Liu's voice hardens as he speaks of the Hong Kong Government's decision.
"It was contemptible," he says. 
"We'd been betrayed by the Hong Kong Government. 
We were so shocked and angry, and we figured we'd be sentenced to 10 years in prison."
The Hong Kong Government declines to discuss specific cases. 
The territory's British overseers have briefly, and as secretly as possible, provided refuge to some prominent democracy activists from China before sending them on to Europe or the United States. 
But the Hong Kong authorities have done this unenthusiastically, worried about the reaction from Beijing, and have systematically moved to curb criticisms about China that would upset its leadership. 
Hong Kong has not allowed some prominent Chinese dissidents living abroad to visit the territory. 
Films critical of China are censored.
In most parts of its former empire, from India to Africa, Britain tried to nurture democratic governments in the territories it was leaving. 
In Hong Kong, it appears to have done the reverse, and democracy forces in Hong Kong charge that British officials have done this so that London can maintain smooth diplomatic and trade relations with Beijing.
British and Hong Kong Government officials dispute such charges. 
They assert that Hong Kong cannot survive without China, and that openly supporting a small number of democracy activists would only hurt the great majority of Hong Kong residents in the long run.
THE FEW MINUTES on the bus as it returned to China were among the worst in Liu's life.
He knew that the Hong Kong authorities provide a list of all the illegal immigrants they repatriate. 
He also knew that the papers and photos he was carrying -- intended to document his involvement in the democracy movement and therefore win him asylum -- would get him swift punishment from China. 
He hid these under the bus seat, knowing that he was riding in a Hong Kong bus that probably would not be searched.
As many as 100 people are repatriated each day from Hong Kong. 
Most are illegal immigrants from Guangdong Province and are released, on payment of a small fine, once they can prove they are from the local area and have no criminal record. 
Those from distant provinces, like Liu Xiang, are interrogated to make sure they are not wanted for some crime. 
Sometimes they are sent back to the Public Security Bureaus in their hometowns, a process that can take months.
From the list provided by Hong Kong, the Chinese knew Liu's name, but he lied about his identity, claiming to be a worker from Xian and giving a false address. 
Eventually, of course, the police would realize that he had given a phony address and might beat the truth out of him, but he hoped to be free by then. 
He asked a detainee who was about to be released to phone a friend in Shenzhen and explain the situation. 
The Shenzhen friend promptly went to great lengths to bribe the guards to release Liu.
"The guards took the 'gifts,' but said that to release me they needed proof that I didn't have a criminal record," Liu says. 
"My friend tried to get that, but it was very difficult to get the necessary paper forged. 
In Guangdong, it's usually easy to get things done with money, but in this case we had some difficulties."
The friend did get one such forged document, but it didn't look authentic and the friend decided not to run the risk of using it.
Liu was transferred first to Zhangmutou Detention Center and then to Yangcun Detention Center, both in central Guangdong. 
The conditions were similar: up to 40 prisoners to a cell and up to 10 sleeping in a single, oversized bed. 
In addition to the beds, the cell contained a basin of water and a hole in the floor for a toilet.
Meals consisted of cold rice with warmed-over vegetables. 
"The biggest problem was that there wasn't enough food," Liu says. 
"If somebody spat out a rotten or disgusting vegetable on the floor, someone else would pick it up and put it in his mouth, even though the guards would beat us if they saw us doing that."
Liu, who is 5 foot 11, weighed 172 pounds when he entered prison and just 147 pounds seven weeks later. 
In addition to hunger, the prisoners constantly suffered from mosquito bites and a particularly ferocious kind of bedbug that left their legs covered with angry red welts.
At the detention centers, as in all Chinese prisons, order was established in each cell by the "boss" -- a prisoner who bullied his way to the top of the heap and ordered the other prisoners around. 
Liu felt frighteningly out of place, but he was lucky enough to be physically larger than most of the other prisoners.
At Yangcun, in another bit of good fortune, the boss in his cell was a fellow northerner and Mandarin speaker. 
"Big Brother, please take my watch," Liu told the boss as soon as he was in the cell. 
The boss warmed to such flattery (and no doubt would have taken the wristwatch in any case), and soon Liu became one of his strongmen. 
They would rough up new arrivals, looking for money hidden from the guards. 
The money would be used to buy cigarettes, food and clothing.
When the boss was moved to another prison, Liu Xiang took over. 
As though he had taken on the coloration of the jungle, the college boy was now a gang leader, forcing other prisoners to wash his underwear and give up their money and sometimes even their food. 
When they disobeyed, he ordered his strongmen to beat them up. 
One might expect Liu, formerly an advocate of democracy, to be embarrassed about his activities as a boss, but he is unapologetic.
"Originally, I didn't want to do it, but then I realized that in prison everything depends on this," he says, clenching a fist. 
"If you don't beat them up, then you'll get beaten up. 
And then you'll end up washing their underwear. 
In there, the only thing that matters is violence. 
There's no morality, just power."
That attitude reflects a general moral uncertainty of recent years. 
China's main sources of moral values -- traditional Confucianism and revolutionary Communism -- have largely collapsed, and many young people today speak of a crisis of faith. 
Some have turned to religion, others to drugs or various cults, to give their lives meaning. 
Even the outpouring of support for the 1989 democracy movement seemed to have stemmed partly from a popular yearning for a noble cause to believe in.
That student movement has given rise, in turn, to a new and powerful imperative: protect the student participants. 
Thus, while many young people are complaining about their nation's spiritual vacuum, there have been countless cases of ordinary people displaying enormous moral courage in protecting student dissidents. 
Even as Liu is matter-of-fact when he talks about beating people in prison, he is scrupulous about not getting anyone in trouble for helping him.
Ironically, it was Liu's assertion of brute force, not his principles, that got him in trouble in prison. 
Liu had ordered his henchmen to beat a newcomer suspected of hiding his money, but the guards broke up the fight and then decided to teach Liu a lesson. 
They beat him and locked him in a separate cell, with his wrists handcuffed tightly behind his back.
"I was left lying on the wet cement floor," he says. 
"There was nothing inside, just a hole for a toilet, and it was clogged and the floor was very wet. 
The handcuffs were terribly tight, and after 15 minutes I was sweating and my blood couldn't circulate. 
I called the guards, but they didn't come. 
I kicked the door, and kept kicking for an hour or so. 
Finally, a guard came and loosened the handcuffs a bit, but by that time I couldn't use my hands. 
There was no feeling in them."
After 20 agonizing hours, Liu was returned to his regular cell.
WHILE IN PRISON, Liu Xiang spent his time humming a popular Chinese rock song -- "I Have Nothing" -- and searching for a solution to his problems. 
"What I thought of most was getting out," he says. 
"What I worried about most was my Mom. 
If she heard I was in prison " -- he pauses and shivers -- "it would be terrible."
He thought his best opportunity to escape would be while working on the prison farm. 
"I decided the best time was when it rained, because then it's harder for them to drive their motorcycles around looking for you, and they won't try as hard to find you."
So on June 12, 1990, after a thunderstorm, Liu made his move.
He was working in a large vegetable field with seven other prisoners. 
Security is relatively lax in Chinese labor camps, because traditionally there is no place for an escaped prisoner to run. 
On that day, only three guards were on duty, and the prisoners were scattered about the field. 
Liu began to work near the guard who was paying the least attention.
"When the guard wasn't looking, I slipped behind a hedge," he says. 
"I was ready to say that I needed to relieve myself."
But the guard didn't notice and Liu crawled to the edge of the field and then through another hedge functioning as a kind of fence. 
Since Liu had not been convicted of any offense, he was wearing civilian clothes and was able to hurry along the road and hitch a ride on a truck. 
A sympathizer had smuggled a small amount of money to Liu, which enabled him to make his way to Canton, where he hid with friends.
He then made his way back to Beijing by train -- using tickets purchased by a friend -- and even though he was a fugitive from the law, he was welcomed by his buddies. 
Almost no one had qualms about seeing him or helping him. 
Yet to his friends, Liu seemed a changed man. 
He was no longer an idealistic university student but a prison-hardened young man who had had a taste of the fast life in Guangdong. 
He boasted of his underworld connections and of the invitations to join the gangs.
By late summer, Liu had regained some of his weight and had had his bedbug bites treated. 
But he also was getting increasingly edgy, terrified that the police were closing in on him. 
He decided to escape once more to Hong Kong.
Having jettisoned his documents while being repatriated to China in April, Liu Xiang had to spend $42 on a bribe to get a new pass to go in and out of Shenzhen. 
He arrived in Shenzhen in the fall of 1990 and renewed his underworld guanxi to see if they could help him flee to Hong Kong. 
But this time he found himself running into one obstacle after another. 
Some smugglers were willing to take him by boat to Hong Kong, but then they were arrested. 
His friends who had arranged the bribe for him to get to Zhong-Ying Street had also been arrested.
While waiting to work out a solution, Liu had his hair permed to look more like a Hong Kong resident. 
The best time to cross the border, he decided, was on a public holiday, when few Hong Kong police are on duty. 
He selected Christmas Day, which is a holiday in the British colony.
Working through his guanxi, Liu was able to join a group of Shenzhen residents visiting Zhong-Ying Street on Dec. 
25. As the other tour members gawked, Liu slipped through the back doors and alleys on the Hong Kong side of the street and made his way to the water. 
With his usual aplomb, he offered to help a group of elderly Hong Kong people carry their bags onto a ferryboat. 
He had a terrible moment when he saw that Hong Kong police were beside the ramp, looking for Chinese illegal immigrants, but he marched brazenly toward them. 
The police recognized the elderly people Liu Xiang was helping and let the group pass.
On the other side of the bay, Liu Xiang took a taxi to meet some friends, who gave him refuge. 
But inquiries to the Hong Kong Government ran into a stone wall. 
The highest levels were advised of his situation in detail, but they refused once more to grant him asylum. 
This left him an illegal immigrant in Hong Kong, subject to arrest and repatriation at any time.
Liu considered various ways to reach the United States, including smuggling himself on a freighter, but in the end another method was found (details of which cannot be revealed here). 
On April 12, Liu Xiang arrived in the United States and was admitted by the immigration authorities because of his political background. 
As this article goes to press, Asia Watch -- the human rights organization -- is trying to find a university to take Liu for the next academic year.
"I think I will love New York," Liu Xiang says exuberantly, a few days after arriving. 
"It's great. 
And after seeing police all over the streets in Hong Kong and China, and being afraid of them, I notice that there are very few police on the streets of New York. 
That leaves a very favorable impression."
 
