
The American public approves of the way President Bush is handling foreign policy by nearly 3 to 1, but the public disagrees with the Bush Administration's priorities on trade with China and the Soviet Union, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.
Sixty-two percent of the 1,084 adults interviewed last Tuesday through Friday approved of the way Mr. Bush was handling foreign policy, a rise of five percentage points since a Times/CBS News Poll taken in May, just before the President's summit meeting with President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union.
 
Soviets Over Chinese
But when asked, ''When it comes to international trade, should the United States give more favorable trade privileges to the Soviet Union, or to China?'' the public split 49 percent for the Soviet Union and 16 percent for China.
This is in disagreement with the priorities of the Bush Administration, which set no conditions on continuing favorable trade status to China but has tied more favorable trade status for the Soviet Union to a liberalization of Soviet emigration policy.
The latest poll reflected the impact of the summit meeting, which ended two days before interviewing for the poll began.
Mr. Gorbachev reached his highest standing with the American public since the Times/CBS News Poll began measuring this factor in 1987. 
For the first time a majority of 51 percent said they had a favorable opinion of the Soviet leader, up six percentage points since the pre-summit poll in May. 
Nine percent held an unfavorable opinion. 
How Essential Is Gorbachev?
At the same time, there was a drop in the proportion of the public seeing Mr. Gorbachev himself as essential to American interests. 
Fifty-five percent said it was ''very important to the interests of the United States that Mikhail Gorbachev, and not someone else, remains in power in the Soviet Union,'' a drop of five percentage points since the pre-summit poll in May.
The nationwide telephone poll had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus three percentage points.
Other findings related to the summit included these:
* 81 percent said the summit meeting had contributed to world peace, including 24 percent saying it contributed ''a lot.''
* 57 percent said the United States and the Soviet Union had gained similar advantage from the summit talks, while 8 percent said the United States had gained more and 23 percent said the Soviet Union had gained more.
* 41 percent said the cold war was over, an increase of seven percentage points from April, but a majority of 52 percent disagreed.
* 26 percent said the summit meeting had been intended mainly to reach agreement on important matters, while 54 percent said the it had been ''intended mainly to help the political interests of President Bush and Mikhail Gorbachev.''
President Bush's rating on his handling of the American economy stood at 43 percent approval, a drop of four percentage points since April and six pecentage points since January.
Mr. Bush's overall approval rating for his handling of his job as President remained unchanged at 69 percent approval, the same level as in May.
 
How the Poll Was Taken
The latest New York Times/CBS News Poll is based on telephone interviews conducted last Tuesday through Friday with 1,084 adults around the United States, excluding Alaska and Hawaii.
The sample of telephone exchanges called was selected by a computer from a complete list of exchanges in the country. 
The exchanges were chosen to insure that each region was represented in proportion to its population. 
For each exchange, telephone numbers were formed by random digits, permitting access to unlisted as well as listed numbers. 
The numbers were screened to limit calls to residences.
The results have been weighted to take account of household size and number of residential telephone lines and to adjust for variations in the sample relating to region, race, sex, age and education.
In theory, in 19 cases out of 20 the results based on such samples will differ by no more than three percentage points in either direction from what would have been obtained by seeking out all American adults.
The potential sampling error for smaller subgroups is larger.
In addition to sampling error, the practical difficulties of conducting any survey of public opinion may introduce other sources of error into the poll.
