
President Bush told Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu of Japan today that the Administration would not oppose Japanese plans to resume its multibillion-dollar program of aid to China. 
But he urged Mr. Kaifu to slow down the aid plan and limit its scope.
Mr. Bush's meeting with Mr. Kaifu, coming a day after the NATO summit meeting at which the alliance declared that it no longer viewed Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union as adversaries, reflected the approach that the United States intends to adopt at the meeting of the Group of Seven industrial nations that begins here on Monday.
Administration officials said that while the United States would encourage its industrial partners to seek reform in China and the Soviet Union, it accepted that each country must pursue its own foreign-policy objectives without interference from Washington.
Mr. Bush has come under attack for not taking a more punitive stand toward China after the massacre at Tiananmen Square, and his acquiescence on the Japan loan issue may well revive criticism that his policy toward China is too accommodating.
Administration officials said that Mr. Bush would also be acquiescent about German aid to the Soviet Union because ''the Germans are hoping no one here will put a fly in the ointment as they try to buy Soviet acquiescence on German unity,'' and the President would go along with that.
 
A Cable to Gorbachev
Marlin Fitzwater, the President's spokesman, said today that Mr. Bush had sent a cable to President Mikhail S. Gorbachev on Friday afternoon as he returned on Air Force One from the NATO summit meeting.
''This was a rather lengthy cable, which gave the President's personal reflections on the summit, expressed his support for the reforms that President Gorbachev is undertaking and just gave a little personal emphasis to the conclusions of the NATO summit in terms of the changing nature of the alliance and their reaching out to the Soviet Union.''
The President confirmed to reporters on the flight from London to Houston on Friday that he had received a letter from Mr. Gorbachev, but would not disclose the contents. 
Administration officials said today that the letter was a plea from Mr. Gorbachev for the United States to help him with his faltering economy, similar to a request that the Soviet leader recently sent to Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of Britain.
Japanese officials said they were hoping that at the summit meeting here this week they would persuade the six other industrial nations - the United States, West Germany, France, Britain, Italy and Canada - that continuing sanctions against Beijing would only isolate the Chinese leadership, reducing the likelihood of reform. 
The sanctions, including a ban on high-level contacts with Chinese officials and a freeze on development loans, were imposed at last year's economic summit meeting in Paris, after hundreds of students and other protesters were killed in the Tiananmen Square uprising in June.
''We can understand the Japanese wanting to proceed, because of their unique relationship with China,'' a top Administration official said. 
''But we wish they would proceed in a more restricted form than they now envision.''
 
The Japanese Position
Regardless of the position of its industrial partners, Japan is inclined to resume credit and aid to China independently.
''We're seeking a full understanding of the legitimacy of our argument at the summit,'' Taizo Watanabe, the chief spokesman for the Japanese Government, said. 
''But there does not have to be any written statement on the China issue this time.''
''Our position is that no one has forgotten Tiananmen Square, but there is more to be gained in terms of reform from an open-door policy toward China,'' Mr. Watanabe said.
Japan has been China's main source of aid and credit, and it planned a $5.2 billion, five-year program of loans. 
Starting last fall, Tokyo began resuming some disbursements under an existing aid program, but the freed money was earmarked mainly for the likes of food and drugs.
 
Pressure on Kaifu From Business
The Kaifu Government is coming under mounting pressure from the Japanese business community to restart normal lending to Beijing. 
And Japanese officials have signaled that Tokyo, with its strong links to its big Asian neighbor, is preparing to act independently of its Western industrial partners, if necessary.
''The Japanese want to change world policy on China, but they seem increasingly willing to go it alone on this,'' said Edward J. Lincoln, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution. 
''What the Japanese want from this summit is some sign from the Bush Administration that they won't take too much heat from the United States if they do resume aid to China.''
As for direct aid to the Soviet Union, Prime Minister Kaifu reiterated his stance that Japan will not participate in assistance until Moscow has settled a 45-year-old territorial dispute over four islands at the end of the Kurile chain that the Soviet Union seized at the end of World War II.
 
U.S. Stand on Aid to Soviets
In an interview here on Cable News Network, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d reiterated that even though Germany and other countries meeting here plan to send money to the Soviet Union, the United States will not provide credits or direct economic assistance.
''Before we spend taxpayer dollars on direct economic assistance to the Soviet Union, we ought to have some reasonable idea or some reasonable faith that the money is going to be well spent,'' he said.
''Some countries here will want to go with direct economic assistance,'' he said. 
''Other countries, the United States included, will say we really ought to see some progress toward economic reform before we make the same mistake we made with respect to Poland in the 1970's and advance financial or economic assistance before appropriate reform.''
He added, ''We can be helpful on the economic side with technical economic assistance - help show them the way to get to a truly free-market economy.''
President Bush plans more meetings with allies for Sunday. 
He is scheduled to go to church in the morning with Mrs. Thatcher and to meet afterward with Prime Minister Brian Mulroney of Canada about the environment and the future of Quebec in light of the constitutional crisis there.
Mr. Bush also planned a meeting with Jacques Delors, the president of the commission of the European Community.
