
The Export-Import Bank, an agency of the Federal Government that provides credit to the customers of American exporters, has made its first loan to China since the military crackdown against pro-democracy demonstrators in June, bank officials said today.
The loan is believed to be the first to China by any Western lending agency since June.
The $9.75 million loan to the China National Offshore Oil Corporation was signed in Washington on Friday. 
Wary of criticism by those who believe its China policies have been too lenient, the Administration did not announce the action.
Last month, Beijing lifted martial law, and the Bush Administration responded by easing some sanctions against China, including ending its blanket opposition to World Bank loans to China.
Bank officials said the loan, which is for 10 years at an annual interest rate of 8.3 percent, had been approved after a determination by the bank's board that the American company would lose the contract without the Government financing. 
Administration proposals to reduce the operations of the bank have drawn criticism from business leaders who are concerned about the loss of such export sales. 
[Page D8.] The new loan will enable the Chinese oil company to finance engineering services for a gas processing plant that the Chinese state enterprise is buying from McDermott International Inc. 
The plant is near the Bohai Gulf.
McDermott, based in New Orleans, has annual revenues of $2.4 billion and employs 2,800 workers, selling, among other things, oil and gas equipment and services. 
Much of its business is overseas.
World Bank officials said their board will take up two China loans on Thursday, one for $60 million for agricultural projects in Jiangxi province in eastern China, and one for $30 million for earthquake reconstruction in Shanxi and Hubei provinces in north China.
The actions of both the Export-Import Bank and the World Bank come against a backdrop of sharp Congressional criticism of the Administration's policies on China. 
Congressional critics argue that the Administration has been too willing to ease sanctions in the absence of significant improvement of human rights policies by Beijing.
Some officials said today that the United States might approve only the earthquake reconstruction loan because this would have the least political repercussions.
The Export-Import Bank makes loans at subsidized interest rates to foreign customers of American companies. 
It also guarantees export loans that commercial banks may make. 
For most of its loans, the bank looks for a guarantor, in case the money is not repaid. 
The guarantor usually is the national bank of the country receiving the goods.
In this case, the guarantor is Mitsui & Company, a giant Japanese trading concern that has close commercial relations with the Chinese oil enterprise and with McDermott.
Bank officials said a guarantee by a commercial enterprise in a third country was unusual but not unprecedented. 
''Mitsui offered the guarantee, and it certainly has the money,'' one bank official said.
