
A group of Chinese exiles issued an open letter today asking world leaders gathered in Paris to impose economic sanctions on China and to aid ''combatants for democracy who are victims of repression.''
The eight exiles, who fled China after the violent crackdown on the pro-democracy movement, also called for a United Nations inquiry into ''the massacre of June 4 and the wave of arrests and executions that followed it.''
Among the eight were Wuer Kaixi, a fiery student leader of the demonstrations in Beijing's Tiananmen Square, and Yan Jiaqi, a 47-year-old former adviser to the deposed Chinese Communist Party leader, Zhao Ziyang. 
Both are being sought by the Chinese authorities.
First Public Appearance
The news conference, which was held at an exposition hall on the fringes of Paris, was the first public appearance by Mr. Wuer and Mr. Yan since they arrived in France about two weeks ago. 
The two have given several newspaper and television interviews but have not appeared in public.
Earlier in the day, Mr. Wuer and Mr. Yan were joined by Culture Minister Jack Lang at the unveiling of a replica of the ''Goddess of Democracy'' statue that had been erected by student protesters in Tiananmen Square at the height of their protests.
''The dictatorial regime can destroy a statue, but not a vast movement for freedom,'' Mr. Wuer declared during a brief ceremony at the Parc de la Villette, a scientific and cultural complex in northern Paris.
The open letter issued at the news conference called on the more than 30 leaders who will assemble in Paris for commemorations of the French Revolution to maintain ''by all means the pressures on the government in taking the economic sanctions that are necessary and in interrupting all high-level diplomatic ties.''
 
CHINESE DIPLOMATS BRIEFED
BEIJING, July 12 (AP) - The Communist Party leader, Jiang Zemin, told Chinese officials today that they must work harder to counter Western ''rumors'' about the crackdown on pro-democracy protesters last month.
At the same time, Prime Minister Li Peng promised that Chinese students abroad who took part in protest rallies will be welcomed back to China and not punished.
