
As many as three dozen political appointees who will leave office next month will first visit Beijing when Commerce Secretary Barbara H. Franklin flies there next week on a $13,000-an-hour Air Force jet, Government and industry officials said.
Bush Administration officials have frequently run into trouble for their use of Government aircraft. 
John H. Sununu, President Bush's first White House chief of staff, drew considerable public criticism when his extensive use of Government aircraft was revealed, although his travel appeared to be more personal than Ms. Franklin's trip.
The purpose of the trip is to review Chinese compliance with two bilateral trade agreements this year, to promote American exports and to hold broad talks on the two nations' economic relations, Ms. Franklin said at a news conference on Wednesday.
 
Administration Is Mum
When asked today for a list of who was going on the trip, Commerce Department officials refused, saying that releasing the names would threaten security. 
They also refused to say how many political appointees would be going but would not deny the estimate of three dozen. 
The trip comes at a time when budget cuts have resulted in severe travel restrictions for American trade officials.
Don Anderson, head of the U.S.-China Business Council and among those making the trip, said he knew of about 30 others who would be going. 
The American delegation will include several corporate executives and will travel on an Air Force C-137, a luxurious version of the Boeing 707 with office space and wide seats, he said.
Ms. Franklin's entourage is unusually large for the task, particularly since a half-dozen American civil servants originally negotiated the two agreements and the political appointees will have no more than a month after their return to use any insights they may develop in China. 
President-elect Bill Clinton is likely to replace them with Democrats when he takes office.
 
The Plane Clinton Refused
The C-137 is the same sort of plane the Bush Administration offered President-elect Bill Clinton for his first trip to Washington after the election. 
He turned it down as too expensive and chartered a cheaper plane.
According to the Pentagon, Mr. Clinton's C-137 would have cost $13,000 an hour for the four-hour trip. 
Air Force officials said that for Federal agencies outside the Defense Department, the White House and Congress, they charge $11,835 per hour of flying time.
A commercial round-trip flight to Beijing takes 37 hours in the air, suggesting a cost of up to $438,000 for the C-137, not including time the aircraft will spend on the ground during Ms. Franklin's six-day trip to Beijing, Shenzhen and Hong Kong.
Officials from the Commerce Department, State Department, the National Security Council and the Office of the United States Trade Representative will accompany Ms. Franklin. Some of them flew to Beijing as early as last week rather than joining the Secretary on the C-137.
Ms. Franklin's trip is partly intended to mollify the Chinese after a trip by Carla A. Hills, the United States Trade Representative, to Taiwan last month. 
Mrs. Hills took five aides and a commercial flight.
 
Negotiators Flew Commercial
Both trade agreements were negotiated with much smaller teams of civil servants who traveled on commercial flights, said Joseph Massey, the assistant United States trade representative for China and Japan who negotiated the first agreement, which provides for stricter protection of American copyrights, patents and trademarks. 
Before he left office last June to become a professor at Dartmouth University, Mr. Massey also negotiated most of the second pact, which was finished in October and calls for the elimination of Chinese restrictions on imports.
Each trip to China for those negotiations typically involved three or four officials from Mrs. Hills's office, one or two State Department officials and one or two Commerce Department officials, Mr. Massey said.
Mrs. Hills, a member of the Cabinet like Ms. Franklin, takes a half dozen aides on her trips and always flies on commercial aircraft, which tend to be much cheaper.
 
Travel Budget Crippled
Mrs. Hills faces deep cuts to her travel budget. 
Although her agency negotiated the two agreements that Ms. Franklin wants to discuss in Beijing, Congress cut her agency's $20 million budget by 10 percent this year, amid complaints by legislators from textile-producing states that she was too willing to abandon American restrictions on clothing imports.
The result has been a crippling reduction in the travel budget that has resulted in the United States' sending even smaller delegations to trade talks that could determine the future of multibillion-dollar American industries.
