
A young Government official paused over his dinner the other day when he was asked what the death of China's senior leaders might mean. 
''Chaos,'' he replied glumly. 
''Maybe civil war. 
It'll be back to the 1920's and 30's.''
Such pessimism is hardly universal, but many Chinese express growing concern that catastrophic social convulsions are possible over the next decade, particularly after the death of Deng Xiaoping and other elders. 
Indeed, this is perhaps the only issue on which many hard-line leaders and democratic dissidents can agree: A large number seem to think that widespread turmoil is a risk, though not necessarily the most likely outcome.
So these days, when Chinese ruminate about the future, they often say their prime fear is less a return to Maoism than a drift into turmoil.
Mr. Deng himself last month warned of the risks of instability in China. 
In comments published in Wen Wei Po, a Beijing-backed newspaper in Hong Kong, Mr. Deng cautioned that if the Communist Party lost its grip on China the result would be chaos that could lead 100 million Chinese to flee to Indonesia, 10 million to Thailand, and 500,000 to Hong Kong.
''Should a civil war break out in China, it would not cease,'' Wen Wei Po paraphrased Mr. Deng as saying.
Such warnings are clearly intended to drive home the message that China must stick with socialism. 
But these days many who see orthodox socialism as part of the problem also say that chaos is a possibility.
''China could just fall apart, with a return to warlords and fiefs and civil war,'' said a university student who like many others is reacting by trying to go abroad to study.
That concern about chaos is not new, but many students say they feel it more intensely than before. 
Last summer they were absorbed with apprehension that the so-called ''Gang of Elders'' would pull China back to the Maoist era. 
Now they are more relaxed about that possibility, for they say that in any case there is enough passive resistance to hobble the policies of the hard-liners.
 
Disintegration and Warlords
''The fundamental question in China is order, stabilityI, the state,'' said a Western diplomat with long experience in China. 
''The real fear among intellectuals now is not a challenge from the conservatives.''
Instead, he said, they fear that less capable leaders will take over after Mr. Deng dies and preside over the disintegration of China.
In this regard, many Chinese seem more pessimistic than Western diplomats and scholars. 
Many Westerners say they believe that civil war and upheavals on that scale are unlikely.
''All Chinese are concerned to a greater or lesser degree with centrifugal forces,'' said a Western diplomat, but he added that China probably would not revert to the turmoil of the 1920's and 1930's, when the country was torn among the ruling Kuomintang, regional warlords, the Communist rebels and Japanese invaders. 
''In the period of the warlords, you didn't have modern planes, fax machines, and the levers of control that we have now.''
Concern about chaos has a particular resonance in China because of the horrors of the last 150 years: The Taiping Rebellion in the mid-19th century left at least 20 million dead, and in the first half of this century famine and fighting killed millions more. 
Some Chinese say the recent experience of the Soviet Union, when Stalinism has declined while national minorities have pushed for autonomy or independence, has made the risk of disintegration more obvious. 
Many Chinese believe that a power vacuum at the center could lead to secessionist moves by Tibet and Xinjiang Province in the west, as well as growing assertiveness in other provinces.
Chinese and foreign specialists say the rapid spread of the democracy movement last year underscored the potential for such upheavals. 
Moreover, they say that the army's crackdown may have made unrest more likely in the long run, by robbing the Communist Party and socialism of legitimacy that otherwise might have helped hold the country together.
