
The television scene shows two young women being led to a suburban home where they are told they will be given lucrative new jobs. 
They wait in a small, locked room and soon discover to their horror the real nature of the deal: they are being sold, for about $950 each.
The television dramatization is one of a few tools the Government is using to warn women about a feudalistic practice that is doggedly making its way back into rural China: the buying and selling of women to serve as wives. 
The partial emergence of a market economy has reinvigorated this variation of slavery, as travel becomes easier and peasants accumulate enough cash to purchase a bride.
No one knows quite how common the sale of wives is, but it almost certainly is increasing rapidly. 
Confidential documents presented recently to China's legislature say that the authorities investigated 18,692 cases of women being sold against their will last year, and presumably many more cases never came to the attention of the authorities.
The documents say that 65,236 people have been arrested in the last two years for involvement in the sale of women and children.
"There are some comrade leaders who do not recognize the threat and the seriousness of this repulsive social phenomenon," says one of the internal documents. 
"Some cadres and party members at the grass roots even connive at, participate in and support the criminal activity of the kidnapping and sale of women."
The documents were circulated to the standing committee of the National People's Congress, China's legislature. 
In June, the standing committee discussed stricter punishments for traffickers of women and children, a spokesman said.
The sale of women disappeared during the first 20 years of Communist rule, and slowly reappeared during the 1970's and 1980's. 
The number of cases has risen sharply since 1985, the documents say.
In rural areas, a bride's family traditionally will insist on a wedding ceremony, and these days the cost of weddings has soared, as neighbors try to outdo each other. 
That has created a strong incentive to buy a wife and save the cost of the festivities.
A wife typically costs less than $1,000, compared to $700 to $3,000 for a wedding, and the family of the purchased bride is obviously not around to insist on a lavish wedding.
Some of the women are foreigners, mostly Vietnamese. 
Last year, at least 2,716 Vietnamese women were repatriated after being kidnapped and sold, although the documents did not make clear how they came to China in the first place.
The typical Chinese victim is a woman from a poor region who is lured by the prospect of a new job, a better life, or free travel, to follow a trafficker to another province. 
Once she is in his hands, the trafficker essentially kidnaps her, often beating or raping her. 
Sometimes the process of abduction can involve a network of more than 100 traffickers.
The women are often young and unsophisticated and have no idea how they could escape, even if they had money for bus fares. 
In addition, they are sometimes locked up until they have borne children, and frequently local villagers side with the man who has parted with his life savings to buy a wife.
"After some of the women are abducted and sold, they are stripped of their freedom for a long time and endure the inhuman life of imprisonment and devastation," says one of the documents. 
"The criminal activity of the kidnap and sale of women more and more has come to resemble the slave trade."
One document also criticized the current legal regulations for trafficking, which essentially stipulate that a common trafficker, who is not a gang leader or a rapist, is sentenced to less than five years.
That same sentence is given to a thief who has stolen a head of cattle worth less than $200.
But in some cases, those who organize trafficking are executed. 
In June, the authorities executed 10 men in Shanxi Province for selling 91 women.
