
In a surprising twist, a British offer of citizenship for a limited number of Hong Kong residents nervous about the Chinese takeover of the colony in 1997 has attracted only a fraction of the number of applicants expected.
The deadline for applications was midnight tonight for the program, which had been widely criticized as an offer of too little too late. 
But at midevening, government officials said they expected to receive about 60,000 applications for the 43,500 passports offered, a figure that falls far short of the 300,000 applications they originally anticipated.
On Wednesday the opposition Labor Party's home affairs spokesman in London, Alistair Darling, called for an investigation into why the plan had evoked so little response.
He said the limited number of applicants "flies in the face of everything I was told during three days in Hong Kong," he said. 
"I was told there would be a deluge."
With the Communist takeover of this lively capitalist colony growing closer, hundreds of thousands of residents have been lining up in front of foreign consulates in the last few years to apply for immigration papers. 
And with people actually emigrating from Hong Kong at a rate of more than 1,200 a week, officials here expected to be swamped with applications for the British passports.
 
Approved by Parliament
The package offered full British citizenship to 50,000 heads of households working in key businesses or professions. 
The 50,000 passports were to be distributed in two offerings, 87 percent, or 43,500, now, the remainder after 1993.
The British Parliament approved the package last year after months of intensive, often emotional lobbying by Hong Kong leaders who argued that after ruling Hong Kong for 150 years Britain ought to provide the colony's residents a place of refuge should life under the Chinese prove harsh. 
When Britain responded with an offer for only 50,000 families, many here felt betrayed and angered, especially the educated, professional families that the plan sought to attract.
Government officials, politicians and others here have offered a host of reasons for the lack of interest, but essentially, they say, most of the 5.8 million people here did not apply because they believed they would not qualify under the complex and limited plan. 
Experts said many here who would qualify did not apply because they simply would rather not live in Britain.
"It was a classic case of Hong Kong civil servants misreading the Hong Kong people," said Robert Broadfoot, managing director of the Political and Economic Risk Consultancy here. 
"They were people with good hearts, saying we have to help people here who face a future under the Communists. 
But the thing is, Hong Kong people have never longed to live in Britain. 
They don't like its economy or its weather, and if they want to escape the Communists, there are plenty of places they would rather go than Britain."
 
Not the Preferred Land
Paul C. K. Kwong, a demographer who has studied emigration trends in the colony, said he was not surprised that the British package was so coolly received because "for the past few years, survey after survey has shown that Britain ranks fairly low on the list of preferred destinations for Hong Kong emigrants, in some cases even after Singapore."
Mr. Kwong, a lecturer in the sociology department of the Chinese University here, said, "Anyone who could fill out the 32-page application for the British plan, and make his way through all its thick, pseudo-legal language, would be educated enough to go to the United States or Canada or Australia, which are the preferred destinations of Hong Kong people."
He said Hong Kong residents, 98 percent of whom are ethnic Chinese, prefer those countries because "they are perceived as having vital economies."
"These are places people think of as open, fair, full of opportunity, and Britain is just not seen that way," he said.
 
Million Forms Printed
Government officials, who printed one million application forms for the British plan, have still pronounced it a success, declaring that the comparatively low number of applicants shows that Hong Kong's people have regained their confidence.
"That was the goal of the nationality scheme, to restore Hong Kong's confidence by getting key people to remain here with the offer of a safety net," said Donald Tsang, Secretary for Administration and the man directing the plan.
Mr. Tsang said demands for British passports were highest after the violent suppression of pro-democracy demonstrators in China in June 1989.
"I think the level of confidence in Hong Kong has changed since then," he said. 
"Things have settled down."
 
'Always Too Small'
One Government official here said that offering British citizenship to residents of a British colony was unpopular "because people here did not want to apply for something they already thought they had."
But Mr. Kwong said a study on which he worked estimated that the number of "core" key workers Hong Kong would need to retain its vibrant economy through 1997 was 356,000 to 544,000.
"The British offer of 50,000 passports to keep key people in place here never even came close," he said. 
"It was always too small for its stated goals."
Correction
