
EARLY in the movie ''Gorillas in the Mist,'' Sigourney Weaver, as the naturalist Dian Fossey, flees headlong down a mountain slope, pursued by a roaring male gorilla. 
''What does Schaller's book say when a gorilla charges?'' her tracker asks moments later as she recovers in safety.
''It says, 'Never run,' '' replies Ms. Fossey, who studied and fiercely protected Africa's mountain gorillas before she was murdered in 1985.
The offscreen, real-life author of the book is George B. Schaller, the science director of Wildlife Conservation International, the global conservation arm of the New York Zoological Society. 
He is perhaps the most famous field biologist in the world today, and over the last three decades he has stood up to more than his share of challenges in the wild.
In the interest of science and conservation, he has confronted lions in the Serengeti Plain in Africa, tigers in India and snow leopards in China. 
He has studied the giant panda up close and worked hard to prevent its disappearance. 
His pioneering study of the mountain gorilla was the first to discover that the species was in danger of extinction, thereby setting the stage for Ms. Fossey's long crusade to save it.
 
'Century of Destruction'
But most of all, he has struggled to help reverse the course of what he calls a global ''century of destruction'' in which he believes that humans are destroying natural resources, particularly plants and animals, at such a rate that humans' existence will ultimately be threatened. 
He says he has devoted much of his life to trying to hold the line so that the next century might be one of rehabilitation.
Now, at 56 years old, he is grappling with the biggest single conservation challenge of his life: the effort to understand and preserve what he calls ''the last really large, unspoiled ecosystem'' on earth aside from parts of the polar ice caps and some mountaintops.
It is the Qian Tang region of northwest Tibet, a vast, bleak territory of sparsely grassed plains broken by hills, valleys, lakes and snowy peaks, populated by wild yaks and asses, lyre-horned Tibetan antelopes, gazelles, blue sheep and, in the higher elevations, snow leopards. 
Some of the animals are found nowhere else on earth.
Dr. Schaller, who is the only Western biologist working in the region, disclosed last week in New York that he and Chinese officials had agreed to create in the Qian Tang what they say will be the world's largest wildlife reserve. 
It would be about the size of Colorado and cover about one-fifth of Tibet's area. 
Qian Tang (pronounced chahng tahng), meaning ''northern plain,'' is largely unexplored, mostly undisturbed and all but uninhabited. 
Only a few herdsmen enter it at certain seasons to hunt for meat and hides. 
The herdsmen will still be allowed to do so under the letter of intent signed by Dr. Schaller and Chinese officials last Nov. 
29 in Lhasa, the Tibetan capital. 
But all other hunting will be prohibited, and the Chinese Government will manage the reserve as a protected area, with both expert help and material aid from Wildlife Conservation International.
 
Fear of Lost Opportunity
As with the American Plains a century or two ago, development is already lapping at the edges of the planned reserve. 
If the worldwide urge ''to develop the last bit of land for human use'' is given free play there, Dr. Schaller said, hunting, mining and other commercial activities will despoil the region and a ''unique opportunity'' will slip away.
In pursuit of that opportunity, he has made four expeditions to the Qian Tang along with Chinese and Tibetan colleagues over the last decade. 
He is planning to make a fifth this summer in a massive effort to delineate and define the ecosystem and its inhabitants, an essential first step in any conservation program. 
The Chinese Government appears serious about preserving the Qian Tang and if the effort succeeds, he said, it will demonstrate a commitment by China to ''the rational use of its resources.''
It would also be a dramatic demonstration of Dr. Schaller's belief that governments around the globe are at last starting to recognize seriously that the destruction of ecosystems, with all the resources they contain, cannot go on. 
''The world as a whole is beginning to wake up to the realities,'' he said.
Dr. Schaller comes honestly to a global perspective. 
Born in 1933, the son of a German diplomat in Berlin, he lived in a number of European capitals as a child. 
He came to the United States with his mother in 1947.
''My mother did not want to remain in Europe after the war, so she brought my brother and myself,'' he said. 
''My father stayed in Germany.''
 
Earning a Living From Hobby
''I've never been interested in anything but the outdoors,'' he said, ''but it wasn't until I got to the university that I discovered you could make a living out of your hobby.''
That was the University of Alaska, where he enrolled after a youthful trip down the Yukon with his cousin. 
He holds two bachelor's degrees from there and a Ph.D. from the University of Wisconsin.
''Alaska remains my spiritual home,'' he said. 
In one of his first major field activities, he took part in the biological survey that preceded the establishment of the vast Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. 
In succeeding years, Dr. Schaller did his work on the ecology and behavior of the mountain gorilla of Africa, the tiger and deer of central India, the lion, wild dog, cheetah and leopard of the Serengeti, the wild sheep and goats of the Himalayas, the jaguar, caiman and marsh deer of Brazil, and the panda and snow leopard of China. 
Along the way, drawing directly on his first-hand research, he has written 11 books and scores of articles.
The Qian Tang, he says, ''has world importance'' and helping to preserve it would be extremely satisfying. 
''You spend years in alien cultures,'' he said, ''often away from from family, from friends, often among people who don't understand you, either your language or what you're really after.''
Traveling by car, carrying their own gasoline, or by horseback or camel or yak or on foot, Dr. Schaller and his Chinese and Tibetan colleagues have so far been able to make spot checks of the Qian Tang's animal populations. 
Now, he said, they are about to engage in hard, detailed surveys of those populations and of the animals' migration ranges.
This sort of detailed work is necessary, he said, if one is to avoid the mistake that has been made at other large preserves like the Serengeti National Park in Tanzania. 
Migratory animals define the limits of such large ecosystems, he explained. 
In the Serengeti, that defining animal is the wildebeest, but the Serengeti park's boundaries were established before it was clear where the wildebeest moved. 
As a result, he said, the wildebeest ranges beyond the park, into agricultural areas hostile to it.
The Qian Tang offers a matchless opportunity to bring a huge, intact ecosystem under protection, he said. 
The vastness of the reserve should encompass its animals' migrations, he said. 
High Point of Career?
Is the Qian Tang venture the capstone of a career?
''The future tends to be hard to predict,'' Dr. Schaller said. 
''If the Chinese are interested and continue their cooperation, I'm certainly most happy to work with the Lhasa and Beijing governments to continue the work.''
While the political upheavals in China and Tibet have made it more difficult to operate there, he said, such difficulties are ''par for any field biologist.''
''When any country has internal problems, you wait it out and then continue, because your concern is long-term conservation,'' he said. 
''Short-term upheavals are really irrelevant to your goals. 
''Conservation transcends politics completely.''
