
Saying it is ''shocked,'' China today condemned the American military strike in Panama as a violation of international law and demanded the immediate withdrawal of American forces.
The statement, issued by the Chinese Foreign Ministry late this morning, came nearly a day after a similar condemnation of the American action by the Soviet Union. 
China has no diplomatic relations with Panama, which has an embassy in Taiwan, but some low-level Panamanian delegations have visited, Western diplomats said.
The Foreign Ministry statement called the American action ''a military invasion'' and said it ''constitutes an infringement against a sovereign state of the third world and violates the norms of international law and the aims and purposes of the United Nations Charter.
''We were shocked and condemn this act,'' the statement said. 
China, the ministry said, ''firmly opposes any country's interference in the internal affairs of another country under any pretext and in any form, particularly by the use of military force.''
 
'Shock and Strong Condemnation'
The statement concluded: ''The independence and sovereignty of Panama should be respected, and the United States should immediately stop the military invasion of Panama so as to prevent a deterioration of the situation.''
At the United Nations in New York, the New China News Agency reported, the Chinese Ambassador, Li Luye, told the Security Council last night of his ''utmost shock and strong condemnation'' of the American military attempt to topple the Panamanian leader Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega. 
Mr. Li said that the American action ''can only aggravate the tension in the region and have a serious negative impact on peace and stabilityI in the world,'' and he urged Washington to withdraw its troops immediately.
Since the crushing of pro-democracy demonstrations here in June, China has frequently attacked the United States for interference in Chinese internal affairs. 
The United States imposed economic sanctions in the wake of the June crackdown, but sent secret missions headed by Brent Scowcroft, the White House national security adviser, and Deputy Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger, in July and again earlier this month, to seek improved relations.
 
It's 'Their Internal Affair'
At a Foreign Ministry press briefing this afternoon, a spokesman, Jin Guihua, would not say anything more about Panama.
Asked to comment on Rumania's reported crackdown last weekend on demonstrators, he said only that China would not interfere in the internal affairs of any other country. 
''We've always held that what is happening in some East European countries is their internal affair,'' Mr. Jin said. 
''We believe that Rumania can properly deal with its own affairs.''
Mr. Jin also welcomed President Bush's decision to ease economic sanctions on China by allowing the Export-Import Bank to extend credit to American companies doing business in China and by authorizing the export of three communications satellites to be launched on Chinese rockets.
Mr. Jin called the decisions ''positive steps helpful to the normalization of relations between China and the United States.''
 
Japan Backs President
TOKYO, Dec. 
21 (Special to The New York Times) - In a guarded statement of support for President Bush's actions in Panama, Japan today said it ''regretted'' that circumstances had brought the American intervention but that it understood the reasons why the United States felt it had to act.
Japan's comments were issued this evening by the Foreign Ministry after long deliberations within the Government, where officials said they were stunned by the American action.
The private expressions of many officials in informal conversations hinted at more criticism of the United States than was reflected in the official Government statement.
The Panama action received extensive news coverage, with much attention on the adverse effect on Japanase oil imports from the closing of the Panama Canal.
In an editorial headline ''Bush Blunders in Panama,'' the Asahi newspaper asserted that the action would inevitably be viewed by the world ''as a blatant invasion of Panama's independence and sovereignty.''
