
A few months after public protests here over the violent repression of democracy in Tiananmen Square, it's business as usual in Hong Kong. 
After years in New York, a young Chinese remarked that his native city ''had become a gigantic shopping mall.''
The so-called Hong Kong dream, a vision of the good life parallel to the American Dream, however, shouldn't be reduced to pure mercantilism. 
For the film scholar Esther Yau, Hong Kong's precarious existence represents a utopia, the right not to choose between the Communist Party and the Kuomintang. 
Nowhere is this utopia better expressed than in the film industry - where audiences may enjoy a taste of paradise lost long ago in Hollywood. 
In Hong Kong, film making is an unpretentious industry, designed for profit, popular entertainment and export to Japan, Taiwan and Korea.
Paradise, however, is in danger of being lost. 
The Hong Kong film industry is a brilliant form of escapism, for there is something to escape from. 
In 1997, the 99-year British concession will expire, and Hong Kong will come under the jurisdiction of the Beijing Government. 
The June 4 crackdown has increased the residents' anxieties - and the film industry has been especially affected by the events. 
Producers, directors and stars, torn between rage, fear and the desire to keep working, might see their world disappear altogether. 
Hong Kong's film industry has its mega-stars (Sylvia Chang, Anita Mui, Cora Miao, Chow Yun-fatt, Tony Leung) and its kung fu idols Jackie Chang and Samo Hung; its major studios (Golden Harvest, Cinema City, D and B); its Spielbergian producers (Tsui Hark); its maverick auteurs (Allen Fong); and a handful of talented women directors (such as Ann Hui - of ''Boat People'' fame - and Mabel Cheung).
The most popular genres are action thrillers and a hilarious mixture of slapstick, martial arts and ghost story. 
Even when parodic, Hong Kong films still stand for the magic of cinema, its power to tell a story and to create a better and more exciting world. 
Gangster films are especially bloody, yet mythical. 
The protagonists are elegant, charming, brave, loyal friends, honorable adversaries, expert marksmen, extraordinary acrobats and, above all, paragons of manliness. 
Because they stick to genres and formulas, Hong Kong products might be described as exploitation films - yet they leave room for experimentation. 
Jackie Chang's humor, generosity and comical stunts have revitalized the action film, as in ''Project A, Police Story.''
Tsui Hark brilliantly combines traditional martial arts and high-tech special effects, as in ''Zhu, Warrior of Sacred Mountain.''
Since the 1970's, Hong Kong has become the Hollywood of Asia and one of the world's most prolific film centers. 
But a shadow looms over its creative energy - that of 1997, when Hong Kong is to be reunited with the People's Republic of China. 
And since June 4, 1989, the day of the Tiananmen violence, history seems to have quickened its pace.
''Chinese often use the past to talk about the present,'' says Po Chim Leong. 
Born in England to an emigre Cantonese family, he moved to Hong Kong in the 60's. 
Channel 4 in London produced his film ''Ping Pong,'' exploring the identity crisis of a young ''B.B.C.''
(British-Born Chinese). 
In Asia, he is famous for his 1986 film, ''Hong Kong 1941.''
The British colonials leave, the Japanese Army arrives, plunging the city into lawlessness and violence. 
Three young people struggle to survive. 
One of them (played by Chow Yun-fatt) gallantly dies to let his best friend escape with the girl they both love.
Beyond the romance, beyond the memory of the atrocities committed by the Japanese, ''Hong Kong 1941'' is pregnant with allusions to the present. 
''When the Japanese officer distributes rice, he says, 'Have faith in me.'
Those were the very words used by Deng Xiaoping to the Hong Kong businessmen who were preparing to do business on the mainland,'' explains Mr. Po.
In her 1984 film ''Love in a Fallen City,'' Ann Hui, a top New Wave director, also set a love story amid the havoc wrought by the Japanese Army. 
Tsui Hark's hits ''Shanghai Blues'' (1984) and ''Peking Opera Blues'' (1986), as well as Jackie Chan's box-office draw ''Project A, Part II'' (1987), used a similar strategy: though displaced in time and space, Hong Kong's anxiety concerning its future at the end of the British Mandate was clearly recognizable. 
Parallels are often drawn between Hong Kong in the 1990's and Shanghai in the 1940's, as exemplified by a recent action film, Teddy Robin's ''Shanghai Shanghai.''
Hong Kong is afraid of meeting the fate of Shanghai, a thriving urban metropolis (and film production center) that went into decline after 1949, following the Communist takeover on the mainland.
''The nightmare,'' says Tsui Hark, ''is that the Chinese Government itself does not know if it is capable of running Hong Kong . . .''
Born in Vietnam to a family from the south of China, he moved to Hong Kong in 1966 as a teen-ager, studied film in the United States, directed a series of successful films and now runs his own production company, Film Workshop.
''Hong Kong is the last place I would leave,'' he adds, aware that this is also the only place he could continue making and producing movies. 
''But I would hate living under an outdated Government. 
The question is not whether to stay or to leave, but whether or not we will be able to change that Government, and how.''
After producing a series of top-grossing gangster films directed by John Woo and starring Chow Yun-fatt, ''A Better Tomorrow Part I'' and ''II,'' and ''The Killer,'' Mr. Tsui went back to directing with ''A Better Tomorrow Part III'' (also known as ''Love and Death in Saigon'').
''Vietnam in 1974, at the end of the American presence,'' he said, ''offered an interesting background. 
The protagonists are the products of their times. 
The main character is less heroic, he's no Rambo, he doesn't stand a chance against a whole army. 
And the bad guys are more elements of the general corruption than typical gangsters.''
Here again, the spectacle of individuals fighting for their dignity and happiness in a country torn apart by opposing armies and rival factions, functions as a metaphor for the colony's worst fears.
Mr. Tsui started filming in Vietnam during the student movement, then went back to Hong Kong to complete production. 
''Then came June 4,'' he says. 
''The actors couldn't concentrate. 
They were crying, constantly turning the radio on to listen to the news. 
They would come to the set with black banners on their chests. 
I had to cancel many production days to allow them to participate in demonstrations.''
As a result, ''Love and Death in Saigon'' is Mr. Tsui's most somber film. 
Allusions to political repression, to the senseless violence of armed men, to student demonstrations, keep creeping in, belying the ''Better Tomorrow'' of the original title.
Can there really be a ''better tomorrow'' in Hong Kong?
It is no longer fun to watch ''Chinese killing Chinese,'' as many people say, and while the hero still gets the heroine (Anita Mui), she dies in his arms.
Since the ''open door policy,'' in which the Chinese Government sought to normalize commercial and cultural relations with both Hong Kong and Taiwan, Hong Kong film makers have been able to shoot on the Chinese mainland, making use of its extraordinary landscapes. 
Between 40 and 50 movies (mostly action films) were being shot annually in co-production with China. 
Since June 4, this number has decreased radically, but the trend seems only temporary. 
For both the Chinese Government and the Hong Kong producers, ''business is business,'' and real locations are more attractive than papier-mache sets.
Last April, Mabel Cheung was shooting ''Eight Taels of Gold'' in a rural area near Canton. 
A shy, overweight New York cab driver (Samo Hung, the kung fu star, creatively cast against type), comes back to the village he fled during the Cultural Revolution. 
There he falls in love with his beautiful cousin, already engaged to another man. 
A return to life on the mainland is impossible for Hung, who is left shouting his despair in an empty landscape.
''We were really excited about the democracy movement,'' says Miss Cheung. 
''We would go to Beijing to give food and supplies to the students. 
On June 4, during a night shoot, we picked up the news on a Hong Kong radio. 
We couldn't believe it!
So we went to Canton and called Beijing to confirm what we heard. 
And we wondered: What's the point of making movies?
We should be lawyers, doctors, farmers, or go to Beijing to help the students.''
The production was halted - a highly emotional moment described by Sylvia Chang, who stars in the film as Samo Hung's cousin: ''When I came back to Hong Kong, people were utterly destroyed. 
They were asking: 'How can something like that happen?
We are Chinese, and we are killing Chinese. 
What's the meaning of life if we cannot do anything to help our own people?'
''
When production finally resumed, mainland Chinese bureaucrats tried to censor the script. 
''We threatened to publicize their attempt at censoring us,'' said Miss Cheung. 
''They must have thought that they don't yet have control over a Hong Kong production - and they let us shoot the way we wanted.''
The immediate impact of June 4 on the film industry seems to be an increased commercialism. 
''Everyone wants to make as much money as possible,'' says Po Chim Leong. 
''They're afraid to think of anything else. 
It's like there's no tomorrow. 
Film makers seem to have lost confidence. 
They keep turning out old formula films.''
For the first time in years, the box office is down. 
Yet people still invest in building and refurbishing movie theaters - knowing that the younger audience will keep going to the movies until the Communists take over in 1997 - and probably after. 
And there is no shortage of interesting projects. 
Po Chim Leong wants to shoot a contemporary version of ''Hong Kong 1941.''
Mabel Cheung plans to direct a two-part film about what she describes as ''the Hong Kong countdown,'' one from a female, the other from a male point of view. 
Allen Fong hopes to make ''as many movies as possible before 1997, to document the last years of Hong Kong,'' then emigrate and give up film making.
Hong Kong's censorship law makes it difficult to produce and exhibit what the text calls ''political'' movies. 
Films ''which may seriously endanger the relationship between Hong Kong and its neighboring countries'' are banned. 
Last December, a Taiwanese video documentary titled ''They're Writing History'' could not be shown at the Hong Kong Art Center because it included interviews with Chinese dissidents and student leaders. 
Paradoxically, television, radio and newspapers are not submitted to censorship and vent, often violently, negative feelings toward China.
Last spring, ''the television networks were competing to report the student movement with as much detail as possible,'' recalls Shu Kei, a film maker and public relations representative. 
''From April 15 till Tiananmen Square, the students almost became our friends, our family.''''
When a Japanese television station approached Shu Kei last year to produce a documentary, he first intended to make a film on the legendary Taiwanese composer-singer Hou Dejian, who, in 1983,defected to China. 
Tiananmen Square thwarted the project. 
(Mr. Hou, on a hunger strike at the end of the student movement, disappeared during the violence and resurfaced in Beijing only two months later.) Instead, Mr. Shu made ''Sunless Days,'' a ''personal documentary'' about Hong Kong's reactions to the crackdown. 
Interviewing families and friends, he took his camera throughout the Chinese diaspora, from London to Australia and Toronto and back to Hong Kong - trying to find answers to the harrowing question: What does it mean to be Chinese in the post-Tiananmen world?
The film is composed of vignettes depicting various reactions to the events: from the radicalization of a couple of fun-loving artists to the self-analysis of writers in exile; from a mainland film maker's decision to go back, ''because there is work to do at home,'' to the middle-class strategy for a comfortable emigration; from demonstrations of Hong Kong students to images of his mother going about her daily chores.
''No one can conceptualize Hong Kong in the hands of mainland China,'' adds Shu Kei. 
''This is why people are so nervous.''
Initially he thought that his documentary would be banned in Hong Kong. 
But the theatrical version of the film won a prize given by the Roman Catholic press at the 1990 Berlin Film Festival. 
So, invited by the Hong Kong Film Festival, ''Sunless Days'' was finally passed by the censorship committee at the last minute and shown on April 15, the anniversary of the death of the ousted Communist leader Hu Yaobang, which had set in motion the democracy movement.
