
Around a hairpin turn, after two days of driving on rough roads through the treeless loess hills of Shanxi Province in northeast China, suddenly, several thousand feet below, was the legendary Yellow River. 
It was enough to take one's breath away. 
Not only was the canyon through which it wound spectacular, but at this particular spot, called Hukou -- "teapot spout" in Chinese -- the entire river plunged over a precipice and roared into a gorge no wider than a narrow city street. 
Through the spray that rose like mist from the churning cataract, a rainbow arched over the river.
As spectacular as this remote setting was, it was hard not to be more astonished by another feature on the landscape. 
Parked on a dirt road was a truck with a tangle of electrical cables snaking out the back and down to a rustic tea house at the gorge's edge. 
The tea house was a film set, and the truck contained a generator being used by Chen Kaige, the director, to shoot his latest film, "Life on a String," the tale of a blind storyteller and his young blind apprentice.
Mr. Chen's award-winning 1984 film, "Yellow Earth," a stark but hauntingly beautiful evocation of peasant life in these hills, first brought him and China's new "fifth generation" of film directors to international prominence. 
Now, after studying and working in New York City since 1987, Mr. Chen had returned to China to shoot a new film. 
As such, he is the first Chinese director of his generation to have lived abroad for an extended period, to have learned English and begun to assimilate into the international artistic community.
The Beijing-born Mr. Chen -- the son of a film maker from that earlier generation of Chinese steeped in socialist realism -- is a tall, intense man who, although still in his late 30's, is already graying around the temples. 
The hallmark of his work has been his realistic depictions of Chinese rural life, a world he became intimately acquainted with during the Cultural Revolution, when he spent eight years rusticating as an "educated youth" and soldier in China's remote Yunnan Province.
Asked how the Shanxi hills felt after the Upper West Side of Manhattan, where he had been living, he laughed and said:
"During the first few days I was back in China, I felt like a stranger. 
I couldn't really believe I was here. 
I didn't really know what to say to family and friends, and I don't think they quite knew what to say to me. 
Nor did the people I was working with have any idea how to deal with me, which was quite natural, because they couldn't really understand all the things that had happened to me while I was gone."
He then began speaking of how he felt he had changed while abroad, not only living in New York but also traveling in Europe and Asia.
"There is a unique kind of Chinese conservatism that wants to limit everything to one correct way. 
Before I left, I always thought that I knew the right way to do things; how to make a film. 
But, as a result of having spent time in a variety of other cultures, I now feel much more uncertain of myself, not so sure that there is just one way to see something or to shoot it.
"My experiences abroad make me want to experiment more," he added. 
Before he left for America, he said, "I always wanted to teach people through film, to give them a big message. 
But now what I feel I want to do is more to dream through film, hoping that maybe the film itself will be able to tell more than I can."
Mr. Chen's odyssey from New York to Hukou with his 80-member film crew-cum-equipment was in some respects more nightmarish than dreamlike. 
While the logistical difficulties were daunting, they were minor compared to the problems of getting the film financed and approved back in Beijing.
For Mr. Chen, the first impediment to making "Life on a String" seemed comical. 
When he discovered a year and a half ago in New York that he had used up all the pages in his passport, he went to the Chinese Consulate. 
Because the Government was displeased by certain reports about his involvement in a documentary film chronicling the 1989 democracy movement, it refused to add extra pages or to issue a new passport.
Eager to start shooting after months of delay, Mr. Chen left for Beijing anyway, where the Public Security Bureau granted him a new passport with so few pages that further travel was seriously restricted.
Like other film makers in China, Mr. Chen is conscious of the Government's grip over artists who depend on being in their country to create. 
He is well aware that his ability to shoot in China depends on the Government's approval.
The next formidable problem was getting the movie financed. 
As any film maker is quick to admit, because Deng Xiaoping's economic reforms have created a situation in which most cultural projects must be self-supporting, there is now virtually no money available in China for film projects that are not either hard-core party propaganda or kung fu/romance movies with a big box-office potential.
Even when state-run studios do support a film project, directors have often found themselves so limited by the official system of control and censorship that they have trouble producing a credible artistic work. 
But though the state is no longer willing to subsidize culture on the scale it once was, neither has it turned the field over to new investors in the private sector. 
Thus, film makers are left almost completely orphaned.
Mr. Chen solved the problems of financing and avoided many of the attendant bureaucratic hurdles that hamper other Chinese directors by teaming up with Donald Ranvaud, an English producer he had met at the Berlin Film Festival. 
With the help of his wife, Hong Huang, Mr. Chen created a consortium of British, German and Japanese investors. 
Then, working through the Beijing Film Studio, they assembled an all-Chinese crew. 
It was a one-of-a-kind achievement in Chinese cinema; the first film project shot in this country by a Chinese crew and director that was financed completely by foreign interests.
"The reason I could even consider making this film was because the financing was from outside China," Mr. Chen acknowledged. 
"If I had been forced to make the movie with local funds, it would have been almost impossible. 
I would have had to go to endless meetings with people who know absolutely nothing about film, and obey endless bureaucrats whose only objective is to control, criticize and censor.
Even after the question of financing was resolved, there were other hurdles. 
Whereas approval of film projects used to be under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Culture, now the arts are again receiving closer party scrutiny. 
To make a movie, a film maker must first become associated with an official Chinese production unit, such as the Beijing Film Studio; next, the script must be submitted to the China Film Co-production Company; then it must be examined by the Ministry of Broadcast, Television and Film, which is now overseen by the Propaganda Department of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party.
Since dissent in the artistic world is often carried out indirectly through the artifice of allegory and historical analogy, a script is carefully scrutinized at each stage of this process.
The script for "Life on a String" was adapted from a deceptively simple story by Shi Tiesheng, a writer who was paralyzed from the waist down. 
Mr. Shi's tale about a blind storyteller and a blind boy who wander from village to village accompanying themselves on the sanxian, a traditional three-stringed instrument, can be viewed on one level as just a story about dealing with physical adversity and fate.
But on a deeper level, it probes both the seductiveness and dangerousness of leaders who set themselves up as Godlike authorities and the mythologies they tend to spin around themselves. 
For in spite of his blindness, the old man possess just such charismatic traits, and at one point his charisma enables him miraculously to bring about a truce between two warring clans.
His belief in the future and his power to lead others depend, however, on a prescription for a remedy to cure his blindness that he believes is hidden inside his sanxian. 
Many years ago, when he acquired the instrument, he was told that only after he had broken the thousandth string while accompanying his storytelling could he remove the prescription and buy the medicine.
But when he tries to do this, he finds only a slip of blank paper. 
With his illusions shattered and hope for salvation vanished, he goes crazy. 
His apprentice, the young blind man, harbors no such illusions. 
He not only survives, he thrives -- as an individual sustained by a love of life rather than the worship of the masses.
For Mr. Chen, the dichotomy between these two characters has obvious parallels to China's national dilemma. 
The director sees the film as a cautionary tale warning people against surrender to the intoxicating ideologies and charismatic leaders that give rise to hope and a sense of direction. 
The film is also a thinly veiled rumination on the need of leaders to feed their egos with massive doses of public adoration.
When asked which of the two heroes most evoked his sympathy, Mr. Chen replied:
"It is important for the old man to believe in something, even though this belief finally comes to naught. 
Actually, he does get a great deal back from life by saving people, and I can identify with this, because I know it's important that people have something to believe in. 
But disastrous consequences can also result from such beliefs and illusory dreams. 
Look at the Cultural Revolution. 
How many Chinese believed in it, and yet how many will now take any responsibility for that illusion?"
Speaking of the character of the young boy, he continued: "It's confusing. 
He doesn't seem to need any illusions to live by, and that in its way is admirable. 
But I'm not sure whether it's possible for human beings to live without some belief.
"I am very interested in both characters," he added. 
"Maybe I can't say which one leads the better life. 
But, you know, Chinese are always trying to find a godlike leader to look up to, and the young boy does not like it when the old man acts as if he were a God. 
Actually, I guess I am happy when the old man dies, because his death liberates the boy and allows him to start making decisions for himself, decisions that were impossible under the old man's tutelage."
Does the director see analogies between his two heroes and China's own generational conflict?
"All that I can say is that my hope is that the younger generation of China can turn out to be somewhat like the young boy; to be more centered and better able to make independent judgments. 
So, in this sense I do root for the boy as the hope of the future.
"But, finally, I don't know if human beings, particularly Chinese, can survive without some hope or dream like the old man. 
So actually, I'm not sure whose side I'm on. 
All that I can say is that both of them interest me, and all that I can continue doing is making films. 
That is the most powerful way I have of speaking out."
During a lunch break on the set, the director and Gu Changwei, the cinematographer, walked up the gorge to the place where a rainbow hovered in the mist, just above the site where the muddy water of the Yellow River roared down into a narrow chasm. 
Mr. Chen suddenly looked up.
"Do you know what this reminds me of?" he asked. 
"Despair. It reminds me of the Chinese people; great, powerful and making an enormous noise, but essentially helpless."
