
On the banks of the West Lake, an enchanted region of islands and temples shrouded by mist and magic in this city 100 miles southwest of Shanghai, a love story has been unfolding before the cameras. 
It is a Chinese love story, in which the leading actress is both chased and - after a fleeting temptation - chaste. 
But it is also a Western love story, both unlikely and true, of a young American devoted to Chinese martial arts.
Mark Salzman may not get the girl, but he gets the martial arts. 
And, just as important, he gets the part of himself in the movie about his experiences filmed here and likely to open simultaneously on American and Chinese screens next fall.
After graduating from Yale University in 1982 with a degree - summa cum laude and Phi Beta Kappa - in Chinese language and literature, Mr. Salzman moved to China for two years. 
There he taught English, studied martial arts and encountered the absurdities and charms of the Middle Kingdom. 
His light, pointillist account of his experiences, ''Iron and Silk,'' was published in February 1987 and won excellent reviews.
Mr. Salzman, a muscular 28-year-old who jokes almost as easily in Chinese as in English, received several feelers from companies interested in buying movie rights to his book. 
But when he said that he wanted to write the screenplay himself, and even to star in the film as himself, they laughed.
He will laugh last, for his dream took shape during the fall and early winter under the camera lights along the West Lake. 
The filming of ''Iron and Silk'' ended Dec. 
21, and it will be edited in the United States by its director and producer, Shirley Sun, a Chinese-American film maker who was a consultant to Bernardo Bertolucci for ''The Last Emperor.''
Ms. Sun in 1984 produced and co-wrote ''A Great Wall,'' a low-budget comedy that attracted favorable reviews for its tale of a Chinese-American scientist who brings his family with him to visit his relatives in China.
Yet ''A Great Wall'' was largely a movie by Chinese for Chinese, or at least Chinese-Americans. 
Much of the dialogue was in Chinese, and it was too forbidding, too full of inside jokes, to capture a mass audience in the United States. 
''The Last Emperor,'' on the other extreme, used a distinctively foreign lens. 
It was about China more than it was about the Chinese. 
Its epic sweep of history and visual panoramas of old China were stunning but did not evoke the life of ''old hundred names,'' as the Chinese refer to their ordinary citizens.
That is the gap for which ''Iron and Silk'' is aimed: a work filmed with understanding, even sympathy, but conceived for Main Street.
''It's time that people who know about China made movies about China,'' said Ms. Sun, who was born in Shanghai but grew up in the United States, and later earned a Ph.D. in art history from Stanford University. 
''For so long the movies were so stereotyped,'' she said. 
''We hope that this and other movies we make will be more authentic about Chinese life.''
''Iron and Silk'' hardly follows a blockbuster formula. 
Ms. Sun declined to discuss the movie's budget, but it seems tiny by Hollywood standards. 
And two important ingredients of many important American movies, sex and violence, have been sublimated and Sinicized so that they are scarcely recognizable. 
Mr. Salzman and his opposite, the mainland Chinese star Vivian Wu, might share a bed if this were a typical American movie. 
Instead, in Chinese form, they share some yearning for each other's companionship but then decide it really isn't feasible after all. 
The other key ingredient, violence, is provided by the martial arts scenes. 
Mr. Salzman began to study kung fu when he was 13 years old, but it was during his two years in China that he practiced under two martial arts masters and learned to use the long sword - a rare skill even among Chinese.
Partly because it is not easy to find a well-known actor who can send a sword whistling among the cameras, the cast is perhaps the most remarkable element of ''Iron and Silk.''
Mr. Salzman had dabbled in acting but had no movie credits. 
Vivian Wu, on the other hand, is a gorgeous 22-year-old who has been appearing in movies in China since she was 16 and then was cast as the emperor's second wife in ''The Last Emperor.''
Now Miss Wu, who speaks fluent English and is studying at Hawaii Pacific College, says she would like to do more English language movies.
Then there is Pan Qingfu, ''The Iron Fist'' himself, a legendary martial arts expert who earned his nickname - and the acorn-size calluses on his knuckles - by his hobby of punching an iron plate a thousand or more times a day. 
Mr. Pan, whose fierce gaze can seem as lethal as his fists, was Mr. Salzman's kung fu teacher in China, and he also plays himself. 
Mr. Pan had appeared in Chinese kung fu movies, but he speaks only a few useful phrases of English taught him by Mr. Salzman, such as ''Don't worry, it's just a shoulder dislocation.''
Moreover, he was accustomed only to the exaggerated style and costumes of Chinese martial arts movies. 
When he showed up in Hangzhou for the filming, Mr. Pan brought with him several warrior costumes that have not been seen on the street in China for many centuries at least.
Except for Jeanette Lin Tsui, a well-known Hong Kong actress, the cast is rounded out by local English-speaking Chinese. 
Some were already English teachers or interpreters, and some were simply selected from Hangzhou's ''English corner,'' an intersection where people go every evening to practice their English on one another. 
Many of these play the roles of Mr. Salzman's English-language students, and for the movie they had to learn to sing ''Jingle Bells,'' with which they serenade him at a farewell dinner.
If Mr. Salzman and the other neophytes are daunted by the prospect of appearing for the first time in a motion picture, they give no sign of it.
''Making this movie is a whole lot easier than buying coffee in Changsha,'' Mr. Salzman said with a laugh, referring to the city where he lived for two years. 
Miss Wu, by comparison a veteran actress, appraised him highly, saying, ''This is Mark's first movie, but he's very good, very professional. 
He will make a very good movie actor if he wants to be one.''
The filming, in cooperation with a Chinese production company, demonstrated some of the cultural differences that are the very topic of the movie. 
Most Chinese movies, for example, do not record sound at the same time they film. 
Voices are dubbed in later in a sound room. 
Likewise, Chinese productions tend to be less meticulous about lighting and other technical matters, so that only about three times as much film is shot as is used in the eventual movie. 
On the other hand, a production like ''Iron and Silk'' typically shoots about 10 times as much film as eventually finds its way into the finished movie. 
That sometimes seemed like a waste to the Chinese on the set, who saw scenes shot over and over even if there was little wrong with the earlier attempts.
''We have a lot of differences in shooting,'' explained Jia Qi, a liaison officer from Beijing who helped the ''Iron and Silk'' crew deal with local authorities and get what they needed. 
''We say Americans are big, and their films are also big,'' he remarked. 
For example, Ms. Jia said that a Chinese film production usually requires three cars to transport equipment, while ''Iron and Silk'' required three large trucks, which had to be driven 800 miles over dubious roads from Beijing.
Another cultural difference was that the Chinese on the set did not quite understand what the film is about. 
They were used to Chinese movies with strong story lines, and ''Iron and Silk'' is in large part just a pastiche of Mr. Salzman's experiences as teacher of English and student of martial arts. 
To be sure, the movie does take artistic license in expanding into a central theme what in the book was a minor incident: an encounter between Mr. Salzman and a young woman, beautiful and intelligent, who is attracted to him but constrained by her situation and by a sense of propriety.
Aside from that liberty, the movie largely follows the book - as might be expected when the same person writes the book as writes the screenplay. 
That was the result of one of the many coincidences in the story of how the movie came to be made.
It all began in March 1987, about a month after the book was published. 
Ms. Sun had read the book - indeed, after starting it one afternoon, she had stayed up most of the night to finish it - but she had other projects underway and did not think of making a movie about it. 
Meanwhile, Mr. Salzman was a fan of ''A Great Wall,'' but he did not know Ms. Sun personally, and he was then considering offers from other companies for movie rights. 
At that point, they met at an Asian film festival at Yale, and they quickly decided to collaborate. 
For Mr. Salzman, one of the strongest attractions was that Ms. Sun would allow him to co-write the screenplay with her, as well as to star as himself.
''I thought he'd be great the moment I met him,'' Ms. Sun recalled. 
''I couldn't possibly get any other actor who knows China and martial arts the way he does, and who has his talents.''
Mr. Salzman acknowledges that writing the screenplay was much more difficult than he had expected.
''Every draft I did, I would think it was perfect,'' he said. 
''Then I would send it to Shirley, and after a couple of weeks I would get a call and she would say, 'I have a few ideas.'
And then I would totally redo it.''
Ms. Sun, who had worked often in China and had good contacts, had no difficulty getting approval from Chinese authorities for the project, but she was not certain where in China to film. 
In fact, the events took place in Changsha, the capital of Hunan province in central China, but neither Mr. Salzman nor anyone else was enthusiastic about filming in that drab city.
In May 1988, Ms. Sun planned a five-day trip to scout locations for filming, starting with Hangzhou and then hurtling to several other cities she was considering. 
But when she reached Hangzhou, she could not get a flight out of the city. 
The planes were all booked up. 
And so she spent all five days on the banks of the West Lake, soaking up the city, and the decision was made by default. 
''Iron and Silk'' would be filmed in Hangzhou.
There seemed little chance of finding Mr. Pan to play himself, when all of a sudden he arrived in Hangzhou by coincidence to participate in a martial arts tournament. 
He quickly abandoned other projects to participate in the movie.
''I really wanted to do this,'' Mr. Pan explained. 
''I'm very happy that Americans are interested in martial arts, and I think we should contribute to the world.''
Mr. Salzman acknowledged some apprehension about how Mr. Pan would react to some passages in the book and screenplay that seemed to poke fun at his considerable ego. 
But in fact Mr. Pan was happy to repeat the lines, which he regarded as entirely accurate, such as one where he said he never makes mistakes. 
Indeed, Mr. Pan said that one reason he took the part was to confirm the book's authenticity.
''When some foreigners read the book, they don't believe what it says about me - that my eyes are like an eagle's, and that I am very tough,'' he explained. 
''So this movie will show them that I really am like that.''
