
What Jane Austen did for marriage in the 19th century, film makers are doing for adultery today. 
In the past few weeks alone, eight films from seven countries have offered a view of infidelity around the world. 
It is an unmistakable sign of a turbulent social era.
''Ju Dou,'' set in China in the 1920's, and ''Tilai,'' set in a contemporary African village, are radically different films that share this single plot: an arranged marriage between a young woman and an older man leads her to an adulterous affair that results in murder. 
''The Sting of Death,'' from Japan, and ''A Woman's Revenge,'' from France, both depict a woman who discovers her husband's adultery and goes mad.
These films, shown at the 28th New York Film Festival (with ''Ju Dou'' and ''Tilai'' to open commercially later this season) echo the adulterous motifs in two current American films. 
''Henry and June,'' which glorifies the menage a trois among Anais Nin, Henry Miller and his wife, June, elevates marital infidelity to an artistic ambition. 
And ''Texasville'' is a slice of pure, commercial Americana whose adulterous tangles make ''Peyton Place'' seem like Mother Goose.
This overload of international adultery also includes films in which infidelity is significant but not central, such as the Australian director Paul Cox's ''Golden Braid'' and the Taviani brothers' ''Night Sun,'' from Italy, both of which were also shown at the recently completed festival.
In all these films, adultery is more than a matter of love or passion; in fact, with the exceptions of ''Henry and June'' and ''Golden Braid,'' there is surprisingly little eroticism in these films. 
But even passionate films such as ''Dangerous Liaisons'' and ''Sex, Lies and Videotape'' function like Austen's novels. 
They use an individual's tale of marriage and adultery to expose social hypocrisy, to analyze and criticize one of the most crucial standards by which any culture lives.
Most often, infidelity becomes a symbolic act of rebellion against the traditional social order. 
In those rarefied subcultures where adultery is acceptable, fidelity becomes the rebellious idea. 
And from the elegant, understated manner of ''Tilai'' to the soap opera commercialism of ''Texasville,'' the common motif is handled in a way characteristic of each country's cinematic style, offering a revealing cross-cultural view.
In films such as ''Ju Dou'' and ''Tilai,'' adultery is explicitly presented as heroic resistance to outmoded traditions. 
These films tell stories of passion and violence, but they are more concerned with social comment than with remaking ''The Postman Always Rings Twice.''
The first fact we learn about Ju Dou, the heroine who gives the film its title, is that she was a very expensive bride to buy. 
Every subsequent action she takes defies the tradition that binds her to an abusive husband. 
The affair and the illegitimate son she has with Tian Qing, her husband's middle-aged adopted son, are both symbolic and personal.
The old husband, so vile that he tries to murder the child, embodies the evil traditions (and by extension the Government control) that have held China back. 
And when the husband dies, a bearded family elder invokes the ancient teachings and banishes Tian Qing from the house because he is not a true son. 
Challenging such rigid social patterns is both heroic and tragic, eventually leading to the murder of Tian Qing by his own son. 
In this context, the persistent love between Ju Dou and Tian Qing is as much a failed social rebellion as it is a private passion.
In fact, when the lovers begin to writhe on the floor of the family's dye factory, the film cuts to a bolt of red cloth in a vat; it is the equivalent of old Hollywood movies that discreetly shift to the fireplace to suggest sex. 
But the director, Zhang Yimou, is not only working in a slow, symbolic Chinese tradition. 
He is circumspect in the way of film makers who must dance around censorship. 
The film was made after the Government repression that began with Tiananmen Square; though it is based on a novel that moves from the 30's to the 70's, the film is situated safely in the pre-Commmunist past.
Idrissa Ouedraogo of Burkina Faso is much more direct in his criticism of the old order in ''Tilai,'' a film whose crisp photography, spare dialogue and gently flowing narrative are typical of African cinema. 
But here, too, adultery is a form of social heroism. 
Nogma is in love with Saga, but is married off to his father. 
When the villagers discover the lovers' adulterous affair, Saga is condemned to death, with his own brother chosen as the sanctioned murderer.
As in ''Ju Dou,'' the film maker sympathizes with the rebellious lovers, whose passionate resistance to tradition carries symbolic weight. 
Nogma's adolescent sister and Saga's brother are also strong figures who question the arranged marriage and the punishment for adultery. 
But as in ''Ju Dou,'' this rebellion fails, leading to a death that functions as virulent criticism of tradition for its own sake.
''The Sting of Death'' is even more explicit in its use of adultery as a social metaphor, though much of that may be lost on an audience unfamiliar with the novel on which it is based or comments by the director, Kohei Oguri. 
The film ''uses the medium of the relationship of a husband and wife to graphically depict the character of the Japanese people in the postwar era,'' he has said.
The film does not make it clear that the time is the 1950's or that the wife was a naive bride who married a soldier about to be sent into battle - not an arranged marriage, though one colored by the exigencies of war and nationalism. 
When she discovers his infidelity after 10 years of marriage and two children, the screen oveflows with his guilt, her obsessive recriminations and mutual threats of suicide. 
If ''Ju Dou'' is ''The Postman Always Rings Twice'' in China, ''The Sting of Death'' threatens to become a low-volume, Japanese version of ''Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?''
But the personal story is connected to the political past by a flashback of soldiers on the island where the couple met. 
Such allusions tie the effectively tense domestic battles to the struggling self-image of the Japanese. 
And on the subway, the husband sees a poster advertising a department store. 
''Happy Family. 
Delightful Shopping,'' it reads, measuring the distance between this family and the social ideal that may not exist at all.
Mr. Oguri's elegant, formal compositions are in the Japanese line that extends back to Yasujiro Ozu; during a typical conversation between the couple, the husband is hidden in shadows that cover half the screen. 
Yet its most disturbing quality is not specifically Japanese at all. 
Both ''The Sting of Death'' and ''A Woman's Revenge'' - an agonizingly hermetic and banal French film directed by Jacques Doillon - contain the insidious idea that women go crazy when men desert them.
The mad wife in ''A Woman's Revenge'' is Isabelle Huppert, who looks up her dead husband's former lover and drives the woman to suicide. 
So much for the image of blase French infidelities. 
In fact, though the story is very freely transferred to contemporary Paris from Dostoyevsky's ''Eternal Husband,'' it challenges the idea that such liaisons are to be forgiven and dismissed. 
Where ''Ju Dou'' and ''Tilai'' see adultery as heroic defiance of the social order, in ''A Woman's Revenge'' and ''Night Sun'' adultery is the social order, so the films come down on the side of fidelity.
''Night Sun'' is another Russian transplant, this time moving Tolstoy's story ''Father Sergius'' to Italy. 
The 18th-century hero, played by Julian Sands dubbed into Italian by Giancarlo Giannini, is a soldier who wages a self-mortifying struggle to escape the sinful world. 
But it is a corrupt marriage contract that sends him fleeing from society in the first place.
The king plans to elevate Sergius's social status by arranging his marriage to a royal woman (Nastassja Kinski), with whom he falls in love. 
But when she confesses that she has been the king's mistress, the hero is so shocked at his personal betrayal and society's hypocrisy that he runs off and becomes a monk. 
The aristocratic, 18th-century world that he rejects is entirely familiar from ''Dangerous Liaisons.''
It is a world in which only a true innocent or a peasant (Sergius is both) could doubt that marriage is a social convenience and that infidelity without guilt is the way of the world.
By the early 20th century, of course, such sophisticated adulteries had been replaced by bourgeois fidelity - at least on the surface of polite society. 
''Henry and June,'' set in Paris in 1931, heralds Modernism and the shattering of bourgeois mores. 
Total sexual freedom and fidelity to one's own passionate experience is the central idea of the film, which reflects the precious, hothouse sensibilities of Anais Nin, on whose diaries the story is based. 
(To my literary taste that is no compliment, but it seems to be what the director, Philip Kaufman, desired.) Rejecting middle-class mores and accepting unrestricted sex go together in this story, where marital fidelity is an emotional prison for the artist-heroes. 
Underneath its self-consciously steamy surface, ''Henry and June'' is as much about society as it is about sex and art.
A potboiler like ''Texasville,'' however, has nothing so lucid to say about adultery and society, even though all of Jeff Bridges's married lovers seem to be sleeping with his son. 
In ''The Last Picture Show,'' the affair between the high-school athlete and the coach's forlorn wife was life-saving; it was also the emotional heart of the film's nostalgic portrait of a fading small-town way of life. 
But the sequel, where Mr. Bridges's character is a millionaire going bankrupt while the whole town goes bust emotionally, has the feeling of fiction rather than life, despite its detailed trappings of life in the 1980's. 
That everyone is sleeping with someone else's mate simply seems part of the soap opera plot of ''Texasville.''
So sometimes adultery is simply adultery, without much social weight. 
And sometimes it is truly mad and personal. 
In ''Golden Braid,'' a man is having an affair with a married Salvation Army worker, but develops an obsessive romantic attachment to an antique hank of golden hair. 
This may be the ultimate twisted infidelity, but none of these films suggests any easy morality or social standards. 
Instead, they question the muddled rituals of love and marriage. 
As Saga's brother says in ''Tilai'': ''It's all so complicated. 
We've all been so stupid.''
