
Three quarters of a century ago, the novel "Family" by Ba Jin, a devastating portrait of feudal culture in 20th-century China, disturbed and inspired a generation of young Chinese to seek and promote change. 
The novel set a tone for much of the influential art of China for the rest of the century.
Except for long periods of artistic control under the Communists, when a mandatory, socialist-realist optimism prevailed, Chinese artists, writers and film makers have seen their country mired in a deeply oppressive, superstitious conservatism that was, in turn, at the heart of its decline. 
Dwelling on China's tragedies, they have tried to puzzle out a basic question: why has their extraordinary and brilliant civilization fallen into such intractable difficulty?
Four new films dealing with aspects of China show that the artistic quest of Ba Jin continues even today -- or, more accurately, has been renewed since the 1989 student uprising in Beijing. 
The films are very different from one another. 
None, moreover, contains any explicit political message, any direct attempt to impart the lessons of history.
They are "Ju Dou," a portrait of a rural family; "Iron and Silk," a lighthearted account of the experiences of an American teaching English and studying martial arts in the city of Hangzhou; "Song of the Exile," a Hong Kong-made film about a mother and daughter coming to grips with a complicated past, and, finally, "Shadow of China," an adventure movie about a former Red Guard who escapes to Hong Kong and becomes a titan of finance -- until his own troubling history catches up with him.
Still, different as they are -- and they were directed, respectively, by a Chinese, Chinese-American, Hong Kong and Japanese film maker -- each touches on that most persistent and haunting theme of Chinese art: the tragedies of 20th-century China and how those tragedies have affected individual lives.
Certainly the most controversial of the new films is "Ju Dou," which opens in New York today. 
The movie, which tells the story of a cloth dyer, his young wife and his adopted son in an unnamed village in China in the 1920's, was nominated by China's national film board to be the official entry in the Academy Awards this year, before Chinese authorities demanded, in vain, that the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences withdraw the film. 
News reports from China indicated that "Ju Dou" fell victim to a conservative turn in the arts following the suppression of the Tiananmen Square student uprising.
"Ju Dou" is the latest work of Zhang Yimou, whose previous film, "Red Sorghum," won the Golden Bear award at the Berlin Film Festival in 1988. 
Mr. Zhang has consistently explored the boundaries of the permissible in China's tightly controlled film industry; like many artists in China, he is trying to express troubling concepts in a way that will pass the censors' scrutiny.
To gain official approval, Mr. Zhang, for example, is said to have set his story in the early 1920's, when the Communist Party was founded in China. 
His reasoning, apparently, was that by explicitly describing what the Communists like to call the "old society," he could not be accused of indirect criticism of present-day authority. 
The conclusion could be that he was showing why it was necessary for a Communist Party to exist in the first place.
Despite Mr. Zhang's efforts, China's film authorities are demanding that the work be recut. 
Their reasons are unclear. 
Perhaps it is because, by Chinese standards, the film is too erotic: the young wife of the tyrannical and much older dyer falls in love with his shy adopted son, eventually bearing his child.
Perhaps the objections arise from the fact that the film offers no escape from the stiflingly feudal traditions of China, no hope for a radiant future. 
In any case, of all of the recent offerings about China, "Ju Dou" is closest to the spirit of Ba Jin and other writers earlier in the century.
At first glance, "Iron and Silk," directed by Shirley Sun, an American born in China, seems far removed from the themes and depictions of "Ju Dou."
Ms. Sun's film, based on a book by Mark Salzman (who plays himself in the movie), is not aimed at the darker side of Chinese tradition. 
In the film, Mr. Salzman goes to China to teach English and realize his ambition of studying with a martial-arts master. 
He has various encounters with his students, especially with Pan Qingfu, a real-life martial arts master who, like Mr. Salzman, plays himself in the movie.
The encounters often puzzle and vex the young American, reminding him that a culture as self-contained, ancient and different as China's presents a tricky shoal for the foreigner to navigate -- even if challenging and often enjoyable.
Despite the film's sweet and gentle tone, authoritarian politics and China's continuing struggle to adapt to the challenge of the modern world are never far away. 
Mr. Salzman runs into trouble with the stern official in charge of the school's foreign affairs -- the very incarnation of China's humorless, inflexible, cautious bureaucrat. 
The bureaucrat sniffs out an innocent love affair that the American seeks with a medical student, played by Vivian Wu.
In this sense, youthful romantic yearnings -- which played a minor role in Ba Jin's "Family" and a major one in the Tiananmen uprising of two years ago -- are characteristically thwarted by the conservatism, the oppressive and life-denying social practices that, in a far more tragic way, spoil the lives of the characters of Mr. Zhang's "Ju Dou."
The dramatic center of "Iron and Silk" shows Mr. Salzman welcomed by ordinary people but isolated by Chinese officialdom. 
Mr. Salzman finds at one point that the door to his martial-arts master's studio is slammed shut. 
The reason: the campaign against "spiritual pollution" and "bourgeois liberalization," code words for the bad habits that supposedly come from Western influences.
Ms. Sun says that, even with the film showing in the United States, the authorities are demanding alterations. 
They have asked that she drop at least one segment of dialogue -- when the medical student tells Mr. Salzman they cannot continue seeing each other. 
"Things are not as free as they seem," she says. 
The Chinese insistence that the line be dropped seems to be an unintentional affirmation that the line is true.
Conflicts arising out of life in China's past are depicted in two other films. 
One, "Song of the Exile," by the Hong Kong director Ann Hui, begins when Hueyin, a student, returns home to Hong Kong for her sister's wedding. 
In so doing, she resumes a troubled relationship with her mother. 
Slowly, the many layers of that relationship, each corresponding to a layer of history, unfold.
Hueyin was a wartime child. 
Her father was a Communist soldier in Manchuria; her mother, Aiko, a Japanese citizen trapped there by the war's sudden end. 
When Hueyin and her mother visit Aiko's family in Japan, the daughter comes to understand her mother's moodiness and lack of affection, both stemming from her sense of estrangement as a Japanese living among the Chinese.
That historical intrusion is complicated by the burst of Maoist radicalism in China known as the Cultural Revolution, which affects Hueyin when she returns to the Communist mainland to visit her grandparents. 
In the beginning of the film, Hueyin believes she can escape the politics of China by going to England. 
Once she returns to Hong Kong, however, she discovers she is too deeply entangled to try to escape again; this time she chooses to remain.
There are similar notes in "Shadow of China," a thriller directed by Mitsuo Yanagimachi and starring John Lone as a member of the Chinese Red Guard who makes his fortune in Hong Kong. 
The opening sequences show the pain and sorrow of China amid the excesses of the Cultural Revolution, but the film, whose dialogue is mostly in English, is taken over by sexual infidelities, cutthroat big-business competition and drug traffickers who belong to the Triads, Hong Kong's main criminal underworld.
But even amid cinematic adventure, the Chinese past reaches out. 
The former Red Guard is, like Hueyin of "Song of the Exile," the child of a wartime marriage between a Chinese woman and a Japanese spy, and that fact, once exposed, leads both to his ruin and to a lonely walk back across the border from Hong Kong to China. 
The Red Guard, even in escaping China itself and creating a new, glittering life, is unable to escape the consequences of war and politics.
John K. Fairbank, the Harvard historian of modern China, used to say that there were three Chinas -- the mercantile country of the coastal port cities, the country of an immense conservative governing bureaucracy and the vast rural country of hundreds of thousands of villagers, nearly untouched by time.
These four films touch on all three Chinas. 
"Ju Dou" is the hinterland; "Iron and Silk" shines a light on bureaucratic China. 
"Song of the Exile" and "Shadow of China" take place on the commercial littoral, the part of China that is part diaspora and part Chinese. 
That spectrum of evocations should be useful to Western audiences who have seen few films about or by Chinese.
In "Iron and Silk," on arriving in Hangzhou, Mr. Salzman notes that here he is in a country of more than one billion people and "I don't know a single one of them."
These movies enable Americans to know at least some of them.
