
Unusually heavy downpours have caused some of the worst flooding in years in eastern and central China, with more than 800 people estimated to have been killed and with heavy damage to several big industrial centers and crops, especially wheat, news reports say.
This is the rainy season, but the inundations are worse than usual. 
Rains are swelling the Yangtze and the Yellow Rivers, and the flooding is taking a toll in a number of eastern and southern provinces, disrupting transportation, industry and other services.
This morning the English-language China Daily reported that 847 people had been killed as of the end of June. 
Scattered reports since then suggest that there have been more than 150 additional deaths, bringing the lives lost to more than 1,000. 
Worse flooding yet is expected, according to the news reports. 
The lives of more than 30 million people have been affected by the floods, along with 21.5 million acres of farmland.
The train line between Beijing and Shanghai, one of the most heavily traveled rail corridors in China, had been cut. 
But partial service was restored late Monday, the New China News Agency reported.
In Hunan Province in central China, the Yangtze flooded more than 700,000 acres of farmland. 
A bus with 50 people aboard was swept into a river, with the fate of its passengers unknown.
The Farmer's Daily newspaper said that half of the summer wheat crop had been lost in the provinces of Anhui, Henan and Jiangsu.
Sichuan Province, China's most populous province and a major agricultural center, has also been hit hard. 
On the upper reaches of the Yangtze, 121 people have been killed by the floods, China Daily said. 
Another 3,400 people have been injured.
The Government has tried some extraordinary measures to relieve the rising water. 
A 400-foot-long dam on the Huangpu River, near Shanghai, was blown up over the weekend to release waters collecting in Lake Taihu, the New China News Agency reported. 
The gates had been opened, but the water was not running out fast enough.
Today, the agency said eight more dams were blasted open to release the water in the lake.
