
ILLEGAL tiger hunting to supply tiger bones for the Chinese folk medicine trade could bring about the extinction of an already endangered species, a leading conservationist says.
In a statement issued recently by the headquarters of the World Conservation Union in Gland, Switzerland, Peter Jackson, chairman of the organization's Cat Specialist Group, reported that poachers in one Indian game preserve alone killed 20 tigers in the last two years. 
Since there are only an estimated 7,000 tigers left in the wild throughout the world, the poaching trend could bring about their extinction, he said, despite a Chinese program that is breeding tigers in captivity for slaughter.
The rapidly rising price of tiger bone sold by traditional apothecaries in China and by druggists serving overseas Chinese communities has prompted the rise in poaching, Mr. Jackson said. 
The poachers are getting $170 to $250 per kilogram (2.2 pounds) of tiger bone smuggled to the border of China, where the bone is processed for retail sale. 
In Laos, which has a large Chinese population, tiger bone sells for $370 per kilogram. 
A small tiger yields about seven kilograms (15 pounds) of bone.
"It's a pretty safe assumption," Mr. Jackson said, "that conservationists and animal lovers are not going to persuade hundreds of millions of Chinese to abandon their ancient belief in the curative powers of tiger bone. 
The demand will be met only by poaching tigers in the wild. 
The rising price of tiger bone is bound to be an irresistible incentive for poachers. 
All this being true, wild tigers may indeed by doomed."
 
Tiger Breeding Program
To partly meet the demand for bone, Mr. Jackson said, China has begun raising tigers in captivity to slaughter for their bones. 
Reporting on a trip he made to China in August, Mr. Jackson said he investigated a tiger-breeding farm in northeast China that started with 14 animals in 1986 and now has 62 Siberian tigers. 
With modern techniques, he said, it will be possible to breed 2,000 "industrial" tigers every seven years.
Mr. Jackson said that he had been tortured by the idea of breeding tigers in captivity for their bones, but added, "I do think that all of us who are interested in conserving tigers in the wild now have to address this question."
One of the worst recent outbreaks of poaching was at Ranthambhore National Park, India, a tiger preserve visited by many tourists. 
In 1989 there were 44 tigers in the park, but a new census last May found only 15 left. 
Nine poachers were caught, but the tigers were gone. 
Since then, widespread tiger poaching has been discovered in other parts of India and Nepal.
Many Chinese believe that tiger bone, in powdered form or prepared as "tiger wine," soothes rheumatic pain and cures ulcers, malaria, burns and, according to one folk-medicine pharmacopeia, "eruptions under the toenail."
Western medical experts discount all claims of any curative powers for tiger bone, as they do for rhinoceros horn, another popular Chinese medicine. 
Demand for rhinoceros horn has reduced the world rhinoceros population from 80,000 in 1972 to 10,000 today.
