
After years of being spurned on the international weapons marketplace, there are signs that these days Taiwan is finding Western countries willing to sell it modern military equipment to defend itself against mainland China.
Taiwan's relative success in buying modern weaponry shows the extent to which it may be reintegrating into the international community even though scarcely any important countries recognize it as the legitimate Government of China. 
The weapons purchases are also likely to inflame relations between Taipei and Beijing and cause tensions between the Chinese Government and Western Governments willling to sell such equipment.
Weapons specialists say that since the Persian Gulf war and the warming of relations between the Soviet Union and Western countries, military contractors -- and perhaps Governments -- are under greater pressure to find new markets, like Taiwan. 
While they may not yet be selling jet fighters, companies are talking to Taiwan about a wider range of weaponry and electronic warfare equipment.
"The business for us is shrinking in the U.S., so we have to start looking overseas for business," said a representative of an American armaments company, who was displaying advanced military communications systems at an exhibition recently in Taipei. 
"That's why we're here."
Armaments companies have always been willing to sell to Taiwan, but in the past, Western governments have frequently denied export licenses. 
Not all weapons specialists agree, but many say that the United States and several European countries may now be reconsidering the benefits of selling certain modern equipment to Taiwan against the risks of Chinese retaliation.
They add that with the collapse of Communism in the Soviet Union, the strategic importance of China may be diminishing, so that countries may be willing to stand up to pressure from the Chinese Government.
"Before, Taiwan could never pay billions of dollars for weapons and the French would never talk to us before," said Hei Youlong, a business executive and weapons expert in Taipei. 
"Now, Taiwan has money and when it talks, people start listening."
For example, in a deal many weapons specialists say is nearly completed, France plans to sell to Taiwan six Lafayette-class frigates, worth $2 billion, according to local news reports, with an option to buy 10 more.
Nearly two years ago, the deal fell through when China protested to France and successfully blocked the sale. 
Not only is the sale expected to go through this time, but China issued only a mild criticism of the deal.
In contrast, in the early 1980's, when Taiwan purchased two submarines from the Netherlands, China downgraded its relationship with the Netherlands to consular status. 
The relationship has since returned to normal.
More recently, the United States has approved the sale of four E-2 Hawkeye early warning aircraft, manufactured by the Grumman Corporation.
Taiwan, however, apparently wants a more modern version that the United States so far has not agreed to sell.
Currently, Taiwan's ability to detect approaching aircraft flying at low altitudes is relatively weak, as is its air capability in general, weapons analysts say. 
In the last two years, 19 to 20 jet fighters have crashed, including a prototype for a locally built fighter plane that Taiwan is trying to develop through a co-production arrangement with an American company.
The United States has consistently refused to sell F-16 jet fighters to Taiwan because they could be used to attack mainland China. 
It has sold the aircraft to other Asian nations, including Pakistan, Thailand and Singapore.
Taiwan and the United States cut off formal ties in 1979, when the United States and mainland China established diplomatic relations. 
At the time, the United States agreed to provide Taiwan with defensive arms but in 1982, it issued a joint communique with the Chinese that essentially limited American arms sales to Taiwan in quality and quantity to the level of those supplied previously. 
The United States was then supplying about $800 million in arms to Taiwan.
