
The Khmer Rouge is earning tens of thousands of dollars a week by selling passes to people who want to mine rubies in areas it controls inside Cambodia, numerous Cambodians interviewed in this refugee camp just inside Thailand say.
Several thousand Cambodians, Thais, Burmese and Laotians pay the Khmer Rouge 1,000 Thai baht, or about $40, to purchase passage along a narrow, mine-strewn path from Thailand into Cambodia and a week's permission to dig for gemstones along three hills now known as Phnom Pech, or Diamond Mountain.
The path runs from an area just north of Bo Rai in southeastern Thailand to an area the refugees say is northwest of Battambang city and once was called Phnom Tadeth. 
To travel it takes a day and a night, they say, because the path is so narrow that miners going in opposite directions must embrace one another when they pass to avoid touching off the land mines sown everywhere along the border. 
Once in the mining area, increasingly few people venture out to cut firewood, because of mines and claymores hidden in the trees.
A ruby-mining area popular in the past, near Pailin, also close to the Thai border, is too dangerous to approach, the refugees say. 
Khmer Rouge soldiers, these refugees say, keep a reasonably strict discipline, verifying tickets at three checkpoints near the mines. 
The soldiers have never tried to steal rubies from them, said two of the refugees, Nuon Sokha and Chhom Sarin. 
The soldiers are forbidden to dig for rubies themselves, Nuon Sokha said, but a few evidently do so anyway, because they sometimes offer to sell rubies to the miners when no officer is present.
Another refugee, Chan Ny, said that the discipline can break down. 
Khmer Rouge soldiers sometimes made him and his friends pay twice.
Nuon Sokha said he found at least $200 worth of rubies every week, and sometimes uncovered extremely valuable stones, which could be sold in Bo Rai.
 
'10,000 People' Digging
''People are traveling along the path into and out of Cambodia all day and all night,'' he said. 
On the three hills, he and others said, there are at times ''10,000 people'' digging for rubies. 
Even cutting his estimate by a factor of five, 2,000 miners would bring in $80,000 a week to the Khmer Rouge, which has been receiving most of its aid, in food, arms and cash, from China.
In a settlement to the long Cambodian conflict now being discussed, diplomats say China has agreed to cut its supplies to the Khmer Rouge and the other resistance factions as the Vietnamese complete their troop withdrawal from Cambodia, which they have occupied since late 1978. 
The Vietnamese overthrew the Khmer Rouge Government led by Pol Pot. 
Under his rule at least one million Cambodians died from starvation, disease and overwork and in mass executions.
The Khmer Rouge is known to have stockpiled a substantial amount of Chinese arms throughout Cambodia. 
Even if the Chinese and their conduits, the Thais, were to cut off the Khmer Rouge entirely, which many Western and Asian diplomats doubt, a steady source of income from businesses like ruby mining and thatch manufacture would enable the guerrilla faction to buy Chinese arms and ammunition.
