
It was midnight, very late by the standards of Chinese night life, and Wang Xiaoguang was having a few beers in a new privately owned club, the Manhattan Bar.
He was dressed in a well-tailored suit - Italian-made, he said with pride -and with him was a young woman beautiful enough to be a movie star -which she was, he added. 
His tab came to the equivalent of $50, a month's wage for most Chinese in Shanghai, but Mr. Wang was unperturbed, pulling out a thick wad of Chinese, American and Japanese currency.
Mr. Wang could afford it because he himself is the owner of a successful new nightclub, one of an estimated four million Chinese who now work in private enterprises as part of the economic initiatives sponsored by Deng Xiaoping, China's senior leader.
Profit vs. Maoist Virtues
Mr. Wang also represents the increasing commercialization of China's economy in the last few years, as the profit motive replaces the old Maoist virtues of communal effort and egalitarianism.
In Mao's terms, this new materialism has created a ''contradiction,'' with China seeming to move in two directions at once.
On the one hand, Mr. Deng's policies of economic change and opening to the outside world have produced entrepreneurs like Mr. Wang, giving an impetus to development and providing a host of badly needed services like restaurants and food markets.
On the other hand, to many of China's Communist elders these changes smack of ''bourgeois liberalism,'' which Beijing has blamed for the pro-democracy movement, and they threaten the Government's entrenched control system.
In the current issue of the party's theoretical journal, Seeking Truth, the new General Secretary of the party, Jiang Zemin, asserted that private entrepreneurs were becoming too wealthy and ''ruining the atmosphere of society.''
 
Privatization Criticized
Another recent article, in Guangming Daily, attacked Mr. Jiang's predecessor, Zhao Ziyang, who has been purged, for encouraging private enterprise. 
Privatization ''laid the ideological foundation for the recent counterrevolutionary rebellion,'' the article contended, adding that advocates of private enterprise might be the ''black hand'' behind the student demonstrations.
Whether these articles signal the beginning of a campaign against private enterprise as part of Beijing's overall crackdown is unclear.
Talks with several private entrepreneurs in Shanghai, China's largest city, with a population of 12 million, showed a wide range of opinions.
''Don't worry so much about the students killed in Beijing,'' said another customer in the Manhattan Bar. 
''That is the only way the old men know how to do things. 
Control, control, control.''
''Sooner or later they will die, and we will do things differently,'' said the man, the owner of a small trucking company. 
''We have learned about the rest of the world.''
He left and drove off in his own car, one of the few private cars in China.
 
Many Are Pessimistic
But despite the economic progress of the last 10 years, despite the greater availability of food, the prevalence of families with television sets and refrigerators and a spectacular boom in housing construction, many residents are pessimistic.
''The past was no good, the present is no good and there is no future,'' said the owner of a four-table restaurant near the Bund, Shanghai's old riverfront.
One of his customers, eating a bowl of sauteed octopus with green peppers, scoffed. 
''You are one of the lucky ones; you are a private entrepreneur and make lots of money,'' said the customer, a young engineer.
No, replied the owner. 
''I may make 400 yuan a month,'' or $108 at the official exchange rate, double the average salary, ''but I have to keep the restaurant 24 hours a day, and the local officials are always asking for money.''
 
Asked for 'Contribution'
Recently he was asked to make a ''contribution'' of about $300 to the Asian Games, which are scheduled to be held in Beijing next year. 
He said he had no idea where the money really went.
Then the owner held up his right hand. 
Several of his fingers were missing. 
During the Cultural Revolution in the late 1960's he had been a high school student in Shanghai, and one day most of the youths in his neighborhood were sent to live in Qinghai Province in the far northwest, a poor, arid area that is part of the Tibetan Plateau. 
It was one of Mao's utopian schemes to make China's young people more revolutionary by making them live with the peasants.
He was assigned to work in a garage, where an electrical short in the machine he was using caused it to malfunction, severing his fingers.
He returned to Shanghai illegally only in 1981, without the necessary clearances to get an apartment or ration coupons, and became a vegetable peddler. 
Last year he accumulated enough money to send for his wife and teen-age son, who were still in Qinghai, and opened the restaurant.
''You are the lucky one,'' the owner said to the engineer. 
''You have a diploma. 
You have a future.''
 
A Quota for Children
The engineer demurred. 
''I have no control over my life,'' he said. 
He wants to have a child, but he must first get permission from the factory where he works, under China's stringent birth control program of one child per family. 
The factory has an annual quota.
Two years ago he was put on the list, but his wife did not become pregnant within the year, and so they have to wait till next year to be put back on the list. 
''If we have a child without clearance, they will fire me,'' the engineer said.
He wants to go to the United States to study, like millions of young Chinese. 
But four years ago when his college held a competition for a scholarship to America, the son of a high-ranking official mysteriously won, though he was not considered a good student. 
The incident left a deep impression on the engineer.
''Corruption is everywhere now,'' he said. 
To get an apartment after he was married, he had to bribe the official in charge of housing in his factory. 
It cost him three months' salary.
 
Fined for Missing Meeting
The factory governs his destiny, a key feature of the Communists' control system. 
When he recently skipped a Saturday morning session held to study a speech by Mr. Deng on the crackdown in Tiananmen Square in Beijing, the factory fined him a week's income. 
Such actions go into a dossier kept by the factory, and he fears that a colleague may report that he expressed support for the students.
Outside, after his meal, the engineer had a request to a foreigner. 
''Would you change some dollars with me?''
The black-market rate for China's currency is almost double the official rate.
A decade ago such a suggestion would have been unthinkable, a sin of capitalism. 
A decade ago the control system would have prevented it. 
Wasn't the engineer afraid of being caught?
No, he answered. 
Even his factory manager is trying to change money, to get enough dollars to send his son to graduate school in America.
