
I MYSELF AM A WOMAN
Selected Writings of Ding Ling.
Edited by Tani E. Barlow with Gary J. Bjorge.
361 pp. 
Boston:
Beacon Press. 
$24.95.
A model of the modern emancipated woman in prerevolutionary Shanghai, and an author of scandalous romantic fiction, the Chinese writer Ding Ling joined the Communists in Yanan in the 1930's and edited the literary columns of Liberation Daily, the party newspaper. 
At a critical juncture in party affairs, she allied herself with Mao Zedong's famous dictum that all art must hasten the revolution. 
Despite her efforts at political rectitude, she was hounded, exiled, and periodically imprisoned from the late 1950's onward.
''I Myself Am a Woman,'' augmented by a long interpretive essay by Tani E. Barlow, an assistant professor of history at the University of Missouri, is the most comprehensive selection of Ding Ling's work yet published in America. 
We now can ponder at close range the literary progression of a tempestuous rebel caught up in a revolution she believed to be necessary and good, who willingly sacrificed her ironic detachment and subtlest perceptions to the Maoist principle of ''serving the people.''
It is easy to see why the audacious stories from the 1920's established Ding Ling's literary reputation.
In ''A Woman and a Man'' (1928) the newly married, bored and provocative Wendy (she has dropped her Chinese name) arranges an assignation with Ouwai Ou, a pretentious, dissipated poet who has given himself a Japanese nom de plume. 
Ouwai Ou, alas, finds easier sexual satisfaction with Aijin, a back-alley prostitute who is grateful for his money. 
Her chastity, if not her feelings of sexual desirability, intact, Wendy returns to her husband armed with the small crumb of insight that Ouwai Ou is ''afraid of me!
Afraid of me!''
This delightful piece of fiction, which skewers the superficial bourgeois-intellectual circle that Ding Ling had come to detest, mixes a fine sense of place and a minute dissection of her characters' inner feelings with her inimitable signature from that era: a frisky, satirical poke at the double standard. 
The author of ''A Woman and a Man'' could be a spiritual sister to Jean Rhys.
In the winter of 1930, the father of Ding Ling's child and 23 other Communist activists and writers were executed by Chiang Kai-shek. 
Her response was swift and irrevocable: she joined the revolutionary struggle.
''Net of Law'' (1932) shows the effects of her Marxist transformation. 
The condition of woman is still close to her heart as she attempts to enter the world of China's proletariat. 
Alcoholism, wife beating, even murder, are rife in the slums of Hankou, a factory town, but the enemy is plainly the viperish capitalist system. 
An opaque veil hangs over the inner life of her characters; she prefers to show that the masses are in motion.
''When I Was in Xia Village'' (1941) demonstrates the transmogrification of Ding Ling, now a high Party functionary, into Maxim Gorky. 
Zhenzhen, a poor peasant raped by the Japanese, has contracted a venereal disease. 
When she returns to her backward village, she is ostracized by the elders. 
But there is hope for Zhenzhen: the Communist Party arranges for her to go to Yanan for treatment.
Innocuous on the face of it, this story was apparently a factor in Ding Ling's subsequent trouble. 
Ms. Barlow says that it ''upset literary policy enforcers because it reverted back to Ding Ling's earlier preoccupation with sex and justice. 
It also placed a woman seeking social redress at the center of the plot.''
I would offer a slightly different emphasis. 
More likely, Ding Ling's specific ideological heresy lay in placing an individual's social redress at the plot's center; in just such hairsplitting distinctions a generation of Chinese writers was destroyed.
In any event, the details of Ding Ling's fall from grace are still murky. 
Her class background, stormy personal life and high visibility were sufficient grounds for suspicion. 
A victim of the 1957 antirightist campaign, she was exiled to Manchuria, where she managed to continue writing under the patronage of some old friends in high places. 
She and thousands of other intellectuals fell into the hands of the Red Guards in 1966. 
Ding Ling underwent the ritual humiliations of the Great Cultural Revolution - the dunce cap, the public confession - and spent most of the next decade in solitary confinement. 
She was rehabilitated in 1978 under the aegis of Deng Xiaoping.
''Du Wanxiang,'' the final story in this collection, dated 1978 but written more than 10 years earlier, is a stolid parable about the hardships of a poor, industrious peasant with minimal skills (actually they are the feminine skills of cooking and cleaning) who triumphs in her desire to serve the people in a development outpost. 
The last lines read, after the fashion of the day, ''Du Wanxiang is our frontline soldier. 
We must learn from her. 
We must go forward with her.''
Officially restored to a position of eminence, Ding Ling was granted a trip to the United States in 1981, where she visited the University of Iowa's writing program and met with Arthur Miller. 
A new generation of Chinese writers, impatient for change and disappointed by her continued defense of literary censorship, took to calling her Old Shameful. 
She died a natural death in 1985.
Ms. Barlow's valuable though overly academic introductory essay proposes that Ding Ling's early feminist ideas were imported from the West, and thus were inevitably doomed in the larger context and priorities of the 1949 revolution. 
But most liberation theories - Marxist, feminist, anarchist, democratic - were imported from elsewhere to feudal, Mandarin China. 
The forcible suppression of the student rebellion this past June reminds us that feminism was not the only idea that lost out.
