
BECAUSE the Chinese words for fish and for prosperity or abundance are pronounced the same - yu - fish is one of the symbolic foods for the Chinese New Year celebrations that begin Saturday.
For this year's holiday banquets, an increasing number of chefs - especially in New York and California - will be scooping their fish live from tanks in the kitchens and sometimes in the dining rooms of restaurants. 
Cooks preparing fish at home can also buy fish live from markets in the Chinatowns of San Francisco, Los Angeles and New York -in Flushing, Queens, and the Sunset Park section of Brooklyn as well as Manhattan.
The trend reflects the growing influence of Hong Kong cuisine, the newest of Chinese cuisines to be imported to the United States. 
Restaurateurs in Hong Kong, anticipating the return of the British colony to China in 1997, have started establishing businesses in the United States, and more and more chefs are relocating.
In Hong Kong, restaurants with fish tanks are routine and shoppers in the city's Central Market often take their fish or shrimp home in plastic bags filled with water.
''As more chefs come here from Hong Kong, you'll see more restaurants with live fish,'' said Ken Hom, the author whose latest book, ''Fragrant Harbor Taste'' (Simon and Shuster, 1989, $24.95) is about the cooking of Hong Kong. 
He described the Hong Kong style as essentially a more elegant version of Cantonese cooking. 
The restaurants tend to be fancier and considerably larger than other Chinese restaurants.
''There is great emphasis on seafood because of Hong Kong's location,'' he added. 
''And whereas it may be easy to keep fish alive in a pond in a rural area in Canton, in a big city like Hong Kong it's expensive. 
That adds to its allure.''
Though his restaurants do not have tanks of live fish, Michael Tong has added a chef from Hong Kong to the staff of one of his establishments, Shun Lee Palace in midtown Manhattan. 
''Hong Kong cooking is the first really new Chinese style that has caught on in awhile,'' Mr. Tong said.
Several Hong Kong-style dishes, like gray sole on a bed of crispy, edible bones, are on his special New Year's menu at Shun Lee Palace, 155 East 55th Street.
Other restaurants in Manhattan that maintain tanks of live fish - usually freshwater varieties - include the Golden Unicorn, 18 East Broadway at Catherine Street, and Oriental Town Seafood Restaurant, 14 Elizabeth Street at Bayard Street.
The new Triple Eight restaurant, at 88 East Broadway at Forsyth Street, maintains tanks of both fresh- and saltwater fish. 
The fish are usually simply steamed with ginger and scallions so the freshness of the flavor can dominate.
Among the dishes at Oriental Town Seafood is steamed black carp with black beans. 
The Golden Unicorn serves live shrimp cooked at tableside in a broth.
Live shrimp is a delicacy that only a few restaurants carry. 
''They are very expensive - up to $20 a pound wholesale - and are so delicate that they can't be kept overnight,'' said Chuck Lou, one of the owners of Hy Fund, a fish market at 75 Mulberry Street in Manhattan, where at least six kinds of fish are available live on a given day.
The fish are freshwater varieties, like carp, buffalo fish, crappie and a type of large-mouth bass. 
Mr. Lou said the market does not carry live saltwater fish because maintaining the chemical balance in a tank is extremely difficult.
Some of the fish come from the Great Lakes and, increasingly, from fish farms around the country. 
Tank trucks filled with swimming white crappies, catfish, carp, blue gills and freshwater bass now make the 28-hour trip to New York from fish farms in Arkansas on a regular basis. 
At the New York Fish Exchange, a wholesaler at the Fulton Fish Market, several other varieties are available from time to time.
Prices in retail markets like Hy Fund in Chinatown range from $1.40 a pound for live carp to $8 a pound for large-mouth bass. 
The markets will dress the fish to order.
In the San Francisco area, live fish are kept in tanks at several Hong Kong-style restaurants, including Wu Kong, at 101 Spear Street near Mission Hill, Hong Kong Flower Lounge in Millbrae, North Sea Village in Sausalito and Suntung Lok in Burlingame. 
Markets in San Francisco that carry live fish include Wah Fat Fish and Sang Sang.
Bruce Cost, author of ''Asian Ingredients'' (William Morrow, 1988) and owner of Monsoon, a restaurant near the San Francisco City Hall that opened in November, is planning to install an aquarium for live fish. 
''For the time being I'm keeping live catfish in a couple of sinks in the kitchen, but I expect to install fish tanks between the kitchen and the bar where the customers can see them.''
The San Francisco restaurants and markets are supplied by fishermen who keep their catch in tanks on boats and by fish farms in Southern California and elsewhere. 
The fish, among them catfish, rock cod and striped bass are bought, cleaned and cooked the same day.
When Chinese cooks buy live fish in a market they usually steam it. 
One example suitable for a Chinese New Year's menu, is steamed buffalo fish with ginger and scallions, a recipe that Norman Weinstein teaches at his cooking school in Brooklyn, Hot Wok. 
Another is Mr. Hom's steamed fish with ham and vegetables.
Both these dishes are particularly appropriate for celebrating the Chinese New Year because they call for whole fish, a symbol of prosperity.
 
Sole, Carp and More
 
Gray Sole Fillet with Crispy Bones
(Adapted from Shun Lee Palace Restaurant, Manhattan)
 
Preparation time: 20 minutes
Cooking time: 15 minutes
 
1 whole gray sole, 3 1/2 pounds, filleted with skin on; reserve the carcass in one piece without the head
 
1 egg white
9 1/2 tablespoons cornstarch
1 1/2 teaspoons cold water
4 tablespoons chicken stock
1 tablespoon rice wine
1 1/2 teaspoons salt
1/4 teaspoon sugar
1 teaspoon Chinese sesame oil
2 teaspoons soy sauce
8 to 10 cups vegetable oil
4 scallions, cut in 1-inch pieces
4 slices ginger root, 1/8-inch thick and cut in 1-inch sticks.
1.Place each fillet skin-side down and cut across the fillets to make four pieces of equal width from each.
2.Beat the egg white with 5 tablespoons of cornstarch in a bowl large enough to hold the fish. 
Add the fish pieces and turn them in this marinade to coat them. 
Refrigerate at least 30 minutes.
3.In a small bowl dissolve 1/2 tablespoon of the cornstarch in the water and stir in the chicken stock, rice wine, 1 teaspoon salt, sugar and sesame oil. 
Set aside.
4.Pat the carcass dry and rub with the soy sauce and remaining 1/2 teaspoon of the salt. 
Then rub with 4 tablespoons cornstarch. 
Set aside at room temperature.
5.Heat the oil in a large wok or deep-fryer until it reaches 375 degrees. 
Add the fish carcass and fry undisturbed until very crisp and golden, about 10 minutes. 
Remove, drain and place on a serving platter.
6.Reheat the vegetable oil to 300 degrees. 
Add the fish pieces one at a time, gently swirling them to keep them separate. 
Cook for about 30 seconds, then using a slotted spoon or skimmer, transfer the fish to a colander to drain. 
Pour the oil out of the wok.
7.Place the wok over high heat, add the scallions and ginger, stir for 10 seconds, then add the sauce mixture. 
When it comes to a boil add the fish pieces and turn in the mixture just enough to coat them with the sauce. 
The fish breaks easily, so turn the pieces very gently.
8.Transfer the fish to the center of the crisp fried bones and serve at once. 
Serve pieces of the crisp, edible bones with the fish.
Yield: 6 servings.
 
Steamed Fish with Ginger and Scallions
(Adapted from Hot Wok Cooking School, Brooklyn)
 
Preparation time: 20 minutes
Cooking time: 15 minutes
 
1 2- to 3-pound piece buffalo carp with bone, or a whole largemouth bass or sea bass, 2 1/2 to 3 pounds
5 tablespoons Chinese rice wine or dry sherry
3/4 cup finely shredded ginger
1 bunch scallions cut in 3- to 4-inch sections
3 tablespoons Chinese sesame oil
3 tablespoons light soy sauce.
1.Select a heatproof platter that will hold the fish and fit into a large roasting pan. 
The roasting pan must have a cover. 
Place the fish on the platter. 
Sprinkle with 3 tablespoons of the wine. 
Top with the ginger shreds and scallions.
2.Place two empty 7-ounce tin cans, like tuna fish cans, with tops and bottoms removed, in the center of the roasting pan to support the platter. 
Add 1 1/2 inches of water to the roasting pan, cover and bring to a boil. 
Turn off the heat and uncover. 
Place the fish platter on the tin cans. 
Replace the cover on the roasting pan, bring the water to a boil, lower heat to medium and steam the fish for 8 to 10 minutes.
3.While the fish is steaming, place the sesame oil, soy sauce and remaining wine in a small skillet. 
Just before the fish has finished steaming, bring this mixture nearly to a boil.
4.Using heat-proof mitts, lift the fish platter from the roasting pan and drain off any accumulated liquid. 
Pour the sesame oil and soy sauce mixture over the fish and serve.
Yield: 4 to 6 servings.
 
Whole Sweet and Sour Fish
(Adapted from Monsoon Restaurant, San Francisco)
 
Preparation time: 1 hour
Cooking time: 20 minutes
 
1 whole sea bass or red snapper, about 3 pounds
2 eggs, lightly beaten
1 1/2 teaspoons salt
9 tablepoons cornstarch
4 large dried black mushrooms
2 1/2 cups hot water
1 small onion, peeled and quartered
8 slices fresh ginger
5 garlic cloves, smashed
2 small red bell peppers, cut in 1-inch squares
2 scallions, cut in 1-inch lengths
7/8 cup sugar
3/4 cup red wine vinegar
1 tablespoon dark soy sauce
1 tablespoon light soy sauce
6 cups peanut oil
Fresh coriander for garnish.
1.Butterfly the fish, slicing up alongside the bone, then pressing down on the fish to flatten it completely. 
Flatten the head as well. 
The butterflying can also be done with the whole fish boned, if desired. 
Cut slashes into the skin of the fish.
2.Blend the eggs with 1 teaspoon of the salt and rub over the fish.
3.Spoon about 2 tablespoons of the cornstarch into a sieve and sprinkle evenly over the fish, then rub it on. 
Allow the fish to stand, uncovered, for 15 minutes. 
Repeat twice again.
4.Meanwhile, soak the mushrooms in 1/2 cup hot water until they soften, about 20 minutes. 
Drain them, reserving the soaking liquid, and squeeze out any excess water. 
Cut off the stems. 
Quarter the caps and mix with the onion, ginger, garlic, red bell peppers and scallions. 
Set aside.
5.In a nonreactive saucepan combine the remaining 2 cups of water with the sugar, vinegar, soy sauces and the remaining 1/2 teaspoon salt. 
Bring to a simmer and cook, stirring just until the sugar dissolves. 
Set aside.
6.Mix 3 tablespoons of the cornstarch with the reserved mushroom soaking liquid and set aside.
7.In a large (16-inch) wok, heat all but 1/4 cup of the oil until it is very hot, 375 degrees, but not smoking. 
Cook the fish for 5 to 7 minutes, until it browns. 
Lift the fish out of the wok and drain on paper towels. 
Leave the oil in the wok.
8.While the fish is draining, heat the remaining oil in another wok or a largeskillet. 
Stir-fry the vegetable mixture until the vegetables begin to soften, then add the vinegar mixture. 
Bring to a simmer. 
Stir the cornstarch mixture and add it, stirring. 
Cook until the sauce turns syrupy and clear.
9.Reheat the oil used to fry the fish, return the fish to the wok and fry again briefly to crisp it. 
Drain the fish, place it on a platter, reheat the vegetables and the sauce, and pour this mixture over the fish. 
Decorate with coriander and serve.
Yield: 6 servings.
 
Steamed Fish with Ham and Vegetables
(Adapted from ''Fragrant Harbor Taste'' by Ken Hom (Simon & Schuster, 1989)
 
Preparation time: 30 minutes
Cooking time: 8 to 10 minutes
 
8 dried Chinese black mushrooms
1 whole red snapper, sea bass or any firm white-fleshed saltwater or freshwater fish, 1 1/2 to 2 pounds
4 tablespoons rice wine
2 1/2 teaspoons Chinese sesame oil
8 thin slices peeled fresh ginger
8 thin slices Smithfield ham
Y cup chicken stock
Salt
1/2 teaspoon freshly ground white pepper
1 teaspoon cornstarch mixed with 1 teaspoon water
6 stalks Chinese broccoli.
1.Soak the mushrooms in enough warm water to cover for about 20 minutes or until they are soft and pliable. 
Drain and squeeze out the excess water, and cut off and discard the woody stems.
2.Make four incisions on each side of the fish and rub with 1 tablespoon of rice wine and 2 teaspoons of the sesame oil. 
Insert a mushroom and a slice of ginger and ham into each incision.
3.Select a heatproof platter large enough to fit into a wok or a roasting pan. 
Place a rack in the pan and add 1 1/2 inches of water to the pan. 
Place the fish on the platter and place on the rack. 
Cover and steam over slowly simmering water for 8 to 10 minutes.
4.Bring the chicken stock, the remaining 3 tablespoons of the rice wine, 1 teaspoon salt, pepper and the remaining 1/2 teaspoon sesame oil to a boil in a small pan. 
Stir in the cornstarch mixture. 
Set the sauce aside and keep warm.
.Blanch the broccoli in a small pot of boiling salted water and drain.
6.Remove the fish from the steamer and pour any liquid that has collected on the platter into the sauce.
7.Place the fish on a serving platter and pour the sauce over it. 
Arrange the broccoli around the sides of the fish and serve at once.
Yield: 4 to 6 servings.
