
The Foreign Correspondents Club of Beijing complained to the Government today about a series of assaults in recent days against foreign reporters by security forces. 
But the Government immediately rejected the complaint as ''utterly unreasonable.''
The Foreign Ministry also accused journalists of violating regulations by entering university campuses and by maintaining contacts with Chinese involved in illegal activities.
The State Department and the United States Embassy in Beijing have already protested the beatings of American reporters, and the Japanese Embassy said it was considering making representations over an assault on the Japanese wife of an American correspondent.
Foreign photographers and television cameramen have been periodically harassed and jostled in recent months, especially around Tiananmen Square, but in the last few days there has been a rash of assaults that go beyond the previous harassment.
 
Clubs or Rifle Butts
While no one has been seriously hurt, several people have been punched or beaten with clubs or rifle butts. 
More than a dozen additional correspondents have complained of being detained at gunpoint or of having guns waved in their faces.
''We most strongly object to the unprovoked use of violence and physical abuse of foreign correspondents by paramilitary officers and security police in Beijing in recent days,'' read the letter signed by the executive board of the Foreign Correspondents Club.
The reason for the assaults is not clear, but they all took place either at Tiananmen Square or in the university district - both areas of particular tension around June 4, the anniversary of the crackdown on pro-democracy protesters.
The Government's response to the complaints came this morning when the Foreign Ministry summoned James Munson, a Canadian television reporter and president of the Foreign Correspondents Club. 
A Foreign Ministry official, Liu Rucai, said any protest from the journalists would be utterly unreasonable and unacceptable. 
Mr. Liu added that Mr. Munson would be held personally responsible for any protest made by the club, according to the notes of the meeting by Mr. Munson.
Mr. Liu also issued a ''serious warning'' that a small number of foreign correspondents were conducting illegal coverage and violating rules by entering university campuses without permission. 
He complained that some journalists had contact with Chinese people engaged in illegal activities.
