
The term ''pregnancy leave'' is taking on a new meaning here, as shown by a successful Hong Kong Chinese banker who is negotiating an unusual sweetener before he takes a new job. 
He wants his employer to pay to send his pregnant wife to Canada to give birth, insuring that their child will be born a Canadian citizen.
In the latest triumph of Hong Kong ingenuity, and the latest sign of Hong Kong's desperation, hundreds and possibly thousands of pregnant women are traveling to Western countries to give their babies what is regarded here as one of the most important things in the world: a foreign passport.
''In Hong Kong, when people ask you where you are going to have your baby, they don't mean which hospital,'' said Frank Ching, a writer and local newspaper columnist. 
''They mean which country.''
It used to be thought that the moment of truth for Hong Kong would come in 1997, when the British colony will revert to China, but now many people feel that the crisis is already here.
 
Mounting Frenzy Expected
Pessimists are drawing parallels with the surrender to Communism of Shanghai in 1949 and Saigon in 1975. 
They expect a mounting frenzy to leave, a surge in corruption as people try to buy a new future, and a social breakdown as the civil service abandons its loyalty to the lame-duck British administration.
''Hong Kong will all be destroyed before 1997,'' said George Hicks, an Australian businessman and writer who seats himself firmly in the pessimist camp. 
''The upheaval and disintegration will come way before 1997, as everybody tries to beat their neighbor out. 
This is like a game of musical chairs in which everybody knows when the music is going to stop.''
Of course, there are also optimists who believe that Hong Kong's economy is well positioned to continue to prosper, and that ballooning bank accounts will help salve anxieties about the future. 
Hong Kong has faced bouts of pessimism in the past, and few places in the world have displayed such a remarkable resiliency in overcoming wars, strikes, riots and trade embargoes.
In 150 years, Hong Kong has transformed itself from a pirates' lair to the world's largest container port, from an impoverished colony abounding in opium and skeletal rickshaw boys to an international financial center where impeccably dressed young men and women race along the streets, their Rolex watches peeking from under their sleeves as they chatter into portable telephones. 
Hong Kong today is richer and healthier than much of Europe, and it has more Rolls-Royces per capita than anywhere else in the world.
 
Despair Over Basic Law
Yet Hong Kong's fate seemed to be sealed in early April, when China's legislature approved the Basic Law that will govern the territory after 1997. 
The passage by China's National People's Congress was a formality, but it had the ring of finality for many Hong Kong residents who had hoped for a more democratic document.
Ever since the rise of China's hard-liners and the killings in Beijing last June, the mood in Hong Kong has been bleak and angry. 
Survey Research Hong Kong, a polling business that has measured confidence in the future since 1985, says its latest survey recorded a new low in public confidence. 
''People in Hong Kong are very discouraged at this time,'' said Louis Tong, director of the company. 
#1,000 Leaving Each Week Residents are emigrating at the rate of more than 1,000 a week, more than twice the rate in 1986. 
The obsession with emigration has spawned a new magazine, The Emigrant, as well as books and counseling services to help Hong Kong Chinese obtain foreign passports.
In one of the most unusual cases, a few people even paid about $5,000 each as a down payment on a passport from Corterra, which a brochure and advertisement identified as a South Pacific nation. 
They discovered too late that there is no such country.
Hong Kong does not officially report figures for capital flows, but John G. Greenwood, chief economist of G. T. Management (Asia) Ltd., an investment company, has derived estimates that suggest that Hong Kong began to shift capital abroad in 1984, the year that Britain agreed to return Hong Kong to China. 
By his method of calculation, the capital outflow soared in 1989 to nearly $5 billion, or almost $1,000 per inhabitant.
The apprehensions have been compounded by Hong Kong's unaccustomed encounter with economic difficulties. 
Economic growth tumbled to just 2.5 percent last year, about one-third of the usual level, and hotel occupancy rates dropped to 74 percent, compared with 92 percent in 1988. 
Over the last decade, Hong Kong's economy became integrated with southern China's, and so China's woes spill across the border into the British territory.
 
U.S. and China Imports Fall
The cause of the economic downturn is fairly straightforward: slowdowns in Hong Kong's biggest export markets: China and the United States. 
Thus the optimists, like George Baeder, director of the Pacific Rim Consulting Group in Hong Kong, argue that those are cyclical slowdowns and that when economic growth returns, the problems of Hong Kong will seem much more manageable.
''Think what happens when the U.S. economy picks up, when China rebounds from its cyclical downturn,'' he said. 
Then, he continued, if the leaders in Beijing ease out some prominent hard-liners and turn toward more pragmatic officials, Hong Kong will again be on the move.
Another source of optimism in some quarters is the belief that hard-line rule in Beijing is unsustainable. 
Albert W. Y. Chan, a local politician in the New Territories part of Hong Kong, is guardedly optimistic for the long term.
''With the democratization of Communist societies around the world, I don't think that the Chinese Communist Party can keep control indefinitely,'' he said. 
''Sooner or later, probably before 1997, there'll be major changes that will benefit Hong Kong.''
 
The Pessimism Deepens
The conventional wisdom in the business sector used to be that China would pursue its own self-interest in insuring Hong Kong's continued prosperity -because Hong Kong is China's biggest outside investor and trade partner, and because successful reunification might encourage Taiwan to return to the mainland as well. 
Arguments about China's self-interest are heard much less often today, for today's China seems to measure its self-interest more in control than in prosperity.
The multinational companies that have regional offices in Hong Kong are weighing the arguments, and more than half of them are considering moving elsewhere, one recent survey shows. 
Singapore is the most likely beneficiary, particularly for companies that focus on Southeast Asia, but many companies say they intend to remain in Hong Kong.
One source of concern for the private and public sectors has been the growing assertiveness of labor groups, and the threats of strikes by firefighters, taxi drivers, nurses and other groups.
''Everybody's scrambling for more money,'' said a longtime civil servant. 
''Nobody wants to wait. 
I don't see how the society can operate that way.''
The official, a Briton who regards Hong Kong as his home, added glumly: ''And I don't think that the real panic has set in yet. 
That's still ahead of us.''
