
In the struggle for China's soul, the hard-line leadership in Beijing seems to be losing ground to this southern Chinese region of fish farms, toy factories and private bars whose knack for free-market Communism has made it one of the fastest growing economies in the world.
Guangdong Province is China's greatest success story, and already it is becoming an international manufacturing center that in some ways recalls the early years of the "four dragons": Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea and Taiwan. 
While Guangdong used to be politically suspect within China for its laissez-faire ways, Deng Xiaoping and other Chinese leaders have recently praised it as a national model and called upon the province to become Asia's fifth "dragon."
 
The Bribes Help
That suggests that Guangdong has defeated Beijing, at least for now, in the competition to chart China's future. 
This could have enormous repercussions, for Guangdong represents a fundamentally different vision of China than Beijing.
"You can get anything done here," said an entrepreneur who found that bribes of $2,000 helped win commercial licenses and official support for his thriving business here in Guangzhou, also called Canton, the provincial capital. 
The businessman works 16-hour days, rakes in the cash, and has even bought a forged American passport for $20,000. 
He wants a foreign passport for ease of travel and for protection in case Chinese policy changes, but for now he prefers to remain in Guangzhou.
"There's more money to be made here," he said.
Guangdong (pronounced gwahng doong) is a symbol of aggressive restructuring, a place where people go to Paula Abdul concerts instead of Marxist study sessions, where entrepreneurs outnumber ideologues, where more people are rich than red. 
It is China's economic frontier, a magnet that draws the ambitious and restless from all over the country, and it is becoming a more important force than Beijing in shaping the values, fashions, economic understanding and social problems of the entire country.
 
The Underside of Success
A 25-year-old woman described her elation when she came down to Guangdong from Beijing in January and found a job as a secretary for a factory manager. 
Her salary was $190 a month, five times her previous wage.
But there were two problems. 
She was regularly exhausted by the long hours and heavy workload. 
And her boss made advances toward her and arranged for her to live in a room that was near to his and that had just a curtain for a door.
"So I quit," the woman said. 
"I got my old job back, and my parents ordered me never to leave Beijing again. 
But the pay and the opportunities were better in the south. 
Much better!
So I'm going to take the job as secretary again. 
I'll find a way of dealing with the boss. 
And if worse comes to worst. 
. . ."
Her voice trailed off and she shrugged.
Such social problems as sexual harassment, drug addiction and prostitution are more common in Guangdong than in most of the rest of China. 
But most people now accept that they are the inevitable underside of the economic integration of the province with Hong Kong and its rise as one of the world's major manufacturing bases for products like Mickey Mouse toys, Wendy Walker dolls, Adidas sweat pants, Yashica cameras, Accord watches and a cornucopia of sweaters, brassieres, purses and shoes.
The economic boom in Guangdong and Hong Kong may be one of the most important transformations under way in Asia. 
The boom, which is focused on the Pearl River delta towns nearest to Hong Kong, has lasted more than a dozen years and in many ways parallels the rise of the four dragons -- except that Guangdong's population of 68 million is about equal to that of all four dragons combined.
The Tiananmen crackdown and nationwide economic slowdown in 1989 caused a pause in the typical double-digit growth rates, but by last year Guangdong had rebounded: in 1991, the equivalent of gross national product jumped 13.5 percent, and industrial output soared 27.2 percent.
For someone arriving from northern China, the towns around here feel like the free world. 
Guangdong still has political prisoners -- including Wang Xizhe, a thoughtful democrat and essayist who is serving a 14-year sentence in solitary confinement -- but many fewer than Beijing. 
There is also less surveillance here, less intimidation, less political indoctrination, and less of a state sector.
In Guangdong Province, 38 percent of industrial production comes from private or foreign-financed businesses, while only about 35 percent is manufactured by the state sector. 
The remainder is produced by collective enterprises, which are often owned by the local townships.
Even the state-owned companies, because they must operate in a market environment, are far more competitive than state-run companies elsewhere in China. 
Bei Zhaohan, the chairman of the Baiyunshan Group Corporation, a state-owned conglomerate based in Guangzhou, seems not so different from Western business tycoons.
 
The Lure of Property
"We want to get into property development," said Mr. Bei, a dynamic 52-year-old man with a well-tailored suit and boardroom manners, "because I see that the richest people everywhere -- in the U.S., in Japan, in Hong Kong -- are all property magnates."
Guangdong's township enterprises are even more freewheeling, and many do without any Communist Party secretary. 
One prosperous township brimming with such companies is Houjie, a frenetic community about half-way between Guangzhou and Hong Kong.
Houjie has an official population of 75,000, mostly peasants who used to wade through the surrounding rice paddies, but it also is a temporary home to more than 80,000 migrant laborers who work on assembly lines in the township's 900 factories.
"There was nothing to do at home," Yan Jimei, a 20-year-old woman with long, neatly combed hair, said of her village in nearby Guangxi Province. 
"So I came here to look for a job. 
Life's much better here."
In a slightly squalid dormitory room in which 12 young women bunk together, 16-year-old Wang Zhiyin recalled that a year ago she was living quietly in the Sichuan Province countryside. 
Then several women returned to her village from their jobs in Guangdong and told of the wages they were making. 
A few days later, Miss Wang accompanied them back to Houjie and found an assembly line job making pink stuffed turtles for $50 a month.
American labor organizations have charged that Guangdong factories are inhuman sweatshops that frequently employ children. 
While some teen-agers do work in the factories, most are in their late teens and their dormitory living conditions are often better than those they left behind in their villages.
Wages are low by American standards, but extravagant by Chinese terms: $50 to $60 a month, more than some university professors earn. 
Almost all of the workers are women, who are regarded by factory managers as more responsible and adroit with their hands then men, and they typically work six days a week for up to about 10 hours a day. 
The women say this is far preferable to sloshing around the rice paddies.
The Communist Party Secretary in Houjie, a short, exuberant man named Fang Shuhui, is enormously proud of the town's progress and points out the sights -- the gleaming new movie theater, the mansionlike public toilet -- as he cruises around Houjie in the back seat of his chauffeur-driven gray Mercedes Benz 300 SEL. 
The car is nicer than those assigned to Cabinet ministers in Beijing, and Mr. Fang also has a cellular telephone, a beeper and other paraphernalia of a tycoon.
Communist Party bosses like Mr. Fang have nurtured a quasi-market economy, with 85 percent to 90 percent of prices in Guangdong determined by supply and demand, but the province is still a planned economy in one very useful way: the Government has devoted enormous resources to building bridges, roads, electricity plants and the like. 
The result is that some analysts believe that growth in Guangdong may be more sustainable than in places like Bangkok, where the economic boom of recent years has strained the infrastructure and led to constant traffic jams.
 
The News From Hong Kong
The opening up of Guangdong has created some risks for the local Communist leaders, however. 
News from Hong Kong, where newspapers and television report constantly and unflatteringly about the Chinese leadership, filters across the border more and more easily.
In the city of Dongguan, the local government even operates a cable television service for $7 a year, offering Hong Kong channels.
A major lesson of the south -- and one that Deng Xiaoping appears to have drawn, encouraging him to make Guangdong a national model -- is that the strategy of the moderates in Guangzhou appears to have been far more successful than that of the hard-liners in the north. 
The Communist Party seems much more likely to be toppled in Beijing than in Guangdong, and it was striking that during the Tiananmen democracy movement in 1989 the protests were far milder in southern cities than in the north.
As in Singapore and Taiwan, the ruling party here in southern China has won a measure of popular support simply by raising living standards.
"Folks complain here, too, but the volume is much lower than in Beijing," said a woman who abandoned a promising career in one of the most prestigious ministries in the central Government to come to Guangzhou to do business.
The willingness of such intellectuals to come to Guangdong to work, joining the uneducated peasants who hold assembly line jobs, reflects the rising status of Guangdong around the country. 
Increasingly, it is seen as China's economic frontier.
"There are more opportunities here," said Zhang Yanan, a 31-year-old university graduate from the central Chinese city of Wuhan who has just found work in a township. 
"Maybe there's not so much culture, but there's more money -- and with money, you can do a lot of things."
