
While China's students and workers seem too intimidated to mount any new protests, the hard-liners who run the country are now facing a challenge from an unexpected quarter: the leaders of the nation's provinces.
Leaders of the 30 provinces gathered in the Jingxi Hotel in Beijing last week for a conference that was marked by a virtual rebellion against the hard-liners' plans to increase the power of the central Government, well-connected Chinese said. 
The local leaders complained bitterly about their economic difficulties and the Government's demands for more money.
Their comments were said to be implicitly critical of Prime Minister Li Peng and his stewardship of the economy. 
The Communist Party General Secretary, Jiang Zemin, addressed the meeting, but apparently tried to distance himself from Mr. Li. By one account, Mr. Jiang said that because the party has great confidence in the Cabinet run by Mr. Li, its leaders have not been closely involved in economic and financial matters.
The challenge from the provinces comes at a time when China otherwise seems remarkably quiet. 
Even recentincreases in the prices of basic items like sugar and coal have not stirred a hint of public protest, probably because of the climate of intimidation.
An indication of the scale of the government's surveillance over the population has been provided by the official Beijing Evening News, which disclosed that 650,000 people were involved in security work in the capital alone when the Asian Games were held here a month ago. 
Many of those agents have gone off duty since the Games closed, but security remains tight enough to discourage ordinary people from conducting protests.
The province governors and Communist Party secretaries are less apprehensive about getting into trouble. 
Many are members of the Central Committee, and a few of them -- like Ye Xuanping, governor of Guangdong province -- have reputations and power bases rivaling those of the national leaders. 
Even the less prominent governors apparently feel that they are safe so long as they stick together.
Diplomats and Chinese officials say that the first hint of the rebellion came late in September, when the governors were summoned to Beijing to put their seal of approval on China's next five-year plan, which goes into effect in January. 
Instead of approving the plan, the governors criticized it vociferously.
The governors, led by Mr. Ye, complained that the Government wanted to take back authority, like the power to approve investment projects, from theprovinces, and intended to adjust the taxation system so that the provinces would end up paying more.
In the meeting last week, which like the earlier one has not been reported in the Chinese news media, even the governors of minor provinces were reportedly outspoken and critical of the national Government. 
They complained that they and their enterprises were already squeezed dry, and had no more money to give Beijing.
More fundamentally, many of the governors are unhappy with the nation's retrenchment policy. 
A Chinese official who met recently with province leaders said he found them pugnacious and concerned mostly with how to evade the obstacles put up by the ideologues in Beijing. 
"If we run into an obstacle, we'll go around it," the official quoted a local leader as telling him.
