
CHINA
A New History.
By John King Fairbank.
Illustrated. 519 pp. 
Cambridge, Mass.:
The Belknap Press/
Harvard University Press.
$27.95.
SLIGHTLY before the midpoint of John King Fairbank's latest and last book -- the eminent Harvard historian of China died last year at the age of 84 -- appears the only overtly autobiographical passage in the volume. 
It was in the early 1930's, Fairbank writes in "China: A New History," that he and his wife settled into Beijing life, and three things at once impressed the young newlywed graduate students as unusual. 
First, there was the extraordinary extent of their privilege as foreign residents; they were treated as members of the ruling-class elite from the first moment in China and were left unbothered by the ubiquitous police. 
Second, because of the incredible surplus of Chinese manpower the easiest form of transportation around the ancient city was by rickshaw: you lay back against the seats of the two-wheeled vehicle while the "intelligent human horse between the shafts" trotted and sweated his way to your destination. 
Third, in both city and country, all women of early middle age and over had bound feet, which left them "stumping about awkwardly on their heels as though the front sections of their feet had been amputated."
Why had this last practice in particular, Fairbank muses, been so little studied or discussed by either Chinese or Western scholars?
For close to a millennium, hundreds of millions of Chinese women had had the toes of their feet systematically bent under their arches, and the arches themselves strapped, tilted and broken, and then the women had performed the same protracted and agonizing ritual deformation on their own daughters. 
Why had no one tried to assess the "social and psychic repercussions" of this nightmare practice, reputedly performed for the sensual delectation of men, even though the physiological, esthetic or erotic effects of foot-binding were far from clear?
Perhaps, Fairbank concludes, Chinese scholars had dodged the topic because it would have forced them to confront the whole problem of women's subjugation; and perhaps the Westerners had dodged the topic as well because they were eager to avoid giving offense to Chinese sensitivities. 
Few scholars "are muckrakers by temperament," notes Fairbank, and since foot-binding was unique to China it was not a convenient topic for comparative sociological study. 
Furthermore, he observes, there is an "occupational quirk of sinologists, a secondary patriotism or sinophilia that may lead otherwise hard-headed scholars to want to say no evil of the object of their researches."
This last sentence is starred to a footnote on the same page, almost the only time in this entire history that Fairbank uses such a device, and the purpose of the starred note is clearly to deepen the autobiographical reflection further, and to carry it forward in time into another kind of dangerous psychic terrain. 
"For an outstanding example of sentimental sinophilia," Fairbank adds, "see my statement in Foreign Affairs, October 1972, that in a certain context the Maoist revolution was 'the best thing' that had happened to the Chinese people in many centuries."
In these brief passages we have a distillation of the historical stance that Fairbank adopted in the last years of his long and formidably productive scholarly life -- a stance that sought to present itself as both frank and skeptical, tackling the difficult questions and suggesting directions for new research, while making the author himself disarmingly vulnerable by his admission of past mistakes. 
Fairbank, this century's foremost promoter of Chinese studies, chose to bow out with a show of modesty.
I say show of modesty not with any intention to belittle this extraordinary man, but rather to underscore the incredible ambitiousness of his final work. 
"China: A New History" sets out to cover, in 432 pages of text, the entire span of China's history from the paleolithic cultures of 400,000 B.C. to the Tiananmen massacre of 1989, and it does so with a brisk and sprightly air but also with an awesomely thorough overview of the current scholarly work of scores of historians. 
The book is indeed a kind of reprise not only of Fairbank's life as a reader and teacher, but also of his long years as editor or co-editor of the many volumes of the monumental "Cambridge History of China," Volume 15 of which, on the People's Republic and Taiwan between 1966 and 1982, was published last year. 
Perhaps most surprisingly, for those who have followed Fairbank's extraordinary range of studies in the fields of Chinese-United States foreign policy, institutional history and missionary history, "China: A New History" is dedicated in large part to social history, to the infrastructures and daily life of the Chinese, and to the elusive world of "civil society" that obviously existed and flourished at many levels under the watchful eyes of the purportedly omnipresent autocratic state.
Despite Fairbank's attention to social movements in this volume, his intellectual energy seems still to be most concentrated on the problems of state power and dissonance that led -- among other things -- to those three aspects of exploitive hierarchy that he highlighted in the book's autobiographical musings. 
In one passage, arresting to the historian at once for its concision and for the vastness of the ideas tackled, Fairbank reflects on how a kind of unifying theory does seem to emerge from his lifetime's reading and research on China's long history, a theory that makes sense because it incorporates the rhythms of China's periods of fragmentation and conquest by others along with its own enduring institutional forms. 
In Fairbank's words:
"The hypothesis may be stated as follows: (1) that early China created a politicized state organized for purposes of central control both by bureaucratic methods of philosophic persuasion and by the imperial autocrat's use of violence; (2) that non-Chinese invaders from Inner Asia became integral participants in the Chinese polity by their military prowess and administrative skill; and (3) that the resulting Sino-nomadic imperial power continued to maintain the primacy of central political control over the subordinated processes of economic growth and cultural diversification."
Elsewhere in the volume, Fairbank produces a rather different formulation that he felt contrasted China succinctly with the main lines of Western development. 
Where the main line of Western national "style" had been "industrial-military-entrepreneurial," that in China had been "agrarian-nomadic-bureaucratic."
In many ways, as Fairbank's chapters on modern China show, both Chiang Kai-shek and Mao Zedong were caught in this cycle of values. 
Fairbank is distinctly unsympathetic to both these central leaders of 20th-century China, consistently with his earlier views in the case of Chiang, and perhaps seeking to bury the ghost of those 1972 "sentimental" deviations in the case of Mao.
Though the economic, educational and industrial reforms of Chiang's Kuomintang years are discussed fairly and thoroughly, Chiang himself emerges as a "vigorous Dr. Jekyll" who "metamorphosed" into a "sordid Mr. Hyde," and lost the civil war of 1946-49 through "stupidity" and "incompetence."
Similarly, though Communist attempts at national and rural reconstruction get their due, Fairbank writes that Mao's basic "organizational principle" was that of any traditional Chinese "bandit" who used "force and guile . . . to curry favor with the local people," before he emerged at last as an "updated emperor" whose final acts were to lead his people "up a mountain and into a volcano."
The only man to get an equally bad press is the leader of the massive mid-19th-century Taiping Rebellion, Hong Xiuquan, whose "bizarre and irrational" theocracy prompts Fairbank to search for parallels that range from Napoleon to Hitler. 
The invoking of such parallels is a device that Fairbank enjoys, and like his invocation of echoes from China's past it can be effective and arresting. 
Occasionally it illuminates the instant with a zany humor similar to that which did indeed bubble just beneath Fairbank's own often formidable public persona. 
One of my favorites is Fairbank's aside that the closest equivalent he can think of to Mao's massively publicized swim across the Yangtze River in 1966 would be "the news that Queen Elizabeth II had swum the Channel."
SUCH asides may not be good history, but they are good-humored and make a point. 
On other occasions, the aside can trivialize the moment. 
Thus to summarize the archeological finds of Stone Age Chinese skeletons with smashed-in skulls as showing that "Peking Man was a small-time cannibal or at least a head-hunter who savored brains" strikes me as a little tacky; to equate Han dynasty neo-Confucian imperial rituals with White House "foto-ops and sound-bites" is erratic; and to call the terrible famine that followed the Great Leap Forward "first-class" is truly odd.
Such ruminations aside, this book is an admirable achievement. 
And even if one cannot accept the idea that this history is entirely new, Fairbank has filled the analytic narrative with intelligent ideas and original contributions: on the long-term effect of the absence of early maritime trade in China, on frontier appeasement policies, on the inherent problems of translation of foreign texts into Chinese characters, on Confucian attitudes to the military, on the development of popular religion, on sweated labor, on the failures of democratic experimentation and the other quests of China's new elite of "Sino-liberals," on the politics of repression and the role of sycophancy. 
Fairbank dominated the field of China studies in the West for 50 years. 
In this volume, we see that even on the edge of death his hand had not lost its cunning.
