
''There are two kinds of people in China these days,'' said a worker in his 20's, continuing with a cheerful exaggeration. 
''First, there are those who simply want to go to the United States. 
And second, there are those who are already well along in their preparations to depart.''
Not everyone is afflicted by the ''emigration fever,'' as it is called here, but it is clear that the urge to leave has markedly increased since the army's crackdown on the democracy movement last year. 
That urge to relocate is motivated not only by political repression but by a far-deeper sense of frustration and discontent, as well as by rising economic expectations that China cannot meet.
''This place isn't stable, for all the official talk about stabilityI,'' said a woman in her 40's, who agonized over lists of English words to prepare for moving to the United States. 
''And everyone finds it stifling, with few opportunities to use your skills. 
What's more, Americans all have cars!''
Alarmed by the flood of students going abroad - compared with the trickle of people returning - the Chinese Government early this year imposed restrictions that on their face prevented college graduates from going abroad to study until they have worked for five years.
But ingenious young scholars are putting their minds to work evading the regulations. 
The most common method is to invent an aunt or uncle in Hong Kong or the United States, and take advantage of a clause allowing those with relatives abroad to pay fees instead of working for five years.
''We've had no significant change in the types of people who come in applying for student visas,'' an American diplomat here said. 
''We're still seeing lots of recent college graduates who come in. 
The number of applicants and the number of issuances are both up.''
In August, for example, the United States Embassy in Beijing received 1,550 applications for student visas, compared with 1,371 applications in August 1989 and 949 applications in August 1988. 
The portion receiving visas has also risen, to 60 percent from 43 percent two years ago.
There is no doubt that the new regulations have had an effect - many recent graduates say that they have postponed their plans to go abroad - so one explanation for the increase in the number of applicants is that it would have soared without the restrictions.
''Five members of my senior class are applying to American universities,'' a high school student in Beijing said. 
''I could do very well here, and join the Communist Party, and find a suitable husband, and get a good job. 
But there are lots of limits on what we can do here, and I think I'll be better off with training in America.''
A young business executive said that a few years ago, a Japanese executive offered to pay for her to study in Japan. 
She refused, and these days she thinks she made a terrible mistake.
''Now I can see that if you have talent here, you're suppressed and harassed,'' she said. 
She complained about her cramped dormitory room, which she shares with three roommates, and about her company's plans to send her to work in a factory to gain an appreciation for manual labor.
''I'm optimistic about my own future,'' she said, ''because I plan to go abroad, but I'm pessimistic about China. 
Anyone with talent is trying to leave. 
Absolutely everyone I know is looking for an exit.''
