
Plans for a new airport here have led to a furor over who now speaks for this British colony's 5.7 million people -- Britain or China, which is scheduled to take control in 1997.
Hong Kong's British Governor is to visit Beijing on Monday and is expected to tell the Chinese authorities that the project will proceed, despite their angry objections.
Analysts and diplomats here say that while Beijing may have some justified concerns about the financing of the ambitious airport project, it also has decided to use the issue to assert control over Hong Kong, even before 1997.
In a war of words that has grown more and more bitter in the past two weeks, Chinese officials have insisted that Beijing has a right to a say in all important policies and projects that will affect Hong Kong after 1997. 
On Tuesday, in a statement that a prominent government analyst at the Chinese University here called "astonishing," the Deputy Premier of China asserted that "during the transition period, only the Central People's Government can, and is entitled to, speak on behalf of the people of Hong Kong."
 
Airport at Top of Talk List
Deputy Premier Wu Xueqian's remarks were quoted in official Chinese press reports. 
The Governor, Sir David Wilson, scheduled his trip before the latest exchanges began, but the airport is now expected to top the list of subjects to be discussed.
Today, Sir David was circumspect about the trip, saying only that Hong Kong wanted "a sensible relationship, a good relationship with China," adding, "That's the objective of my visit."
Sir David is expected to meet with Chinese Premier Li Peng and with Lu Ping, the new head of the Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office.
An experienced political analyst at Hong Kong University said that the dispute over the airport has grown into such an important political issue that "it is very doubtful that the question can be resolved at the Hong Kong level, during the Governor's visit."
"This is an issue that must be negotiated by Britain, by top-level officials," the analyst said. 
At most, he added, "The governor may be able to soften them up and help prepare for the visit of Lord Caithness," the British minister with special responsibility for Hong Kong. 
He is to meet with Chinese officials later this month.
 
China Seeks Project Suspension
Newspapers here have reported the airport dispute in front page stories with bold headlines, and in editorials they have called China's statements "hostile" and "bullying."
One political columnist said that if Britain acceded to Beijing's demands for veto power over projects here, the Hong Kong administration would go from being a "lame duck" to a "puppet" government.
Western diplomats said when a Hong Kong government team went to Beijing a week ago for talks on the technical and financial details of the $10 billion airport package, they were told to suspend the project until China's objections were answered.
As the three days of talks bogged down in Beijing, China's Ambassador in London was summoned to the British Foreign Office on two separate occasions to explain China's opposition. 
The talks ended on Jan. 
12 with Luo Jiahuan, who heads the Chinese airport team, telling reporters that the current Hong Kong government was only "a colonial government," and did not represent the Hong Kong people, who should be consulted more on the airport and given more information about it.
Another member of the Chinese airport team, an official with the Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office, Chen Zuoer, warned of "serious consequences" should the project proceed without China's full approval.
 
Total Cost Put at $16 Billion
Plans for a new international airport and an expanded shipping port, which the government now estimates will cost $16.3 billion, were announced in October 1989. 
Since then, China has bombarded the Hong Kong government with objections, but recently its criticism has grown more pointedly political. 
The project is still largely in the planning stages, though important contracts are scheduled to be announced soon, with work to begin before the end of this year and the first runway to be completed by 1997.
