
Cotton futures prices surged yesterday at the New York Cotton Exchange, bolstered by reports that Pakistan was halting all new export sales and by rumors of purchases by China.
The news from Pakistan, a leading cotton producer and exporter after China, the United States, Soviet Union and India, was the major factor in the cotton pit, said Ed Whitten, an analyst with the Balfour Maclaine Corporation in New York.
''Pakistan has issued an edict to not allow any more exports,'' he said, adding that rumors of Chinese purchases of American cotton also supported prices.
Cotton prices settled 0.67 cent to 1.60 cents higher, with the contract for delivery in March at 59.19 cents a pound.
At the Chicago Board of Trade, grain and soybean futures prices dipped, but analysts said supportive fundamentals helped temper losses.
Slightly more farmers sold corn and soybeans over the weekend and helped put pressure on prices, said Victor Lespinasse, a trader for Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. in Chicago.
The buying was further discouraged by the notion that a selloff was due after the markets' strong gains last week, he added.
In the wheat pit, the traders sold yesterday after a sale of export wheat to China that was rumored Friday failed to materialize.
But anticipation that a deal with China may still be near, and expectations that the Soviet Union may make a bid on corn, helped stem the decline in those pits, Mr. Lespinasse said.
On the Commodity Exchange in New York, credit tightening by the Federal Reserve Board late last week, indicative of its ''commitment to an anti-inflationary stance,'' continued to put pressure on gold and silver prices, said George Anagnos, an analyst with Thomson McKinnon Securities Inc. in New York.
Gold prices settled $2.80 to $3 lower, with the contract for delivery in March at $387.30 an ounce; silver prices were 4.7 cents to 8 cents lower, with March at $5.85 an ounce.
In Chicago at the Mercantile Exchange, cattle prices dipped, hog prices were mostly lower and pork belly futures were mostly higher in lackluster trading.
Pork belly prices remained firm despite the Agriculture Department's monthly cold storage report, which was released after trading closed on Friday, indicating that frozen pork belly supplies were slightly greater than had been expected.
Anticipation of the report touched off a selloff on Friday, which in turn encouraged short-covering yesterday, the analysts said.
