
Cotton futures prices surged yesterday on New York's Cotton Exchange after the United States agricultural attache in Beijing lowered his estimate of the size of China's cotton crop.
On other markets, energy futures were mixed, grains were lower and soybeans were higher.
The attache, in a report written last Thursday and released yesterday, put China's 1992-93 cotton output at 4.33 million metric tons, or 19.9 million 480-pound bales, down from an earlier forecast of 5.50 million metric tons, or 25.3 million bales. 
The attache attributed the decline to a boll weevil infestation and damage caused by drought.
Cotton for delivery in December settled 2 cents higher at 54.93 cents a pound.
 
Doubts on Accuracy
Some analysts doubted the accuracy of the attache's report. 
Ernest Simon of Prudential Securities Inc., for example, said that while there was little doubt that the size of the Chinese cotton crop would decline this season, the 21.3 percent drop estimated by the attache was exaggerated.
Energy futures were mixed on the New York Mercantile Exchange after a day of roller-coaster movement before the release of weekly oil inventory figures.
Data from the American Petroleum Institute were expected to show a rise in stocks of crude oil and distillates -- heating oil and diesel fuel -- and a drop in gasoline stocks for the week that ended last Friday.
December light sweet crude was 7 cents lower at $20.70 a barrel; December heating oil was 0.66 cent lower at 59.43 cents a gallon; December unleaded gasoline was 0.11 cent higher at 57.96 cents a gallon, and December natural gas was 2 cents higher at $2.441 for 1,000 cubic feet.
Grain futures were lower and soybeans higher on the Chicago Board of Trade. 
Wheat futures were pulled lower by profit taking and the rejection by the Agriculture Department of a bid by Russia for 500,000 metric tons of United States subsidized wheat.
The announcement before the start of trading of the Agriculture Department's acceptance of China's bid for 1.5 million metric tons of subsidized wheat had no effect on the market because it was factored into prices on Monday, traders said.
