
Diplomats and Thai officials say the necessary elements for a comprehensive settlement in Cambodia are rapidly coming together.
The assessment is based on several developments: the first direct talks between the Vietnamese and the Chinese in more than nine years, the first visit of a Thai foreign minister to Vietnam in more than 12 years and the first summit meeting, expected next summer, between the Soviets and the Chinese in nearly 30 years.
''Everyone has pretty much decided that Vietnam has made its decision to extricate itself from Cambodia and get on with the business of rebuilding its economy,'' a Western diplomat said. 
''A lot of the old taboos are falling, the Soviets want to get on with the Chinese, and everyone is positioning themselves for new diplomatic and trading relationships.''
Over the weekend, the Vietnamese Deputy Foreign Minister, Dinh Nho Liem, flew to Beijing for the first direct talks between the two nations since Mr. Liem helped to negotiate a cease-fire in their February 1979 border war. 
That short, sharp clash was a self-described effort by the Chinese ''to teach Vietnam a lesson'' after Hanoi, supported by Moscow, invaded Cambodia in late 1978 and overthrew China's ally, the Khmer Rouge Government of Pol Pot.
Under the Khmer Rouge, who took power in April 1975, more than one million Cambodians died from starvation, disease, party purges and mass executions.
 
China to Cut Support
China has been the prime supporter of the Khmer Rouge, which it revived as a way to harass Vietnam and its patron, Moscow.
But in December discussions with the Soviet Union, China agreed to cut its support for the Khmer Rouge in step with Vietnamese troop withdrawals. 
The Chinese insisted on a firm timetable for final withdrawal. 
With Soviet prodding, Hanoi announced this month that its troops would be out of Cambodia altogether by September if a political settlement could be reached by then, a declaration quickly welcomed in Beijing.
In late December, the Vietnamese said they had completed the withdrawal of 50,000 soldiers in 1988, with 50,000 remaining. 
Western diplomats believe the Vietnamese still have about 85,000 troops in Cambodia.
As a sign of the political delicacy of the meeting between ancient enemies, Mr. Liem's visit to Beijing was announced by neither side at first. 
The experienced Mr. Liem, Vietnam's Ambassador in Moscow for four years, is thought to be preparing a visit to Beijing by Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach, perhaps before a regional conference on Cambodia scheduled for Jakarta, Indonesia, in late February.
Asian diplomats say the Soviets and the Chinese would like the major aspects of Cambodian deal settled by their scheduled summit meeting, the first since 1959.
 
Thais Promise Aid to Hanoi
The other related development in regional relations was exemplified by the sudden visit to Hanoi of the Thai Foreign Minister, Siddhi Savetsila. 
In four days of meetings with Mr. Thach that ended Thursday, Mr. Siddhi, accompanied by more than 60 businessmen and academics, announced that Thailand looked forward, after a Cambodia settlement, to helping Vietnam out of its economic morass.
Mr. Siddhi had regularly discouraged the business-oriented Prime Minister of Thailand, Chatichai Choonhavan, from opening relations with Vietnam. 
And he constructed what has been firm Thai policy, to which the Association of Southeast Nations has sometimes unhappily conformed: support for China and the Khmer Rouge and a boycott of Vietnam until it ended its occupation.
But a decade later, with less ideological leaderships in Moscow, Beijing and Hanoi and the boycott slipping, Thailand has clearly decided ''not to miss the train,'' a Western diplomat said.
Difficulties remain about the shape of an interim Cambodian government that is to oversee new elections. 
The Chinese have agreed that the Khmer Rouge should not return to sole power, but it is unclear how that can be insured or how a new civil war can be avoided.
 
Progress on a Formula
But here, too, there has been progress. 
In his talks with Mr. Siddhi, Mr. Thach said Vietnam agreed to an international control ''mechanism'' in Cambodia, an undefined compromise between the larger international peacekeeping force Thailand and China wanted and the smaller ''control commission'' Hanoi favored. 
They also agreed that the Jakarta talks should be expanded to include the Soviet Union and China.
