
Wang Yani is a prodigy. 
She is largely self-taught. 
She paints rapidly in brush and ink. 
The earliest of the 69 paintings in ''Yani: The Brush of Innocence,'' at the Arthur M. Sackler Gallery, were made when she was 3 and 4 years old. 
She has spent her 14 years in the village of Gongcheng in Guangxi province in southern China, 50 miles from Guilin, which the catalogue says has been renowned since Ming times for ''the most beautiful mountains and waters under heaven.''
There is plenty of exuberance and delight in this problematical and even troubling show. 
The monkeys with which Yani was preoccupied between the ages of 3 and 6 are tireless in their willingness to perform for one another and for her. 
Her large, irked lion - painted when she was 8 - with monkeys pulling his tail and climbing over him like a party of kids on a sleeping father's back, opens one beady eye, turns down his red mouth, and bears them.
Almost everything in these episodic paintings is in a state of expectancy or resolution. 
A monkey with a fishing line has just hooked a fish. 
Trees not only flower but actually offer fruit. 
Wide-eyed birds seem to be waiting for orders to fly. 
Almost every animal is self-confident and proud. 
Only in the children - there are no explicit images of adults, although they are omnipresent in the mountains and trees - is there doubt that happiness is near.
Yani seems to have Chinese painting in her blood. 
Her feeling for every single thing she paints reflects the pantheism that runs like a river through Chinese art. 
Mountains and monkeys, as well as cranes and lotuses, are staples of Chinese painting. 
From the age of 3, Yani has had an awareness of solid and void and of the expressive possibilities of brush and ink. 
She is completely at home on paper.
The exhibition provides a great deal of information. 
According to Jan Stuart, the specialist in Chinese art at the Sackler, who installed the show, there is now in China a particular interest in prodigies. 
Artistic prodigies who are girls are no longer that surprising. 
Nor is the enthusiasm with which Yani has been greeted by a Chinese art establishment largely run by men.
What arouses that enthusiasm is the freshness and youthfulness of her paintings. 
After a period of artistic dogma and oppression, they seem to offer an assurance that new beginnings are possible and that childhood can have the irresistible force of a condition.
In her catalogue essay on ''Wang Yani and Contemporary Chinese Painting,'' the art historian Julia Andrews points out that Mao Zedong died in 1976, when Yani was 1, and suggests that Yani has given the Chinese an image of themselves they need. 
''Her emergence coincided with the severe disillusionment of many older artists in socialist realist art and with a desire to promote experimentation and exploration of other forms. 
The paintings of a child who knew nothing of politics offered a fresh vision that many artists sought in their own work.''
One of the pressures Yani has to live with, however, is that there is now an investment in her ''innocence.''
She is already something of a sideshow. 
''She is a national treasure, and people come from great distances to watch her at work,'' write Lynn T. Goldsmith and David Henry Feldman, developmental psychologists, in the catalogue. 
When the exhibition opened, Yani was in Washington to answer questions and demonstrate her freewheeling techniques.
Wang Shiqiang, Yani's father, formerly a narrative oil painter working in Western styles, wants to protect her from self-consciousness. 
Her feeling for painting has a great deal to do with him. 
When she was tiny, they roamed rivers and fields and visited the zoo where she first encountered the monkeys that made her howl and jump with glee. 
He bought her a pet monkey when she was 3. 
Ms. Stuart said that Yani considers her monkey her best friend.
It was on a trip with her father when she was 2 1/2 that Yani first painted. 
From the beginning, her images and methods were purely Chinese. 
In 1983, when Yani was 8, her father gave up painting. 
He works as a cultural-affairs officer. 
When Yani travels, he accompanies her. 
He keeps a diary of their travels. 
He will decide when she is ready for art books. 
He has kept almost all her paintings, which now number around 10,000. 
None has been sold.
All the family references in the catalogue are to Yani and Shiqiang. 
There is only passing mention of her mother, Tang Fongjiao, even though her presence can be felt throughout Yani's stories. 
She works in a department store. 
It is said that the money she earns buys Yani's art supplies.
There is no indication in the catalogue that Yani even has a brother. 
She does: Wang Qiangyu is 9 years old, and he, too, is exceptionally gifted as a painter. 
The family is considering discouraging him from painting. 
The fear is that his artistic development may inhibit Yani's spontaneity.
In short, this show of paintings made between the ages of 3 and 12 by a wonderfully gifted child needs to be approached with caution. 
There are many possible agendas in it. 
For example, the exhibition was organized by the Nelson-Atkins Museum of Art in Kansas City, Mo., with the sponsorship of the Ministry of Culture of the People's Republic of China. 
This museum has been a force in Chinese art, and an exhibition on a contemporary Chinese artist unknown in the United States will help it remain one.
It is significant that a prodigy in a distant, semi-autonomous region of China can be seen in Japan, Europe and the United States when still a prodigy. 
This exhibition is a statement of the will that existed in China to make the world aware of at least some of its cultural energy. 
And it is a statement of the will of the international art world to penetrate every corner of the globe and show art when it is still fresh and hot.
Should this exhibition be taking place?
A number of Yani's paintings are astonishingly finished for a child, but they are not the paintings of an accomplished artist. 
In addition, they are weighed down by the museum setting and by their black frames. 
The best way to see the paintings is in the catalogue, where the rapid succession of images reflects the quickness and concentration with which they were made. 
What this show is, above all, is a fabulous children's book - imagined and painted by a child.
Yani is not ready for the art-historical treatment. 
When Ms. Goldsmith and Mr. Feldman write of the ''significant shift when she is about 6 or 7,'' a ''period'' that can be ''characterized by explorations of a broader range of technical and thematic issues,'' it is absurd.
So is the mythology of production. 
In a generally sensitive catalogue essay, Dr. Wai-ching Ho, a developmental psychologist and the project director for the show, writes that ''by the age of 6 Yani had produced 4,000 paintings'' - a statement proudly repeated in the press release. 
All this does is put pressure on Yani to produce, and turn her into a production machine.
Why is Yani a prodigy?
For one thing, she seems to have been born with an understanding of space and form. 
For another, she not only has the ability to fantasize, but her fantasies are totally accessible to her, and she has absolute faith in their goodness and worth.
The paintings in this show are functional. 
That is to say, what Yani painted was real to her, with real effects. 
In his essay, Dr. Ho relates, ''One day her father bought her a lovely red umbrella. 
Too impatient to wait for the rain to come, she painted a monkey holding a little red umbrella and playing happily in the rain.''
Ms. Goldsmith and Mr. Feldman write that in her paintings Yani ''fed'' her ink monkeys. 
''Sometimes her father would even hear her chiding the painted images to behave, because she was about to share (that is, paint) their fruit.''
These are the works of someone with supreme confidence in herself, in her subject matter and in painting, and who has the ability to make others believe in her magical powers. 
When a painting works, everything in it is personified. 
The smudges and blots of her cliffs and peaks loom like people and animals amid strange and not always friendly activities and games.
From the beginning, Yani has had a remarkable ability to digest psychologically loaded information. 
For example, when she was 4, she painted three images of intoxication. 
In ''Drunk,'' two furry monkeys with red faces are sprawled out on the floor alongside a phallic- and dragon-shaped wine pot made by her father. 
In ''Sniffing the Wine,'' a solitary monkey and the pot seem almost to be kissing each other while loquat fruit shaped like disembodied breast-eyes lie on the floor to one side. 
These images are already sexual and self-conscious. 
They are not innocent. 
Yani is clearly extremely observant, so it is not surprising that the strength of her paintings depends so much upon eyes. 
The most conspicuous aspect of her children are their big eyes. 
The eyes anchor her horses and egrets in space and make them human. 
Even the lotuses she loves so much look as if they can see. 
It is only the larger and more threatening forces, like mountains, that are deprived of sight.
What will happen to Yani?
Certainly she has tremendous resources. 
. Such an artistic prodigy may be conceivable now only far from a big city, in a secure world rooted in tradition. 
Yani still lives in Gongcheng, near mountains and rivers she continues to wander, and to which she feels she belongs. 
She clearly has remarkable intelligence, shrewdness and wit. 
She will need them. 
(After closing at the Arthur M. Sackler Gallery on Oct. 
22, the exhibition will travel to the Nelson-Atkins Museum of Art in Kansas City [Dec. 
16 to Jan. 
28] and then to the Asian Art Museum in San Francisco [March 7 to April 29]. 
Financing was provided by United Technologies Corporation.)
