
With parachutists, panda balloons, 11,000 pigeons and 20,000 young Chinese dancers and martial arts experts, China opened the 11th Asian Games today as a mini-Olympics intended to win back international respect and domestic support lost during the military crackdown last year.
Flanked by other top leaders, President Yang Shangkun tonight opened the extravaganza before an international crowd of about 65,000 spectators in the Workers Stadium in the center of the capital. 
Determined that nothing should go wrong, the authorities arranged an enormous show of force and sent workers home this afternoon with the stern advice that they should stay off the streets and watch the ceremony on television.
 
Prelude to Olympic Bid
For China this has been far more than an athletic competition. 
It is the biggest international conference ever held in China, and more important it is an opportunity to rejoin the international community after the criticisms and isolation that followed the crackdown in June 1989. 
No effort has been spared to impress foreigners, from the new drug-testing center to the fake brick walls that have been erected around town to conceal the grim apartments that previously lined the roads.
If the Asian Games go smoothly, China intends to make a bid to be host to the Olympics in 2000. 
Officials from the International Olympic Committee arrived to see the Games, and they were treated as heads of state in the hope that they would back China's application to be host to the Olympics.
''This is my wish,'' the 83-year-old President Yang told Juan Antonio Samaranch, the president of the International Olympic Committee, in a meeting today. 
''If it is fulfilled, I shall be very happy, and China will build more stadiums and gymnasiums.''
The Beijing Asiad, which has been in the planning for eight years, is also intended to serve a domestic purpose: to unite the Chinese people behind a patriotic theme closely associated with the Communist Party. 
The torches used to light the Asiad flame were carried in an extensive relay race through every province in China, and some 180 million people were organized to line the route and applaud.
''China used to be called the 'sick man of East Asia,' '' the People's Daily declared today in a front-page editorial. 
''Over the past 40 years and more, ever since the establishment of the People's Republic of China, many Chinese athletes have made awesome achievements and now China has become host of the 11th Asiad. 
From a certain angle, this change reflects the great achievement of the Chinese people in socialist construction.''
 
Fear of 'Hostile Elements'
The Government's worst fear has been that ''hostile elements'' will take advantage of the international spotlight and create disorder, just as student demonstrators took advantage of the visit by President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union in May 1989. 
But these days nearly everyone in Beijing seems cowed, and few people expect any significant unrest.
''We're not going to do anything at all during the Asian Games,'' said a member of an underground organization that grew out of the 1989 crackdown. 
''It's much too tense.''
After the crackdown, there were at first some calls for a boycott of the Asiad, but those soon fizzled and for a time it seemed that Beijing would be host to the first Asian Games ever in which every eligible country participated. 
Then the Gulf Crisis intervened, and on Thursday the Olympic Council of Asia voted overwhelmingly to exclude Iraq because of its invasion of Kuwait. 
It is not clear whether Jordan is sending athletes. 
54 Delegates From Kuwait Kuwait's 54 delegates were given a rousing welcome as they entered the stadium during a procession of delegations. 
While many Kuwaiti athletes were stuck in their home country and have not been able to participate, some had been training in Europe and were able to come to the Asiad.
Other enmities seemed mostly to have been forgotten today. 
South Koreans, thousands of whom have turned up for the Games even though Seoul has no diplomatic relations with Beijing, waved their flags and roared approval not only for their own delegation but also for that of North Korea. 
A Vietnamese Deputy Prime Minister, the most senior official from Hanoi to make an official visit to Beijing since the two countries fought a border war in 1979, sat with top Chinese officials in the President's rostrum. 
And athletes from Taiwan and China, who grew up hearing tales of each other as dreaded ''Communist bandits'' or ''stinking capitalists,'' are mingling affably in the Asian Games Village.
While the level of competition in some sports may not be up to the highest international standards, Asian athletes are among the best in the world in diving, archery, shooting, judo, badminton, volleyball and table tennis, among other sports.
The 29 Asiad events will include, in addition to most of the typical Olympic sports, such Asian specialties as kabbadi, which has the advantage in poor countries that it requires no special equipment. 
The game is a bit like tag, except that attackers must continuously repeat the word ''kabbadi'' and are eliminated if they run out of breath.
 
Objective Is 100 Gold Medals
China, which takes sports very seriously, is hoping for about 100 gold medals, of the 308 possible. 
This will be a chance for China to redeem itself after a disappointing performance at the Seoul Olympics in 1988, when it won only five gold medals.
In the last Asian Games, which were held in Seoul in 1986, China won 94 of the 270 gold medals then at stake. 
South Koreawon 93 and Japan 58.
China's delegation of 838 athletes and officials is the biggest in the Games, followed by South Korea's with 757 delegates. 
Japan is third with 722, while Palestine - which many Asian countries recognize as a nation, and which is represented by Palestinian athletes living in various countries - has just two delegates.
Security was tighter than it has been in Beijing since the night of June 3 of last year, when protests erupted at Beijing University to mark the one-year anniversary of the killings of pro-democracy protesters.
 
Police Monitor Rail Stations
Tens of thousands of people without Beijing residence permits have been shipped out of the capital to their hometowns, and the police are monitoring the railway station and main roads to keep unauthorized people from coming to Beijing. 
University students have been subjected to bed checks to make sure they are not on the streets fomenting political mischief.
A large area around the stadium was sealed off in midafternoon, and everyone entering the stadium was searched with metal detectors. 
A helicopter hovered over the stadium during the ceremony, and thousands of police were in the nearby streets, but there was no hint of trouble.
It is difficult to gauge the attitude of Beijing residents to the games. 
In general, some intellectuals are contemptuous of the Asiad and complain that it is a terrible waste of money, while some children and workers are quite enthusiastic about the sports competition.
 
Cost Put at $530 Million
But the most common attitude seems to be one of only mild interest, mitigated somewhat by indignation at the forced contributions that were solicited to raise money for the games. 
China spent about $530 million preparing for the Asiad.
China's capital, normally a relatively drab city of endless apartment blocks whose color is measured in hues of gray, has taken on a new look for the games. 
Statues of Pan-Pan, an exuberant panda who has been chosen mascot of the Asiad, decorate the city just as portraits of Chairman Mao Zedong used to be the universal fixtures.
The most startling renovation has been the fake brick walls that have appeared along some major roads, to hide the dilapidated homes that used to line the way. 
Workmen even painted bricks on the outside of the new walls so that they appeared relatively elegant. 
But for Beijing residents, who sometimes have to wait a decade or more to be assigned an apartment, it has been galling to see such efforts dedicated to camouflage instead of to resolving the housing shortage.
 
New Buildings Draw Complaints
''Why don't they put those building materials into building us houses, instead of into hiding the problem?'' complained a worker in his 20's.
Officials have also made sure that shops are filled with merchandise to impress visitors. 
Nearly $900 million worth of merchandise - including eels from Fujian province, seedless grapes from Xinjiang Province and Phoenix brand bicycles from Shanghai - have been flown to the capital to lure visitors and startle longtime residents.
One problem, however, is that ticket sales to Asiad events have not been publicized much, even though they are an important source of revenue for the games. 
A Chinese American businessman complained tonight that he had been trying for days to purchase tickets to athletic events, and still had no idea where to buy them, or if they could be purchased at all.
