
China and the Getty Conservation Institute today announced a joint effort to preserve two of China's largest and most significant cultural sites, where statues and paintings dating from the fourth century are decaying from harsh weather, pollution and damage by earthquakes.
The sites are the Mogao Grottoes on the edge of the Gobi in northwestern China and the Yungang Grottoes, 200 miles west of Beijing. 
Together, the sites contain 545 cave-like temples carved into cliffs. 
The temples contain more than 53,000 clay figures of Buddha, ranging from miniature bas-reliefs to a statue 108 feet high. 
The temples, popular among both Chinese and foreign tourists, also have 484,200 square feet of wall paintings.
The cost of the project has not been determined, but it will be shared by China, the Getty Conservation Institute and Unesco. 
The work is to involve at least 25 preservation specialists from the United States. 
The focus will be on arresting decay, not restoring art already damaged, said Luis Monreal, the director of the Getty Conservation Institute, a private foundation. 
He said the first step would be ''diagnosis'' of the sites and would take 18 months.
 
How It Happened
The announcement of the conservation project was made in Los Angeles by Ma Yuzhen, China's Consul General, and Harold M. Williams, the president of the J. Paul Getty Trust, a private foundation. 
The Getty Conservation Institute, a subsidiary of the trust, was created in 1982 and has collaborated with Egypt to preserve the tomb of Queen Nefertari and the royal mummies in the Egyptian Museum in Cairo.
The possibility of cooperation between China and the Getty was first raised in 1986 by China's National Administrative Bureau for Museums and Archeological Data. 
Last May, Getty representatives visited the sites.
Mr. Yuzhen said the sites contain ''evidence of the astonishing creativity of the ancient Chinese people.''
''The Mogao and Yungang Grottoes are the most magnificent storehouses of Buddhist art in the world,'' he said. 
''Both are national treasures of China.''
''We can provide resources of rescue technology not available now in China,'' Mr. Monreal said. 
''At the same time, field projects of this magnitude provide the international conservation community with valuable information on the application of new materials and technologies.''
 
What the Sites Contain
The Mogao Grottoes are near the town of Dunhuang on the edge of the Gobi, 1,100 miles west of Beijing. 
The site includes 492 rock temples with thousands of square feet of wall paintings and 2,000 painted clay figures of Buddha.
Hot summers and frigid winters and sand blown by fierce winds have eroded many of the statues and paintings, peeled off paint and washed out colors. 
Algae and fungus are also problems. 
The area also has frequent earthquakes of medium intensity.
Because of the damage and fears for safety, some of the temple caves are closed to the public, Chinese officials said. 
Although remote, the Mogao Grottoes are accessible by a new airport.
The Yungang Grottoes, near Datong, a coal mining city in northern China, face decay from pollution, salt deposits and the weather. 
There, 53 rock temples are carved into the face of a 1,000-yard-long sandstone cliff.
The Yungang temples contain 51,000 representations of Buddha, ranging from miniature bas-reliefs to statues 60-feet high, all carved directly in the rock. 
Most of the carvings, which date to the year 460, were restored in the Ming Dynasty from 1368-1644. 
The eroded carvings were covered with plaster, which was then redecorated.
