
Arranging a $175 million investment in a coal mine in China was hard enough. 
It took several handshakes with Deng Xiaoping and other top Chinese leaders to get Beijing's agreement.
But now, the Occidental Petroleum Corporation has set itself up for what may become an even tougher task: getting rid of the investment without a huge loss.
The open-pit An Tai Bao coal mine in China's Shanxi Province -- the dream of Occidental's late chairman, Armand Hammer -- is one of the biggest and most famous joint ventures in China. 
As Western investment in China boomed in the early 1980's, and board chairmen competed to sign agreements in the Great Hall of the People, the Occidental deal symbolized the hope that Chinese-American cooperation could be lucrative for both sides.
 
'Beyond China's Capability'
These days, as Occidental tries to withdraw from an apparently money-losing venture, the mine exemplifies the skepticism with which many foreign companies now view the Chinese market.
"The An Tai Bao case becomes symbolic of both the potential and the problems," said an American consultant familiar with the project. 
"China is a developing country, and a lot of projects were thought up that went beyond China's real capability."
China may be a huge market, but the economy is severely underdeveloped, with supply shortages, crumbling roads, antiquated trains and countless Chinese officials willing to wait forever rather than sign agreements that do not suit them perfectly.
More than three months after Dr. Hammer's death in December and more than two months after Occidental announced it was pulling out of China, the joint venture is illustrating another pitfall of foreign investment: the difficulty of withdrawing gracefully or profitably.
 
Sale to China Expected
One foreign business executive said Occidental had decided to sell its stake to the Chinese, possibly because of difficulties in finding an outside buyer. 
He added that Occidental was close to reaching a settlement with the Chinese, but this could not be confirmed.
Occidental could withdraw from the investment under terms in the contract, lawyers familiar with the project said. 
The Chinese side would pay for Occidental's holdings according to complex formulas in the contract. 
One lawyer in Beijing said the amount would be substantial enough so that the Chinese would want to find a buyer to help cover the payment.
In any case, bankers say, Occidental would have to offer its stake to its Chinese partners before it approached an outside buyer. 
An analyst said some companies had considered purchasing Occidental's interest, but none seemed eager to buy.
 
Chinese Said to Be Offended
Without a settlement, Occidental could probably find a buyer itself, but only at a depressed price. 
The Chinese partners must approve any transfer of Occidental's 25 percent stake in the mine, and analysts said some of the Chinese involved were offended by Occidental's sudden announcement of plans to pull out.
Those familiar with the mine said that because of economic factors, especially low coal prices, it could take a couple of years to sell the stake to an outside buyer.
"The overall investment climate is not conducive to people investing in a project of this size, and China projects are not famous for their quick returns and lack of operational problems," said Paul Y. Au, regional representative for China at the Royal Bank of Canada, one of the banks financing the deal.
Occidental executives declined to be interviewed, as did the Chinese partners. 
Most bankers and business executives associated with the project declined to be named, for fear of offending the Chinese.
 
New Investment Philosophy
Occidental has said that its decision to pull out reflects a new investment philosophy and not any disillusionment with China. 
Ray R. Irani, Dr. Hammer's successor, plans to sell about $3 billion in assets, including the company's 51 percent stake in the meatpacker IBP Inc., to reduce debts.
Bryan Jacoboski, an analyst at Paine Webber Inc., said that much of the $3 billion would come from the sale of many oil, gas, coal and chemical operations. 
He said that the disposal of Dr. Hammer's money-losing pet projects -- among them a Soviet petrochemical business, Arabian horses, Black Angus cattle, a film production company and the Chinese coal mine -- is likely to bring relatively little.
"The symbolism is more important than the financial impact," he said.
Occidental has said that it is prepared to write off much of its China investment, which analysts say has increased over the years to about $250 million.
 
Attempt to Save Face
Despite Chinese annoyance at Occidental and determination to bargain hard, they need to maintain the impression that Occidental was able to leave gracefully and that the mine is a success.
"The Chinese don't want to lose face," said a Chinese business executive familiar with the project. 
"If no one takes the deal, it's embarrassing for China, especially since Deng Xiaoping personally supported it."
But some bankers say it may be difficult for any company to turn a reasonable profit on the project in the coming years. 
Estimates of the mine's annual losses range from $25 million to $50 million.
A foreign businessman in Beijing said: "One question is whether they are serious about posturing for the Chinese or whether they are really willing to walk away from the project -- and what would that do for China if a company was willing to walk away and lose millions of dollars?
They've had their problems. 
How do you bring a bunch of West Virginia and Kentucky coal miners to a small town in Shanxi?
You're talking about a cultural conflict."
 
China's Largest Mining Project
Many companies interested in China would be intimidated by the sheer size and complexity of the mining project, analysts said. 
Already, the Americans and the Chinese have invested $700 million to $800 million. 
It is the largest mining project in China, and Occidental's one-quarter share is the biggest American investment in a single project there.
This huge operation comes on the market as foreign investors are becoming more cautious and more likely to favor smaller investments. 
Part of this caution results from China's economic difficulties.
The average value of new American investments in China has dropped from $2.3 million in 1989 to $889,000 in the first nine months of 1990, said China's Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations and Trade.
Occidental's coal mining venture has been tangled in bitter disputes and misunderstandings with local, provincial and central government officials ever since talks began about a dozen years ago.
Some of the project's difficulties stemmed from the very blessings by Mr. Deng and other top Chinese leaders. 
When the deal was negotiated in the early to mid-1980's, China was a command economy where orders from the central Government were easily carried out. 
But after the economic restructuring of the last decade, Occidental found that local authorities did not heed orders from Beijing.
One headache involved local wildcat miners, who began to steal coal from the mine. 
Occidental could not sink shafts in the most efficient ways for fear of crushing trespassers.
Bankers say they are confident that the project will generate the finances to repay a $475 million loan provided by a syndicate of international banks.
