
Every evening in the last week, the official television news, viewed by millions of Chinese, seems to have reverted to the kind of indoctrination techniques familiar in the Mao era.
In the past there was never such a broad visual diplay, but today the methods have been adapted to television. 
Every night there are scenes of horror stories that inspire pity for the soldiers of the People's Liberation Army and hatred for ''the small number of conspirators'' who began ''a counterrevolutionary rebellion.''
In the first days after the military crackdown against pro-democracy demonstrators on June 4, in which soldiers killed hundreds or perhaps thousands of civilians in central Beijing, the television showed Government footage of civilians throwing rocks and stones at tanks and soldiers.
The Government has now moved beyond that, using other scenes to nurture a sense of outrage against the ''thugs'' and ''hooligans'' who are accused of inflicting damage to the city.
Tonight's national television news program was fairly typical. 
Here is some of what the viewers saw.
 
Scene 1
The camera pans to a large, sparsely furnished hall where several hundred high officials have come to listen to a reading of a speech first delivered by Deng Xiaoping, China's senior leader. 
The speech is introduced by Prime Minister Li Peng, who appears wearing a Western-style suit for the first time in recent days.
''Comrade Deng Xiaoping's important speech made a profound analysis of the cause and nature of the counterrevolutionary rebellion and the correctness of the measures we adopted,'' Prime Minister Li tells the gathering.
Mr. Li's voice fades out and the announcer explains that Mr. Li had urged everyone at the meeting to study Mr. Deng's words carefully and to ''unify the people's thinking on the basis of Deng Xiaoping's speech.''
The camera passes through the rows of officials sitting in folding chairs as the announcer lists the names of some of the more important officials. 
Some officials are taking notes, some are reading and at least one participant is looking sleepy.
 
Scene 2
The camera opens on a street corner, called Xidan, where a great deal of the violence took place in the early-morning hours of June 4. 
Xidan was also where a soldier was killed and his body disemboweled and burned by civilians. 
For the last few nights, the television news has shown scenes of the charred body of the soldier propped against a truck, or lying flat on its back.
A few days ago, the television news showed citizens placing small wreaths along the bridge at the intersection, in memory of the soldier. 
Now, the camera shows how the railings are brimming with large, colorful wreaths as parades of citizens continue to lay more flowers in the soldier's honor.
The announcer relates the Government version of the events of that June 4 morning, when the soldier, Liu Guogeng, was killed, supposedly while trying to rescue a man from a boisterous crowd.
The soldier was on his way to seek help from colleagues, the announcer says, but when he was about 200 yards away from the Communist Party headquarters, on the Avenue of Eternal Peace, or Changan Avenue, he was beaten to death by ''thugs'' who then doused his body in petroleum, disemboweled it and then burned it.
The picture then switches to Jilin Province, where Mr. Liu's mother, father and younger brother live.
''I ask his younger brother to learn from the older brother,'' says his mother, who is sobbing with sorrow and anger. 
''Go annihilate the thugs.''
His father, lying sick in a hospital bed with an undisclosed ailment, says: ''We must resolutely deal with these thugs. 
They deserve no leniency.''
His younger brother says: ''I feel honored. 
I will learn from my brother.''
 
Scene 3
An announcer reports that as of Tuesday, the Beijing Public Security Bureau has received 1,227 letters giving details about ''counterrevolutionary thugs.''
 
Scene 4
The camera turns to a meeting of 31 leaders of China's ethnic minorities, including a Tibetan Buddhist, who are all voicing their support for the Government's efforts to ''put down the recent rebellion.''
The announcer reads a few remarks by one of the leaders. 
''The scheme of those who wanted to create contradictions and stir up riots among the ethnic groups have failed thanks to the joint efforts of the minority people,'' the announcer quotes the leader as saying.
 
Scene 5
Two students who were named on Tuesday among the list of 21 ''wanted'' student leaders are seen being led into a police station for interrogation.
One of them is Zhou Fengsuo, a 22-year-old physics student at Qinghua University in Beijing, who was arrested in the central city of Xian, where his family lives. 
He was reportedly turned in by his older sister and brother-in-law.
The scene turns to a livingroom couch in Xian, where Mr. Zhou's sister, Zhou Yanrong, is sitting with a baby in her lap and her husband next to her.
Miss Zhou and her husband, Yang Yibo, who works at the Institute of Communications Engineering in Xian, says she saw the Tuesday television news that showed the woman's younger brother as a fugitive.
The couple say they discussed what to do next and came to what the television announcer thought was the correct conclusion.
''They contacted the security office of the institute, and the officers there cooperated with five policeman to go to the town of Three Bridges to arrest Zhou Fengsuo,'' the announcer says.
''Zhou Fengsuo confessed that he was a member of the standing committee of the Beijing autonomous student union and that on June 9, he took the train to Xian,'' the announcer adds.
 
Scene 6
The camera focuses on an old, heavy-set woman, standing in the Chongwenmen district on a bridge covered with wreaths to commemorate a soldier. 
The soldier was reportedly beaten up by ''thugs'' on the evening of June 3.
The old woman says she witnessed the ''thugs'' kill the soldier by throwing him off the bridge.
''I stand in front of the people of this city as a witness,'' the woman says, speaking into a television microphone. 
''The People's Liberation Army soldiers did not shoot people.''
''I went up to the People's Liberation Army soldiers with some other old women and we pleaded with them not to shoot the people,'' the woman says. 
''They told us: 'We are the people's army. 
We will not shoot the people.'
''
''But then the thugs spread a rumor, telling the people that the soldiers had killed the son of an old woman,'' she says. 
The woman explains how the ''thugs'' then beat up the soldier and threw him off the bridge.
''When I saw the dead soldier, I felt terrible,'' she says. 
''He was still alive when he was thrown off the bridge. 
I feel I should bear some responsibility for the death of the soldier because I took the lead with two other women to go after the soldier, and this gave the thugs the opportunity to follow us.''
