
When United Technologies Sikorsky Aircraft began negotiations to sell two dozen helicopters to the Chinese government early in 1985, Marion P. Spigener bore the title of customer relations representative. 
But by the time a top-level Chinese delegation arrived that July to seal the deal at Sikorsky's headquarters in Stratford, Conn., Spigener was sporting a new title: chief of protocol.
''During the selling process,'' he recalls, ''we realized they had only a vague notion of what a customer relations man really does. 
But they knew what protocol meant. 
It's a proven set of rules that has worked for years - in fact, for centuries. 
They wanted to be working with a man who makes things happen, who brings things together.''
In a triumph of style over substance, Spigener's title was ''upgraded'' to a term more familiar in diplomatic circles than on Wall Street.
A seasoned practitioner in the art of Doing The Right Thing, Spigener books hotels, plans banquets, hires limousines, schedules plant tours, makes security arrangements and selects gifts (often, something from Steuben or Tiffany & Company). 
Above all, he prepares Sikorsky executives for a visit to foreign customers - from giving a briefing on current events, to providing a list of safe conversational gambits, to handing out sheet music for sing-alongs at Korean and Japanese banquets. 
In today's competitive global arena, Sikorsky Aircraft cannot afford to make a single faux pas in dealing with the Saudis, Brazilians or any other potential purchaser in the 16 countries in which the company is currently in negotiation.
Spigener is hardly flying solo in his role as protocol officer. 
Corporations such as A.T.&T., Boeing and the Chase Manhattan Bank also have protocol specialists. 
Many of these masters of the British title and the Japanese tea ceremony are now expanding their spheres to include Eastern Europe. 
Their mandate: to provide at least two of the three ingredients that Adlai E. Stevenson, when he was chief American delegate to the United Nations, listed as endemic to a diplomat's life - ''protocol, Geritol and alcohol.''
Forty-five-year-old Robert W. Frye, the debonair chief of protocol at New York-based A.T.&T., looks every inch the diplomat, from pocket handkerchief to gold cuff links. 
He carries a briefcase loaded with the tools of his trade: passport, 35-millimeter Ricoh camera, Franklin electronic Wordmaster (''So I'll spell right'') and aspirin. 
Like protocol officers everywhere, he stocks up on Cross pen-and-pencil sets embellished with the company logo. 
''My aim is to prevent distractions from getting in the way of constructive negotiations,'' he says, ''to make people feel relaxed and comfortable.''
As Frye tells it, much of his work is routine. 
He books ''senior customers'' from abroad into the Waldorf-Astoria, escorts their spouses to the Metropolitan Museum of Art, the South Street Seaport and his company's Bell Laboratories in Murray Hill, N.J. 
After A.T.&T. built a telecommunications manufacturing plant in Thailand, as part of its on-going relationship with the Thais, Frye found himself squiring Professor Dr. Her Royal Highness Princess Chulabhorn on a trip to Disney World in 1988. 
(One of the instructions he was given: ''Never touch the Princess, unless she needs assistance or shakes your hand.'') And in his nine years as chief protocol officer, he has organized a host of events in foreign countries.
When A.T.&T. opened a new plant in Spain in 1987, Frye was in charge of the intricate seating chart at a company-sponsored state dinner. 
The potential for a high-level gaffe was daunting, particularly at the table that included James E. Olson, then A.T.&T.'s C.E.O.; King Juan Carlos of Spain; Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez, and leaders of Spain's banking and business communities. 
As a backstop, Frye asked that the Spanish order of precedence, an offical ranking of dignitaries, be translated for him.
Corporations like A.T.&T. that deal directly with foreign governments are natural breeding grounds for protocol officers. 
Aircraft manufacturers, for example, sell to foreign governments and national airlines. 
Executives from the large international banks have tete-a-tetes with central bankers, finance ministers, officials at the World Bank and directors of the International Monetary Fund.
Joseph Verner Reed, the 52-year-old chief of protocol for the White House, is the arbiter general of American decorum. 
The scion of a socially prominent Greenwich, Conn., family, Reed perfected his knowledge of international protocol as a vice president at Chase Manhattan Bank and assistant to its globe-trotting chairman, David Rockefeller, in the 1970's. 
One of Reed's more demanding assignments entailed helping Rockefeller find accommodations and transportation for the Shah of Iran and his entourage when they went into exile in 1979.
After a stint as Ambassador to Morocco and service at the United Nations, Reed was invited by his close friend and fellow Yale alumnus, President Bush, to head the White House protocol office's 60-person staff. 
''International business is increasingly aware of that peculiar word, 'protocol' - the order of doing business between governments, corporations, people,'' Reed says. 
Although at least one critic has derided his grand style of state entertaining as ''Cecil B. De Reed,'' Reed himself says that much of what he does simply reflects proper family etiquette: ''Do you stand up when your grandfather comes in?
Do you have your mother-in-law over for lunch?
It all requires protocol.''
Following in Reed's footsteps at Chase, Anne de la Morandiere has brought considerable elan to her job as vice president and director of external affairs and special events. 
De la Morandiere relishes the chance to influence a business deal with something as prosaic as a seating chart. 
''It's wonderful to hear afterwards that a deal was consummated,'' she says. 
''Would that happen if the right people weren't seated next to each other?''
Annual meetings of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund in Washington or foreign locales - in 1991, the groups will meet in Bangkok - test de la Morandiere's staff with weeklong rounds of breakfasts, lunches and dinners.
Though the members of Chase's International Advisory Committee, who include Henry Kissinger, and the members of the board of directors are usually, Morandiere says, ''well enough traveled to know the ropes,'' she will occasionally slip in a reminder on protocol: ''On one occasion in London, I did warn them that they could light up a cigarette only after the Queen has been toasted.''
She adds, helpfully, ''That's usually just before dessert.''
De la Morandiere points out that protocol officers must be able to stand their ground with C.E.O.'s, customs officials and even caterers. 
''You can't crumble when the chairman says, 'That's a stupid idea,' '' she says. 
No matter how well-laid the plans or assertive the protocol officer, however, the unpredictable does happen. 
The entire Italian Government collapsed last summer just a week before Chase's board was due to arrive. 
Only Giulio Andreotti, now Prime Minister but then merely acting Foreign Minister, honored his appointment with the board.
De la Morandiere has also had some awkward moments in the Far East. 
''You don't number tables in China,'' she says. 
''You go to the primrose or the hollyhock table. 
The Chinese don't want to appear to rank guests, and how can you quibble with that?
You just wander around in a vast dining room, hunting for your seat. 
It's wild.''
At the Boeing company, the corporate image is closer to hot dogs than caviar. 
Letitia Baldrige, a corporate-etiquette consultant based in Washington, D.C., has an explanation: ''It's the aw-shucks attitude handed down from the Air Force military establishment.''
David C. Peterson, who retired as Boeing's director of customer relations in February, was in charge of a stream of foreign dignitaries who visited the aerospace company's Seattle headquarters. 
He traces Boeing's down-home attitude to a conservative corporate culture that has existed from the company's earliest days. 
''We couldn't be as social as Lockheed and McDonnell Douglas were down in Los Angeles. 
They had the glamour of Hollywood,'' he says. 
''We felt like green peas. 
So over the years we made a conscious effort to get to know customers, their wives and their families.''
It was routine for Peterson's wife, Sally, along with other Boeing spouses, to throw a barbecue for visiting dignitaries at an executive's suburban home. 
Boeing's customers included Jordan's King Hussein, who came to Seattle to see his country's jets rolled out and to take a tour of the 747 assembly plant. 
''It's the world's largest building, you know,'' Peterson says. 
Thornton A. Wilson, former C.E.O. at Boeing, referred to Peterson as the company's ''chief cookie pusher.''
People used to just barge over to foreign countries, without the right gifts, the right clothes,'' says Letitia Baldrige. 
''They lost deals because they put their foot in it. 
It's tough competition for Americans against the suave Europeans, who understand sophisticated customs and are used to crossing borders.''
In February 1989 a meeting was set up in Moscow between A.T.&T. brass and one of the largest distributors of telephones in the Soviet Union. 
The person who handled the arrangements was Aleksandr Kovaler, the 27-year-old deputy managing director for the U.S.S.R. and Eastern Europe for A.T.&T. 
International in Brussels. 
But Kovaler misjudged the gift to bring. 
''We gave them a large-button telephone - the kind for kids and older people - and they didn't know why we were giving it to them,'' says Kovaler. 
''They were puzzled, not amused.''
Alan W. Lukens, a former Ambassador to Congo and a consultant to the State Department on crisis management, points out the problem of sending someone who is not a protocol officer to act as goodwill ambassador. 
''Oil companies tend to send out geologists,'' he says. 
''They're good technicians but they have no ideas about relations with governments, and they get into trouble.''
C.E.O.'s who lack adequate coaching in protocol can also make mistakes on foreign trips. 
''They're big shots at home - but fish out of water overseas,'' Lukens says. 
''They get led around by local managers who don't always represent the real interests of the C.E.O.''
According to A.T.&T.'s Robert Frye, Americans new to the game often leap into intimate conversations with foreign executives. 
At a first meeting, he says, ''they'll ask 'How are the kids?'
You don't ask, 'How do you like your work?'
You ask, 'What is your favorite hobby?'
''
Stephen Blank, senior associate of Multinational Strategies Inc., a New York consulting company, says that in European companies ''executives know the right answers to protocol problems - they can tell you, 'This is how you do it in Nigeria.'
At most American companies, each division goes off on its own.''
Corporations tend to fill their protocol jobs with people who have backgrounds in public relations, marketing and meeting planning and who have a knowledge of the industry. 
Such candidates are preferred to foreign-affairs specialists with no industry experience. 
Says Charles Lahiguera, a senior career adviser at the State Department who helps foreign-service officers find jobs in the private sector: ''One of our people speaks Chinese and knows the Far East. 
But when he went out to Wisconsin to apply for a job, they said, 'What we want is someone who knows how to run a plastics factory.'
''
The remuneration for knowing the proper etiquette for drinking in Korea (fill your neighbor's glass as well as your own) or the correct presentation of bilingual business cards can run to six figures. 
Knowing a foreign language is not a prerequisite for the job, according to Frye, who speaks only English. 
''At A.T.&T. we're dealing with over 100 countries,'' he says. 
''You can rent language skills - interpreters, translators - if you need them.''
But anyone involved with corporate protocol - from secretary to executive assistant to meeting planner - must be knowledgeable about the fine points of gift giving. 
Among other things, they must be careful lest the gift be interpreted as a bribe under the strictures of the 1977 Foreign Corrupt Practices Act. 
Before the passage of the act, ''there were terrible bribes,'' according to William Proxmire, the former Democratic Senator from Wisconsin who was author of the legislation. 
''The Lockheed Corporation paid a bribe to Japan of more than $1.5 million,'' Proxmire says. 
''Bribery was wholesale. 
And it had an adverse effect on the market. 
You bought things because you got a bribe.''
In 1982, Boeing pleaded guilty to Federal charges of failing to disclose more than $7 million in payments by top-level executives to overseas agents in the early 1970's. 
Though none of the payments seems to have been made by protocol officers, Peterson, the former Boeing man, says that protocol officers these days are wary. 
''I've heard about giving cars,'' as gifts, he says. 
''We've never done that in our whole history. 
We're especially careful. 
Gifts under $25 is all.''
A.T.&T.'s Frye goes to great lengths to find - or create - appropriate gifts. 
A top Italian executive was scheduled to visit A.T.&T headquarters. 
Frye learned that the V.I.P. was a biking enthusiast. 
''I phoned his wife at their home in Italy,'' Frye recalls, ''and found out what bike he liked. 
She gave me its exact name and model number. 
Then I got in touch with the manufacturer, obtained a copy of the original mechanical drawing of the bike and had it etched on a beautiful piece of crystal. 
Do you think he'll ever forget A.T.&T.?''
Letitia Baldrige is bountiful in her praise for the many polished executive secretaries who often function as protocol officers - in fact, if not in name. 
''There's a vast interlocking network of secretaries out there,'' she notes. 
''They know who to call. 
If there's a lunch for a visiting lord from London, they'll phone the secretary to the British Consul General and get the lowdown on who should sit where, what the person likes to eat. 
Two of the best I've seen are Jim Robinson's assistant at American Express and Rand Araskog's at I.T.T.''
Barbara Neysmith, American Express's former assistant to the chairman, last fall moved on to become assistant corporate secretary. 
Katherine Condon, Araskog's assistant, serves as manager of the chairman's office.
Foreign nationals who work abroad for American companies may also find themselves pressed into service. 
In setting up overseas negotiations, Morgan Stanley & Company relies on its Tokyo staff, which is more than 80 percent Japanese, and its London staff, which is more than 90 percent British and European. 
Such advice is essential. 
''If John Reed is going to Sao Paulo,'' says John Maloney, vice president of media relations at Citicorp, ''the arrangements are going to be made right in Brazil.''
Thanks to the worldwide flow of information, and the increasing numbers of foreign executives who attend American business schools, doing business globally no longer requires an encyclopedic knowledge of foreign customs. 
''The Japanese are getting used to us,'' says a protocol officer with a major commercial bank. 
''They've adapted to an international language of behavior and habits and expectations. 
Everyone's beginning to act the same way - in Stockholm, Paris, New York, Singapore.''
There can be pitfalls in trying to master foreign ways. 
As a communications specialist in the investment banking field puts it, ''If you attempt to learn Japanese culture - and don't get it right - you look stupid. 
Why risk using the wrong protocol?''
The doubters have not discouraged entrepreneurs from setting up shop as cross-cultural protocol consultants. 
Sondra Snowdon, formerly a protocol specialist at Citicorp and author of ''The Global Edge: How Your Company Can Win in the International Marketplace,'' dispenses advice to such clients as Price Waterhouse and New York's Hotel Pierre. 
Two Stanford M.B.A.'s, Lennie Copeland and Lewis Griggs, have sold their ''Going International'' film and videotape series to 1,500 companies, from Aetna Life & Casualty Company to the Xerox Corporation. 
Brigham Young University published and sold 750,000 guides to foreign manners called ''Culturgrams'' last year, each pamphlet in the series written by a native or an American who has lived for five to ten years in the country.
Last Fall, when Marriott Hotels and Resorts opened a hotel in Warsaw, it called on International Planning and Analysis Center Inc., Washington-based consultants, to provide a crash course on Poland. 
Mark L. Raczynski, an I.P.A.C. vice president who had been a soldier in the Polish underground army in World War II, enlightened Marriott executives. 
The company should not invite the President of Poland to the ribbon-cutting, for instance: ''Would you invite President Bush to the opening of a hotel in America?
But go ahead and invite the Mayor of Warsaw, because of the importance of the joint venture.''And he cautioned the executives to be evenhanded. 
''Arrange appointments with both Solidarity and Communist Party leaders,'' he said. 
It was timely advice.
For American companies, the fall of the wall in Eastern Europe has introduced a new challenge. 
According to Baldrige, ''Eastern European businessmen are terribly naive. 
They haven't had a chance to get out and travel. 
They have a huge learning process to go through.''
In the sudden confluence of East and West, there is great potential for gaffes.
According to George Lorinczi, a partner in the Washington office of the New York law firm of Stroock & Stroock & Lavan, ''It's a terrific problem, the way Poles, Czechs and to some extent Hungarians have been isolated. 
Now they are inundated by business proposals and propositions.''
Lorinczi, who was born in Hungary, spends much of his time traveling in the Eastern bloc. 
''In Warsaw,'' he says, ''the Cabinet ministers had a waiting room full of people. 
And they couldn't tell who was who. 
They couldn't tell the difference between someone from Goldman, Sachs or Bear, Stearns - and Stanislas, a retired welder who has $600 to spend.''
Last fall, Stroock organized the First Hungary Fund, a closed-end mutual fund that was placed by Bear, Stearns & Company and the International Finance Corporation, an arm of the World Bank. 
In setting up the fund, Lorinczi says, there were ''plenty of moments when cultural and political differences ruffled deals and egos.''
Different legal customs and terms can be misinterpreted. 
''What is a perfectly normal thing to ask in a Western transaction - for a company to give 'representations and warranties,' for instance - can be an insult in Eastern Europe,'' Lorinczi says. 
''A Hungarian will say, 'You don't believe my company can enter into a contract?'
''
In the give-and-take of investing in a region hitherto out of bounds, like Eastern Europe, even the touchy matter of a nation's treasures can become a headache for corporate diplomats. 
''Take the case of Herend, Hungary's world-renowned porcelain factory - some 200 years old,'' says Lorinczi. 
''When Western interests made a proposal to buy it, the Hungarians went into a state of shock, just as we'd react if outsiders tried to buy the Smithsonian.''
That was where an instinct for diplomacy came in. 
''It had to be explained,'' Lorinczi says, ''that with a fresh infusion of capital and improved marketing, it would be better for everyone. 
It took a lot to get the notion across. 
We had to explain how both traditional and national interests would be preserved.''
And cross-cultural confusion can cut both ways. 
Americans have been puzzled to find themselves warmly received by Czechoslovakian businessmen for no apparent reason. 
''The U.S. 
Embassy would phone a Czech official to make an appointment for an American businessman - just as a courtesy,'' Lorinczi says. 
''The Czech would assume that the executive must be a well-connected figure. 
He'd think that someone who gets that kind of service must be George Bush's first cousin.''
Lorinczi's diplomatic solution to the misunderstanding: ''We have to explain present American realities, the apolitical nature of our business system, our decentralization, the minimal Government interference, the kaleidoscope of disconnected or unconnected businesses. 
We would explain that there is no American position on a business situation, that it's a happy chaos. 
And then the Czechs would ask, 'How can you operate in that environment?'
''
