
One is an obstetrical nurse whose grateful patients have named at least nine babies in her honor. 
Another is a subway conductor whose cheerful patter leads passengers to applaud his arrival. 
Still another is a principal who uses her own money to take her handicapped students on special trips.
From New York City's largely anonymous municipal work force of 200,000 employees, seven individuals were singled out this week for honors and $5,000 prizes for outstanding performance.
The seven were named recipients of the 20th annual Sloan Public Service Awards, sponsored by the Fund for the City of New York, a nonprofit organization created by the Ford Foundation to promote civic improvement. 
The awards are financed by the fund and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation.
"They are the city's unsung heroes, who deliver the highest quality of service but rarely are recognized for their commitment," said Mary McCormick, president of the fund. 
The winners were nominated by fellow employees, supervisors or New York residents; a panel of corporate and civic leaders made the final choice. 
The awards were presented at the recipients' work places on Tuesday, followed by a reception that night at the Hotel Roosevelt.
 
Mary McInerney
She decided to make a career of helping children with handicaps, she says, when she was about 8 years old and discovered that an older cousin had a disability that kept him from reading. 
She sat down to teach him.
Now, as principal of the Hungerford School on Staten Island, one of the city's special education schools, she offers an inventive program for teaching physically or mentally disabled pupils, kindergarten through age 21, that attracts children locally and from other boroughs.
She believes fervently that whenever possible, disabled students should attend classes with students without special needs. 
"They need to socialize and develop friendships with students we classify as 'normal,' and find role models outside their immediate circles," she said.
Because youngsters dependent on wheelchairs or special equipment often have to wait for available funds for repairs, she will use her $5,000 prize for a trust fund for equipment. 
She intends to name the fund for her father-in-law, Thomas McInerney, to "keep alive the memory of this generous Irish farmer."
 
Annie Shen
At Elmhurst Hospital Center in Queens, the obstetrical staff stopped counting the number of newborns called "Annie" after nine, including Egyptian, Ghanaian, Colombian and Chinese babies.
"I try to discourage it," said Annie Shen, an obstetrics nurse, with a smile, "but it's such an honor."
The bulletin boards in her office are covered with photographs of the babies she has tended.
The Elmhurst community has been inundated in the past decade with immigrant families and the hospital's patients are said to be the most multiethnic in New York.
Mrs. Shen, born in China and trained in Britain, alerted the medical staff at Elmhurst to the high incidence of diabetes among pregnant Asians, which she believes may be caused by their diet. 
The hospital gives her credit for rallying its response to the findings, enabling it to adapt rapidly to the new health-care needs. 
She is the co-author of two medical papers on diagnosing, treating and preventing the diabetes.
Mrs. Shen plans to use the award to fulfill a cherished dream -- a trip to China to "look for my roots."
 
Harry Nugent
For two decades, he has made it his mission to make the 17-mile long subway run between 242d Street in the Bronx and South Ferry in Manhattan a more civilized experience through his travel commentaries.
"I don't believe the public address announcements have to have the quality of graffiti," he said. 
Mr. Nugent added that he was gratified by the number of listeners who praise his diction and inquire where he was educated (New York city schools).
When his Broadway local train approaches 66th Street, he advises passengers where to find the exit for Lincoln Center and often tosses in a news item about performances at the Philharmonic or the ballet. 
At 28th Street, he is apt to inform riders they have reached the flower and fur district, or in Nugent style, "the street of flora and fauna."
He tries not to repeat his commentary.
His biggest satisfaction, he said, came from a homeless passenger. 
"He leaned into my window," he said, "to say 'thank you for 40 minutes of happiness and making me feel like a human being.'
"
 
Ellie Ludvigsen-Jennings
The program she created a few years ago to help the Department of Probation deal with the rising incidence of family violence cases in Queens died in the city's budget cuts. 
But the innovations of the program live on in a domestic violence manual that will soon be made available to all city agencies and some private ones for training officials to look for the danger signs of possible abuse.
Ms. Ludvigsen-Jennings had her first close-up look at violence among youth groups when she served as an Inner-City Peace Corps member in Brooklyn assigned to work on street-gang programs. 
She later joined the Youth Board and then moved to the Mayor's Office of Service Coordination as administrator of youth programs in Brooklyn and Queens.
Years spent coping with family violence have convinced her, she said, that people need to stop trying to control others and concentrate on controlling themselves: "People have to learn to live together, it's as simple as that."
 
Yolanda Bonitch
Her title is dry: Manhattan Borough Community Specialist in the New York Public Library. 
But her work is anything but: getting books into the hands of youngsters living in homeless hotels or shelters, group homes, hospitals and residences for AIDS patients.
One library official remembered Ms. Bonitch's visits to the bleak and forbidding Martinique Hotel in Manhattan, which other staff members were reluctant to even enter. 
"She knocked on every door on every floor," the colleague recalled, "enticing the kids to a newly installed library shelf, frequently changing the book collection to please their tastes and even persuading their mothers to dress them up for special events."
Because Spanish was her mother tongue, she is sensitive to the needs of Hispanic communities -- she was the guiding force behind a committee of children's librarians that produced a bibliography for Hispanic youngsters that is widely used in school districts. 
But she is no less attentive to other ethnic groups, particularly the homebound elderly who are comforted by a book or tape in their native German, Yiddish or Chinese.
She sees nothing extraordinary about her commitment, saying "It's a wonder we're paid to do work that is so dear to the heart."
 
Stephan Likosky
Mr. Likosky did not invent the idea of a prison library. 
But in his 12 years as an institutional librarian, he has helped develop libraries from New York City northward to the upstate prisons near the Canadian border, negotiating to secure needed space and persuading wardens that libraries have a calming impact on inmates. 
He was a prime mover in setting up a dozen libraries at Rikers Island.
A student of linguistics who once taught Russian at Harvard University, he has turned down promotions rather than leave prison work.
Even existing prison libraries need improvement, he maintains, because they offer limited opportunities. 
He advocates turning them into "learning centers" equipped to teach inmates about computers and to help them develop other skills that will give them job opportunities when they are released.
On Rikers, he argues, detainees need such programs to use their time constructively. 
"The government spends $56,000 in a year to keep a person in a city jail, often for a first offense," he said. 
"For much less cost, it could help prepare an inmate for rehabilitation."
 
James Gilmore
Years ago, his father walked the same beat in Washington Heights. 
Since then, drugs have become a major industry in the area, but Officer Gilmore has used techniques from his father's era to develop information used to smash two major drug operations.
An officer in the Manhattan District Attorney's office attests to his value in providing data he obtained from rival gang members "too frightened to talk with anyone but Jimmy."
Community residents provide another perspective on James Gilmore, citing his help in organizing a team to guide children to schools and to escort elderly people who were frightened to leave their homes to do their marketing.
"One of the things I learned from my father is that a policeman builds equity with his community by never shunning the smaller duties," said Officer Gilmore. 
"People truly appreciate it when you get rid of drunks on a stoop, break up a rowdy street quarrel, ticket triple-parked cars. 
That's also police work. 
It's now called improving the quality of life. 
I call it converting a neighborhood into a policeman's buddy system."
