
Mikhail S. Gorbachev left China today after a four-day summit meeting that ended 30 years of estrangement between the Soviet Union and China, taking with him promises of expanded party and government contacts and a general reduction of military tensions in Asia.
The reconciliation of the two Communist giants was interrupted and finally eclipsed by huge pro-democracy demonstrations in Beijing and other Chinese cities, dampening Mr. Gorbachev's hope of putting his policies on display to a wide Asian audience.
But the Soviet leader pronounced the summit conference an event of ''epoch-making significance.''
As Mr. Gorbachev concluded his visit with a side trip to Shanghai, the official Soviet and Chinese news agencies issued a joint communique promising new ties between the Communist parties of their two nations, which split in the late 1950's over ideology.
The agreements, which had been described earlier in general terms, included the reduction of military forces along the Soviet-Chinese border ''to a minimum level commensurate with the normal, good-neighborly relations between the two countries.''
 
Demilitarization Hoped For
Mr. Gorbachev said at a news conference Wednesday that he hoped this would eventually lead to full demilitarization of the border.
The Chinese and Soviet leaders also upgraded negotiations on several outstanding boundary disputes, now under the charge of deputy foreign ministers, to the level of foreign ministers.
The most extensive section dealt with the future of Cambodia, on which the two nations failed to overcome their remaining differences.
The Chinese repeated their call for the creation of a four-party transition government, including the Vietnamese-backed regime of Hun Sen and the three rebel factions headed by Prince Norodom Sihanouk. 
Prince Sihanouk would lead the government pending elections under this plan.
Moscow, which supports Vietnam in its 10-year-old war against the guerrillas, insisted that transition and elections were an internal Cambodian matter.
The two sides agreed that when Vietnam finishes withdrawing its troops in September, outside parties should gradually end military aid to any of the warring factions.
The communique declared that ''neither side would seek hegemony of any form'' in Asia or elsewhere.
 
Steers Clear of Protests
In Shanghai, Mr. Gorbachev steered clear of the student protests that have spilled into this city. 
He met with Mayor Zhu Rongji and the Communist Party leader, Jiang Zemin, laid a wreath to the Russian poet Pushkin, and toured the Minhang Special Economic Zone, one of the areas China has created to attract foreign investment.
The Soviet Union is contemplating establishing similar zones.
Compared with his three days in Beijing, where his schedule was cut and juggled to avoid the legions of protesters occupying the city center, the Shanghai visit was peaceful.
The only mishap occurred at the administrative building of the free trade zone, when an elevator carrying Mr. Gorbachev, his wife, Raisa, Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze and Aleksandr N. Yakovlev, another Politburo member, balked and refused to move. 
First Mr. Shevardnadze got out, then Mr. Yakovlev, and still the elevator would not function. 
Finally, The Soviet leader was forced to descend the stairs from the sixth floor.
When a reporter asked if the group was too heavy, Mr. Gorbachev said, ''No, it's your Western technology.''
Shortly afterward, Mr. Gorbachev toured a Chinese-Japanese joint venture - an elevator factory.
The Soviet leader apparently saw nothing of the demonstrations that filled the port and city center here.
