
From Radio Afghanistan to the Voice of Zaire, more official government radio stations than ever before are broadcasting abroad on shortwave, and many have started downplaying strident propaganda and overt ideology in favor of more candor in their official newscasts.
The trend reflects the recent movement toward greater political and cultural openness in the Soviet Union and China, which has encouraged other countries to follow suit. 
It is also a response to the proliferation of other forms of communication in the developing world, which has fostered greater competition for listeners, government and private analysts say.
''The winds of openness are blowing in more ways than one,'' said Lawrence E. Magne, the editor of Passport to World Band Radio, an annual publication for shortwave users published by International Broadcasting Services, a private company in Penns Park, Pa. 
''There's been a decline in hard propaganda and a rise in more objective news.''
But with about 100 countries broadcasting abroad, the shortwave spectrum is becoming so congested that countries are building more powerful transmitters and taking other steps to insure that their official voices are heard abroad.
 
The New Candor
People who monitor international shortwave radio say the new candor has been evident in several countries, especially in the Soviet Union and China.
''Both are now surprisingly frank when it comes to dealing with domestic problems,'' said Kim Elliott, the director for audience research of Voice of America, which is operated by the United States Government. 
''They're doing a much better job of talking about themselves.''
During the recent earthquake in Armenia, for example, Moscow radio provided extensive news coverage. 
Shortwave monitors say the coverage included not only detailed reports of the estimated damage but also criticism of the Government's response.
In general, criticism of official institutions in the Soviet Union, the result of Mikhail S. Gorbachev's attempt to implement a sweeping reform program, is most apparent in the two official stations charged with external broadcasts, Moscow radio and Radio Peace and Progress. 
The economy, with its lack of consumer goods and lethargic industrial sector, has also been a subject of recent critical newscasts.
 
Coverage of Nanjing Riots
Beijing radio, which once began broadcasts with quotations from Mao Zedong, has similarly moved away from heavily ideological broadcasts. 
Its recent coverage of the riots in Nanjing, where Chinese students demonstrated against students from Africa, suprised Western analysts of shortwave programming.
''They hinted that there was racism in China,'' said G. Alex Batman, who monitors broadcasts for International Broadcasting Services. 
''That would not have happened in the past.''
And Vilnius radio, the official voice of Lithuania, a Baltic republic in the Soviet Union, has recently broadcast calls for more political autonomy.
Apart from the new openness, competition from other foreign stations, cassette players, videocassette recorders and improved domestic radio and television has forced countries to adjust their programming abroad to ''provide an attractive alternative to domestic media and cater to the international interests of the listener,'' Mr. Elliott said.
In many cases, he said, listeners wanted objective news about a country and would listen to stations they thought were providing it. 
This, he added, explained in part the vast international audience of the British Broadcasting Corporation. 
''One reason it's so powerful is because it's credible,'' Mr. Magne said. 
''Propaganda doesn't sell anymore. 
People won't listen.''
 
Medium for Propaganda
But ever since the late 1910's, when Bolsheviks used radio to try to foment revolution among vastly dispersed peoples, addressing broadcasts to, as its announcers intoned, ''all, all, all,'' propaganda has been and remains a key reason for broadcasting. 
Because of shortwave radio's range, countries have used it to project their messages across geographic and often ideological and religious divides.
Some countries have not been affected by the trend toward more candid and self-critical programming. 
Extremely strident propaganda can still be heard on Albania radio and Pyongyang radio, the official station of North Korea. 
And analysts in the West stressed that Moscow radio has not abandoned propaganda in its broadcasts; its message has simply become more subtle, they say.
Despite the Soviet Union's decision to end jamming of the United States Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty, radio warfare is not dead. 
The Soviet Union, for example, is still jamming foreign broadcasts aimed at Afghanistan in the Pashto and Dari languages, said Jonathan Marks, a Dutch shortwave expert at Netherlands radio.
 
A Crowded Spectrum
The medium's primary constraint, however, is the increasingly crowded shortwave spectrum. 
The number of national broadcasters has risen over the last 20 years to about 100; the number of hours broadcast has risen to about 30,000 hours annually, almost double the number in 1960. 
This has left too many countries competing for too few frequencies.
''It's a very crowded spectrum,'' said Mr. Marks. ''In order to be effective, countries are looking at ways to get their signal closer to their foreign audiences.''
Several countries, notably the United States and Britain, have embarked on ambitious programs to expand their broadcasting ability, building more powerful transmitters and establishing far-flung radio networks. 
But budgetary constraints will almost certainly delay the American expansion program.
 
Exchange Agreements
In addition, several countries have recently signed agreements to exchange radio facilities, essentially using one another as relay stations for broadcasting. 
A country transmits a program by satellite to another country's station, which then rebroadcasts the program by shortwave. 
This allows a country to broadcast from a position closer to its target.
''It's much cheaper than building a relay system overseas and then managing it,'' said Mr. Marks, who has counted more than 30 of these agreements, the majority of which developed in recent years.
