
China's 3.1 million soldiers are enjoying a higher budget as their reward for crushing the democracy movement last summer, but Chinese officials say significant tensions are festering within the military leadership.
The influence of the army and its generals has increased in recent months, and some Chinese and foreign experts say the military could play a pivotal role in coming years. 
Indeed, few of these experts will rule out the possibility of a coup d'etat after the death of the senior leader, Deng Xiaoping.
Already, the army is partly reorienting itself from a mission of defense against the Soviet Union and other external threats to a growing role in insuring internal security. 
The army has created rapid deployment forces in each military region, and troops have also been transferred to bolster the People's Armed Police, which already had 600,000 members.
The clearest sign of the army's rising influence is its budget. 
The only official announcement so far is that the military budget will increase. 
Although the amount was not specified, a well-placed army officer said the 1990 budget was $850 million higher than last year's, a 16 percent increase. 
Another Chinese, who also has access to high-level military information, put the increase at $1.06 billion, or 20.3 percent, when riot control and other domestic security costs are included.
 
Increases Amid Austerity
Such increases will only keep pace with inflation, but they are striking because military spending had fallen 40 percent in real terms over the last four years. 
This year money is particularly tight because of an austerity drive. 
But even as university faculty members report that they have been told that the education budget is being cut by 5 percent, more money is being scraped together for the army.
The army remains the most secretive institution in China, but discussions recently with an array of Chinese officials, in and out of the army, suggest that there are a number of splits in the military.
The use of military force to crush the democracy movement in June sparked considerable discontent, the officials say, both among younger officers and among senior generals who are keenly aware of the army's image problem. 
In May, seven top military figures signed a letter urging that the army never be used to crush the students, and some of them are said to be still smoldering.
Vice President Wang Zhen, a hard-liner, recently urged the former Defense Minister, Zhang Aiping, to acknowledge that it was a mistake to sign the letter in May, one official said. 
While the conversation began politely, the official said, it soon became a shouting match when Mr. Zhang refused to change his views.
 
Shades of Old-Time Warlords
A large number of career military officers are said to be concerned about the rising influence of the family of President Yang Shangkun, who is also first vice chairman of the Central Military Commission. 
Mr. Yang's half-brother, Yang Baibing, is the Military Commission's secretary general as well as the army's chief political commissar, and he has been behind a broad campaign lately to re-emphasize political considerations in the army.
President Yang is 83 years old but appears very healthy; a well-connected Chinese said that Mr. Yang had a medical check-up a few weeks ago and amazed the doctors with his vigor. 
Thus some soldiers and civilians fear that after Mr. Deng dies, the Yang family will make a bid for supreme power.
Frictions are also reported between the army's central leadership in Beijing and the seven military regions. 
There are persistent rumors that the commanders and political commissars will be shuffled soon to prevent them from building independent fiefs.
 
Political Training Proves Irksome
One of the principal disagreements these days appears to be the extent to which the army should be ''red'' versus ''expert.''
Much of the military's younger leadership places its faith in technology and professionalism, and chafes when 30 percent or more of training is spent in political study to make soldiers more ideologically correct.
Even some official accounts have acknowledged the tensions. 
The official People's Daily granted that ''a handful of people'' in the military were ''stubbornly sticking to bourgeois liberalization.''
The official New China News Agency reported earlier this month that in the army ''some comrades are still quite confused on such questions as the superiority and future of the socialist system.''
So far it is striking that for all the disagreements, almost no one in the military is known to have been disciplined for hesitating in June. 
Only one commander, Xu Qinxian, who feigned illness rather than march against the students, is believed to have been court-martialed.
There are reports that the army disciplined 111 officers and a much larger number of troops for misconduct in 1989, much of it presumably related to the democracy movement. 
But Western diplomats say that such numbers are relatively insignificant.
