
If Solzhenitsyn were Chinese, then the windswept plains here in Qinghai Province might be as notorious as Siberia, and the word "laogai" might be as common and ominous as "gulag."
Qinghai Province, the northeastern part of what was once Tibet, is a sparsely populated region of prairies and mountains, 10,000 feet or more in elevation with few trees or shrubs and bitterly cold winds that leave cheeks dry and cracked. 
Soon after the 1949 Communist revolution, it was made the centerpiece of China's gulag: the site of harsh, remote labor camps where "counterrevolutionaries" and criminals fought for survival and often lost.
Laogai" (pronounced lao-guy, the first syllable rhyming with cow) means "reform through labor," but that is a euphemism for the cold and starvation and illness that offenders faced. 
The first prisoners, in the early 1950's, were forced to build the mud walls that confined those who came later. 
Rations were so meager that felons working in the fields caught earthworms and regarded them as a great delicacy.
In the 1980's, the number of prisoners in Qinghai apparently declined and conditions improved, but Wei Jingsheng, one of China's most articulate advocates of democracy, was sent to a Qinghai laogai in 1984, where he suffered from altitude sickness. 
Mr. Wei, now serving the 13th year of a 15-year sentence, is believed to be in a prison in Hebei Province, and no one connected with the 1989 democracy movement is known to have been sent to Qinghai.
 
An Embarrassment to Officials
For officials in Qinghai Province, who are now trying to attract foreign investors and tourists, the province's history and reputation constitute a serious embarrassment. 
A room full of provincial officials erupted in indignation when a reporter brought up the topic of laogai camps.
"There's this prejudice against Qinghai," said Wang Yinhui, director of the Qinghai Foreign Affairs Office. 
"Sure we have laogai. 
But so does every country."
Suonan Tsering, a Tibetan who is in charge of minority affairs in Qinghai, said: "Qinghai people are unhappy about this prejudice. 
Some people in other places think that we're all criminals, all involved in laogai production."
Wu Zhengyun, vice chairman of the provincial planning commission, said there were fewer than 10,000 prisonzers in Qinghai's laogai camps. 
He added that since 1985, Qinghai had not accepted any more prisoners from other provinces.
"There are still a few prisoners from other provinces who were sent some time ago, but soon there will be none," Mr. Wu said. 
He added that while it was now impossible for foreigners to see a laogai camp, such a visit might be allowed some time in the future.
It is impossible to know whether the official figure of 10,000 prisoners is accurate. 
The reliability of the official national total of 1.26 million Chinese in prisons, laogai and re-education-through-labor camps is also uncertain.
The Chinese authorities do not normally invent economic and social statistics entirely these days, although they do manipulate them to their advantage, but the credibility of official information about prisons is particularly low.
During a tour of Beijing No. 1 Prison two years ago, for example, the authorities turned down a request to visit other prisons on the ground that there were no others in Beijing. 
Many former inmates can attest that this is untrue, and the official New China News Agency recently published references to the supposedly excellent care at Beijing No. 2 Prison.
By all accounts the overwhelming majority of prisoners are common criminals rather than political offenders. 
And a range of Qinghai residents interviewed privately over the course of a week agreed that there were many fewer inmates in the laogai system now than in the Maoist period. 
They said that camps remained but that treatment was now reasonably humane.
"They're fed well and they sleep on bunks now instead of on the floor," said a peasant who based his information on a fellow villager who was recently released from a laogai.
