
The crisis in the Persian Gulf is truly a terrible thing, a Chinese writer complained the other day.
''With this new situation, Kuwait may not be able to attend the Asian Games,'' he added. 
''And maybe some other Arab countries won't come either. 
It really is terrible.''
These days conversations here are frequently turning to the situation in the Persian Gulf, but usually people focus on the effect of the conflict on the Asian Games, which begin in Beijing on Sept. 
22.
It is not that people discount the horrors of a possible war, or lack sympathy for Western hostages in the region, but in most conversations those topics seems secondary to the impact on the sports competition.
 
Appeals to the Nation
China has been preparing lavishly and frantically for the games, which are held every four years as a regional version of the Olympics. 
After the Army crackdown last year, the Government has tried to win back loyalty and pull the nation together again with nationalistic appeals to make the games succeed. 
The Chinese leadership also hopes that if the games succeed, they will win back respect internationally - as well as tourists for China - and lead the way for China to be the host of the Olympics in 2000. 
Until the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, China's diplomacy had seemed to be working, for all 38 countries in the region had said they would take part.
The dreams of a perfectly smooth event collapsed with the invasion of Kuwait. 
Among those killed was Sheik Fahd al-Ahmed al-Sabah, a Kuwaiti who was also the president of the Olympic Council of Asia, the group that coordinates the Games. 
The invasion thereby not only left the organization leaderless in the final month before the games, but also cast doubt on whether athletes from Kuwait would participate because of the annexation of Kuwait by Iraq.
 
Deadline for Lists
''Everybody's wondering about these questions, but our Government hasn't explained what's going to happen,'' a middle-age woman said. 
''We have no idea who's going to participate.''
One reason the authorities have not explained is that they apparently do not know. 
While all 38 countries said at first that they would in fact participate, the deadline for submitting name lists of competing athletes is tonight at midnight. 
It is not clear how many countries have submitted these name lists, and officials of the Asian Games have declined to be interviewed on the subject.
In recent days, the authorities have publicly expressed optimism that the Asian Games will succeed despite all the conflicts. 
Zhang Baifa, a Vice Mayor of Beijing, told a news conference on Saturday: ''We are confident that the Asian Games will surely be a meeting of unity, friendship and progress.''
 
Fans From Saudi Arabia
Despite the invasion, Kuwait might be able to send a team, as most of its athletes are said to be training in Europe. 
But other gulf countries may be too absorbed by the possibility of war to send teams, and even if they all do arrive in Beijing some teams may object to competing against political rivals. 
Saudi Arabian sports officials had advised China that if their soccer team reached the finals, they would send 3,000 fans to Beijing to root for their squad. 
Partly as a result, the Chinese authorities arranged the early opening of an unfinished expressway between Beijing and the nearby port city of Tianjin. 
The idea was that some fans could stay at hotels in Tianjin and commute to Beijing.
These days, however, some Chinese wonder whether there will be any Saudi Arabian entry at all.
