
China and Vietnam announced today that Vietnamese leaders would visit China this year, in a meeting that is expected to lead to a normalization of relations between the two neighbors.
While they have a territorial dispute and have been at odds since a brief border war in 1979, the two countries have been drawn together lately by the collapse of Communism elsewhere around the world. 
Relations between Hanoi and Beijing have been improving rapidly, and the warming is likely to improve the prospects for a peaceful settlement of the Cambodian war.
The joint statement issued today, during a visit by the Vietnamese Foreign Minister, Nguyen Manh Cam, did not specify which leaders would visit China. 
But Vietnamese officials have suggested that the delegation will be led by Du Muoi, the Communist Party leader, and will mark the full normalization of relations.
While the two countries never cut diplomatic ties, relations have been frosty for more than a dozen years. 
Air and rail links between China and Vietnam are suspended, and trade is partly restricted by the Chinese side, although smuggling is rampant and Chinese consumer goods are found throughout the Vietnamese markets.
In earlier years, China gave considerable assistance to the Communist Government in North Vietnam, and nearly 1,100 Chinese died in the Vietnam War, according to a recently published Chinese book.
Vietnam also offered assistance to China in one crucial matter: the embalmers who had prepared Ho Chi Minh's body for exhibit flew to Beijing in 1976 and took charge of the effort to preserve Mao Zedong's body, after an earlier Chinese effort produced unsightly results.
But relations worsened because they supported different factions in Cambodia. 
Vietnam ousted the Chinese-backed Khmer Rouge forces, and in 1979 China invaded Vietnam border areas as a punishment.
"Both sides agreed that a relationship of good-neighborliness and friendship should be restored between China and Vietnam," the statement said.
It continued, "Both sides expressed their readiness to take practical steps to restore the exchanges and cooperation between the two countries in the economic, trade, scientific, technological, transportation, cultural and other fields with a view to gradually normalizing Chinese-Vietnamese relations."
There was no public mention of the territorial dispute of the Spratly Islands in the South China Sea. 
Vietnam and China clashed in 1988 over their rival claims to the islands.
