
Jiang Lianxiang has a modest living room, with a sofa, a television, a refrigerator that doesn't fit in her dollhouse-sized kitchen, and an abiding faith that her son will be richer than his parents. 
Here, it almost seems as if the 1989 Tiananmen crackdown on dissent had never happened.
"Our incomes are still going up," said Ms. Jiang, a relaxed and smiling woman of 41, as she sipped tea in her living room and watched her son practice his calligraphy in a corner. 
"We have most things we could want. 
Of course, the boy wanted an electric fan for the summer, but if you open the window it's really not so hot. 
And we talked about getting a video player, but then we were afraid that might disturb the boy from doing his homework each evening. 
So we pretty much have what we need."
This economic complacency is not what was expected after the army throttled the democracy movement 1,080 miles away in Beijing. 
Many Chinese and foreigners alike believed that with tanks crushing student tents at Tiananmen Square, the economy risked collapse as well, through a decline in foreign investment, a rollback of economic reforms and an increasingly disgruntled and uncooperative work force.
But none of that has happened, at least not so far. 
It is one of the paradoxes of the 1990's: China, with a hard-line Communist leadership, is booming along at a 6 percent growth rate, with low inflation, foreign investment up, and exports and foreign exchange reserves at record highs.
In contrast, democratic India, Asia's other third-world giant, is struggling along with a 4 percent growth rate, a trade deficit, and double-digit inflation. 
As for the Soviet Union, the other country with which China is most often compared, its economy has sunk further into chaos as the country fragments in the aftermath of the hard-liners' failed coup in August.
Of course, there are clear differences among the three countries, and no one seems to think that repression makes good economic sense. 
But so far, against most expectations, China has not paid any overwhelming economic price for pursuing a hard-line ideology.
"The doomsaying that went on a couple of years ago, on so many fronts, has not come about," said Nicholas Lardy, a specialist on the Chinese economy at the University of Washington. 
"In fact, I can't think of any negative forecasts that have come to pass."
To be sure, there is still deep bitterness toward the Government in many circles, and there is a common belief that the hard-liners are doomed. 
And for the economy the last few years have not been clear sailing by any means.
Beginning in late 1989, China endured its worst slump in more than a decade. 
The recovery is now well under way, but many Chinese economists worry that inflation will soon come roaring back. 
And the state-owned sector of the economy is still a disaster area: unreformed, inefficient and perhaps hopeless.
Yet over all, despite immense troubles in the state sector, the Chinese economy is enjoying far more vigorous growth than the economies of the United States, Japan, India or most other countries, rich or poor. 
This kind of steady economic growth is the crucial feature of Deng Xiaoping's strategy to preserve Communist Party rule in China. 
Mr. Deng, the ailing 87-year-old architect of present-day China, argues that if the party can raise living standards substantially, ordinary people will support Communist rule and overlook such matters as the army assault on pro-democracy demonstrators in 1989.
"In the end, convincing those who do not believe in socialism will depend on our nation's development," the official Economic Daily recently quoted Mr. Deng as saying. 
"If we can reach a comfortable standard of living by the end of this century, then that will wake them up a bit. 
And in the next century, when we as a socialist country join the middle ranks of the developed nations, that will help to convince them. 
Most of these people will genuinely see that they were mistaken."
 
Expectations Rise Faster Than Income
Mr. Deng seems to be right that many ordinary Chinese are far more concerned with whether they can "fa cai" -- get rich -- than with repression of dissidents. 
But it is not at all clear that growing prosperity will make them more supportive of the Communist Party, for two reasons.
The first reason is that while incomes are rising, expectations are rising even more quickly. 
Consequently, many people seem dissatisfied with their stunning economic progress and some even insist -- absurdly -- that they are worse off financially than they were a few years ago.
The second reason is that many Chinese believe that they owe their fatter wallets not to Communism but to capitalism. 
And many economists here say they are right.
After a dozen years of economic restructuring, China sometimes seems more capitalist than Communist, and that is one reason why the country is doing so well. 
Most of the growth now is coming from private and collective enterprises, not from the state-owned behemoths. 
China's politics and oratory may be hard-line Communist, but brush aside the slogans and what emerges is that the economy's saving grace is that it is deeply pluralistic.
The state sector accounts for only about one-third of China's gross national product and 18 percent of the labor force. 
The goods and services purchased by the Government total only 6 percent of G.N.P., just one-half the level in India. 
China's 800 million peasants live in their own homes, work for themselves on individual plots of land that are more or less their own, and increasingly engage in small-scale capitalist ventures that make everything from tofu to ball bearings.
"Our policy is to talk all the time about socialism, while moving more and more toward the private sector," quipped a Chinese official who returned recently from a visit to the Soviet Union. 
"The Soviets are just the opposite. 
They're talking all the time about reform, but they still haven't changed anything. 
There, the state still owns everything."
Thus China sometimes seems to be repeating the slogan "Socialism Forever!" as it heads directly toward a market economy.
Important reforms are again on the Chinese agenda these days, although the leadership still balks at any rapid restructuring of the state sector. 
Despite protests from some of the nation's octogenarian leaders, like Vice President Wang Zhen, China is moving ahead on stock issues in the cities of Shanghai and Shenzhen. 
Canton may get a stock market by the end of next year, and foreigners will be permitted to buy special "B Shares" beginning early next year.
"Li Peng personally favors central planning," said an economist who has discussed economics with the Prime Minister. 
"But he knows that he has no choice. 
He's got to move toward the market, and that's what's happening in China now."
 
Shift to Market Continues Apace
Aside from the nurturing of stock markets, there are several other reforms now gaining momentum:
*The Government this year began to raise money by issuing bonds underwritten in part by securities firms, in place of the old system of issuing bonds that people were simply forced to buy. 
Chinese workers used to dread the automatic deductions from their paychecks to pay for bonds, but now the securities pay reasonable interest and can be sold before they mature.
*China, beginning this year and next, is inaugurating large-scale "housing reform," by raising rents from their present unrealistic levels (a few dollars per month or less) and by encouraging families to buy the homes in which they live.
*The Government this year raised prices of grain, cooking oil, bus fares, rail transportation and other goods and services to levels that more closely reflect their value. 
Already, most goods in Chinese shops are sold at market-determined prices, rather than at state-fixed prices.
*China is moving toward making the yuan a convertible currency. 
A 31 percent devaluation over the last two years has left the official exchange rate little different from the black market rate, and many companies and some individuals can now trade their foreign exchange at near-market prices at specially created currency markets in major cities.
While foreign economists applaud these moves to rationalize the Chinese economy, ironically many ordinary Chinese are far less enthusiastic. 
In particular, workers are alarmed by the freeing of prices and rents, because the upshot is that they will have to pay more for their apartments and more for food and other necessities.
Thus some Chinese economists say, with barely disguised glee, it will be the hard-liners who will be blamed for the costs of market liberalization.
Already in China, it is sometimes startling how enthusiastic many people are about anything that smacks of capitalism.
When a liberal American man married a Chinese woman who had graduated with a degree in economics, he was surprised to find her a disciple of Milton Friedman and an absolute believer in markets. 
In their dinner table discussions, it was left to him, the nominal capitalist, to defend the proposition that the Government sometimes has a role to play in the economy.
"You just look at our economy and it's pretty obvious," said an economics professor, looking over his shoulder to make sure no one will overhear his heresy. 
"What's the most vibrant sector?
Private business!
What's next?
The collectives. 
And which is least efficient and always manages to lose money?
The state sector!"
Yet most fundamentally, what is changing is not so much the policies as the attitudes toward markets and competition. 
These attitudes have yet to infiltrate state-owned companies in any concerted way, which is partly why the state conglomerates are in such trouble, but they have spread throughout society itself.
 
Business Careers Gain in Status
Until a few years ago, for example, many intellectuals held the traditional Confucian view that business was a low-status occupation and beneath their efforts. 
Consequently, many of China's entrepreneurs were ex-convicts who could get no other jobs and were forced to sell clothing or videos in small stalls.
In the last few years, however, more and more university graduates have also gone into business, largely because they can earn incomes many times greater than those if they work as Government officials. 
Most people expect that the boom in the private sector will continue, with at least the tacit approval of the Government, and entrepreneurs are enjoying rising status.
"It used to be a girl wanted to marry a guy who had a nice job as an official," said a 20-year-old woman in the town of Bijie in Guizhou Province. 
"But now a lot of girls say to heck with that. 
They'd rather marry a guy who's into business, and who can spend some money on them."
Joint ventures with foreign companies are particularly prized employers, and the most brilliant graduates of Beijing universities now often aim for jobs at such concerns in the way that students a few years ago used to seek jobs with the Communist Party Central Committee. 
Now there are more such companies than ever, and foreign investment has picked up particularly quickly in the last few months.
Even after the 1989 crackdown, foreign investment rose somewhat, against most predictions. 
Taiwan companies poured in cash to make up for the slowdown in investment by American and European companies.
And in any case, China gets far more hard currency from exports than from investments or tourism, and exports to the United States and other countries have been booming for the last two years. 
This export boom might collapse, however, if the United States revokes -- as Congress threatens to -- the trade benefits known as most favored nation status.
 
The New Breed Of Businessman
Zhong Hongru, a 47-year-old man with piercing eyes and thick hair brushed neatly back over a high forehead, is an example of the new breed of businessman in China. 
Until 1987, he was a doctor here in Guiyang, earning $40 a month. 
Then he left the hospital and started his own trading company, initially bringing sweaters from Shanghai to sell in local shops.
Last year, Mr. Zhang's company earned nearly $1 million in profit. 
He has diversified into everything from chopsticks to Maotai wine, and his apartment boasts a Japanese-made television and an enormous stereo system. 
As he relaxed on his couch on a recent afternoon, Mr. Zhang seemed confident that the Government would continue to tolerate private enterprises like his own -- if for no other reason than that they are too important to squelch. 
He notes that he pays $100,000 a year in taxes and employs 500 people.
"Look, I'm contributing to the state," Mr. Zhang said, with a twinkle in his eye. 
"So whatever the problems with this or that policy, I think the direction of reform will continue."
--------------------
Next: The stagnating state sector.
