
For an enterprising orthodontist, China may represent the ultimate challenge.
In this nation of 1.2 billion people, nutrition has been poor, dentists are scarce, and teeth come in at odd angles and in odd shapes. 
More to the point, there are only about 300 orthodontists in the entire country. 
That works out to about 4 million mouths per orthodontist.
For now, it is up to people like Dr. Fu Minkui to cope with the challenge. 
Dr. Fu is the elder statesman of China's orthodontists.
''In China most people don't even know we can correct teeth, and even medical school students have never heard of orthodontics,'' said Dr. Fu, vice dean of the Dental School at Beijing Medical Sciences University.
''Someday, I hope there will be an orthodontist in every Chinese village, but I know this is a long way off,'' said the orthodontist, who does not expect orthodontics to be common in China for 30 to 50 more years.
 
A Matter of Priorities
Although many people need orthodontia to correct bite problems, some of which may eventually cost them their teeth, many others want braces simply to look better. 
These prospective patients raise special questions in poor countries like China, where dentistry of any kind is scarce.
''Most of the money is spent on acute care and infectious diseases such as hepatitis, and very little goes to cosmetics,'' said Wang Dajue, a surgeon at the China Rehabilitation Research Center in Beijing.
Still, China's economic development over the last decade has produced a new class of people with money and the inclination to change how they look and, more important, to change how their children look.
''Now that many parents here have only one child, they are paying much more attention to that child,'' Dr. Wang said.
 
Fashion as Well as Function
Dr Fu observed: ''It's getting more fashionable for the young people to wear braces. 
They care about looks, we care about function, so it all works out.''
Dr. Fu is China's first orthodontist to continue his studies in America, attending Northwestern University in 1981-82.
In a clear sign that orthodontics has been given a push, the Government has allocated money for expensive X-ray machines and other large dental equipment that had to be imported. 
It has also financed a factory to make braces.
This investment has vastly reduced the costs of Chinese braces. 
One stainless steel tooth bracket now costs 50 cents to make in China. 
Although the quality is not as high as it is in the United States, orthodontists in Hong Kong are considering buying the cheap tooth brackets.
The cost for a complete program of braces in China is $100, which may be just a fraction of the cost in America, but it represents the equivalent of three to four months' salary for an average Chinese worker.
Comparison With U.S. 
[The American Association of Orthodontics, which is based in St. Louis, said the cost of braces and treatment varies considerably in the United States, according to severity of the problem and how well the patient cooperates. 
But it said ''typical braces'' usually cost from $3,000 to $5,000. 
The association also estimated that there are roughly 10,000 orthodontists in the United States. 
That means a mere 24,000 mouths for each specialist.] In Beijing, there are two major dental hospitals, but only about 40 orthodontists. 
Each year, Dr. Fu and his staff of 37 orthodontists and assistants at the Dental School of Medical Sciences University of Beijing accepts just 700 new walk-in patients, about all his offices can handle. 
Registration takes place just once each year on a first-come, first-served basis.
This March, before the day of registration, hundreds of parents accompanying children with crooked teeth camped for two days and nights outside the university's hospital.
''My parents brought me here,'' said Sun Yingchu, a 14-year-old patient at Dr. Fu's clinic. 
She spoke through a wiry night brace that seemed to envelop her face.
''They tease me at school,'' she confided. 
''But I don't think anything of it. 
Later my teeth will be pretty.''
The hospital receives another 700 patients a year through referrals, mostly because they are interesting cases that complement the department's research or teaching activities.
The number, however, hardly makes a dent in the millions of young children who apparently need the treatment. 
Dr. Fu estimates that of about 220 million school-age children, 40 percent need braces either for cosmetic reasons or to save their teeth.
''There are so many of these children who need braces,'' said Xu Baohua, 25, an intern in orthodontia, as he pointed to a row of children in their dental chairs at the Medical Sciences University of Beijing.
