
The top-ranking Republican on the Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.'s and M.I.A.'s asserted today that American prisoners had been transferred to China and the Soviet Union after the Korean War ended in 1953, and he suggested that some might still be alive.
The Senator, Bob Smith, Republican of New Hampshire, also said Government documents showed that United States officials knew about prisoners in the Soviet Union and North Korea and hid the facts from the public.
The Government "has covered up what it knew through a pattern of denial, misleading statements and, in some cases, lies," Mr. Smith said.
Other witnesses said the Senator misinterpreted the documents he had studied.
 
Aversion to Conflict
The Senator did not offer any reason why the Government would conceal the existence of prisoners. 
But one witness, Philip A. Corso, a member of the National Security Council staff in the Eisenhower Administration, suggested that Washington did not want to provoke a war with China or the Soviet Union by pressing them on the issue.
Mr. Corso said he believed that as many as 1,200 prisoners had been transferred to the Soviet Union during the Korean War.
Today's hearing, the first of two days the committee is devoting to missing service personnel from the Korean War, had the look and feel of recent sessions on Vietnam M.I.A.'s, with family members and advocates in the audience, some wearing satin jackets with "POW/MIA" emblazoned on the back.
Senator Smith released a sheaf of documents that he said provided conclusive evidence that at the end of the Korean War, North Korea failed to repatriate Americans it had captured.
"It's a document that shows in explicit detail that the Government of North Korea did not return a large number of American servicemen at the end of the war and that some of the men left behind were sent to Communist China and to the Soviet Union," Mr. Smith said.
 
'Bad Research'
But Paul M. Cole, a researcher from the Rand Corporation who was hired by the Defense Department to look into the issue, said much of the intelligence reports and other data that Senator Smith drew upon were flawed.
"What you're dealing with is bad research," Mr. Cole said. 
"I'm a university professor as well. 
You're dealing with C stuff in some cases."
Although the Government officially listed more than 8,000 Americans who served in Korea as unaccounted for, Mr. Cole said he doubted that more than 100 were moved to the Soviet Union or China. 
He said most of those were interrogated by Chinese or Soviet aides, returned to North Korean prison camps and later repatriated.
Still, Mr. Cole and Alan C. Ptak, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for P.O.W./M.I.A. 
Affairs, said they could not rule out the possiblity that Americans had been sent to Russia and that some might still be alive. 
The men said that until Moscow grants fuller access to its archives, it would be impossible to preclude that possibility.
