
The dusty main street of this rural Chinese community is a flourishing free market, with peasants and townspeople jostling each other to sell everything from shoulder pads to pictures of Hong Kong actresses.
Now, in a tribute to the maneuverings of the leadership in Beijing, 600 miles north, local Communist Party officials are planning to put up a red banner over the street along the lines of "Struggle for a socialist market economy!"
More to the point, they are also planning to establish several more free markets and to devote more attention to the needs of local businesses.
A five-day journey through Anhui province, a relatively poor region of rice paddies and mud-walled villages in east-central China, suggests that even remote places like this one are digesting the call of the recent 14th Communist Party Congress for an economic revolution along market lines.
 
Getting the Message
Few rural party workers know much about the leaders in Beijing who were promoted or demoted, nor do they care much about the party's contortions that enable it to borrow from capitalism to advance Communism. 
But in rural areas, the congress's outcome is being read as a green light to push ahead with economic changes and not to worry about ideology.
"Our big impression of the party congress was that the leaders said that the reform policy won't change for 100 years," said Hong Congmin, the Deputy Mayor here in Sanhe, a township with a population of 20,000. 
"That lets us all breathe more easily. 
We can pay more attention to running businesses."
Dai Zhaoyin, the 45-year-old Mayor, looked a bit puzzled when he was asked if Sanhe was bothered by "leftists" -- the code word for hard-liners, against whom the country is now supposed to be on guard.
"Well, I'm not sure they're leftists," he said doubtingly, as if speaking of some rare species of wildlife. 
"But there used to be some old comrades who weren't so flexible in their thinking. 
Now things will go a bit more smoothly with them."
In many ways, townships like Sanhe have long been far ahead of the leadership in Beijing. 
Nobody knows quite what the party means when it calls for a socialist market economy, but it probably is something like Sanhe: a bustling free market, a sharply rising living standard, income distribution that by Chinese standards is egalitarian, a docile population and a Communist Party organization that is unquestionably in charge.
Indeed, in many ways China has been led in the last dozen years not so much by the old men in Beijing who appear to call the shots as by towns like Sanhe that speckle the countryside. 
It was the peasants in most places who took the initiative in breaking up the communes, and it was they and the townspeople who started building the quasi-market economies that the party congress finally got around to endorsing a couple of weeks ago.
 
And What After Deng?
Still, even after 14 years of economic restructuring, many ordinary Chinese continue to worry whether such policies might be reversed after Deng Xiaoping, the nation's 88-year-old senior leader, dies.
"What people here care about most is whether the policy will change," said Yang Chuanzao, Mayor of Maoqian, a village of rice farmers 100 miles north of Sanhe. 
"That's what people fear. 
So they thought it was great when the congress said that the policy won't change. 
Everybody felt relieved."
Emboldened by all the talk of change and of a market economy, many Chinese seem to have found an excuse to do all the things they already wanted to do. 
Mr. Yang, for example, is busy making plans for his village to start collectively run factories producing carpets, lamps and embroidered cloth.
In Bengbu, a city of 2.8 million in northern Anhui province, the local newspaper is full of lofty phrases borrowed from the party congress, and a group of city officials who had gathered over a banquet table the other day agreed that the talk of change would have practical effects on the city. 
But they had a bit of trouble identifying precisely what changes might occur, until one mentioned the increased financial opportunities.
"Officials can now go into business," said Wang Wei, director of the city's external-affairs office. 
"Of course, the business can't interfere with your official work, but cadres can be managers of enterprises now."
All the officials beamed at that thought, and the conversation drifted to the possibilities of going into business on the side and making pots of money.
