
The Government acknowledged problems today in its handling of a hijacking last week in which 128 people were killed, and it suggested that it would dismiss some relatively low-ranking officials at the airport and airline involved.
But the results of an official investigation made public today did not address the crucial question in the incident: why did the plane's crew not obey the hijacker's demand and fly to Taiwan?
Instead, the plane continued on its scheduled course to the southern city of Canton, and crashed when the pilot and hijacker struggled over the controls as it tried to land.
The crash, on the morning of Oct. 
2, killed an American, 30 people from Taiwan and 3 from Hong Kong. 
There has been sharp criticism abroad of China's handling of the incident, including suggestions that the authorities were so determined to foil the hijacking that they risked - and lost - the lives of the passengers.
The hijacked plane also struck two other airliners, setting off an inferno in which passengers on a Shanghai-bound plane, waiting on the runway, were also killed. 
The authorities have offered no explanation for why the runway was not cleared and the passengers evacuated in the 40 minutes that the hijacked plane was circling overhead.
 
Changes in Management
The official New China News Agency, which has carried only brief reports about the crash, said today that the incident ''revealed the existing problems of the airport and airline company.''
It said a shake-up would be ordered in the management, apparently of Canton's Baiyun Airport and of Xiamen Airlines.
According to the agency, the hijacker - Jiang Xiaofeng, a 21-year-old purchasing agent from Hunan Province - forced his way into the cockpit after the Boeing 737 left the eastern Chinese port city of Xiamen in Fujian Province. 
Mr. Jiang, who was described as wanted by the police for absconding corporate funds, reportedly asserted that he had a bomb that he would detonate unless all crew members except the pilot left the cockpit.
The agency said that Mr. Jiang ordered the plane to fly to Taiwan, but it gave no explanation for why the pilot did not obey. 
The departure point, Xiamen, is much closer to Taiwan than it is to its destination of Canton.
Communications with the ground were cut until the plane established contact with flight control at Canton, the press agency reported. 
The ground control reportedly informed the plane that it could land anywhere, including Taiwan, but at that point the pilot responded that he had enough fuel to go to Hong Kong but not to Taiwan.
 
Instructions to Pilots
''In the end, as the fuel was running out, the pilot made an emergency landing'' in Canton, the agency reported. 
As it taxied along the runway, Mr. Jiang attacked the pilot and it veered out of control, the report said.
The bodies of the pilot and Mr. Jiang were found in the cockpit, but there was no sign of explosives, suggesting that he had been unarmed all along.
The official version of events seemed intended to suggest that it was the pilot, Cen Longyu, who made the decision to defy the hijacker and continue flying to Canton.
The Civil Aviation Administration of China has not disclosed what standing instructions it provided to pilots whose planes were hijacked. 
But on a number of recent occasions, airline crews have attacked and overpowered hijackers. 
Even if there were no formal orders to try to foil hijackings, Mr. Cen may have felt that his bosses would disapprove if he obeyed the hijacker without attempting to trick him.
In a statement today, the Civil Aviation Administration of China declared that passenger safety was its highest priority. 
For the first time, it also expressed sorrow at the loss of life.
The statement also welcomed the announcement from Taiwan a few days ago that it would henceforth return to the mainland any hijacker of a civilian airliner. 
That announcement will make it much less likely that anyone will again try to hijack a plane, especially as Japan has already returned a hijacker and Hong Kong almost certainly would do so as well.
The relatives of those killed have been upset not only at the handling of the hijacking, but also at its aftermath. 
There were long delays in releasing the names of those on the planes, and Taiwan residents were not allowed to visit injured relatives in the hospital for two days after the crash.
