
When an obscure documentary, ''Mainland China 1989,'' was screened in an art theater here last week, Hong Kong censors cut 17 minutes from the 78-minute film, deleting interviews with a mainland dissident and several pro-democracy student leaders. 
Officials said that without the cuts, the film could ''seriously damage our relations with other countries.''
Hong Kong, which is to be handed back to China in 1997, is now quick to censor itself, and equally quick to criticize any word or deed that could upset or offend China.
While democracy is sweeping Eastern Europe, in this colony the democratic impulse that gripped Hong Kong in the hopeful, heady months of May and June is fading. 
British and colonial government officials, politicians and community leaders have grown more and more fearful of China since it crushed the democracy movement in Beijing last June and adopted a sterner, more intrusive attitude toward Hong Kong.
Time of Anxiety
On the surface, Hong Kong still has the flash and flair of a wildly successful Western city, sleek, rich and self-assured. 
But as residents hear repeated Chinese warnings that it will not permit the colony to become a base for ''subversives,'' and as they watch Beijing attack liberal leaders here by name and draw up new provisions to limit political dissent after 1997, the underlying mood has become anxious.
''For years Hong Kong was afraid to speak out, but for a few weeks last summer all taboos were forgotten and they stood up to support democracy and protest the bloodshed in Beijing,'' said Joseph Cheng, a political analyst who has edited books on Hong Kong and China. 
''Now, the self-restraint, the self-censorship is creeping back and it is a sad thing to watch.''
The Governor of the colony, Sir David Wilson, set the new political tone here in October when he advised Hong Kong residents to use their rights and freedoms ''with self-restraint.''
 
No Symbols, Please
Recently, in an effort to reassure Beijing, British colonial officials have denied several Chinese dissidents with valid visas the right to enter Hong Kong, bundling them off on return flights to the United States. 
Pro-democracy groups have been denied the right to put up a permanent Goddess of Democracy, symbol of the Beijing democratic movement, in Hong Kong.
When Chinese families who for years have celebrated Taiwan's National Day on Oct. 
10 put out their Taiwanese flags this year, the police removed them, saying they obstructed traffic. 
When students from the April 5 Action Group, who held a permit to protest, gathered outside the celebration to mark China's National Day in September, they were pushed back by the police, there was a scuffle and several were arrested.
This fall, furious that Hong Kong had allowed a mainland athlete to declare himself a dissident and go to the United States, China suddenly stopped taking back its own citizens caught sneaking into Hong Kong. 
The crowded colony has reason to fear being overrun by a wave of mainlanders. 
After intense negotiations, the Chinese asserted that Hong Kong had made suitable concessions and once again accepted the return of the illegal migrants.
 
Damning Evidence
Hong Kong officials adamantly denied making concessions. 
But in a secret letter written the day the dispute was settled, and later obtained by a local newspaper, the colony's political affairs adviser wrote the director of the New China News Agency, whose Hong Kong bureau serves as China's de facto embassy, that ''the Hong Kong government has no intention of allowing Hong Kong to be used as a base for subversive activities against the People's Republic of China.''
''N.C.N.A. will have noticed the arrest of members of the April 5th Action Group,'' the letter continued. 
''They will also have noted that the 10 October celebrations passed off in a low-key way, and that the Hong Kong government has recently rejected a proposal for a permanent site for a replica of the statue of democracy.''
''The Hong Kong Government,'' the letter concluded, ''will continue to have a prudent regard for the special circumstances of Hong Kong and the interests and concerns of the Chinese Government.''
While government officials insisted that the letter showed toughness in the face of China's demands that they ban all dissident activities, others said the tone and substance of the letter were deeply disturbing.
In fact, this week a court found the April 5th demonstrators not guilty of all charges. 
But even the most ardent reformers concede that most of the colony's new political will has dissipated.
The Chinese themselves seem satisfied that Hong Kong's new political will is dissipating. 
Last week, a senior Chinese official told reporters that the time was ripe to discuss details of the colony's future political system, saying: ''Hong Kong people were not so calm over a considerable period of time after June 4th. 
They were too emotional. 
Hong Kong people are getting more calm now.''
Among the Hong Kong Government's recent moves to appease Chinese officials was the rejection of a proposal for a permanent site for a replica of the Statue of Democracy, which now stands in Victoria Park.
