
After two bleak years in which it has lurched from one crisis to the next, exhaling confidence the way a punctured tire loses air, Hong Kong finally seems to be feeling good about itself again.
A new agreement was reached at the beginning of this month between Britain and China about a new airport to be built here -- and more broadly about how the territory will be governed until the hand-over to China in 1997 -- and it has elicited an enormous sigh of relief.
Spirits also rose today after the United States Senate vote Tuesday on trade benefits to China. 
Because Hong Kong depends a great deal on China for its economic livelihood, the vote, which makes likely the prospect of unconditional extension of the benefits, touched off even greater business optimism.
 
Stock Market at a High
For two straight days now, the Hang Seng stock market index has hit a new high, closing today at 4,028.77, up nearly 19 points from Tuesday's record. 
Housing prices are also estimated to have risen at least 10 percent since the airport agreement was announced on July 4. 
And for the first time since the Army crackdown in Beijing two years ago, there seems to be a measure of hope in the air here.
Hong Kong's confidence has been shaken not only by the political repression and ideological orthodoxy on the home turf of its future landlord, but also by the arrests of Hong Kong visitors on the mainland and a rising number of mainlanders sneaking into the territory and committing robberies. 
Emigrants continue to flee the territory at a pace of over 1,100 a week.
Now, with major uncertainties removed, politicians, business executives and bureaucrats here are turning to the nuts and bolts of the airport and port project, which is expected to dominate the economy until 1997 and cost more than $16 billion.
 
Caution and Foreboding
As with all bouts of optimism in Hong Kong in the last decade, however, this one is mixed with caution and a foreboding that China's verbal assaults may once again cloud the skies.
The agreement provides that China will support the construction of the airport in Hong Kong and will honor Hong Kong's debts after 1997. 
In exchange, Britain agrees to consult Beijing on all matters relating to the airport that will have an impact after 1997. 
Academics and politicians say the document is a crucial annex to the original joint declaration in 1984, which provides the basis for the handover of power. 
Some say it could set a precedent for power-sharing on all matters straddling 1997.
"China got what it wanted -- it got a formal acknowledgment of their role prior to 1997," said a diplomat in Hong Kong. 
The Chinese, he added, are believed to have suggested registering the memorandum as a treaty with the United Nations, as was the case with the 1984 Joint Declaration, but the British said no.
 
Risk of Imported Labor
As companies enter the contract bidding in the next few months for certain parts of the airport project, the Government is suggesting that the construction activity will add more than a full percentage point to Hong Kong's economic growth estimates in the near future. 
Costs for the airport and rail and bridge links will be $12.7 billion and billions more for the port development.
Although the political uncertainty may be removed for the moment, some economists and analysts say the endeavor will still stumble. 
For instance, a construction boom could be inflationary, unless the Government allows the import of labor. 
Another major risk that investors and bankers must consider is that all the connecting parts, such as the rail link, the suspension bridge and the airport, must be completed before any one can be used.
For the moment, the general public is busy with Hong Kong's favorite pastime: making money. 
Last week, the first Government land sale since the memorandum brought a price that was more than double the one reached for a similar plot in the same area last November. 
And there are some indications that the small investor also wants to keep investing in Hong Kong.
