
In a move certain to increase tension between China and Britain over the future of Hong Kong, the colonial Government announced today that it would spend $1.2 billion to prepare the site for a new airport here despite Beijing's refusal to approve the financing of the project.
Hong Kong Government officials said that postponing a decision on the site preparation contract while it negotiated with China would have been too costly and caused too much of a delay in the airport construction schedule.
But the colony's Financial Secretary, Hamish Macleod, said Hong Kong would still be negotiating for China's approval of an overall airport financing plan, emphasizing this was not a "go it alone" move.
 
A $22 Billion Project
Britain and China both agree that the rich, bustling colony needs a new and larger airport, but Beijing has continually criticized the Hong Kong Government's plans for financing the $22 billion project. 
China and Britain signed a so-called memorandum of understanding on the project last year, but China has yet to approve ways to pay for it.
Since some of the airport work would be completed after the Chinese takeover, in 1997, China's final approval is regarded as crucial. 
But talks on the airport have been stymied as Britain and China locked horns over the political development of the colony in the years leading up to the takeover.
Britain's Governor here, Christopher Patten, recently proposed political changes that would increase the democratic base of the Hong Kong legislature before 1997. 
China was furious over the proposals and has been issuing almost daily denunciations of Mr. Patten, his plans, and his Government.
Officially, China has maintained that its approval of an airport financing plan is not tied to negotiations over democratic changes here, but few colonial officials believe there is no connection and today's announcement is expected to draw a shrill denunciation from Beijing.
"They will take heat over this, but if the Hong Kong Government had backed down, had delayed finalizing the contract, they would be totally abrogating their authority here," Robert Broadfoot, director of the Political and Economic Risk Consultancy group here, said.
 
Maintaining the Debate
"If the Government had done nothing, it would have been tantamount to admitting any decision in Hong Kong already rests with Beijing," he said. 
"Now, they have at least maintained the debate, by asserting that they are the Government here after all."
A bid for the site preparation work, made by an international consortium and approved last July, was to expire at the end of this month.
The Government statement today pointed out that at the time the bid was approved, China had suggested Hong Kong proceed with the contract, but the colonial Government preferred to wait to seek an overall financial plan. 
Now, because of delays and increased costs, a spokesman said, "we are convinced it would be best to award the contract."
"Our first priority continues to be a common understanding with the Chinese side on the overall financial arrangements for the airport," the spokesman said. 
"But pending such agreement, we are taking a step by step approach."
