
Eight years before the marriage of the century, when capitalist Hong Kong and Communist China will be united in a ceremony here, they seem already to be melting into each other's arms.
The ''bamboo curtain'' that once isolated Hong Kong from its vast neighbor has been trampled down by the millions of Hong Kong Chinese who cross the border each year to shop, to see a doctor, find a wife, take a vacation, or to die. 
Several hundred thousand mainland Chinese also visit Hong Kong each year, either as tourists or on business, and residents of Guangdong Province in southern China watch Hong Kong television programs and occasionally even read Hong Kong newspapers.
Many Hong Kong residents remain deeply suspicious about whether China's intentions toward the territory are entirely honorable, and tens of thousands of the most talented young people are fleeing each year rather than live in Hong Kong after it returns to Chinese rule in 1997. 
But the millions of residents who remain seem to feel that if there is nothing to be done about it, they might as well enjoy the benefits.
That has already resulted in a reintegration of Hong Kong with the motherland, nearly 150 years after they were split apart by the persuasive efforts of British gunboats. 
Economically and culturally, China and Hong Kong are becoming one again.
 
'Enlargement of Hong Kong'
''We see no boundaries,'' said Gordon Y. S. Wu, chairman of Hopewell Holdings, a Hong Kong company that has invested deeply in China. 
''It's basically an enlargement of Hong Kong.''
It is not so much that the territory is returning to Chinese control; in some respects, China is coming under Hong Kong's control. 
The territory is already the largest source of China's foreign investment and its largest trading partner. 
More than two million people in Guangdong Province work directly or indirectly for Hong Kong companies.
Hong Kong songs and movies are popular throughout China, and adventure books by Hong Kong authors such as Jin Yong are popular among young Chinese. 
More and more Chinese companies are putting up signs bearing the old-style Chinese characters that were banished from the mainland decades ago but are still used in Hong Kong and Taiwan.
Perhaps most important, Hong Kong is increasingly seen as a model - economically, socially and even politically - for China.
 
Imitating the Capitalist Side
''They are trying to imitate the capitalist side of Hong Kong,'' at least in Shenzhen, the free-wheeling city across the border from Hong Kong, said David K. P. Li, chief executive of the Bank of East Asia.
Su Shaozhi, one of China's most prominent social scientists, told a Hong Kong interviewer recently that ''Hong Kong has a lot of strong points from which we must learn.''
In particular, he stressed that China should try to copy Hong Kong's development of the rule of law.
Already Shenzhen has announced that it will try to adopt Hong Kong's commercial and trade law. 
The city has even hired a Hong Kong institution, Sun Hung Kai Securities, to advise it on setting up a stock market.
But for many people here, what matters most is that the reintegration of Hong Kong and China has changed their daily lives. 
Poor families in Hong Kong take the train across the border each weekend to do their shopping. 
They also visit doctors and dentists across the border, where prices are much cheaper, and some send their children to university in China.
 
Brothels and Burial Plots
Burial plots are extremely expensive in Hong Kong, so families buy plots in Shenzhen. 
Some Hong Kong men regularly visit Guangdong's brothels; others find Chinese wives and install them in apartments in Shenzhen where they will be available for weekend visits during the 5-to-10-year wait for approval to immigrate into Hong Kong.
''Some Shenzhen women have a Hong Kong husband two days a week, and a local boyfriend five days a week,'' said Zhang Qingni, a Shenzhen lawyer sent by the Government to study Hong Kong's legal system. 
Miss Zhang recently represented a Hong Kong man seeking to divorce his Shenzhen wife.
Each year 27,500 mainland Chinese move legally to Hong Kong, and many more move illegally. 
In addition, more than 355,000 mainland Chinese visited Hong Kong as tourists last year, almost double the number in 1985. 
About two-thirds came on group tours, but many also came as business executives.
Just as Hong Kong is the largest investor in the mainland, so the mainland is the largest investor in Hong Kong, with $10 billion invested in the more than 2,000 mainland companies operating in Hong Kong. 
Many of them were set up by towns or counties in Guangdong as a way to shelter hard currency, and as an excuse for officials to visit Hong Kong regularly.
 
Resentment and Partnership
Some of them are also used to funnel investments back into China. 
That way, they get special incentives aimed at foreign investors that they would not receive as purely local investments.
Mainland residents often resent what they say is the trickery of Hong Kong people, while Hong Kong residents often say that mainlanders do not know how to work hard. 
Yet for all the resentment, the partnership is growing rapidly. 
It is also changing Hong Kong's role from a manufacturing base to a service center and hub for Guangdong Province.
Roderick W. Macneil, a lawyer who runs a China consulting company in Hong Kong, said, ''I really view Hong Kong now as the capital of Guangdong Province.''
