
The best way to learn about the growing economic links between Hong Kong and China is to leave a new Mercedes-Benz on a street overnight.
In the morning, it may well be in China.
Thieves will have stolen it, driven it to a deserted dock and loaded it onto an armored speedboat for the quick trip to Guangdong Province across the border. 
Once there it will be given a new registration, perhaps in exchange for a bribe, and sold.
The smuggling is a tribute to China's simultaneous boom in both capitalism and corruption. 
As China has opened up over the last dozen years, it has been increasingly possible for smugglers to fence stolen goods, pay off the police, hide their speedboats and conceal their profits in the banking system.
 
On an Enormous Scale
The scale is enormous, particularly for cars, video recorders and computers. 
According to official Chinese estimates, more than one million video recorders are smuggled into China each year, accounting for 90 percent of all those sold.
As for Mercedes-Benzes and other luxury cars, 1,324 were stolen in Hong Kong in the first nine months of this year, an average of one every five hours. 
It was double the number in the same period last year, and the great majority are believed to be now in China.
George M. F. Humble, chairman of Mollers Insurance Holdings, said that insurers in Hong Kong were "teetering on the brink" of refusing to insure luxury cars for theft unless they had a security system that immobilized the car rather than just sounding an alarm. 
"It's no good saying that if you move that car it's going to make a noise like a crazed cow," Mr. Humble said. 
"Nobody takes any notice of a crazed cow. 
Cars are blowing off all over the place."
The smugglers, operating in huge gangs and led by people on both sides of the border, originally shipped cars in junks but over the last two years have increasingly relied on tai feis -- motorboats with steel hulls and up to five 300-horsepower engines. 
The tai feis have sharpened bows for ramming and bulletproof plates.
 
Chinese Announce Ban
Hong Kong banned construction of tai feis last year, but a newspaper here reported recently that the smugglers had flown technicians to Malaysia to build the boats there.
Despite growing tensions between Beijing and Hong Kong over calls for democracy in the territory, top Chinese police officials seem willing to cooperate with their colonial counterparts in combating smuggling.
In October the Chinese authorities announced a new measure that may help curb the trade in Hong Kong cars: a ban on the registration of vehicles with the steering wheel on the right side. 
In Hong Kong, people drive on the left and so cars have the steering wheel on the right, while it is the other way around in China.
In theory, the ban would make Hong Kong vehicles useless in China. 
But a similar rule was introduced in 1988 and never put into practice, and it is too early to tell whether the new ban will be enforced more rigorously.
"It is hard to get a new car on the road if it has right-hand steering," said a taxi driver in the southern Chinese city of Guangzhou who owns a second-hand Hong Kong van with the steering column on the right. 
"But if you've got connections with the police, you can get around the new rules."
 
Stopping Theft of the Lexus
Perhaps the most innovative approach to deter thieves has been taken by Crown Motors Ltd., the distributor in Hong Kong for Toyota.
Neither Toyota nor Crown will sell cars or spare parts to China for the Lexus model, and in May Crown announced that even in Hong Kong it would sell parts only to legitimate owners of a Lexus.
Crown Motors also took the unorthodox step of advertising in Chinese newspapers, reminding people that the Lexus is meant to use only unleaded fuel and will break down after fewer than 20,000 miles if it uses leaded gasoline, the only fuel available in China.
"We haven't had a single Lexus stolen in the last few months from Hong Kong," said John Haines, the managing director of Crown Motors.
One intriguing questions about the smuggling is the degree of involvement by China's navy and marine police. 
It is clear that the security forces are often paid to look the other way, but in addition some seem to take part more directly.
 
Chinese Police Aboard
On several occasions, the Hong Kong police have intercepted boats suspected of engaging in smuggling, only to find uniformed Chinese police officers on board. 
A year ago, policemen who tried to board a smuggler's boat in Hong Kong waters were stopped by two uniformed Chinese police officers aboard.
The Chinese police pointed machine guns at the Hong Kong officers and summoned two other Chinese police boats, which also intruded into Hong Kong waters. 
The Chinese show of force forced the Hong Kong police to back off.
In an unrelated episode, a Hong Kong newspaper, The South China Morning Post, in August published a photo it had taken in Guangzhou of a Lexus waiting outside a five-star hotel. 
The steering column was on the right and the car had almost certainly been smuggled from Hong Kong.
The license plate indicated that the car belonged to a senior Chinese Army leader. 
Whoever he is, he ranks high enough that an Audi full of soldiers accompanied the Lexus as an escort -- perhaps to make sure it was not stolen again.
