
As alarm mounts over China's tough attitude toward Hong Kong and hopes rise that Britain will introduce greater democracy here, there is a growing sense that Hong Kong's future will be largely determined in the next few months.
The final version of the Basic Law, the blueprint for rule here after 1997, is expected to be determined by March, and the end game of sorts begins on Wednesday, when Hong Kong's Governor, David Wilson, visits Beijing for the first time since the crackdown on pro-democracy protesters there June 4.
''Everything's at stake,'' said David J. Clark, a senior lecturer in political science at the University of Hong Kong. 
''From now until March is the last opportunity to influence the content of the Basic Law.''
Opinion polls suggest that confidence in the future is waning, and more and more skilled professionals are applying for a ''lifeline'' to leave before 1997, when the territory reverts to Chinese rule. 
Each time the Beijing authorities criticize Hong Kong - as they have frequently recently - the mood becomes more bleak, many residents say.
 
Meeting With British Minister
As soon as Governor Wilson returns from Beijing, he is scheduled to meet with Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd of Britain in Hong Kong. 
The two apparently will discuss the results of the talks in Beijing and possible measures to boost confidence in Hong Kong.
At issue is the extent to which the people of Hong Kong will be able to elect their legislators. 
The debate is not just over the elections in 1997, when the territory reverts to Chinese rule, but also over those in 1991, which some Hong Kong leaders believe are pivotal for determining the pace at which greater democracy is brought to Hong Kong.
For nearly two years now, British and Chinese leaders have tried to devise a plan that would provide for a smooth transition in 1997. 
Thus, Hong Kong would move slowly toward the system that China intends to put into effect after 1997. 
Beijing believes that only 30 percent of legislators should be directly elected, so that would imply that Britain should not allow election of a higher proportion before 1997.
Advocates of faster democratization want a greater proportion of directly elected seats in 1991, even if the percentage exceeds what is stipulated for 1997. 
This way, they argue, when China assumes control over Hong Kong, it will have to unravel a relatively advanced democratic system in order to implement the more conservative one spelled out in the Basic Law, and this could be embarrassing for the authorities in Beijing.
 
Fears of a Legislator
If the pace of democratization is to quicken, it must be encouraged by the British, at the risk of reprisals from China.
''In the present climate, the chances are nil - that is, the Chinese will not give in,'' said Martin C. M. Lee, an outspoken legislator who was recently barred by the Chinese from the Basic Law drafting committee. 
''The question is, 'What will Britain do?'
And I fear that Britain will kowtow.''
One test of how far London will go against Chinese wishes will be the fate of a British Government proposal to give 50,000 Hong Kong families, or about 225,000 residents in all, the right to live in Britain. 
The plan was recently condemned by the Chinese as a ''gross violation'' of British commitment to the Chinese-British agreement signed more than five years ago.
When the British and the Chinese agreed more than five years ago that Hong Kong would be returned to the mainland and that a joint committee would help draft a Basic Law, there was a strong sense of opportunity: the Hong Kong people would become a part of their motherland and have a say in forming the laws that would govern it after the territory was returned to China.
 
Basic Law Assailed
But there is now widespread skepticism among Hong Kong's 5.7 million residents that China will abide by the Basic Law, according to local polls. 
For many of the territory's legislators and leading intellectuals, who have worked over the last three years to help shape or influence the Basic Law, there is little pride in the final document as they envision it. 
Many people believe the Basic Law was largely dictated by Chinese leaders on the mainland.
''To me, the Basic Law is a total failure, a tragedy, an irony in itself,'' said Albert W. Y. Chan, a regional councillor for the territory's Tsuen Wan district. 
''The declaration of the Basic Law should have been a joy to most Hong Kong people, that they could have a system determined by themselves. 
But that is not the case. 
Their system will be dictated by the Chinese Government.''
Instead, these people look to the future with a mixture of resignation and defiance. 
On New Year's Eve, a cold, damp, dark night a few thousand Hong Kong residents huddled together outside to light candles for the victims of the Rumanian uprising and to demand the removal of the ''Ceausescus in China.''
