
Dame Lydia Dunn, a senior member of the colonial government here, is a seasoned politician as celebrated for her perfect British reserve as for her establishment views.
And so the colony was stunned recently when Dame Lydia broke into tears as she testified before a British parliamentary committee investigating the problems confronting Hong Kong as Britain prepares to return it to China in 1997.
Dame Lydia lost her composure when she began to speak on the emotional issue of nationality and the fact that while Hong Kong's residents are British subjects, and have been for almost 150 years, they have no special right to live or work in Britain. 
As one legal expert put it: ''A native of Hong Kong has no more chance of being accepted for permanent entry into Britain than, say, a Japanese. 
Colonial ties count for nothing.'
Each time China routs demonstrators in Tibet or harasses a human rights militant in Beijing, Hong Kong residents flinch, reminded of the future fragility of their own freedoms. 
Tens of thousands of people here have already begun to cast about for some kind of escape hatch should Hong Kong life collapse under the Communists.
 
'Colossal Bitterness' Found
David Howell, a Conservative Member of Parliament and the chairman of the visiting foreign affairs select committee, said he was surprised by the ''colossal bitterness'' he had encountered over the issue. 
As the committee left for Beijing to continue its inquiry, Mr. Howell told reporters that while Britain would never grant all of the 3.2 million people born here the right to settle in Britain, proposals to relax some restrictions on immigration should be weighed.
For years critics have charged that the restrictive nationality laws are racist, and there is a feeling here that Britain might be more apt to make immigration concessions if Hong Kong natives were not almost exclusively ethnic Chinese.
Angry Hong Kong officials, politicians and professionals argue that for the first time in its history, Britain is relinquishing a colony to another sovereign power, a Communist power at that, and because Hong Kong's fate is unique, its people deserve unique immigration concessions. 
They say that if the British Government is not prepared to grant full right of abode in Britain to all Hong Kong natives, which most concede is a political impossibility, officials should at least make more liberal use of their discretionary powers and permit more civil servants and those with strong family, educational or cultural ties to enter Britain.
Instead, Britain has maintained a hard, unbending attitude, even refusing recently to grant automatic right of abode to a handful of Hong Kong war widows whose husbands died defending the colony against the Japanese in World War II.
 
Concessions Are Urged
The hearings last month, and the loud, bitter calls for help from Hong Kong, appear to have created some momentum for change. 
In the last few days, several important British publications, including The Economist and The Sunday Times, have declared that Hong Kong-born residents deserve special nationality concessions.
Britain took away all residency rights for colonials through four nationality acts passed between 1962 and 1981. 
Most Hong Kong people, who had no need or desire to live in Britain, originally viewed the mounting restrictions as churlish insults, but now they are seen as vitally affecting their future.
Britain's refusal to bend its restrictive policies is now seen as one more indication that it is abandoning the 5.7 million people in the colony, 98 percent of whom are ethnic Chinese.
Even the colony's top officials, usually unswerving in their defense of the British Government, which appoints and employs them, have been uncharacteristically critical of the laws. 
Dame Lydia, a member of the executive council that advises the Governor, called them ''morally indefensible,'' while the Chief Secretary, Sir David Ford, vowed the Hong Kong government would continue to press London for changes.
Sir David, in his testimony, pointedly reminded the visiting parliamentary committee that residents of the nearby Portuguese enclave of Macau, which reverts to China in 1999, will have right of abode in Portugal, which means that under European Community rules they may also reside in Britain - unlike this colony's own British subjects.
 
Grades of Citizenship
William S. Clarke, a lecturer in law at Hong Kong University specializing in nationality issues, said Britain is the only democracy that has grades of citizenship with vastly different rights. 
A full British citizen, he said, has the right to live in Britain, while those born in a British colony are merely British dependent territories citizens, who have the right of abode in their own colony but not in Britain. 
When China takes over Hong Kong, residents here will be downgraded to British overseas citizens ''who have no right of abode anywhere in the world,'' he said. 
''Their passport is really just a travel document.''
Moreover, China has already declared that all ethnic Chinese here will be considered Chinese nationals in 1997.
To gain entry into Britain, he explained, a Hong Kong resident would have to apply for permission like any foreigner and would be given right of abode, eventually, only if he were independently wealthy or had special skills or a British spouse. 
Mr. Clarke said there are probably no more than 100,000 Hong Kong residents with that right.
Hong Kong people have begun seeking foreign passports as an insurance policy against a Communist calamity in 1997. 
Last year, conservative government estimates placed the number of emigrants at 45,000, with most going to Canada, Australia and the United States.
 
How a Passport Would Help
''I sometimes wonder what the British people feel when they read about Hong Kong British subjects scurrying around the world to find somewhere else to take them in,'' Dame Lydia told the bipartisan committee from the House of Commons. 
Then, her voice choked, she added, ''It would do so much to help families commit themselves to a future here if they could be guaranteed a hope of last resort in Britain.''
The British and the Chinese are now conferring on the basic law that will govern Hong Kong after 1997. 
But as one political analyst here said, ''The British confer, but it is the Chinese who decide.''
In the end, ''granting full passports is the one real, practical measure Britain could take to help protect Hong Kong's people,'' he said. 
''The Chinese might not like it, but they could not stop it.',
