
The Governor of Hong Kong said today that his three days of talks with Chinese officials had been useful, but neither side reported major progress in easing tensions between Hong Kong and Beijing.
There was no sign of new conciliation on the Chinese side to accompany the lifting of martial law, which took effect on Thursday. 
On Thursday and again today, Chinese officials made comments that were widely perceived as reproachful of the British position.
The Governor, Sir David Wilson, who was on his first visit to Beijing since the army crackdown in June, said he told Prime Minister Li Peng and other officials about the opinions in Hong Kong about proposed democratic changes.
The June crackdown has increased alarm in the British territory that Beijing will suppress dissent and ignore local opinions after Hong Kong reverts to Chinese rule in 1997.
 
Draft Law Faulted
China is now completing work on a ''basic law'' that will govern the territory after 1997, and many Hong Kong residents assert that the recent drafts of the law do not provide for enough democracy and will erode confidence in the territory's future. 
Sir David said he hoped that his comments on Hong Kong views would be taken into consideration by those drafting the basic law.
''I've been explaining the views that people in Hong Kong have both on short-term political developments and the hopes that people have for long-term development, for steady and continued development of the political structure,'' the Governor said at an airport news conference before returning home.
He said he also asked for Chinese assistance in reducing the flow of Vietnamese refugees, many of whom travel by boat along the Chinese coastline before landing in Hong Kong. 
He also said that the Chinese had repeated their criticisms of a recent British proposal to provide passports to 50,000 Hong Kong Chinese and their families before 1997, and that he had explained the reasons for the proposal.
''I can't say that in these discussions we have solved every problem,'' Sir David said. 
''But I do think that as a result of these meetings, it has been possible to increase understanding on both sides and get back to resuming the sort of practical dialogue which we need if we're to deal with practical issues in Hong Kong at the moment.''
 
Beijing Assertions of Subversion
The official New China News Agency tonight quoted Prime Minister Li as saying he was glad to see that ''on some issues, the two sides are drawing closer.''
The agency did not eleborate, but it said that Mr. Li also called on China and Britain to take steps to prevent damage to relations between Hong Kong and Beijing.
But earlier, there seemed to be some tension in the air. 
When Sir David referred in the presence of reporters to difficulties in the political climate, Mr. Li reportedly responded, ''Maybe that's your feeling, but I feel fine.''
On Thursday, Li Hou, deputy director of China's Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office, said to Sir David, in front of reporters, that some Hong Kong residents were trying to harm the relationship with China. 
He seemed to suggest that the Hong Kong Government should do more to stop such conduct.
At his news cnference today, Sir David addressed the Chinese concern that Hong Kong is being used as a base from which to subvert Communist rule in the mainland.
''We in Hong Kong have no wish, we have no intention, that Hong Kong should be used as a base for subversion against China,'' the Governor said. 
''In particular, we don't want people from outside Hong Kong to come to Hong Kong to use it as a battlefield against China. 
At the same time, we treasure our own liberties and freedoms in Hong Kong.''
