
One day before long, when Dame Lydia Dunn joins the House of Lords, a legislative institution that has symbolized British male gentry for centuries, she will stand out not only because she is a woman but also because she is Chinese.
''It's rather intimidating,'' Dame Lydia said in an interview in her spacious wood-paneled office, accented with two reproductions of large antique Chinese screens. 
''Whenever I think about being introduced into that august body, I often think, 'I wonder what they think to have someone like me in their midst?'
''
A 50-year-old executive director at Swire Pacific Ltd., a British-run Hong Kong conglomerate, and the leading member in Hong Kong's Executive Council, Dame Lydia was honored on the Queen's birthday list in June with a life peerage. 
Only two other Hong Kong residents, both men, currently hold the honor here, and the flurry over it is a reminder of how this territory blends Chinese and British styles and traditions.
Hong Kong is run by a Briton who serves as Governor and periodically dons formal uniforms that seem to have emerged straight from history books of imperial Britain. 
And while more than 97 percent of Hong Kong's population is Chinese, the judges and lawyers here still wear white-powdered wigs in the courtroom, and prominent executives and public servants are knighted and called Sir. 
The result is some Chinese names, like Sir Yuekong Pao and Sir Runrun Shaw, that raise a few eyebrows among the British aristocracy.
 
In the British Tradition
If there is any symbol of that mix of styles in Hong Kong, it is Dame Lydia. 
Her cautious, conservative diplomacy during the territory's transition to Chinese rule, while it has won her prominence here and in London, reflects the delicacy with which Britain has approached China.
Dame Lydia is one of the few Chinese women to have risen so quickly in Hong Kong's British-styled society, winning appointments in the Parliament for more than a decade and senior positions in several business organizations. 
Her immaculate attire, sometimes a bold yellow dress or a V-necked red frock, has been a mark of her elegance, as is her knack for tact and diplomacy in the debating halls and corporate boardrooms.
While her roots are as Chinese as those of China's senior leader, Deng Xiaoping - both have the same family name, but use different Romanizations - Dame Lydia is very much a product of British tradition: she is married to a British man, she travels often to Britain, she works at a British company and has a second home in London.
Now, with her seat in the House of Lords - an honor often given to reward the Prime Minister's political allies - the Hong Kong people may gain a voice in the British Parliament.
But if this greater access to the British Government gives Hong Kong a bit more influence in Britain, it comes just as the territory is moving inexorably toward becoming a part of China. 
On July 1, 1997, Hong Kong will become a part of China, by agreement between London and Beijing.
''I don't think she'll have a political future in Hong Kong,'' said Frank Ching, a local columnist currently writing a book about Hong Kong. 
''Lydia Dunn has a reputation for sitting on the fence.''
 
'I Am Not a Politician'
Dame Lydia would not rule out the possibility of seeking the post of chief executive, the top job in Hong Kong after 1997. 
But Mr. Ching and others say that her seat in the House of Lords may preclude her from gaining the requisite blessing from the Chinese, who may view her as an emissary of Britain.
For all Dame Lydia's prominence in Hong Kong, her views on some key matters remain a secret, because she rarely expresses them. 
She has never held an elected office, and says she will not run next year for one of the new 18 directly elected seats in the Hong Kong Parliament.
''I am not a politician,'' Dame Lydia said.
If her career has stressed cooperation with the colonial rulers, it is far from the only path taken by Hong Kong's British-educated Chinese professionals. 
Dame Lydia is probably one of two most prominent Chinese in the territory, and the other is a perfect contrast: Martin C. M. Lee, a leading lawyer and Queen's Counsel who dresses in sober suits and speaks in a posh accent but regularly infuriates the British Government by demanding more democracy for the territory.
Currently, none of Hong Kong's members of Parliament are directly elected, and although freedom of speech and of the press is generally allowed, no one asserts that the territory is a democracy.
 
Expelled From Committee
Mr. Lee was expelled by the Chinese authorities from the drafting committee of the Basic Law, the constitution for the territory after it becomes part of China. 
The British have not welcomed him much more warmly, and he seems unlikely to become a lord any time soon.
''Mr. Average would like somebody like me to speak up on occasion,'' Mr. Lee said in an interview.
Even Dame Lydia has indirectly expressed criticism of his outspokenness, saying that political leaders have responsibility ''to take the consequences of their words.''
But Mr. Lee says he believes such criticism is motivated by a fear of China's reaction, and he brushes it aside.
''They are beginning to think like a slave already,'' Mr. Lee said. 
''I don't want to antagonize my master and I don't want another guy to antagonize him either for fear that they will get less bread from the master.''
But Dame Lydia's refusal to take a stand on an issue has sometimes frustrated even a few British officials. 
In April, when the British Foreign Affairs Committee visited Hong Kong to hold a hearing on the pace of democracy in Hong Kong, Dame Lydia summarized the two diverging views -one faster, one slower - among the delegates.
''I can personally see the case for both,'' she said, diplomatically. 
When a British official then pressed her to state her personal view, she replied, ''That is difficult to comment, and I would say that I have an open mind on the pace.''
