
Britain and China are engaged in an increasingly bitter dispute over the degree of democracy in this territory, and the resulting political typhoon has Hong Kong awash with fundamental new uncertainties about its economic and political future.
In recent months, the new British Governor has stunned almost everyone by calling for more democracy, reversing the approach of the last half dozen years, in which the British authorities went out of their way to squelch the colony's democratic impulses. 
China has responded with outrage, starting a new cold war against the Governor, Christopher Patten, whom it has promoted to the top of its list of foreign enemies.
The Governments in London and Beijing appear to be on a collision course over policy toward Hong Kong, which is now a British colony but which will revert to China on July 1, 1997. 
The dispute already has developed into a virtual cold war in which virtually everything is at stake: the territory's political system, the relationship between Britain and China, the transition of Hong Kong to Chinese rule, and perhaps even the long-term governability and prosperity of the territory.
 
China Would Undo Changes
In the latest from the north, China's National People's Congress Standing Committee this weekend asserted that if Mr. Patten went ahead with his proposals, Beijing would be obliged to undo the changes in 1997. 
That would create havoc in Hong Kong and make a mockery of the smooth transition that both sides say they want.
"If the British side wants to give China a 'stab in the back' during the remaining hours before sunset, the Chinese side will be forced to respond with a 'fatal weapon,' " Ta Kung Pao, a Beijing-controlled newspaper in Hong Kong, declared recently.
Wen Wei Po, another Beijing mouthpiece, said of Mr. Patten: "Deep in his soul are all the deep-rooted bad habits of an extremely arrogant colonist who benefits himself at the expense of others."
This barrage of insults is by far the fiercest that China has made against any foreign statesman in recent years. 
Normally, Beijing does not attack foreign leaders by name, and the level of vitriol is a reflection of the abruptness with which Britain has reversed its policy toward Hong Kong this year.
 
'A Distinct Change'
"I can see a distinct change of direction on the part of the British Government," said Martin C. M. Lee, a legislator who for many years tried without success to prod the British Government to introduce more democracy. 
"They don't want to be led by the nose any more."
Mr. Lee's administrative assistant, Thomas Boasberg, said of the British Government's new enthusiasm for democracy: "Every morning we have to pinch ourselves to be sure we're not dreaming."
One reason that China dislikes democracy in Hong Kong is that candidates like Mr. Lee -- who would probably be in prison if he lived a few dozen miles to the north -- won last year's limited Hong Kong elections with overwhelming majorities, while pro-Beijing candidates suffered humiliating defeats. 
China sees no reason why Britain, which ran Hong Kong as a benign dictatorship for more than 100 years, should suddenly introduce political changes in its last few years of power.
Despite the fury from Beijing, an overwhelming proportion of ordinary Hong Kong citizens seem to be standing by the Governor. 
One poll last month found that 73 percent of those surveyed supported Mr. Patten's proposals for a more representative government, with 11 percent opposed and the remainder uncertain.
Most of those surveyed doubt that China will ever endorse the changes, but say they still feel more hopeful for Hong Kong's future because of the proposals. 
A poll last week found that 57 percent of those questioned believed that Hong Kong should proceed with the steps toward more democracy despite Beijing's opposition, while 29 percent disagreed.
Still, the invective from China has clearly unnerved some people in Hong Kong, particularly those in business. 
Curiously, some of the territory's leading capitalists have joined the Chinese Communists in urging Mr. Patten to back down.
"To run the risk of developing a political system that will likely be dismantled in four-and-a-half years time is just not acceptable to us," Vincent H. S. Lo, the chairman of the Business and Professionals Federation, said on Monday. 
The Federation, which represents some of Hong Kong's most distinguished business leaders, called on Mr. Patten to withdraw some proposals.
To be sure, some taipans -- as the territory's tycoons are known -- support Mr. Patten's proposals, while others are desperately trying to preserve their neutrality. 
But the business community seems to be the sector of Hong Kong society that is most skeptical about the prospects for nurturing democracy in China's backyard.
 
'Red Rag to a Bull'
"It's like waving a red rag to a bull," said Sir Gordon Macwhinnie, a retired accountant and former chairman of the Royal Hong Kong Jockey Club. 
"China is just not going to accept any speeding-up toward democracy."
Sir Gordon added that the demands for democracy would simply lead China to withhold approval of a major new port-and-airport project, which he said mattered more than democracy in ensuring Hong Kong's long-term stabilityI and prosperity. 
He added: "We're hammering away at more democracy and while we do it, they're stalling on these other issues that we think are more important."
Michael Hanson, the Governor's spokesman, said that the debate over democracy was healthy, but he also noted that the concerns expressed by business leaders do not seem to be widely held by the public as a whole.
"I would be concerned if the business community found itself at odds with the rest of the community," Mr. Hanson said. 
"That would not be helpful."
 
Market Near Record
To everyone's surprise, the sniping between China and Britain has not punctured the Hong Kong stock market. 
Instead, the market has risen in recent weeks and is near its record.
The equanimity with which Mr. Patten accepts the attacks from China is particularly surprising because in the past British officials went to extraordinary lengths to avoid what they called "confrontation."
The British officials in Hong Kong not only did everything they could to undermine the local democracy movement -- even gerrymandering election districts and rigging public opinion polls -- but also censored films that criticized China, banned visits to the territory by Chinese dissidents and on at least one occasion handed back over to China a dissident who had arrived safely in Hong Kong and had applied for asylum.
Prime Minister John Major apparently felt increasingly that the conciliatory approach was both embarrassing and ineffective, and earlier this year he dismissed the previous Governor, Lord Wilson, a China expert. 
In his place he appointed Mr. Patten, a close friend and a former chairman of the Conservative Party.
"People feel that Britain has been kowtowing too long, and that it's time to give it to the Chinese," a long-time Hong Kong official said, with considerable relish. 
"Everybody's kind of enjoying it for a change."
