
From the days of opium and cannons to those of Valium and satellites, there has been one pre-eminent address in Hong Kong: 1 Queens Road, headquarters of the Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation. 
It is the nexus of power and money, and these days an emblem of the difficulties of big Hong Kong businesses and of international banking as well.
Confidence here was shaken recently when the Hongkong Bank, as it is universally known, announced that it was forming a new holding company with British registration. 
While the bank's headquarters and management will remain in the territory, the bank effectively decided to do what many of Hong Kong's 5.8 million inhabitants are doing: obtain a foreign passport as possible protection against the vagaries of Chinese rule, which is to begin in 1997 when Britain relinquishes control.
 
Passing through a Minefield
But many question whether the passport will be enough. 
The bank is known as a gweilo -- "ghost" or "foreign devil" -- institution in a territory whose control will soon pass from the gweilos to the highly nationalistic Chinese authorities. 
This raises two questions: first, will the Chinese leadership allow a gweilo bank to continue to dominate the local market, and second, in an increasingly Chinese environment, will the top executives of the bank, who are all British, continue to have the connections and information that have helped them run local operations so profitably over the decades?
To reduce the risks that will arrive along with Chinese rule, the bank has set out in the last decade to become a truly international institution, with a leg in each time zone. 
But its recent experience and that of many other banks suggests that the road to becoming fully international passes through a minefield.
The bank's assets have soared tenfold in the last decade to $143 billion, making it the 26th-largest bank in the world.
But much of the expansion was expensive and unprofitable. 
For instance, the bank acquired Marine Midland Bank of New York and 14.9 percent of Midland Bank P.L.C., a major British institution, only to see both investments go sour because of problems in the two banks' loan portfolios.
Because of the problems overseas, almost all analysts expect the Hongkong Bank to report a decline in earnings in 1990 for the first time since 1967. 
And this year will also be tough, though perhaps better than 1990, said William Purves, the chairman and chief executive of the bank.
"I'm sure shareholders would be happier if we'd stayed a regional bank," Mr. Purves acknowledged in an interview. 
But the silver-haired Scot, whose prestige in Hong Kong is reflected in his Chinese nickname, Pu Weishi, meaning "great man," added that in the long run the strategy of international diversification was sound and would continue.
 
Cosmopolitan From the Start
Mr. Purves's continuing enthusiasm for creating a more international banking company is natural: the institution has been cosmopolitan since it was founded in 1865. 
It claims to have been the first foreign bank in the United States, in 1875, and by the end of the 19th century it had a network of offices throughout Asia. 
But until about a dozen years ago, the bank remained highly focused on Asia.
That is when the management and board resolved to create a fully international institution. 
The conventional wisdom in banking circles for much of the 1980's was that international deregulation, technological strides and the integration of global capital markets would lead to the emergence of a small group of super banks that would straddle the globe. 
Seeking a place in the top tier, the Hongkong Bank acquired not only Marine Midland and a stake in Midland Bank, but also James Capel & Company, a London-based international securities firm. 
It also established a major presence in Canada and Australia.
Paradoxically, these diversification efforts led to a greater dependence on the Hong Kong base for profits. 
Because of the losses abroad at Marine Midland, James Capel and the Australian subsidiary, the share of profits derived from Hong Kong has risen and now probably exceeds 60 percent of global earnings even though assets in Hong Kong amount to less than one-third of the bank's total.
It is this lucrative Hong Kong base that could give the bank a significant advantage in scooping up other institutions while prices are depressed. 
The Hongkong Bank has its problems, but past indigestion has not curbed its appetite for further acquisitions if the right opportunity arises. 
While the bank announced this month that it would not raise its stake in Midland Bank, at least for now, Mr. Purves said it would very much like a larger presence in Europe.
 
Building as a Metaphor
Analysts note that the bank remains highly liquid and able to afford a big European bank. 
Traditionally a conservative institution, Hongkong Bank has few problem loans in its own portfolio and sits on a cushion of hidden reserves, which it is not required to disclose. 
Most analysts estimate that these reserves amount to $1.2 billion or more.
In its home market, the problem is not profits, which keep rolling in, but long-term uncertainties.
"If you look out your window, you see the Bank of China Building," said David Kowitz, an analyst at Jardine Flemming Securities Ltd. 
"That's pretty much a metaphor for what is happening."
The new headquarters for the Beijing-based Bank of China soars 1,209 feet, enabling it to look down on the 600-foot Hongkong Bank headquarters.
Many people here believe that the Chinese authorities will make some efforts in the years after 1997 to assert their mastery of local banking and reduce the influence of the Hongkong Bank.
"It's inconceivable to me that China will allow the Hongkong Bank to maintain its dominance of the Hong Kong banking environment," said John M. Mulcahy, the research director of Peregrine Brokerage Lt., a securities firm based in Hong Kong. 
"I don't think they'll nationalize it, but I think they'll try to establish a substantial presence of their own."
But China's strategy of using the Bank of China to gain market share seemed to collapse after the Army crackdown in June 1989. 
Thousands of Hong Kong depositors withdrew their funds from the Bank of China in protest, and these days the Bank of China and its sister banks are much less aggressive than they used to be.
 
A Question of Privileges
So China may now be looking for another strategy, which could involve acquiring an existing bank in Hong Kong. 
One possibility would be the Hang Seng Bank, a major Chinese-managed institution that is 61 percent owned by the Hongkong Bank. 
Another possibility would be the Hongkong Bank itself.
The Hongkong Bank is now incorporated under special bylaws that prevent any stockholder from accumulating more than 1 percent of its shares. 
The bank would like to keep this provision, but it is still unclear whether the Hong Kong exchange will grant the new British holding company the same privilege. 
A stake of 20 or 30 percent might be enough to control the bank, since there are no large shareholders, and some analysts believe that over the next 10 or 15 years China might seek to acquire such a position.
Also uncertain is whether Hongkong Bank's executives will be able to hold onto the privileges that have flowed from their institution's mystique. 
The taipan, or "big boss," of the Hongkong Bank has always been a member of the Executive Council, the territory's top policy-making body, and a steward of the Jockey Club, its foremost recreational institution. 
Such perquisites -- and many more -- insure that bank executives are always among the first to know of policies or trends that might affect finance. 
The extras also help executives nurture contacts and friendships that are a great lubricant in the business world of Hong Kong.
Hongkong Bank's franchise in Hong Kong is enormously profitable, as is its Canadian subsidiary, which is the seventh-largest bank in that country. 
Moreover, Hongkong Bank is well placed to benefit from continued high growth rates in Asia, and perhaps in China as well. 
But the strengths in the Hong Kong market could be undermined by the bank's image among young Chinese as a stuffy and discriminatory institution.
 
No Top Chinese Executives
While 98 percent of Hong Kong's population is ethnically Chinese, Mr. Purves and most other executives have not learned Chinese, and there is not a single Chinese face among the top tier of executives.
"This is still a gweilo institution, and they don't give a lot of opportunities to Chinese," said a mid-career Chinese employee of the bank. 
The perception of discrimination is magnified because these days there are plenty of Chinese in banking circles with college and graduate school degrees, while Mr. Purves himself has only a high school diploma.
"In the Hongkong Bank, it's very difficult for Chinese people to get to the top," said a Chinese employee of another big bank in Hong Kong. 
"That's the general view."
Cheah Cheng Hye, an analyst at Morgan Grenfell Asia Securities Ltd., said that incipient Hong Kong nationalism may become more of a problem for the bank, but that the executives could head off the problem by installing Hong Kong Chinese as general managers of the Hong Kong unit, and by taking other measures to give the bank a greater local identity.
As for Mr. Purves, he acknowledges the problems but puts the accent on Hongkong Bank's underlying strengths and historic resiliency.
"We've survived 155 years of buffeting," he said, "so why should we stop now?"
 
