
Almost everyone wishes he would confess to some counterrevolutionary crime or another, if only to get his sentence reduced, but Liu Shanqing sits in his unheated prison cell in China and obstinately refuses to admit that it was wrong to believe in democracy.
''I tried to get Liu Shanqing to confess, but it's no good,'' his father, a tiny, timid, sparrow-like man in his 70's, said in an interview. 
''He won't confess, because he didn't do anything wrong.''
Mr. Liu is regarded by some people here as Hong Kong's hostage in China. 
He has spent eight years in prison, the last three in solitary confinement. 
But even the Chinese authorities have never indicated that he did anything more than visit the wife of an imprisoned dissident and offer her a small amount of money to help pay the bills.
Thus Mr. Liu's 10-year prison sentence is widely viewed as a warning to Hong Kong people not to interfere in China. 
China's Government treated Mr. Liu, an ethnic Chinese who lived in Hong Kong and worked as a computer sales engineer, as a local citizen and imprisoned him, and so any Hong Kong resident would think twice about crossing the border to help dissidents. 
''They are deliberately warning people in Hong Kong not to interfere,'' said Martin C. M. Lee, a lawyer and democracy worker in Hong Kong. 
''They want to make an example of him to warn the people in Hong Kong.''
Mr. Liu's saga began on Christmas 1981, when he crossed the border from Hong Kong into Guangdong Province in southern China. 
He planned to spend two or three days visiting the families of two political prisoners. 
The two men, He Qiu and Wang Xizhe, were leaders of the democracy movement in Guangdong and are believed to be still serving prison sentences of 10 years and 14 years respectively. 
After meeting Mr. Wang's wife and giving her the equivalent of $51, Mr. Liu was arrested and sentenced to 10 years in prison for counterrevolutionary crimes. 
For the last three years, he has been kept in solitary confinement in a prison in a remote part of Guangdong more than 130 miles from the provincial capital, Canton.
Because they are frail and short of money, Mr. Liu's parents make the trip to see their son only twice a year. 
It is a day's journey each way, and they can see him for only 30 minutes, with a guard present to make sure they speak only about family matters.
Mr. Liu's father, who was nervous during the interview and asked that his name not be used for fear of offending China, said that he had visited his son just a week ago and had found him in fine health and good spirits. 
Now 37 years old, Mr. Liu is scheduled to be released at the end of next year, but it is not clear whether he will then be allowed to return to Hong Kong or whether he will be sent to some remote part of China to work. 
One of the most frightening aspects of Mr. Liu's case, from Hong Kong's point of view, is that the Chinese authorities are treating him as a local person rather than as a foreigner.
The reason for this is that China regards Hong Kong as its own territory, and thus considers all ethnic Chinese residents of Hong Kong to be Chinese nationals. 
Mr. Liu's plight was never pressed energetically by the Hong Kong or British governments.
Similar cases have occurred periodically in other parts of China. 
Among the most recent was the arrest, announced on Dec. 
25, of three Hong Kong Chinese and two Chinese from the Portuguese enclave, Macao, who were accused of helping the ''Underground Railroad'' that carries leaders of the democracy movement out of the country. 
The fate of the five is unknown.
For Mr. Liu, and the others being held, one of the surest ways to get a reduced sentence is to plead guilty and to implicate others. 
But his friends say he is unlikely to bow to the authorities, and they worry that his ''bad attitude'' will lead the authorities to ban him from returning to Hong Kong.
''He's a very tough guy, mentally,'' said a longtime friend, Stephen Y. C. Leung, a high school teacher. 
''You couldn't change his mind, unless you could really prove him wrong. 
And he's not afraid of anything. 
Once he sees justice, he'll pursue it.''
