
Angry over Hong Kong's decision not to send back a top Chinese swimmer who sought political asylum here, China has retaliated by refusing to accept the routine return of 70 Chinese who immigrated illegally to Hong Kong.
Since China's suppression of the democracy movement in Beijing last June, Chinese officials have adopted a sterner attitude toward Hong Kong. 
But officials said the move to reject the return of the illegal immigrants, who come by the tens of thousands each year and are usually sent back in an orderly manner, was a punitive action that they found disturbing.
The dispute over the swimmer, Yang Yang, began several weeks ago when he was arrested by the Hong Kong police for overstaying his visitor's permit. 
He asked for political asylum, saying he had secretly helped democracy groups in China.
 
China Wants Swimmer Back
Taiwan offered asylum to the swimmer, but Chinese officials told Hong Kong publicly that Mr. Yang should be returned to the mainland and that he would not be persecuted or harassed.
To help Hong Kong and China avoid a confrontation, the United States agreed to issue a visa to Mr. Yang, who flew to San Francisco last Tuesday. 
Chinese officials here then issued a stern warning, saying the Hong Kong government had set a ''bad precedent'' and that the Yang case had ''marred cooperation between the two sides.''
The statement declared that Hong Kong's action would ''also cast its shadow over the cooperation between the two sides in other fields,'' and that the Hong Kong government ''should be responsible for all the consequences.''
 
Embittered Relations
Relations between this British colony, which will revert to Chinese control in 1997, and mainland officials have been bitter and strained since Hong Kong residents staged large displays of support for the democracy movement in China, which was crushed in June.
The Hong Kong government is trying to contain the dispute and treat it as a disturbing but temporary setback. 
But Chinese officials now say they plan to review the case of each illegal immigrant seized in Hong Kong, a policy that could cause large disruptions and might encourage new waves of illegal immigrants to cross the border.
