
Li Ka-shing has built a multibillion-dollar fortune and a business empire by trusting his instincts rather than the crowd's. 
But for all his contrarian savvy, his attempt to burst into the United States by purchasing the $3 billion ''junk bond'' portfolio of the Columbia Savings and Loan Association is raising more eyebrows here than cheers.
For the time being, the United States Government has halted the transaction because regulators did not approve of the loan Columbia Savings, based in Beverly Hills, Calif., would be making to Mr. Li's group. 
But negotiations are continuing, and Mr. Li seems determined to buy the bond package. 
Through a spokesman, Mr. Li refused to be interviewed.
His determination highlights a sensitive challenge facing Chinese executives in this nervous British colony. 
As they spirit some, if not most, of their billions of dollars in capital out of Hong Kong before China takes over in 1997, will they also be able to export their money-spinning wizardry to the United States?
Periscope on Corporate America
''The big factor in the deal is that it would give us a periscope into corporate America,'' said Simon Murray, a wiry Briton with a dry wit who is group managing director of Mr. Li's flagship conglomerate, the publicly traded Hutchison Whampoa Ltd.
The United States has a far more competitive market, where the informal networks that tie together and control Hong Kong's economy do not reach.
Mr. Murray emphasized, nonetheless, that Mr. Li could not afford not to look to the United States as a potential home for some of his assets.
''We'd like to have a position in the U.S., but there are different rules in that game,'' Mr. Murray said, acknowledging that wandering outside the cozy confines of Hong Kong was easier said than done. 
''It sounds immodest to say that Hong Kong is getting too small for us, but the walls are getting close. 
We don't have much choice.''
 
Delicacy of the Situation
Making the situation even more delicate is that confidence in Hong Kong may be shattered if it appears that business leaders like Mr. Li are pulling up stakes.
''His options are limited by his profile,'' said John Mulcahy, an analyst at Peregrine Brokerage Ltd., a firm in which Mr. Li has an investment. 
''The impact on market sentiment if people thought he was really pulling out would be devastating.''
Undaunted, Mr. Li, who is 62 years old, has placed himself at the vanguard of those determined to gain a foothold in the largest, one of the safest and one of the most open economies in the world. 
That determination could eventually have a big impact on both Hong Kong and the United States, because of the tens of billions of dollars his companies control.
Mr. Li and various public and private interests he controls are a 50 percent partner in the group that won the bidding for Columbia Savings' junk bonds. 
With the market for such bonds nearly comatose, describing Mr. Li's move as being against the grain would be an understatement.
 
Potentially Attractive Terms
The deal, nonetheless, had potentially attractive terms. 
Mr. Li and his partner, Gordon Investment, a Canadian investment concern, would have put down just 10 percent, or $300 million, in cash. 
The remainder would have come in the form of a 10-year loan from Columbia, which lost $430 million in the first half of the year.
The $3 billion price tag was $70 million over the estimated market value at the time of the bid. 
At its peak, Columbia's junk bond portfolio had a face value of about $4.5 billion.
''I worry that they're going into something that they don't understand,'' said Marc Faber, an investment adviser here who previously ran the Hong Kong office of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., which sold most of the junk bonds to Columbia Savings. 
''They are very good, but what do they know about managing a junk bond portfolio?''
''I would prefer they stay in Hong Kong, where they have the expertise,'' said Steven So, an analyst here with Jardine Fleming Securities.
 
Further Drop in Bonds' Value
Joe Bencivenga, head of high-yield research at Salomon Brothers in New York and a former junk bond analyst at Drexel, said the value of the bonds had dropped another $200 million since the bidding. 
''They need to have a 5-to-10-year horizon to make this work,'' he commented.
As Mr. Murray emphasized in his office overlooking the Hong Kong harbor, this move would be not an investment play but an essential part of the group's future as it seeks to escape the uncertainty of Hong Kong.
It is also, Mr. Murray added, part of the testing of the next generation of leadership at the company; a key figure in it was Richard Li, Mr. Li's 23-year-old, American-educated son.
''Some people have expressed their doubts about the sons,'' Mr. Mulcahy said, ''but K. S. still has the final say. 
He's exposing them to the front line.''
 
Loans to 300 Companies
The acquisition would instantly make this canny entrepreneur a big lender to more than 300 large American companies, people familiar with the portfolio's contents said .
The companies, they said, range from RJR Nabisco to McCaw Cellular Communications, Pacific Lumber and Wickes. 
The deal would give Mr. Li access to potentially large amounts of inside data - as well as the responsibility for helping keep the companies afloat in difficult times.
''It is a good opportunity, but it will require an immense amount of manpower,'' said one Wall Street expert who had studied the portfolio. 
''There are going to be numerous workouts, bankruptcies and other negotiations associated with these securities.''
 
Possible Acquisitions Studied
Mr. Murray said Hutchison Whampoa had already studied possible acquisitions like Pan Am, Hilton Hotels and CSX, the transportation concern.
Despite its reputation as a bastion of free markets, Hong Kong's economy is actually a series of semi-monopolies and cartels, analysts contend. 
Much of Mr. Li's fortune was created from and is invested in such situations.
Mr. Li's background is like that of many Hong Kong entrepreneurs; he is a refugee from China. 
He left his family's home in southern China in 1940, and 10 years later had opened a factory, riding the crest of the first wave of industrialization in Hong Kong - making plastic flowers. 
That business provided him the capital to make his move, eight years later, into property investment, where he built his fortune, now estimated at $2 billion to $3 billion.
 
Member of Informal Cartel
By the early 1980's his principal real estate concern, the publicly traded Cheung Kong (Holdings) Ltd., in which he owns about 40 percent, was an industry leader. 
It is now a member of what analysts here describe as a sort of informal cartel that orchestrates the supply of apartments to the market every year to insure that supply will not slacken.
When Mr. Li bought control of Hutchison Whampoa - one of the old British trading companies, or hongs - he gained control of one of two leading retailers here and a more-than-60-percent share in the business of loading and unloading containers at what is one of the largest ports in the world. 
Later, Mr. Li acquired a large stake in a Government-sanctioned monopoly, Hongkong Electric Holdings, a power company.
In recognition of his position as a pre-eminent business figure, Mr. Li holds the title of non-executive deputy chairman of the Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation, which dominates finance here.
 
Steps Taken Into Canada
Mr. Li has also taken several big steps into Canada, acquiring 43 percent of Husky Oil Operations Ltd. and buying a 204-acre site in downtown Vancouver, British Columbia, where the 1986 World's Fair was held. 
He is building, in a project in which his other son, 26-year-old Victor, is heavily involved, a $1.7 billion development at the site that will include more than 7,000 housing units and two million square feet of office space.
Recently, Hutchison has invested heavily in telecommunications. 
It now dominates the paging and cellular phone businesses here and is a big investor in Asiasat I, a satellite sent into orbit aboard a Chinese rocket earlier this year. 
Its signal will reach from Karachi, Pakistan, to Tokyo -more than two billion people.
It is an impressive history and array of businesses, but it has still been difficult to get American investment experts to take the company seriously, Mr. Murray complained. 
One of Mr. Li's problems in moving to the United States, he added, is that Wall Street investment bankers still do not bring him their best deals.
''We're an afterthought for some of these people,'' Mr. Murray said. 
''They say, 'There's this guy in Hong Kong named K. S. Li who has got a lot of bread. 
He'll buy anything.'
We have to find a way in that allows us to do the negotiated deals. 
That's what we hope this deal will do for us.''
