
When several local legislators recently suggested using Hong Kong's hefty budget surplus to buy an uninhabited island somewhere and resettle the colony's 5.7 million people there, other lawmakers agreed the idea was worth pursuing.
And when a millionaire businessman called a news conference to suggest that the United Nations take over Hong Kong, creating a neutral, independent state he envisioned as ''the Switzerland of Asia,'' his proposal drew the immediate support of the chief executive of the Hong Kong stock exchange and several community leaders.
Since the violent suppression of the democracy movement in China last June, the people in this British colony, plucky, resourceful and inventive, have been applying all their skills to the problem of how to escape or circumvent the Chinese Communists, who regain control of Hong Kong in 1997 under an accord reached with London in 1984.
 
Tens of Thousands Leave
In recent years, tens of thousands of professionals and wealthy entrepreneurs have left the colony to avoid the Communist takeover, but now some leading citizens are trying to devise plans that would protect millions of people here from the excesses of a mainland regime.
Hong Kong, known for its practical approach to life, is awash with schemes so wildly imaginative they must be regarded as either absolutely inspired or utterly desperate.
Some citizens, for example, want Hong Kong to declare its independence and seek international protection from the Chinese, and a British research institute has come up with detailed plans for moving all of Hong Kong to Europe, recommending a site on the coast of Scotland.
A group of industrialists is working on a plan that calls for ''re-creating'' Hong Kong in a remote spot near Darwin, Australia, that has been designated as a special economic zone. 
Another citizens' group proposes inviting three million residents to contribute to an investment fund that would be turned over to any country that lets the investors settle there.
Explaining the idea of moving Hong Kong to Darwin, Albert Cheng King-hon said: ''We're not talking about buying an island. 
That's useless because it means seeking independence. 
Our idea is to rent a site that would be a new British territory.''
He estimated the cost of the Australian Hong Kong at $100 billion.
''Most of these ideas are non-starters, but they are significant because they show the depth of the psychological despair here,'' said Richard Margolis, a former Government political affairs official.
 
'Insurance Policy' Is Wanted
Stanley Ho, the businessman who wants Britain and China to lease Hong Kong to the United Nations, said, ''I know the possibility is extremely remote, but as a citizen of Hong Kong, I thought I ought to try to do something to help.''
'' Thousands of people are leaving Hong Kong and taking their money with them. 
We must find ways to restore confidence in our future.''
Mr. Ho, whose vast business interests include the biggest gambling casino in the nearby Portuguese enclave of Macao, believes the protection afforded by a United Nations presence would encourage residents to remain past 1997.
In fact, most of the proposals for mass migration or resettlement stress the idea that with a home of last resort available in the event of a Communist calamity, many people would remain in Hong Kong and life in the colony could continue.
''Most people here love Hong Kong but they want an insurance policy against any problems after 1997,'' a senior politician said. 
''They want to know they can get out if things fall apart here.''
Many of the proposals for taking over distant islands sprang up after a major campaign here to persuade Britain to give the right of abode in Britain to the 3.2 million natives of the colony, a plea London has steadfastly refused.
 
Plans Are Called Unhealthy
Robert Broadfoot, a political and economic consultant on Asia, said he believes that, in the end, all the great ideas and grand plans being explored now are ''unhealthy because they deflect interest and energy away from the very real issues that need to be addressed here, such as a more rapid movement towards democracy, a greater autonomy for the Hong Kong Government as it approaches 1997.''
Beijing continues to promise that it will permit the colony ''a high degree of autonomy'' and preserve its economic and social systems for 50 years. 
But as Mr. Ho said, ''people don't seem reassured by Beijing's promises.''
Conservative estimates by the government put the number of Hong Kong emigrants at 45,000 last year. 
Foreign consulates here have been inundated with requests for resettlement, and the drive to leave the colony is so strong that there was a riot when Singapore declared that it had places for 25,000 Hong Kong immigrants and opened a booth to pass out applications.
 
Expert Help for a Fee
Sensing the special business opportunities, immigration consultants have been flocking to Hong Kong, where for a fee they will guide residents through the procedures of emigration to places like Canada and Australia. 
This week, the splashy new Hong Kong convention and exhibition center announced that it would no longer permit its space to be used for immigration exhibitions. 
Helene Li, the center's marketing director, said the center was built primarily ''to foster Hong Kong's image internationally,'' and ''anything that promotes the mass exodus of people'' from the colony is not in keeping with that goal.
Mr. Margolis, the former Government official who helped negotiate the terms of Britain's hand-over of Hong Kong, said the colony had weathered other crises of confidence just as frightening. 
But one longtime political observer insisted that the crisis of confidence today is even darker because ''there is little the colony can do to help itself.''
''The only real thing that will overcome this fear, this crisis, is a total change in leadership in Beijing.''
