
As foreign governments and international relief agencies condemn Hong Kong's forced repatriation of Vietnamese boat people, Hong Kong residents are expressing their approval of the radical measure, and even at times suggesting that harsher measures are needed.
''I don't think sending them back is inhumane,'' Chan Wai Shing, a Hong Kong electrician, said today. 
''Keeping them in Hong Kong is a waste of taxpayers' money.''
 
Threatening and Cajoling
For months now, legislators, community leaders and citizens' groups have been threatening and cajoling the British and Hong Kong Governments, demanding that they rid the colony of the 44,000 Vietnamese boat people who have crowded into the territory in the last year and a half, joining 13,000 already here and awaiting resettlement. 
Now that forced repatriation is under way, few here are debating the morality of the operation or even its possible political repercussions.
When the colony's Legislative Council met on Wednesday - one day after the forced repatriations began - council members discussed fire ordinances in boarding houses, kidney donor cards and trips abroad for district board members. 
In the middle of the session, the Chief Secretary made a brief statement defending repatriation.
 
Concerned About Cost
One member, concerned about the cost of returning the boat people, tried to ask a question about the repatriation, but he was ruled out of order, and nothing more was said on the subject. 
But politicians here are already preparing to fight new battles over the boat people, complaining that Hong Kong ought not to have to pay for the forced return of the Vietnamese, and arguing that other measures will be needed to curb the flow of Vietnamese.
''Mandatory return will not solve the root problem,'' said Kingsley Sit, a legislator who advocates scrapping the colony's policy of first asylum so that any new boat people arriving in Hong Kong's harbor would be pushed back to sea. 
And opinion polls show that Mr. Sit's position is popular with Hong Kong's residents. 
A recent poll by political leaders in the Central and Western districts - downtown Hong Kong and a heavily Chinese neighborhood adjacent to it - showed that 90 percent favored forcible repatriation of the Vietnamese and almost half wanted any new boats of Vietnamese shoved away. 
Other polls have shown even wider margins of support for that extreme measure.
A possible explanation for those views may lie in the makeup of Hong Kong's population of 5.7 million, which is 98 percent ethnic Chinese whose sympathies lie more with the thousands of mainland citizens who try to sneak across the border into Hong Kong each year. 
About 50 mainland Chinese a day are rounded up here to be shipped back across the border, handcuffed and under guard. 
Even though more than half the Chinese here were refugees themselves, fleeing the repression and poverty of China, they do not identify with the the Vietnamese who are fleeing similar problems in Vietnam. 
Instead, they have signed petitions and staged demonstrations against the boat people, and formed neighborhood vigilante groups to patrol in areas where Vietnamese are housed in squalid camps behind high-barbed wire fences.
 
'Britain Takes Responsibility'
While the British Government has ultimate responsibility for the harsh repatriation policy, British officials privately say that while they have no desire to send home the Vietnamese, Hong Kong's citizens have been growing mutinously angry over the situation and the Government had no other choice.
''Britain takes responsibility, as it should, for this act, but with a wink and a nudge and a nod at the Hong Kong Chinese,'' said one Chinese political analyst here. 
''They say they fear we would become ungovernable if the Vietnamese problem were allowed to persist. 
I don't know if that is true, but I do know that China has made it very clear they want this problem cleared up before they take over.''
When confronting forced repatriation, the Chinese here tend to pick their way through a thicket of paradoxes, ignoring thorny, contradictory issues. 
The colony's liberal conscience, the lawyer and legislator Martin Lee, is one of the very few here who have pointed out similarities between the desperate Vietnamese who sail here in their tiny open boats and the prosperous Chinese who were once refugees themselves here.
The hard line taken against the Vietnamese comes at a time when Hong Kong, which will be handed back to China in 1997, is asking British officials for assurances that its citizens will have a haven if the Chinese regime proves harsh and repressive. 
Rita Fan, a staunch supporter of forced repatriation and an outspoken critic of Britain's failure to grant Hong Kong citizens right of abode, has said: ''Some people try to connect the two issues, but there really is no connection between the Vietnamese coming here and Hong Kong people, who are British subjects, wanting the right to go and live in Britain. 
I see no connection.''
Mrs. Fan says Hong Kong must simply face the criticism that comes with forced repatriation and offer ''a thorough explanation of the difficult situation it faced.''
But Mr. Lee has warned that the operation was not only morally wrong, but could well endanger the Hong Kong people's quest for safety after 1997.
