
Mamie Xuemin Zhu and Charles Kecheng Li were wed a few days ago in the recreation room of the Wilcrest Baptist Church. 
Red and pink streamers draped the doors and pink satin hearts were on the wall.
The couple's parents could not attend. 
The Government of China would not give them permission to leave. 
So the bride asked two fellow immigrants who were friends of her parents to walk down the aisle in their place.
The bridegroom's mother and father were represented by church elders who share his family name, but are not related.
Relying on friends to fill the roles of distant relatives is part of the new life of young Chinese who leave their country to study abroad and then feel they cannot go home.
Mamie and Charles arrived about three years ago, she from Shanghai, he from Sichuan, for classes at Northeast Louisiana University in Monroe. 
She came to earn a master's degree in chemistry; he was completing a master's in physics.
They abandoned their Chinese names, because Americans found them hard to pronounce. 
A friend of Miss Zhu's nicknamed her Mamie, and it stuck. 
Mr. Li picked Charles because he liked the sound.
They met when Mr. Li, who is 28 years old, gave Miss Zhu, who is 25, a lift to her driver's license test. 
The exam took three hours, but he waited for her. 
He missed his next class. 
She got her license. 
They fell in love.
''He is good and honest and kind,'' she says.
He says: ''She is beautiful. 
She deserves beautiful things.''
They wanted to go home for their wedding to be with parents, grandparents, sisters, brothers, aunts, uncles and friends. 
''My parents never met Charles,'' Miss Zhu said. 
''He sent them letters and pictures. 
I wish they could meet.''
Then, on June 4, Government soldiers fired on demonstrators in in Tiananmen Square, killing hundreds.
''We were afraid that if we go back for the wedding we won't be able to come back here,'' Miss Zhu said. 
They decided not to change her name because she might not get a new passport from the Chinese Consulate General.
''I got a letter from a friend,'' Mr. Li said. 
''It described things there that I just can't imagine. 
I don't think the situation is good. 
The Chinese life style, the way they live under the police; you can do things here that you don't do there. 
The religion, the freedom.''
When their parents could not get a passport, the couple decided to marry here without their families. 
After graduation in August, they moved to Houston and found jobs, he as a software engineer with a pipeline company here, she as a laboratory technician at the Baylor College of Medicine. 
They also joined the Baptist church and began to plan a ''very American wedding,'' Mr. Li said.
They registered at Dillard's department store for a list of necessities, including an electric wok. 
Mr. Li rented a gray morning coat. 
Miss Zhu rented a white satin gown with big puff sleeves and a veil.
The afternoon of Dec. 
16, Miss Zhu dressed in room 302 of their church's activities area. 
She shared it with a kindergarten teacher who had spread paper plates on the floor and was turning them into Santa Claus faces for a children's party that week.
Friends arranged platters of cold sesame noodles, Chinese pastries, tea eggs, chicken drumsticks, glazed doughnuts and orange gelatin. 
Finally 50 guests went to their chairs.
The ceremony was in Chinese, with translations. 
The pastor read the vows in Chinese. 
The bride and groom answered in English.
A very shy kiss; a walk back up the aisle. 
The guests turned their chairs around for the reception. 
Per Chinese custom, they asked the newlyweds embarrassing questions: ''Show us what your first kiss was like.''
''What will you do tonight when the party is over?''
''Why do you like Charles?''
''Why do you like Mamie?''
Miss Zhu was asked to introduce her relatives. 
''There is just my sister,'' she replied. 
''She came here three months ago. 
And our two cousins. 
That's all.''
She did introduce their friends, the group from church, the group from her genetics lab, the group from her husband's company, the group from Monroe. 
The guest of honor was Mamie's landlady.
The couple toasted each other with punch, cut the cake and posed for pictures. 
All this was captured by a photographer roaming the room with a video camera; a copy will be sent to the relatives at home.
Mamie Xuemin Zhu and Charles Kecheng Li, whose parents were not permitted to leave China, asked friends to take their parents' places at their wedding ceremony this month in Houston (The New York Times/F. 
Carter Smith)
