
Armed with a new flexibility and immense reservoirs of foreign exchange, Taiwan is struggling for a seat at the international table, and in the process new tensions are surfacing between the rival Governments in Taipei and Beijing.
The Government here is aggressively cultivating developing countries, with considerable success. 
So far this year, four more countries have recognized the Republic of China, as Taiwan calls itself, bringing the total to 26.
''I'm hopeful more will come forward,'' Foreign Minister Lien Chan said in an interview, adding that contacts are under way with other nations.
China has been particularly upset because the recent diplomatic successes by Taiwan run counter to the previous trend. 
Until about two years ago, Taiwan was growing increasingly isolated. 
One by one, countries switched their diplomatic ties from Taipei to Beijing, and two of the more important nations still recognizing Taiwan - Saudi Arabia and South Korea - seemed to be preparing to switch to Beijing as well.
Then this pattern was abruptly reversed, partly because Taiwan no longer required other nations to cut their ties to Beijing before establishing ties with Taipei. 
Dual recognition was tolerated.
Even more important than diplomatic flexibility was money: Taiwan's per capita income is about $7,500, more than 20 times the level on the Chinese mainland. 
More important, Taiwan has foreign exchange reserves of more than $75 billion, highest in the world after Japan. 
Taiwan made it clear that it would offer aid to its ''friends.''
Beijing has reacted with indignation to Taipei's courtship of developing nations. 
The annoyance in Beijing is doubly strong because third world countries used to be its allies, and because it is apprehensive about a bidding war with Taipei for diplomatic support.
''Taiwan has been using its silver-bullet diplomacy to buy people's minds and hearts,'' People's Daily complained in October.
President Yang Shangkun, Prime Minister Li Peng and other top mainland officials have strongly criticized Taiwan's diplomatic policy, and the official New China News Agency suggested that dual recognition was aimed at establishing Taiwan as an entity independent from China.
So far the four countries that have recognized Taiwan this year are the Bahamas, Grenada, Liberia and Belize. 
Except for the Bahamas, which had not had diplomatic relations with either capital, each country previously had recognized Beijing. 
The Chinese responded by suspending relations with each of these countries, a step just short of severing relations.
Taiwan is offering the prospect of technical and economic aid, particularly a new Overseas Economic Cooperation Fund, endowed with a $1.2 billion this year. 
There has been some domestic criticism of the diplomatic offensive, on the ground that it is silly to buy friendships with tiny states, but many others back the policy.
''Now that we have money and now that we have declared to the world that we want to share our international responsibilities, when deciding who to give it to naturally we give it to countries with which we want to promote relations,'' said Tsai Chengwen, chairman of the political science department of National Taiwan University.
About a dozen countries have opened representative offices here in the last 18 months, and many others have sent trade delegations or relaxed visa restrictions for Taiwan passport-holders.
The upheavals in Communist countries are also regarded as presenting new opportunities, particularly since those nations are desperate for capital. 
Trade delegations are exploring opportunities with Vietnam, and the Government here this week eased restrictions on travel to Eastern Europe.
In the interview, Mr. Lien appeared to be wary of saying anything that would antagonize Beijing. 
Taiwanese officials used to seize every opportunity to denounce the Communists.
''To realize our national aspiration of unification,'' Mr. Lien explained, ''we must above all be rational and realistic. 
Verbal acrimony and hostile jargon are only for propaganda value. 
They serve no purpose.''
