
ON A CRISP DAY IN BEIJING LAST DECEM-ber, the kind of day when a fine haze of yellow dust swirls above the cinder-colored buildings, I took a taxi to a row of free-market stands where I expected an old acquaintance, a man named Lu Lin, to be waiting. 
The taxi, a sleek Toyota, sleeker than the taxis I knew when I lived in the Chinese capital a decade ago, dropped me off in front of a new hotel, near a row of rickety stalls of a sort that did not exist when I was a Beijing-based journalist. 
I looked for a certain numbered stand, feeling nervous. 
I was asking myself an impossible question: What do you say to a person, and the barest of acquaintances at that, whom you may years ago have helped send to prison?
I knew that Lu Lin was expecting me, since a common friend had tracked him down and forewarned him of my visit. 
But the man in a heavy black coat sitting in front of a colorful display of down ski jackets and other clothing was not someone I recognized. 
It was hardly surprising. 
My encounters with Lu Lin had been few and brief, the first taking place in 1979 when he was well known as a political dissident.
He had been active in the ''Democracy Wall'' movement -named for a stretch of gray brick wall along a Beijing avenue where free expression was briefly tolerated, even encouraged, by China's Communist authorities. 
At the time, I was reporting on China for Time magazine, one of many foreign journalists observing the swirl of activities at Democracy Wall - the ''big character posters'' attacking the rightist holdovers from the bad old days and demanding greater freedom; the distribution of unofficial newspapers, journals and magazines.
Now, 10 years later, I noticed the man in the black coat watch me as I approached. 
I wasn't sure if he was Lu Lin and, judging from the expression on his face, it seemed he wasn't sure of me either.
''I am Bai Libo,'' I said. 
That is the name I have used in places where Chinese is spoken ever since a Hong Kong friend made it up for me when I was a student of the language years ago.
''Lu Lin,'' the man said. 
He stood up and shook my hand. 
He was friendly but a bit hesitant, unsure perhaps of what this encounter was all about. 
I couldn't tell if he welcomed it or had merely been too polite to turn it down.
Milling around us were wives of diplomats, some local Chinese shoppers, a few foreign tourists poking through the merchandise. 
I watched as Lu Lin made a sale, lowering his price a bit to satisfy his customer, taking change out of the money belt around his waist. 
I had thought about Lu Lin with a certain helpless remorse for many years and now that I was seeing him again, I didn't know what to say.
''We met twice before,'' I said, trying to jog his memory. 
I remembered both occasions well. 
While I had never talked at length with him, the encounters were memorable for two reasons. 
First, he had struck me as one of the more coolly forceful members of the hardy band of Democracy Wall dissidents. 
Second, I had over the years wondered how he was doing in prison, asking myself if he knew of certain events that bound us together.
''You went to prison?''
I asked him, keeping my voice low so nobody in neighboring stalls could hear. 
I already knew the answer to the question. 
''Yes,'' he said. 
''When did you get out?''
''Last year,'' he replied, meaning 1987. 
''How long were you in?''
''Six years,'' he said.
I gasped, not expecting that length of time, repeating ''six years'' in disbelief. 
I knew that he had been arrested in 1981 for helping to smuggle from China the prison diary of one of his jailed dissident colleagues, a man named Liu Qing. 
I had arranged for excerpts of that diary to be published in Time magazine. 
Soon after Lu Lin's arrest, I heard that he had received a sentence of three years of ''reform through education'' - a euphemism for prison and a common punishment for ideologically wayward individuals who were not formally charged with a crime or put on trial. 
Three years was the maximum penalty. 
''I had a trial,'' Lu Lin said. 
''It was a closed one.''
No members of the public are allowed to attend closed trials; no official announcement is made of the results. 
''I was convicted of disseminating counterrevolutionary propaganda.''
We were standing in the back of Lu Lin's stall. 
Nearby, a woman was sifting through the down ski jackets. 
The free-market stalls specialize in goods manufactured in China but intended for export, so none of the state-run shops have this particular kind of merchandise.
''It must have been terrible,'' I said, referring to his six years in prison.
He looked me in the eye. 
There was a slight and, I assumed, ironic smile on his lips. 
''Good training,'' he said.
''Do you know,'' I plunged on, ''that I was the one who first published the Liu Qing manuscript?''
Lu Lin had not known. 
''Do you know that the Public Security Bureau found a letter on me from the people who gave the manuscript to me in Hong Kong that must have been incriminating for you?''
Lu Lin shook his head. 
He had not heard of that either.
''They searched me at the Beijing airport,'' I explained. 
''I wasn't expecting it. 
Later, I was interrogated at the Public Security Bureau. 
They asked me about you.''
Lu had not heard of that. 
I went ahead with a kind of apology I had been waiting years to make.
''It was careless of me to allow myself to be found with that letter in my possession,'' I said. 
''I don't know if it contributed to your imprisonment or if they would have gotten you without it, but I have wanted for a long time to tell you that, if it hurt you, I'm extremely sorry.''
Lu Lin and I stood a bit awkwardly together under the lengthening shadows of a late Beijing afternoon. 
I was aware of the sound of bicycle bells drifting across from the street nearby. 
The air was chilly and filled with the odor of coal bricks burning in neighborhood stoves. 
Lu's eyes were moist. 
Perhaps it was the sting of the cold, dusty air. 
I fought back tears. 
Lu Lin waved his hand dismissively and looked into the distance. 
''Mei shi,'' he said. 
''It's nothing.''
IT IS OFTEN IN THE SMALL THINGS OF LIFE, THE everyday details, that change is best noticed. 
My trip to Beijing last December - the first since I left China at the end of 1982 - was, from a personal standpoint, unusual from the moment I made arrangements to travel there. 
I picked up a visa without difficulty in Paris, not notifying the Chinese authorities in advance, not contacting them after I got there. 
Ten or seven years ago, you couldn't get a visa to China without official sponsorship by a Chinese organization, certainly not if you were a journalist.
My plan was to visit my old friends in the Chinese capital. 
The mood in China had supposedly relaxed a good deal during the years I had been away, and I thought the time was right to measure how much things had changed.
Still, when I arrived in Beijing, I was not at all counting on seeing Lu Lin. 
I assumed that, as a former political prisoner, he would hesitate to meet a foreign reporter. 
He had had trouble enough already. 
And so, for my first few days, I visited writers, some painter friends, a teacher or two. 
I paid a call on Fang Lizhi, the astrophysicist who is China's leading human rights advocate these days. 
He is a man who, as a scientist of international renown, is in the forefront of a group of Chinese intellectuals calling for the release of all political prisoners.
I also saw Ren Wanding, a once-jailed dissident. 
Ren came to the sleek lobby of the Jianguo Hotel where I was staying. 
He would never have come to a foreigner's hotel in the old days. 
A security guard would have made him register his name, which would have been sent along to the Public Security Bureau. 
Ren had recently become the first of the former Democracy Wall dissidents to resume a degree of activity. 
He had been interviewed for a story that appeared on page 1 of this newspaper; an article of his, advocating greater freedom in China, had been published on The Times's Op-Ed page - all of that without any apparent reaction from the Chinese authorities. 
And so, my impression was that the clenched fist of political control had been relaxed, at least somewhat.
Among the friends I looked up early on in my Beijing visit were Yang Yiping and Li Yongcun, two painters and members of the Stars Exhibition Group, a decade-old unofficial artists' association. 
The group was well known in China during the Democracy Wall period and its members had even held two public exhibitions of their work. 
But, in fact, the painters weren't political dissidents in the way Lu Lin and Ren Wanding were. 
They merely wanted to paint outside the restrictions of ''socialist'' art.
Li Yongcun, for example, was political only in that his somber, melancholy landscapes, his dark villages brooding under heavy skies, were devoid of the optimism required by the canons of Socialist Realism.
Once, in 1982, I went to see him at his home in the eastern part of the city, forgetting to take the precaution of parking my car, with its conspicuous foreigner's license plates, a good 100 or so yards from his door. 
After the visit, when Li walked me out of the house to the car, he was suddenly surrounded by a group of militiamen, who curtly asked him who I was and what I was doing there. 
Li signaled me to leave, which I did, horrified that my lapse might have landed him in serious trouble. 
Later, he told me he had been interrogated until the early hours of the morning about our friendship and what we had discussed.
This time, I visited Li Yongcun in his house just as I might pay a call on a friend in New York. 
And he came to the hotel a few times to pick me up in his own car, bought with the proceeds of sales of his paintings. 
This was also something he couldn't have done in the past: sustain a career as an independent artist. 
Furthermore, Li has traveled abroad - to Japan, France, the United States - in order to visit museums and attend exhibitions of his work. 
But it was the car that impressed me most, a little, cramped Fiat, made in Poland. 
It had cost him $3,000. 
I thought how odd and wonderful that Li Yongcun, a self-employed artist who paints under the name Bo Yun, could take me to see the sights in his own car. 
Before, only foreigners had been allowed to own cars.
When I went to see Yang Yiping, we met outside the Yenjing Hotel, our old reconnoitering spot. 
It was a bright winter's morning, and we walked through a zone of barracks-like buildings to his small studio. 
Along the way, I recalled another meeting with him in the same spot years earlier, when I followed him at a safe distance so nobody would know we were together. 
There was a time before I knew him when his entire artistic endeavor consisted of painting Mao portraits and propaganda posters. 
Now, he does photorealistic, sepia-toned Beijing street scenes. 
Every so often, he holds an exhibition of his work in his studio, inviting a few dozen people, many of them foreigners, who might be interested in buying his paintings.
''Do they give you any trouble?''
I asked, referring to the members of the neighborhood committee, the basic unit of the Chinese surveillance system, which would have looked askance at such activities a few years ago.
''No,'' Yang replied. 
''I can sell my paintings and nobody pays any attention.''
EVEN AS I MET WITH old friends, I asked about Lu Lin, and, when I did finally meet him at his clothing stand, the encounter brought back powerful memories of the way China had once been - while providing reminders of what it could become if the cordon of political control should dramatically tighten again.
My first meeting with Lu Lin was in the home of Liu Qing, a noted dissident and an editor of April Fifth Forum, one of the Democracy Wall movement's more thoughtful and well-known journals. 
A few weeks after that encounter, Liu Qing, on behalf of a group of activists calling for democracy in China, circulated at the Democracy Wall a transcript of a defense statement made by Wei Jingsheng. 
Wei, a leader in the democracy movement, had been publicly tried and given a 15-year sentence for what were officially termed ''counterrevolutionary'' activities.
Liu Qing, too, was arrested and in the decade since has not reappeared. 
In 1981, however, he managed to break through the wall of silence and secrecy that surrounded him. 
A long and electrifying account of his arrest, interrogation and imprisonment was smuggled out of his prison cell.
Around that time, I was in Hong Kong waiting for a return visa to China. 
With time on my hands, I decided to call on a group in the British colony that had information about the ongoing Chinese crackdown on the leading members of the democracy movement who were still free.
During my visit with the group, one of its members pulled out of a yellow envelope a thick sheaf of papers that was the Liu Qing manuscript. 
I realized its importance immediately. 
It described a part of the vast, secret Chinese gulag that people on the outside knew about only through rumor and second-hand accounts. 
Liu Qing recounted his experience in vivid detail, describing the ''blind fury'' of the Public Security Bureau interrogators, the constant cold of the cells, the ''infinite flexibility'' of ''the dictatorship of the proletariat'' - a reference to the police being able to do whatever they wanted.
The group in Hong Kong gave me the manuscript, which I photocopied and sent off to Time magazine in New York, where excerpts of it were to be published. 
I was also given a letter - in a sealed, unmarked envelope -which I was to deliver by hand to some of Liu Qing's friends once I returned to Beijing.
However, when I finally got my visa and returned to China, I could not make the delivery. 
The atmosphere in Beijing was tense, far too tense for me to meet with the former Democracy Wall activists without jeopardizing their safety. 
In the provinces, editors of unofficial journals were being arrested. 
The Foreign Ministry called a meeting of the entire foreign press corps - more than 100 reporters from dozens of countries - during which a deputy minister declared that reporting on what he called ''underground activities'' would be considered a violation of our status in China and was forbidden. 
Although I firmly believed that reporting on ''underground activities'' was a journalistic duty, I also felt that acting as an intermediary between groups inside and outside China was not part of that duty.
As it happened, the day before the excerpts of the Liu Qing manuscript were to appear in Time, I had to fly to Hong Kong, and I decided, with fateful foolishness as it turned out, to return the letter to the people who had given it to me.
I wanted, I suppose, to show them that it remained sealed and had not been seen by anybody. 
At the Beijing airport, however, I was stopped at customs. 
I was taken to a small room, where the customs police went through everything I was carrying: every notebook, every piece of paper. 
Trying to appear nonchalant, I watched as the agents came across the sealed envelope, which I knew would attract their attention because it had no address or other writing on it. 
''What is this?'' they asked. 
''It's just something that belongs to me,'' I stammered, attempting to reach for it. 
They opened it and I could see some flyers in Chinese with the letterhead of the Hong Kong group on them and a two-page handwritten letter. 
The agents read the materials quickly, excitedly. 
They confiscated the envelope and its contents, along with six rolls of film that I had taken months before and was finally getting around to having processed in Hong Kong. 
Then I was permitted to go to my plane.
The next day, a Monday, the excerpts of the Liu Qing manuscript were published in Time and subsequently in several other newspapers around the world. 
I went back to China after a week in Hong Kong and, a month later, was summoned to an office on the narrow lane just outside the moat of the Forbidden City that the Public Security Bureau kept for its various dealings with foreigners, usually involving such things as residency and travel permits. 
There, for about four hours, I was questioned by three uniformed officers about my connection with the seized letter and the publication of the Liu Qing manuscript.
I was accused of having engaged in ''illegal activities'' in China. 
I tried, foolishly, to lie about the incriminating letter, saying it had arrived unsolicited in the mail in an envelope sent from Hong Kong. 
But the police sternly assured me that they knew I had it with me when I came to China after getting the Liu Qing manuscript in Hong Kong. 
I was put off balance by the accuracy and completeness of their information. 
There was an informer someplace, probably inside the group in Hong Kong.
I have thought many times about that interrogation, wishing I had been brave enough simply to refuse to answer questions no matter what the consequences. 
The plain fact is that they have you at a disadvantage: there you are in a little room you know you will not get out of until they are ready to let you go. 
The reflex is to give them something, a tidbit that will satisfy them.
And so, I admitted having received the Liu Qing manuscript in Hong Kong, and I maintained, truthfully, that I had had no contact with anybody inside China in connection with the whole matter.
It is possible, of course, that the interrogation mattered very little as far as Lu Lin was concerned. 
Probably, once the Liu Qing manuscript was published, he would have gone to prison even had the police not found the letter I was carrying. 
But I knew from members of the Hong Kong group something of the letter's contents. 
It reported on the receipt and dissemination of the manuscript and thus would certainly have helped to establish a link between that and Liu Qing's friends in China.
The meeting at the public security office was farcical in one sense. 
The chief interrogator declared for my benefit that ''the Chinese people enjoy full democratic rights.''
Then, rather stiffly, he announced something to the effect that if I did not cease my ''illegal activities'' I would bear all of the consequences. 
Just before I left, I was told that three of my six rolls of film, which had been processed by the security police, would not be returned to me. 
''Why?''
I asked. 
''You took those rolls, so you know why yourself,'' was the reply. 
I found this answer striking. 
I knew that one of the basic techniques of serious Chinese interrogations -the kind that lead to imprisonment, rather than just warnings - is to refuse to tell a defendant what he is suspected of. 
Instead, he is informed that if he confesses to the unspecified crimes he ''knows'' he has committed, leniency will follow.
''But I don't even remember what was on those rolls,'' I protested, informing the interrogator they had been taken months earlier during my various travels, none of which had been to unauthorized areas.
''You know what is wrong about them,'' the agent repeated, ''since you took the pictures yourself.''
''May I look at them to remind myself of what is on them?''
I asked. 
''That is forbidden,'' he said. 
Eventually, Lu Lin and another former democracy advocate, Liu Qing's younger brother, Liu Nianqun, were arrested and imprisoned for assisting in the release of the prison diary to a Western reporter. 
Liu Qing, already serving his term of ''reform through education,'' was brought, according to his friends, to a closed trial and sentenced to a further seven years in prison. 
The charge, as far as I have been able to determine, was disseminating ''counterrevolutionary propaganda,'' meaning the diary he had written. 
Liu Nianqun got off with the lightest punishment - a three-year term of ''reform through education.''
He, too, I was told during my recent visit, was now tending a free-market stand. 
''I don't see him very much anymore,'' Lu Lin said.
There was another curious footnote to the Liu Qing matter. 
Around the time of Lu Lin's arrest in 1981, the security police also picked up a young artist named Li Shuang and sentenced her to a two-year term of ''reform through education.''
Li Shuang was living then with her fiance, a French diplomat whom she has since rejoined in Paris and married. 
I always found the timing of Li Shuang's arrest rather odd, coming right after the Liu Qing affair.
The case was a sensation in France and received widespread international press coverage. 
At the time, the common assumption was that the police wanted to make an example of Li Shuang's ''immoral'' behavior. 
But I knew that her fiance had close contacts with the group around Liu Qing and was suspected of having played a role in getting his prison diary out of the country. 
I always believed that by sending Li Shuang to two years of ''re-education'' the Chinese were punishing him for his role in the affair. 
China was like that in those days.
I DIDN'T SPEND MUCH TIME with Lu Lin when I was back in China in December. 
But one night, I went to a bus stop where Lu was waiting for me. 
He took me to his mother's home, where his sister had prepared a meal, and we talked. 
At one point, when I suddenly heard some loud voices in the lane just outside, I was almost struck dumb with fear that some prying neighbors had summoned the police, who would take Lu away again. 
Such things have happened before in China. 
Lu left the room to find out what the noise was about, and came back to tell me that it was nothing.
Lu didn't say much about his imprisonment. 
Once, after he had tried to pass a note to another activist he had seen in the exercise yard, he was kept in a ''punishment cell'' for three months. 
He got one 10-minute visit a month from his parents. 
His girlfriend was not allowed to see him or to write to him during his entire term of imprisonment. 
The two got married after his release. 
He told me that the conditions of his life now are quite good. 
The free-market stall, he said, does an uneven seasonal business, but the family income is certainly far higher than it used to be when Lu, before his arrest, worked in a factory.
After dinner, Lu Lin accompanied me on the mile-long walk through Beijing's quiet, ghostly streets back to the Jianguo Hotel. 
I invited him in for a coffee, which I would not have been able to do in the old days. 
And as we sat down at a table in the very post-Maoist lobby, once more I felt an infinite sadness at the punishment he had received.
What crimes had he and his friends in the democracy movement committed?
They spoke out for such things as a free press. 
They claimed that China could never be modern unless it became democratic first. 
In quashing that movement, China had snuffed out some of its brightest, certainly some of its most courageous voices. 
As I sat in the Jianguo lobby with Lu that night, I felt that things had changed at least enough to enable us to be together without harassment. 
It was good to sit with him there. 
Yet I was left with a dark, final thought about China's system of political control. 
Was it enough of a change that Lu and others could have coffee with me in a hotel?
Here was a bright and highly motivated young man. 
He could be a writer, perhaps a journalist. 
He should be able to travel abroad, attend conferences on human rights, publish a memoir of prison life. 
But he won't do any of these things.
Lu made it clear to me that his days of political activism are over. 
He will try to lead a quiet, inconspicuous life.
