
IN the 19th century, it could be said that there were two alternative predictions about mankind's future. 
Marx proclaimed the inevitability of world socialism while Toqueville asserted that democracy, which he saw with some trepidation as rule by the consent of the governed, would surely replace rule by the few.
Marx has proved to be wrong. 
But was Toqueville right?
Do glasnost and perestroika, the student marches in China, and the fall of dictators from the Philippines to Paraguay signal the realization of his prediction?
Milovan Djilas, the Yugoslav author of the dissident classic, ''The New Class,'' summed up an optimistic view on the issue at a conference earlier this month in Washington. 
''The only real, irrefutable progress of man is his freedom,'' the former Yugoslav vice president and political prisoner said. 
''Or, more precisely, expansion of his freedom is both the way and the condition of human existence.''
Mr. Djilas and people from two dozen countries spoke at a meeting sponsored by the National Endowment for Democracy, a group financed by Congress that gives money to democratic movements around the world. 
A few days earlier, some two dozen dissidents from China gathered in Bolinas, Calif., to talk about their country's present and future. 
The dominant assumption at both meetings was that totalitarianism has failed and is on the wane. 
Zbigniew Brzezinski, who moderated Mr. Djilas's panel, has written a new book called ''The Great Failure,'' a reference to the bankruptcy of Marxism. 
Meanwhile, in Latin America, in Eastern and Central Europe, in the Soviet Union, in China and in several African countries the trend is toward more freedom, less control.
 
Notes of Pessimism
But amid the optimism were notes of pessimism, recitations of remaining obstacles, including the obvious fact that many rulers do not want democracy. 
They want power. 
''We seem to be in a mood of self-congratulation and optimism,'' said Jean-Francois Revel, the French author of ''How Democracies Perish.''
But Mr. Revel, who is not among the optimists, went on to ask, ''Are we right?''
Many analysts believe that a kind of global village phenomenon is helpful to democratic movements. 
Monica Jimenez de Barros, who led a voter registration drive in last year's plebiscite on military rule in Chile, told the Washington conference how her son in Santiago had posters in his room celebrating the Solidarity trade union in Poland. 
The overthrow of Ferdinand E. Marcos, Mrs. Jimenez said, was also an example to Chile.
The move toward democracy also seems reinforced by what might be the most earth-shattering development of the late 20th century - the crisis of ideology in the Soviet Union and China. 
''The Soviet Union has entered the era of its decline and dissolution,'' said Janos Kis, a Hungarian writer, reflecting a common view in Eastern Europe that Poland, Hungary and even Czechoslovakia are moving toward democracy.
Wu Guoguang, a former reporter for the People's Daily, the official Chinese Communist newspaper, proclaimed that the student marches in his country, taking place despite a ban on such protests, show that ''a new force for change has arisen.''
Many of the Chinese dissidents meeting in California saw the recent demonstrations as reflecting not only a widespread loss of faith in socialist orthodoxy, but also a failure of confidence among the leaders who, in the past, quickly repressed all pro-democracy movements.
The most recent developments are different from previous surges of democratic feeling, the Chinese dissidents said, because now the dictatorships have lost the justification they once could claim - that only they could guarantee order and economic progress. 
The Chinese argued that the political leadership's intention to reform the economy without expanding political freedom cannot work.
 
Obstacles to Freedom
The words emerging to describe all this is ''the democratic revolution,'' a phrase that Vilem Precan, a Czechoslovak history professor who now lives in West Germany, defined as ''a system based on spiritual, political and economic pluralism and mutual tolerance.''
Its goal, he continued, apparently referring to what he sees as the flawed intentions behind the Soviet policy of glasnost, is not ''to modernize the Communist system and make it more efficient while retaining its essence.''
''The aim,'' he said, ''is to do away with it once and for all.''
And yet, as Mr. Precan acknowledged, ''democratic revolution'' may be overstating what is happening in the world. 
The rise of Islamic fundamentalism is one instance of a revived dictatorship, one that uses religion to justify itself. 
Terrorism is another force working against democracy. 
The weight of poverty and overpopulation are used time and again as justifications for authoritarian rule.
Leszek Kolakowski, the Polish writer and philosopher, pointed out that the dissolution of dictatorships can lead to chaos rather than to democracy. 
If democratic reform does not work in countries like China and the Soviet Union, the situation could be ripe for new demagogues and dictators. 
Hitler and Mussolini took power in floundering democracies in times of political and economic crisis, bringing an end to what might be seen as an earlier ''democratic revolution'' in this century after World War I. Jean-Francois Revel said last week that, in fact, the 20th century has on the whole been a disaster for democracy. 
If the democratic revolution has been renewed, it has so far only managed to bring some parts of Eastern Europe and Asia, Africa and South America to roughly the point they had reached when the last great anti-democratic cataclysm struck.
That may be progress, but as Mr. Revel pointed out, the century has already shown how fragile the progress can be.
