
In a bold proposal for change, three influential Chinese economists with close ties to the Government have called for China to abandon state ownership of industry.
The proposal would transfer ownership of all China's state-owned companies to shareholders that would include individuals, universities, institutions and local governments.
The economists, all Communist Party members in senior positions at Government institutions, presented their ideas in writing to the Communist Party leader, Zhao Ziyang, about 10 days ago, said Hua Sheng, the most prominent of the three economists. 
He said the ideas had also been discussed with other high-ranking officials.
Ready for Publication
Mr. Hua, who spoke in a four-hour interview on Sunday night, is ensconced with his colleagues in a guest house belonging to China's State Council - the rough equivalent of a cabinet in Western countries - so that they can prepare their ideas for publication. 
Their proposal is to be published next month in an official journal and expanded into a book to be published in Chinese in May. 
An English-language edition is expected by the end of the year.
Mr. Hua said there had been no reaction from China's top leaders. 
He acknowledged that the plan would meet opposition and he said he doubted it would be adopted in the next six months, because China is focusing on how to stabilize its overheated economy.
But he said that when the economy has been stabilized, perhaps by the middle of this year, the proposal is likely to be considered and eventually to be adopted.
 
A Sign of Interest
In a sign of Government interest, the official newspaper People's Daily carried a long article today about Mr. Hua and his ideas. 
People's Daily, which is published by the Communist Party, did not directly include the suggestion that China abandon state ownership, but it did note approvingly that Mr. Hua had ''courageously pointed out that public ownership no longer is the premise of socialism.''
Separately, the English-language China Daily began publishing a four-part series on the ideas of Mr. Hua and his colleagues today. 
It also did not directly mention the privatization proposal.
 
A Record of Success
Mr. Hua, who at 36 years old is head of the Microeconomics Department at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences' Institute of Economics, is considered a Wunderkind in Chinese economic circles. 
His education included a year at Oxford University, and he plans to return there this month to begin studies for a doctorate in industrial economics. 
His collaborators, in the current proposal and in several previous projects, are Zhang Xuejun, 34-year-old head of planning and statistics at the same institute, and Luo Xiaopeng, 41, a manager of national economics research in the State Council's Research Center for Rural Development. 
In the last five years, their proposals have led to several of China's most far-reaching structural changes.
This time, however, they are not just seeking greater economic efficiency but eventually political restructuring as well. 
Mr. Hua said the proposal would create a class of universities and corporations independent from the Government and able to exert pressure for greater democracy.
 
'Strongholds for Democracy'
''Right now universities are just like Government agencies,'' Mr. Hua said. 
''If they were economically independent, then universities could become strongholds for democracy.''
Mr. Hua said a new definition of socialism is needed, focusing on broad issues of social justice like equality of opportunity, instead of on public ownership of the means of production.
Mr. Hua asserted that while Marx was generally correct in the field of politics, he erred in economics by opposing private property.
Mr. Hua said that when companies are owned by the state, the Government interferes with managing them efficiently and the companies themselves try to maximize benefits to employees rather than profits and productivity. 
In the long run, he said, the society and the workers suffer because the economy is unable to grow robustly. 
Mr. Hua said that the companies would do best if they instead had owners whose sole interest was in seeing them perform efficiently and profitably. 
''The problem with many socialist reforms is that they try to reduce government intervention without creating an owner for each company,'' Mr. Hua said. 
''And every enterprise needs an owner.''
A Western diplomat in Beijing who specializes in economics noted that the Government has been very interested in ways to develop a shareholding system, and suggested that there probably would be high-level interest in the latest proposal. 
But he added that the idea would not only be opposed by many people for ideological reasons, but would also be extremely difficult to carry out because at the local levels there is bureaucratic resistance and inertia, and there is no legal groundwork for a shareholding system.
Mr. Hua first achieved general recognition in 1984, when he proposed what is known as the ''dual track pricing system.''
That plan, adopted the following year, stipulates that the Government should continue to fix prices for goods produced under the state plan, but that prices of goods produced above the quota can float freely.
Several other Chinese economists, most notably Li Yining, a Beijing University economics professor, have called on China to move to a system of shareholder ownership. 
The Communist Party has endorsed the idea, but even maverick thinkers like Professor Li say the state should retain a controlling interest of 25 percent to 51 percent in companies it spins off.
 
Going Further Than Others
In two respects, Mr. Hua and his colleagues go much further than others have gone. 
First, they call on the central Government to sell all its holdings. 
Second, the new proposal is the first to aim at broad political goals such as greater democratization, as well as at economic efficiency.
Financially, a huge amount is at stake. 
State-owned companies have fixed assets valued at about $190 billion, and they account for two-thirds of China's industrial output.
Because potential investors would not be able to afford to buy companies from the state, Mr. Hua would like the Government to issue ''asset certificates'' that could be used in place of money to buy shares in state companies. 
The certificates would be given to Chinese universities and other institutions, partly replacing the subsidies they receive from the Government. 
Certificates would also be given to local governments, in exchange for pledging to pay a fixed sum to the central Government each year. 
Finally, certificates would be given to individuals working at state-owned companies, in exchange for giving up their right to lifetime employment.
