
The whispers among Chinese officials these days are all about power struggles or major reshuffles in the leadership.
Many of the whispers concern a possible demotion for Prime Minister Li Peng. 
The problem with assessing the rumors is that Mr. Li appears to be one of the most disliked people in China these days, many Chinese and foreign diplomats say. 
Thus it is difficult to tell whether the rumors are based on fact or on wishful thinking.
Whether or not Mr. Li falls, other senior leaders are widely expected to be replaced during the National People's Congress in March and April. 
Most accounts are that there will be one or two new deputy prime ministers, and perhaps a new vice president.
Those mentioned for the posts tend to favor economic liberalization, and if they are promoted, as is rumored, it would be a sign that perhaps China is returning to the path of economic restructuring that it pursued for a decade before the violent crackdown in June.
The rumors about Mr. Li are mostly traded among middle-level and senior officials. 
Even if they are not true, they could impair his effectiveness.
One official said he and other policy advisers were now unenthusiastic about providing information and recommendations for the Prime Minister because they believe that he might not be around much longer.
So far, no one says he has seen a document spelling out Mr. Li's resignation, and there is no clear evidence that he is in difficulty. 
Indeed, there is some evidence to the contrary. 
A friend of Mr. Li, Zou Jiahua, was named to the pivotal position of head of the State Planning Commission last month.
But some Chinese officials say Mr. Li was highly embarrassed at the fifth plenum of the Communist Party Central Committee, in November. 
They say he made a detailed proposal to the Central Committee, calling for rewriting the formula for how much money the provinces pass on to the central Government. 
The proposal would have called for higher contributions from the provinces; the Central Committee, which includes many provincial leaders, rejected it.
Those who believe that Mr. Li will lose his job note that China's senior leader, Deng Xiaoping, hinted at that on May 31 in a speech that has still not been officially released. 
''We should change the group of leaders,'' Mr. Deng said in the speech. 
''The new group of leaders should be a brand new one that conveys a new image to the people.''
Mentioned most often by Chinese officials to replace Mr. Li is Li Ruihuan, a 66-year-old former construction worker who is one of six members of the Politburo's standing committee. 
He is more popular than most top officials, and he is regarded as a centrist.
A senior Chinese cited an incident in support of the theory that a power struggle was under way. 
The official said the Prime Minister's office telephoned the national television headquarters to complain that the news clip of Li Ruihuan meeting with a foreign dignitary lasted longer than the one of Li Peng meeting with the dignitary.
Aside from Li Ruihuan, the most widely mentioned candidates for promotion are Zhu Rongji, the ruler of Shanghai, and Ye Xuanping, the Governor of Guangdong Province. 
Mr. Zhu and Mr. Ye, who are believed to be under consideration for deputy prime ministers, are regarded as among the strongest advocates of economic restructuring left in the leadership.
