
Like the bamboo shoots that emerge everywhere after a spring rain, to use a Chinese simile, democracy is sprouting again in China.
No one knows if it will take root any more than it has in the past. 
But what is striking this time is that the calls for a more democratic system are coming not just from students and intellectuals but from a new social class of wealthy entrepreneurs and from the Communist Party itself.
This time there is little of the fanfare of past crusades for democracy: the dissident posters pasted on ''Democracy Wall'' a decade ago, or the student demonstrations that ended with a crackdown on intellectuals in January 1987. 
But today's calls for more openness and democracy may also have more weight because some are coming from within the party itself.
'New Political Order'
No one expects the Communist Party to permit the emergence of a multi-party democratic system, at least for many years. 
But the party is tolerating criticism that not long ago would have been a ticket to prison, and there seems to be a growing view that political liberalization modeled to some extent on the increasing openness in the Soviet Union is in order in China today.
''We need not only a new economic order, but also a new political order,'' the Communist Party General Secretary, Zhao Ziyang, told Henan Province officials last month. 
Mr. Zhao did not elaborate, but it seems he may have had in mind a society increasingly founded on law instead of caprice, where institutions respond to popular opinion instead of signals from above.
Accompanying the debate about more democratic political institutions is a growing tolerance. 
On Sunday night, for example, about 50 young artists and dissidents openly gathered in a smoke-filled private bar to hear a discussion of human rights and sign a petition calling for release of political prisoners. 
The security forces did not intervene, and initial nervousness faded into joviality.
 
An Illegal Arts Magazine
''Now people can criticize the party quite openly,'' said Mang Ke, a poet who was active in the Democracy Wall movement a decade ago. 
''More and more people are daring to criticize the Government. 
People want more democracy.''
Mr. Mang is testing the limits of the new openness. 
He is editor of a new arts magazine that, although illegal, has aroused no reaction from the Government. 
And in a sign of the growing self-confidence of the dissidents, the staff members have decided to list their names in the second issue, which is due to be printed later this month.
An unauthorized new social science magazine with democratic leanings has also emerged in the last few months, and again the normally vigilant security organs have not reacted.
''The leaders don't like all this, but they can't control it,'' said Fang Lizhi, an astrophysicist who is China's best-known dissident. 
''There are too many people who are outspoken.''
One of the new features of the present steps toward liberalization, Mr. Fang says, is support from a new class of wealthy business entrepreneurs. 
Such people, who have come into existence only in the last decade, are helping to finance the incipient democratic movement and provide logistical support. 
Just in the last month, for example, owners of private businesses have twice underwritten gatherings of intellectuals to discuss democracy.
Mr. Fang said one businessman dropped by his home the other night to offer the equivalent of thousands of dollars to bolster democratic activities.
 
A Minority Concern
Still, only a tiny proportion of the population seems visibly concerned by the question of democracy. 
Supporters of political change admit they are frustrated by the many young people who seem much more interested in the opportunity to make money than the chance to vote. 
And even those who proclaim support for democracy often seem to have only vague notions of what it is that they want.
Among high officials, the new-found tolerance seems partly the result of a genuine feeling that pluralism is more respectable than repression, and that a measure of democracy and freedom can help economic modernization.
But perhaps no less important in explaining their tolerance is simply the crisis of confidence in which the Communist Party finds itself. 
In the last eight months, China has been mired in inflation and corruption that the party admits have tainted its image. 
Its image as a monolith has cracked, and people have felt free to rush into the vacuum to offer their own ideas.
The official press has suddenly become less official, with newspapers spewing out various ideas including greater democracy. 
People's Daily, the newspaper of the Communist Party itself, published the preface of a new book, ''On Democracy,'' including the assertion that lack of democracy has been the chief cause of many of China's failures, including the Cultural Revolution that shook the country from 1966 to 1976. 
The article added: ''Only when democracy is instilled in economics, culture and other fields, can reform of those areas succeed.''
Meanwhile, the Government seems to be trying to provide some new mechanisms to broaden its base and gain legitimacy by involving more people in decision-making. 
Officials have even said recently that up to one-third of leading posts in the central Government should be filled by people outside the Communist Party.
 
'Marxism Is in a Crisis'
The limits to the new openness seem to have been unintentionally defined by Su Shaozhi, a distinguished political theorist and Communist Party member, who strongly rebuked the party in a recent speech for failing to provide academic freedom.
''We should frankly admit that Marxism is in a crisis,'' Mr. Su said in the speech, which was reprinted in the World Economic Herald in Shanghai. 
''We should be aware of the grim situation that Marxism now faces. 
Because Marxism was dogmatized and glorified for a long time, and bolstered by those in power, Marxists were liable to rest content with the hackneyed and stereotyped expressions in textbooks.''
Other newspapers were immediately ordered not to reprint the speech. 
The World Economic Herald was reprimanded, and many journalists express fear that the newspaper's editor may be dismissed in a few months when the controversy dies down.
