
Like many young Chinese, Cheng Lin grew up despising and even fearing the Nationalist Chinese forces on Taiwan. 
But these days, for Miss Cheng and probably hundreds of millions of other Chinese, loathing has faded into longing, and Taiwan is no longer the enemy but the model.
''Young Chinese envy Taiwan,'' Miss Cheng, one of China's most famous pop singers, said in her velvet voice in a recent interview.
''We used to think that Taiwan was a wretched place, but then we discovered it isn't like that. 
It is very rich and we envy it enormously. 
Life is so much better there.''
Miss Cheng, a 22-year-old who is married to a Taiwan singer now living on the mainland, is probably protected by her fame and is therefore bolder than most Chinese. 
An idol to many of China's youths, and probably a barometer of their views, she scarcely paused when asked if China should adopt Taiwan's free market economic system.
''Everybody thinks that in their heart,'' she answered.
 
Lessons From Taiwan
Not only pop singers, but also economists, journalists, student demonstrators and even Communist Party officials are searching for lessons in Taiwan's stunning economic development and in its political liberalization in the last few years.
Perhaps the reports of the Nationalists' defeat in the Chinese civil war four decades ago were exaggerated, for Taiwan's influence on the mainland is substantial and almost certain to increase. 
Contacts between the mainland and Taiwan are multiplying almost daily, leaving ordinary Chinese with a clearer impression than they have ever had before of an alternative to the Communist way that they have known for 40 years.
The most obvious sign of the growing ties between the onetime enemies is the presence this week in Beijing of Shirley Kuo, Taiwan's Finance Minister, who is here to attend a conference of the Asian Development Bank. 
Miss Kuo is the first Taiwan Government official to come here since the end of the civil war.
 
Coveting on the Mainland
The ''Taiwan fever'' on the mainland includes a tremendous interest in the way of life on Taiwan, including fashions, music, films and books. 
Potentially far more important, many mainlanders also covet Taiwan's economic system or increasingly competitive political system.
Above all, people are asking questions that Chinese leaders find embarrassing: Why is Taiwan so much richer than the mainland?
Why are Taiwan citizens now allowed more political freedom than their relatives on the mainland?
''Across the nation, many people think we should imitate Taiwan,'' Wu Jiaxiang, a leading Communist Party theorist, acknowledged in a recent interview. 
''But that is a very complicated matter.''
Mr. Wu said he thought that the mainland could learn some lessons from Taiwan's experience with opening up its political system, particularly its tolerance of public meetings and its use of voting to select officials.
''They've done better than the mainland in this,'' he conceded, ''although they have not done as well as the West. 
We should be able to do what Taiwan has done.''
 
Students' Awareness on Taiwan
Student leaders here generally say that while they are deeply interested in the liberalization on Taiwan, it has not been a direct inspiration to their movement for greater democracy.
But some students acknowledge that Taiwan's political development has been in the back of their minds, and they say it is relevant because of its similarities to the mainland. 
At least until recently, both were Chinese societies ruled in an authoritarian manner by a single party, yet Taiwan has found a path toward significantly greater democracy.
Taiwan officials are delighted by the island's growing influence on the mainland, and in the last two weeks a major debate has been under way in Taipei about how to react to the student unrest.
Jaw Shau-kong, a Taiwan legislator, sponsored a motion that drew support from 24 colleagues urging the Government to support the mainland students demonstrators, and the Nationalist Party central standing committee has also discussed the possibility of assisting the students.
''We're watching it very closely,'' Mr. Jaw said in a telephone interview. 
''We hope to help the students ask for more freedom and democracy.''
On how Taiwan could help the students, Mr. Jaw mentioned moral support, but he also did not rule out clandestine financial aid.
 
Influx of Taiwan Journalists
One area in which Taiwan's political impact is already felt is in the journalists it has sent to the mainland. 
The first Taiwan journalists came to the mainland less than two years ago, but now dozens are in town, and several publications plan to open bureaus in Beijing and other cities.
Freedom of the press has become an increasingly important issue in China, and one reason seems to be that intellectuals want to follow Taiwan's path toward liberalization.
''Look at what Taiwan did,'' a Beijing university professor said recently as he discussed strategies for getting greater democracy on the mainland. 
''They first expanded freedom of the press. 
That's what we need to do, too.''
Chinese economists are also casting an increasingly interested eye across the Taiwan Strait. 
Mainland journals, such as Comparative Economic and Social Systems, are publishing articles about Taiwan's economy, and many economists here say the mainland can learn a great deal from the economic miracle on Taiwan.
''For the present period, our economy should be like Taiwan's,'' Wu Jinglian, one of China's most prominent economists, said in a recent interview. 
''We have to build a system very close to Taiwan's or those of other newly industrializing Asian countries.''
Chinese lawyers are also looking at Taiwan's legal system for inspiration. 
Chang Hailong, a lawyer in the southern city of Shenzhen, said Taiwan had gained useful experience in commercial law that the mainland was studying to see what lessons could be learned.
In fact, the reverent gaze toward Taiwan is partly a vindication of the Nationalists' propaganda in the last few decades that they would serve as a beacon of inspiration to their brethren suffering under the ''Communist bandits'' on the mainland.
But Taiwan need not feel quite so smug, for almost no one here seems enthusiastic about the Nationalist Party itself, whose rule on the mainland before 1949 is widely remembered for its corruption, chaos and brutality.
 
A Fascination With Success
Aside from the use of Taiwan as a political or economic model, there simply seems to be a society-wide fascination with Taiwan's success.
Tapes of Taiwan singers like Su Rui, Wan Shalang and Pan Anbang are extremely popular on the mainland, and so are books by Taiwan authors. 
Dog-eared copies of the scathing indictment of Chinese culture, ''The Ugly Chinaman,'' by the Taiwan essayist Bo Yang, are cherished by university students here since the work was banned two years ago.
Some shrewd business people have already realized that a Taiwan connection is a big help in marketing books or videos.
A book bearing the subtitle ''An Exposure of Taiwan's Dark Society'' created a sensation recently and prompted demand for a companion video series that sold 10 times more copies than the average mainland video. 
The purchasers apparently did not realize that both the book and the screenplay were written by mainland Chinese who had never been to Taiwan.
