
As the smoke from his cigarette whirled around the deep lines in his face, tan and textured like the old leather saddles on the horses grazing behind him, Namshin remembered the days when the plateau was inhabited only by fellow Tibetans, so that he lived his first 35 years without ever seeing a single Chinese.
"Now look at those villages over there," said the 68-year-old Mr. Namshin, who possesses 150 sheep but only one name, and he waved his hand beyond a herd of yaks at some hamlets on the prairie. 
"They're all Chinese. 
Now there's no place to raise our livestock down here, and we must go into the mountains to graze our sheep."
Four decades after the Communist revolution, Mr. Namshin's dismay seems to be shared by many other Tibetans who live here in Qinghai Province. 
The Communists have brought roads, trains, X-rays, television and a measure of prosperity. 
But they have also brought their own people, Han Chinese, who are remolding this part of the Tibetan plateau in their own image.
 
Minority in Their Land
This land of mountains and prairies historically was Amdo Province of Tibet, but it fell under Chinese control in the 18th century and was inherited by the Communists after their 1949 revolution. 
Today, when most people around the world speak of "Tibet" they refer to the "Tibet autonomous region" that China invaded in 1950 and still tightly controls. 
But to the Tibetan government in exile and to many Tibetans themselves, this too is Tibet -- the one forgotten by the West, the one that cannot call itself Tibet, the one in which Tibetans are now a minority in their own land.
Once this was a center of Tibetan learning, the birthplace of the Dalai Lama, the exiled spiritual leader of Tibetans. 
But now the Dalai Lama's photo cannot be sold on the streets to people who still worship him with a devotion that is luminous in their eyes.
The rights of Tibetans have been a matter of growing international concern, but this Tibetan area has been among the most remote and among the least visited by foreigners, with little information trickling to the West about conditions here. 
A rare, eight-day journey through Qinghai found many Tibetans chafing at religious and family planning restrictions, and alarmed that they were being submerged in a Chinese sea.
As a result of Government-backed migration, Qinghai Province's population of 4.5 million is now 58 percent Han Chinese, 20 percent Tibetan and 22 percent Hui and other minorities. 
In contrast, a 1950 handbook to China says Tibetans were then the largest group in Qinghai.
Yet there is little sign in Qinghai of political unrest or of the deep antagonisms that are immediately evident in the Chinese "autonomous region" of Tibet, particularly in the capital, Lhasa. 
Troops in Lhasa have fired on protesters and tortured monks and nuns, provoking outrage in the West and radicalizing the local population, but here the authorities are using gentler tactics and appear to have won acquiescence and sometimes support from a considerable sector of the Tibetan population.
"Relations among the nationalities are good here," said Wenchangtai, a 28-year-old Tibetan peasant, as he chewed on oily bread for breakfast in a room of his mud-walled home in Gonghe County. 
One indication that relations are indeed relatively good is his Han Chinese wife, Wang Guojin, also 28, who was sitting a few feet away on the "kang" platform bed nursing their baby.
"Our parents had no objection," Mr. Wenchangtai said. 
"Of course, some parents might not be happy, but it wasn't a problem with ours."
About 10 percent of the marriages in the area are between Tibetans and Han, local people say.
Suonan Dajie, an 18-year-old student walking down the dirt path to visit relatives, also seemed fairly typical of a younger breed of Tibetans who have few complaints about the system.
"I know that in Tibet there've been some separatist activities, but it's not like that here," he said. 
"Relations among the nationalities are good here, and we've got religious freedom."
 
Chinese Learned in School
Mr. Suonan Dajie and Mr. Wenchangtai, who spoke in the fluent Chinese they learned in school, were interviewed at random along with dozens of other Tibetans, mostly during several days of hiking along the trails of Gonghe County in central Qinghai Province. 
No one else was present for most of the interviews, although the security forces made considerable efforts to trace this reporter's steps and interrogate those Tibetans who were interviewed.
Local officials, who had previously refused to allow a visit to Qinghai, allowed this trip to an international conference in Qinghai. 
They protested vigorously when this reporter slipped away to roam the countryside, and they also assigned "tails" to try to determine who was contacted.
The jitteriness among officials contrasted with the bucolic scenes of yellow wheat and snow-capped mountains, and paradoxically most of the rural Tibetans seemed more content and less politicized or fearful than the urban middle class in cities like Beijing and Shanghai -- or Tibet itself. 
In Lhasa, many Tibetans are enraged by the shootings and torture and repression about them. 
But here in Qinghai there appear to be few detentions and little or no torture to radicalize the Tibetans, although conditions may not be so idyllic as the authorities claim.
"There've been no conflicts, not even one," claimed Suonan Tsering, a Tibetan who is director of the Government's nationality affairs commission in the provincial capital, Xining.
 
Confrontations Reported
In fact, however, there have been several confrontations since 1987 in the East Qinghai town of Tongren, and two Tibetan monks there were sentenced last year to prison terms of 12 months and 18 months for unfurling a Tibetan national flag on the street. 
Both presumably have now completed their sentences.
In Xinghai County, two young men were forced to flee to India last year when the police sought to arrest them for distributing 100 pro-independence leaflets, villagers said. 
And in Gonghe County, a young man was detained after he visited associates of the Dalai Lama in India. 
He was released and fled back to India.
Robert Barnett, coordinator of the London-based Tibet information network, an independent monitoring service, cited several past arrests in southern Qinghai, not far from the town of Yushu. 
But he said it was not known if there were now any Tibetan political prisoners in Qinghai.
Villagers in Qinghai said they were unaware of the new Tibetan-language broadcasts by the Voice of America, but they all knew of the shootings of protesters in Lhasa. 
They said the news had spread by word of mouth, rippling across the grasslands from hut to hut, tent to tent.
 
'Our Hearts Are Breaking'
"Our hearts were breaking," a middle-aged Tibetan peasant said in the privacy of his home. 
"We don't count as people here. 
We're becoming a minority, and the only way to protect ourselves is independence. 
People don't dare say it, but everybody feels it in their hearts."
That was far from a uniform view among Tibetans interviewed, but even those who opposed independence were deeply distressed by the violence in Lhasa and by restrictions affecting religion. 
While many young Tibetans said they had religious freedom, there are stark limits. 
A half-dozen shopowners said independently that they were not permitted to sell photos of the Dalai Lama.
The photos are enormously important to Tibetans, who revere the Dalai Lama and want to display photos of him in their shops, monasteries and on altars in their homes. 
In the Tibet autonomous region, repression is in many respects greater than in Qinghai, but there photographs of the Dalai Lama are allowed to circulate freely.
"We can display the photos in our homes, but not here at the monastery," said a young monk at Kumbum monastery, also known as Taer Si, in eastern Qinghai. 
As in Tibet, the monasteries function as an alternative university system, and what little resistance has surfaced in Qinghai has come largely from monks.
"That is the space of the picture of the Dalai Lama," said a lean old monk in Kumbum monastery. 
He pointed reverently to a blank space on a wall, as if it were one of the monastery's most precious possessions.
The authorities also place loose restrictions on the numbers of monks who can be inducted into any monastery. 
Kumbum, for instance, had 3,000 monks at the time of the Communist revolution, according to the American-published "China Handbook" of 1950. 
Now it is officially allowed to have 400 monks, although in fact there are about 500.
A common source of antagonism appears to be family planning restrictions in rural areas. 
The rules in Qinghai are similar to those in the rest of China: Han couples are allowed one child each, or sometimes two in the countryside, while Tibetans and other minorities are given special dispensation and are allowed two or three each. 
Fines equivalent to $100 to $200 are now imposed on those who have unauthorized births.
While many peasants all over China complain about family planning rules, here the grumbling sometimes takes on nationalist overtones because those who enforce the unpopular policies tend to be Han Chinese.
"They didn't sterilize anyone around here until recently," said a Tibetan peasant who already has more children than he was supposed to. 
"But now they're trying to sterilize women after they give birth to two babies. 
They keep coming to me and saying that unless my wife agrees to be sterilized, then they'll take our land and smash our house."
He shrugged his shoulders helplessly. 
"So we'll give in," he said. 
"She'll be sterilized."
Still, standards of living for Tibetans in Qinghai are unquestionably rising, as they are in all of China, and that may be one of the most important reasons why there is not more political and religious ferment.
While the villages visited were all accessible only by dirt path, they had electricity, bicycles, often tiny tractors and among young people, the first hints of an interest in fashion. 
A teen-age girl was toiling one evening in the fields, arranging stacks of grain -- a timeless scene, except that she was wearing a bright-red blazer.
"They control religion pretty tightly," said a 29-year-old Tibetan peasant who seemed to fit in the middle of the spectrum of opinion. 
"But life's getting a lot better for us. 
Most folks have televisions, and a few even have a color television. 
So life's getting more comfortable, and a lot of us are reasonably satisfied."
