
Throughout the 1980's, China's hottest growth area, and its biggest experiment in capitalism, was in Hong Kong's backyard: Guangdong province, a hotbed of entrepreneurial activity, economic experimentation and hundreds of Hong Kong-financed factories.
But Guangdong's reform-minded politicians and its soaring economic growth - 15.9 percent in 1988 -made it a prime target for Beijing's conservatives in the economic crackdowns that followed the Government's violent crackdown on the democracy movement last June. 
And when entrepreneurs in Hong Kong look at Guangdong, an area that includes the rich Pearl River basin and the former European trading outpost of Canton, they often feel they are staring at their own post-1997 future.
What they see today is a confused picture. 
The region is not the disaster that many predicted a year ago, nor is it enjoying the booming growth of the past. 
A Chinese Government campaign that started last summer to eliminate ''inefficient'' rural and township enterprises - hundreds of thousands of small companies and production centers in Guangdong alone - greatly slowed the region's output. 
So did a sharp downturn in China's domestic demand for the products Guangdong has become famous for: bicycles and color televisions, small washing machines, smaller refrigerators and sewing machines.
In recent months, the economy has shown signs of reviving, while other regions have ground to a standstill, or worse. 
''The reason is mostly subterfuge,'' said one foreigner living in the area who keeps close watch on the factories and small enterprises. 
''Many of the enterprises that the Government closed quickly merged or formed again, often using 'retained earnings' that were retained in big glass jars under the flood. 
And today the political pressure is easing up.''
In fact, on the streets of Guangzhou, as Canton is now called, Hong Kong's influence seems to be overshadowing Beijing's. 
Night markets are alive with a variety of products that one would rarely find in the capital, from fruits to locally produced Hitachi television sets. 
The Chinese-language newspapers are once again beginning, if cautiously, to hail the productivity of privately run factories, and local businesses have little interest in selling their raw materials to Government-run factories that are unwilling to pay market prices.
Nonetheless, there is a broad sense that Guangdong cannot again get too far ahead of the rest of China. 
''It creates too much jealousy and too many political tensions,'' said a Chinese banker based in Hong Kong.
Some development is going elsewhere, especially as Taiwanese entrepreneurs develop the coastal area closest to Taiwan itself, around the port of Tianjin. 
Other projects that a year ago seemed bound to fuel development are delayed until the direction of the political wind becomes clear. 
On nearby Hainan Island, where the Kumagai Gumi Company, a Japanese construction concern, paid a reported $30 million early last year for 30 square kilometers of land, the governor was ousted and the project has stalled.
The best news Guangdong has received in a year came last week, not from Beijing but from Washington. 
President Bush's decision to continue most-favored-nation trading status for China marks a reprieve for Guangdong, which is more dependent than ever on its exports.
