
With the hard-line rhetoric blaring from the central Government these days, it may seem from abroad that China has abandoned liberalization in any form. 
But while the pace of economic change certainly has slowed significantly since the mid-1980's, in the last two years necessity has prompted leaders at all levels to take small but important steps toward a market system.
"There is reform, but it's regionalized," said a Chinese business executive. 
"It's coming from the bottom up. 
It's the local governments that are implementing reform, and they'll do as much as they can get away with."
Many of the visible changes are in trade, already much more unfettered than other areas. 
Export and import subsidies have been reduced, for example. 
But, Chinese economists say, there also have been a few price adjustments, advances in the bond and stock markets and city-by-city, county-by-county attempts to tackle the complex problem of urban housing, welfare and enterprise ownership.
 
'Moves Ahead Slowly'
"I wouldn't say reform is on the front burner, and Li Peng does not have a big appetite for reform," Nicholas R. Lardy, an economist at the University of Washington, said, referring to the Prime Minister. 
"But when faced with the alternatives, he moves ahead slowly."
China allowed its first government bond underwriting earlier this year and already the city of Shanghai and Shenzhen, the special economic zone created next to Hong Kong, have started modernized stock exchanges; Canton is waiting for approval. 
Scores of enterprises are hoping to raise money by obtaining a listing soon on these exchanges.
Shanghai, Canton and counties in poorer provinces like Anhui in central China, also have begun their own experiments in revamping housing. 
So far, however, there has been no nationwide attempt to overhaul urban housing, which is provided by employers.
One proposal supported by some Westerners is a national housing corporation that would buy homes and apartments from the various enterprises and manage them. 
Workers would turn to the housing corporation, rather than their employers, for mortgages and living accommodations. 
But so far, there seems to be no consensus on the concept.
Because of their financial burdens, as well as their overall inefficiencies, up to 38 percent of China's industrial state-run enterprises were losing money by the middle of this year, according to materials presented privately at a recent economic planning session. 
But China has been loath to make significant changes to loosen up government-run industry.
For this reason, some Chinese economists say that the last two years have been largely wasted from the standpoint of reform. 
They say that since the military crackdown in June 1989, central planners have regained control over much of the economy and that there is no longer much chance of a big change in the ownership system.
Proposals a few years ago to transform state-owned companies to shareholder-owned ones have been dropped or starkly scaled back because of accusations that this was the same as privatization -- an ideological taboo.
These economists also say that Chinese leaders missed an attractive opportunity to retool their economy, to raise prices during a period of low inflation, to close down money-losing enterprises and to literally force those enterprises to improve, instead of bailing them out with government loans.
"Parts of the economy show signs of improvement, but there has been no fundamental change," said a Chinese economist. 
"I don't think that in the next one to two years there'll be any major reform."
 
A Solid Exchange Rate
One of the more noticeable changes in the direction of a market economy has been in the foreign exchange markets. 
Since the 1989 crackdown in Tiananmen Square, China has devalued the renminbi, the local currency, by 43 percent. 
The rate of 5.3 yuan, as the unit of currency is called, to the dollar is generally thought to be not too far off from what it would be in a free market. 
Economists say a realistic exchange rate is very important in pricing imports and exports appropriately, and in this respect China is well ahead of many other developing countries that enormously overvalue their exchange rates.
A year ago, Prime Minister Li agreed to a plan to allow the Government's Administration of Foreign Exchange Control to make tiny, daily adjustments to the exchange rate, according to a Chinese official. 
The purpose apparently was to save companies from having to accommodate large jumps in the exchange rate.
But it also meant that China's exchange rate began to operate almost as a managed floating exchange rate. 
In fact, the rate has gradually risen another 2 percent in the last 10 months.
These days, many companies trade their dollars legally on the swap markets, where last month, 5.8 yuan could be changed for one dollar, essentially a market rate. 
Last year, a total of $13.16 billion was traded in 100 such official exchange centers, compared with $8.57 billion in 1989. 
In the first half of this year, $8.75 billion passed through swap centers, according to an article last month in the English-language China Daily.
Companies still have to give a portion of their foreign exchange export earnings to the Government, but now, much of those earnings are converted into local currency at the swap market rate, which offers a greater incentive to export. 
In return for this benefit, however, the Government this year began slowly reducing export and import subsidies, in part because it could no longer afford the swelling payments.
 
Price Revisions
Some of the most important measures in the last two years involved raising fixed prices for food and raw materials, which had been sold well below market levels. 
Economists regarded it as crucial to rationalize these prices and the Government has now obliged. 
But the main reason apparently was not so much an enthusiasm for markets but that the Government could not afford the subsidies.
China this year, for example, raised the prices of steel and cement, and it took a big step in May by raising the average price of grain by 71 percent and the average price of edible oils by 168 percent. 
For years, the Government had purchased grain and oils from farmers at prices much higher than it charged urban residents for them.
Such subsidies amounted to the equivalent of $7.5 billion in 1990, but the new price hikes will shave the burden by nearly a third in the case of grain and by more than two-thirds in the case of edible oils.
"They have been raising some prices, but in many cases it's been more for budgetary reasons rather than to rationalize prices," said Christine Wong, a China economist at the University of California at Santa Cruz. 
"It's hard to say they aren't moving forward on reform because they've done little things here and there. 
What's lacking is a comprehensive vision of where they ought to be going and what they need to do to get there."
Still, China's state sector is shrinking as a share of the economy and by the end of the 1980's, it produced less than 40 percent of China's national income. 
That is not far off from government contributions in Italy and France, according to Professor Lardy.
One Chinese business executive said he remained optimistic even though he expected few big reform measures from the nation's current leadership.
"The leaders?" he asked rhetorically. 
"It is not in their interest to reform. 
Their interest lies in planning, which means control and power. 
Power means better treatment, better living conditions."
But he added that 60 percent of the labor force, most of which is in the countryside, is essentially working for itself, and that even if China took no steps toward reform, the state sector would continue to shrink.
With a smile, he added, "The private sector will just keep expanding, and as long as more people are working for themselves, things will get better."
