
To the list of fictional acts of derring-do attributed to the Teen-Age Mutant Ninja Turtles, the popular cartoon characters, many in this British colony now add a real feat: helping rescue the Hong Kong stock market.
The stock of the Hong Kong company that manufactures these toy characters, Playmates International Holdings, became a standout this year and helped to fuel a stock market rally.
Playmates' demonstration of entrepreneurial flair was followed by two other developments that warmed Hong Kong's chill: President Bush's decision at the end of May not to suspend China's most-favored-nation status in trade, and China's decision to permit Fang Lizhi, the dissident who fled to the United States Embassy after the military crackdown in Beijing on June 4, 1989, to emigrate to Britain. 
The move was viewed as an indicator of a more open China.
 
Stocks Rebound
As a result, share prices in this beleaguered capitalist enclave, which plummeted after the crackdown, have rebounded sharply. 
They rose nearly 5 percent in June. 
Today, the key market indicator, the Hang Seng index, surged to a post-crash high of 3,385, up more than 44 percent from the period a year ago.
Many in Hong Kong still expect the worst when China regains control over Hong Kong in 1997. 
But resilient entrepreneurs here interpreted the success of the pizza-munching turtles as a sign that there are opportunities in the short time left to do what they do best: make money.
Playmates International is among the stock market's hottest performers. 
Its stock closed at $14.40 a share (Hong Kong) today, or $1.84 in United States currency, up from $1.60 (Hong Kong) at the beginning of the year.
''That was when Hong Kong started to feel good about itself again,'' Eric A. Rasmussen, an economist here for Jardine Fleming Broking, a regional securities firm, said of Playmates' success. 
''People felt they could still do it.''
Nonetheless, he added, ''One shock from a stupid move from China and the market could drop right through the floor.''
 
A Different Kind of Rally
He and several other economists also pointed out that this rally in Hong Kong has been different from others. 
The money fueling it is coming primarily from Hong Kong and other Asian investors, including Taiwan and Japanese institutions. 
Western capital has played a less important role than in the past.
These changes make Hong Kong less of a financial bridge between the West and Asia, its traditional role, and more of a regional hub. 
''Hong Kong has become more of an Asian financial center rather than a global financial center,'' said Alan A. McLean, chief economist at the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank, the colony's dominant financial institution.
Much of the investment in Hong Kong is going into factories that take advantage of China's low wages. 
Hong Kong's economy has been slowly merging with that of neighboring Guangdong Province in China, economists say. 
For instance, two million Chinese work in Hong Kong-run factories on the mainland, Mr. McLean said, nearly triple the 780,000 who work in factories in the colony. 
More than 80 percent of Hong Kong's re-exports, the fastest-growing sector of the territory's trade, are coming from or going to China. 
A re-export is merchandise imported and then shortly exported to a third country, usually with new packaging and in only slightly altered form.
 
Tourism Hurt
But these links cannot counter the pessimism many in Hong Kong feel when they consider life under Communist rule. 
Stung by the harsh face the Chinese Government showed in last year's crackdown, Hong Kong's economy posted no growth in the first half of this year, and inflation is close to double-digit levels. 
Tourism and hotel occupancy are down significantly.
More than 1,000 people a week are emigrating from Hong Kong, in part to avoid living under Communist rule, causing a serious brain drain. 
Now there is a worry that commercial fraud, already a problem, may flourish as many accountants depart.
Improbable as it may seem, these serious problems have not completely squelched the territory's economic spirit. 
Nearly every conversation in Hong Kong is interrupted by the sound of jackhammers or other construction equipment as old buildings fall and new ones go up at a furious pace.
From the top of the new 70-story Bank of China tower, the famous harbor looks like a spoiled child's bathtub full of toys. 
The water last week was jammed with ferries, lighters, tugs, dozens of container vessels and an American aircraft carrier.
Making the best of a bad situation, one company has even been marketing Rice Paddy Babies, toy dolls dressed up as Chinese and described as Hong Kong residents seeking to emigrate and looking for ''sponsors.''
The stock market's sudden surge is regarded as similarly opportunistic. 
''We have been surprised by the strength of the market,'' said Mr. McLean of the Hongkong Bank. 
''We thought it would take the whole year to get back where it is.''
 
Many Are Cautious
Pleased as many are with the market's new life, there remains an unmistakable undercurrent of caution.
''It's a difficult feeling to come to grips with,'' said Philip L. Tose, chairman of Peregrine Capital Ltd., a merchant bank. 
''Sure, things are bubbly on the surface, but you crack that surface and just underneath there are real problems. 
Confidence today is very shallow. 
We are going to have more shocks in Hong Kong.''
Mr. Tose is among those who have benefited most from Hong Kong's revival. 
He founded Peregrine with some partners in January 1989 after leaving the securities unit here of Citicorp. 
The company weathered the stock crash after the June 4 crackdown in China, and went on to conclude two takeovers and several asset sales, reaping tens of millions of dollars in windfall profits and a listing on the Hong Kong stock market.
''We've made much, much more money than we thought we would,'' Mr. Tose acknowledged. 
''Frankly, luck is better than brains. 
But there's still a lot to do here.''
He added: ''Everyone was deeply shocked by what happened last June, and that won't go away. 
People are skeptical now, but on the whole they want to stay here. 
Hong Kong is a great place to do business.''
 
Trading Status Stressed
Many also emphasize the importance of President Bush's decision on China's trading status in rebuilding confidence in Hong Kong. 
There had been pressure on the United States to suspend favored-nation status for China because of the country's reported human rights violations. 
Many members of Congress, which must confirm the President's decision, still express those concerns.
The most-favored-nation listing sharply reduces tariffs and duties charged on products originating in China. 
Since so much of China's trade flows through the colony or is produced in Hong Kong-owned factories, a crimp in China's exports to the United States would have hit hard here.
What heartened many was the role Hong Kong played in the Administration's decision. 
''Were it not for Hong Kong, most people would have been in favor of suspension,'' said Representative Stephen J. Solarz, Democrat of Brooklyn, who held hearings on the matter in Congress and was in Hong Kong last week.
''For the first time since last June 4, we believe Beijing saw Hong Kong as a political asset, not just an economic asset,'' added John Kamm, president of the American Chamber of Commerce in Hong Kong, which fought to keep the favored-trade status for China.
But perhaps the most comforting aspect of the decision was that it suggested that politics was taking a back seat to basic economic interests, analysts here said.
''The real question for people here is whether they feel China or the United States will be pragmatic,'' said Mr. Rasmussen, the economist. 
''They don't trust ideologies.''
