
The feeling of betrayal is heavy in the Hong Kong air, but when people here dissect the territory's crisis, they sometimes speak most bitterly not of hard-liners in Beijing but of Government officials in London.
One of the most graphic comparisons suggests that Britain's plan to hand over Hong Kong's 5.7 million inhabitants to China in 1997 is analogous to handing over 6 million Jews to Nazi Germany in World War II. 
Martin C. M. Lee, Hong Kong's best-known dissident and apparently the first to make that analogy publicly, said that the comparison may not be precise but it reflected the despair and betrayal felt in Hong Kong.
''The people of Hong Kong were led down the garden path by the British and Chinese Governments,'' Mr. Lee said.
A cartoon in The Hong Kong Standard, an English-language newspaper, captured the resentment: it compared British Foreign Ministry comments on the need for a popular government by self-determination in the ''dynamic, bustling, financial center, Afghanistan,'' with the calls for caution and continuity in ''backward, undeveloped, remote, illiterate Hong Kong.''
 
Discriminating About Democracy
The cartoon reflects one of the main complaints of people here - that while Britain has favored democracy in other parts of the world, including Eastern Europe and Namibia, it has refused to introduce a democratic system in Hong Kong and thereby create a chance for democracy under Chinese rule. 
Under great popular pressure, the colonial Government has agreed that a small number of legislators would be directly elected next year, but most legislators and all officials in the powerful executive branch would continue to be appointed.
It is not only ethnic Chinese but also Britons and other resident foreigners who make such criticisms. 
Anthony Rogers, the chairman of the Hong Kong Bar Association, was quoted in the Hong Kong press recently as telling a conference in New Zealand that the failure to allow self-determination for Hong Kong was ''one of the biggest denials of human rights by Britain in this century.''
Another prime complaint is that Britain has been cowed by Beijing into acting as its police in the territory. 
The Hong Kong Government, stressing the need to avoid offending Beijing, refuses to allow Chinese dissidents into Hong Kong and even censors movies that might offend the Chinese Government. 
One official, explaining censorship policies, suggestd that the Hong Kong Government had to be more aggressive in censorship after the rise of the hard-liners because China is more easily upset than it used to be.
''The perpetrators of 4 June 1989 were in effect given veto powers over liberty and democracy in Hong Kong,'' said the Far Eastern Economic Review, a Hong Kong-based news magazine that recently featured a cover story proclaiming the surrender of Hong Kong. 
Hundreds died on June 4 when Government troops moved against pro-democracy protesters in Tiananmen Square in Beijing.
 
A Varied Choice of Lands
Another common criticism is over London's refusal to allow greater numbers of Hong Kong Chinese to move to Britain. 
Simon Murray, a leading Hong Kong businessman, said in a speech last week that it may be a ''sublime conceit'' of the British to worry that millions of Hong Kong Chinese wish to move there, for most Hong Kong residents, he said, seem more interested in emigrating to the United States, Australia or Canada.
Many officials in the British and Hong Kong Governments are privately sympathetic to these sorts of criticisms. 
But in rebuttal, some officials suggest that Hong Kong poses special problems because it must be handed over to a foreign country. 
When Britain retreated from colonies in Africa or other parts of Asia, it could hold an election and pull down the flag, but in Hong Kong there has been wide acceptance of the view that Hong Kong cannot become independent and must be returned to China.
Barrie Wiggham, the secretary for the civil service in Hong Kong, defended the British position and said that London has always argued Hong Kong's case in meetings with Chinese officials and has sought greater democracy.
Because Hong Kong will become Chinese territory in 1997, Mr. Wiggham added, it would be counterproductive to develop democratic institutions that would last only a few years. 
While democracy proponents argue that Beijing would be politically embarrassed to dismantle a democratic structure it inherited, Mr. Wiggham suggests that China might dismantle such a system anyway, and the result would be a greater blow to Hong Kong's stabilityI and confidence.
''The reality is that we live alongside China, and so there are limits to how far we can travel down that road,'' he said. 
''It was a question of how much we could achieve in Hong Kong without upsetting the system or creating instability.''
