
The Western industrialized countries and Japan agreed today to help developing nations adhere to a worldwide ban on a class of chemicals that is destroying the protective layer of ozone in the atmosphere.
They fell short of establishing a special international fund urged by China, India and a group of other developing countries, but did not exclude the possibility and ordered a report for consideration at an ozone conference in London next year.
Earlier this week, 80 nations adopted a declaration agreeing to phase out the production and consumption of chlorofluorocarbons by the end of the century. 
The chemicals, used in refrigerators, air conditioners and industrial solvents, rise into the atmosphere, where sunlight breaks them down. 
The resulting compounds destroy the ozone layer, which protects the earth from the sun's damaging ultraviolet radiation.
Scientific evidence presented to the conference, the first meeting of 37 signers of the 1987 Montreal Protocol on protection of the ozone layer, indicated that its destruction will continue to accelerate for decades, even if the whole world bans chlorofluorocarbons.
 
Waiting Seen as Unacceptable
As a result, increased ultraviolet radiation at the earth's surface will cause ''tens of millions of cases of skin cancer, cataracts and, possibly, serious immunological disease,'' 90 environment groups said in a statement.
In addition, they and many government officials pointed out, even the best available substitutes for the ozone-destroying gases will continue adding to the global warming effect, in which increasing levels of carbon dioxide and other gases combine with moisture to trap heat inside the earth's atmosphere, causing climate changes and a global rise in sea levels.
The participants agreed with Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of Britain, who said last week that waiting and seeing is no longer an acceptable environmental policy. 
But what can be done, and to what effect, was far less clear.
 
Special Fund Urged
The Indian delegate, Ambassador Kalarickal P. Fabian, and the Chinese representative, Wang Yangzu, were among those urging the wealthier countries, which produce most of the 700,000 tons of chlorofluorocarbons used every year, to establish a special international fund to help developing nations acquire new technology themselves, instead of having to buy expensive modified refrigerators, air-conditioners, and silicon-chip factories from the West.
Neither India nor China has signed the Montreal Protocol, though Mr. Fabian said India was considering it and China helped draft the compromise resolution on aid to developing countries.
But, attending as observers, they agreed with representatives of more than 80 other countries, including the 36 that have ratified the Montreal Protocol, on the need for a ban on chlorofluorocarbons rather than the protocol's 50 percent cut in five of the substances by 1996.
The agreement does not cover carbon tetrachloride and methyl chloroform, used as cleaning solvents and fumigants, or require a phase-out of halon gases, used as fire extinguishers.
 
Severe Effects of Ozone
In 1987 British scientists found that 97.5 percent of the ozone above the South Pole had been eliminated during winter there. 
Similar but less severe effects have been observed over the North Pole, and scientists fear the northern latitudes between 40 and 60 degrees, where most of Europe and Canada and part of the United States lie, could be similarly vulnerable.
Even if the world does stop using all chlorofluorocarbons by the end of the century, it is estimated that the amount of chlorine compounds in the atmosphere will keep rising over the next 100 years. 
Unless other measures are taken, it would reach nearly four times its present level by 2100, according to a new study by the United States Environmental Protection Agency that was presented to the delegates.
Eileen Claussen, a deputy assistant administrator of the agency, said the study showed that other chemicals that deplete ozone, especially carbon tetrachloride and methyl chloroform, would also have to be universally replaced by safer substitutes to start a decline in chlorine compounds in the stratosphere.
The Environmental Protection Agency's projections of how three different sets of assumptions would affect concentrations of all forms of Ozone-destroying chlorine in the atmosphere (Source: Environmental Protection Agency)
