
THE GREAT BLACK DRAGON FIRE 1
A Chinese Inferno.
By Harrison E. Salisbury.
Illustrated. 180 pp. 
Boston:
Little, Brown & Company. 
$17.95.
In terms of sheer destruction and ecological damage, the fires that swept the Hinggan forests of Manchuria and Siberia in May 1987 rank as one of the worst environmental disasters of this or any other century. 
The fires were more than 10 times the size of last year's fires in Yellowstone National Park. 
Yet little is known about them outside China and official circles in the Soviet Union. 
Even among experts, there is only sketchy information on possibly the world's largest forest fires in the past 300 years, conflagrations that blackened an area almost the size of New England.
Harrison E. Salisbury, the distinguished former New York Times correspondent and the author of, among other books, ''The Long March: The Untold Story,'' is one of the few foreigners to have visited the remote, devastated region. 
''The Great Black Dragon Fire'' is the sobering story of a catastrophe whose full impact has yet to be measured or understood. 
The Chinese are convinced that the fires affected their climate, and there has been speculation that they may have further damaged the fragile ozone layer.
The Greater Hinggan Forest was the world's largest stand of evergreens, stretching like a green velvet sea, approximately 500 miles long and 300 miles wide. 
It is bisected by the Heilongjiang, or Black Dragon, River (known in the West by its Russian name, the Amur), which forms the border between Chinese Manchuria and Soviet Siberia. 
Before the fires, the Manchurian part of the forest accounted for a third of China's timber reserves.
There had been a prolonged period of dry weather, and the danger of fire was high on both sides of the river in the spring of 1987. 
From Mr. Salisbury's description, it would seem that the Chinese fire prevention and detection methods and firefighting resources were primitive by American and Canadian standards. 
Despite the hazardous condition, people smoked in the forest, built campfires and used unsafe logging practices. 
From natural and accidental causes, a number of fires broke out about the same time in Manchuria and Siberia, quickly consolidating into several large ones.
One known cause was Wang Yufeng, an 18-year-old who was temporarily working as a brush cutter. 
Ironically, brush cutting is done to reduce the danger of fire, but the inexperienced teen-ager violated every safety rule and, as Mr. Salisbury notes, became a modern Chinese version of Mrs. O'Leary's cow. 
He overfilled his machine, spilling gas, which ignited from an engine spark and set the machine and the grass on fire. 
It jumped to the trees and flashed into a raging inferno that destroyed the town of Xilinji. 
(The hapless young man was whisked off to jail even as the alarms were sounding.) Thus began one of the largest Black Dragon fires. 
The monthlong battle was fought by Chinese Army troops, the local inhabitants and what appears to have been a small number of professional firefighters. 
Missing were the battalions of trained forest firefighters who are deployed in the American West and specialized apparatus, effective communications and airplanes that drop fire-retardant chemicals. 
There was no contact between the Chinese and Soviet commands that were fighting fires on each side of the river.
Mr. Salisbury's interviews with the people involved reveal the strength of the human spirit when faced with overwhelming tragedy. 
There were some notable cowards and incompetents, but there were more heroes. 
Most of the inhabitants of the Manchurian timber towns did the best they could as the fiery monster devoured their homes and livelihood and killed their families and neighbors. 
No one really knows how many died, but Mr. Salisbury believes the official Chinese report of only 250 is far below the actual toll.
As the Mayor of Xilinji, Wang Zhaowin took firm command, anticipated the tricks of the wind and saved thousands of lives by evacuating her people from the river - where they would have been trapped - to an open road junction. 
Incredibly, 18,000 people huddled at the crossroads as flames fanned by a 40-mile-an-hour wind engulfed the town. 
(Later, her bitter reward was to be relieved of her job by the provincial government.) The Black Dragon fires burned until it rained in early June. 
When they were over, China had lost more than three million acres of timber. 
The total damage is estimated at more than $4 billion. 
The long-range environmental impact has yet to be calculated, but the outlook is grim. 
It could be several generations before the dominant larch evergreens grow again, and the Hinggan forest may never be the same.
One can only guess at what happened on the other side of the river in Siberia. 
Between 9 million and 15 million acres are believed to have burned there - at least three times larger than the area destroyed in Manchuria. 
Despite glasnost, there has been no report from the Russians. 
What may have been the greatest forest fire in history remains a nonevent in the Soviet Union.
Mr. Salisbury's book penetrates some of that secrecy and provides a fascinating look at a remote pocket of the world. 
It is also a dramatic and compassionate account of the people who live there and the disaster that befell them. 
And ''The Great Black Dragon Fire'' is another warning to everyone who is concerned about what is happening to planet Earth.
