
After a five-year development binge that has dotted Beijing's perpetually hazy skyline with dozens of new office and hotel towers, the Chinese are suddenly learning that the flip side of a boom is a bust.
With the chill in business and political ties between China and the West during the last year, offices designed especially for foreigners are lying vacant, rental rates are tumbling, loans for many building projects have had to be renegotiated and foreign residents are facing something they never imagined possible during the heady days of expansion - competition for their business.
As more buildings open in the coming months, the situation, many people here say, will get worse.
The excesses are in some ways a metaphor for the West's difficult business relationship with China during the past decade. 
The West's enthusiasm has tended to swing to extremes, and many foreign and Chinese developers are paying a price for the spurt of over-optimism.
Harsh Austerity Campaign
When the Chinese Government ended several years of fast growth, openness and economic reform in mid-1988 with a harsh austerity campaign to quell inflation, it was too late for many developers to turn back. 
Office buildings they had started earlier were already coming on the market.
The Government's bloody suppression of the pro-democracy movement last year only intensified the existing trend and frightened off some foreign corporations, the prospective tenants for the new office space.
Probably the best illustration of how bad things were before the building boom, and how things have changed, is the story of Shell China Ltd., a subsidiary of the Royal Dutch/ Shell Group, the world's second-largest oil company. 
Seven years ago, when Shell was shopping for office space, the best it could find was half of the sixth floor of the Hepingmen Roast Duck Restaurant building, about a mile south of Tiananmen Square in the center of the capital.
 
'It Always Smelled of Duck'
''All in all, it was quite adequate compared to the other choices, mostly hotels,'' said Christopher Evans, head of administration for Shell's 26-person staff here. 
''The real problem was that it always smelled of duck; it was not inferior duck or anything like that, but it's the largest Peking duckery in the world, and so they were cooking them all the time.''
Shell moved several months ago to the new China World Trade Center, the largest office complex in the country, which includes two hotels, a convention center, apartments, a shopping complex and much better ventilation.
''We like it because the telecommunications are a bit better than at the duck, and it's a better location,'' Mr. Evans said. 
An additional benefit, he said, is he can again enjoy ordering Peking duck at restaurants, something he could not bear while ensconced in the old quarters.
As one of the premier new buildings in the capital, the China World Trade Center, with 550,000 square feet of space, was expected to be filled by now. 
But its managers are generally happy to have commitments for about 70 percent of the space, all taken by foreign companies.
 
Rental Prices Fall
The maximum rents being charged are about $3.25 a square foot - less than the top rate of $4.15 a square foot they had expected before China's military crushed the pro-democracy movement last summer.
Yoshiaki Hashimoto, an administrative officer here for the Mitsubishi Corporation, said that after the turmoil in Tiananmen Square his negotiations with the World Trade Center's management took a decided turn for the better. 
The rent sought for the 26,000 square feet fell sharply.
Although he would not give the exact figure, Mr. Hashimoto said Mitsubishi ended up paying about half what it was being charged at its previous site, the Capital Hotel, whose facilities he said were poor. 
Like many other foreign companies here, Mistubishi had moved into a hotel in the mid-1980's because it was the only space available.
The granddaddy of hotel-office complexes here is the Jianguo Hotel - an exact replica of the Holiday Inn in Palo Alto, Calif. 
(The American investor in the joint venture to build the Jianguo Hotel was also an investor in the Holiday Inn and brought with him a set of plans.) It opened in 1982 and enjoyed close to 100 percent occupancy for years, drawing on tourists and companies taking rooms on long-term leases.
Now it is feeling the squeeze, too. 
Over the last year the Jianguo has lost about half its long-term corporate tenants and the overall occupancy rate is barely 50 percent, said Peter J. Hierzi, deputy general manager. 
$2 a Square Foot Some offices in other new buildings built for foreign occupants are being let for $2 a square foot, down from a minimum of about $2.75 just 18 months ago, according to Richard Ellis Ltd., a real estate brokerage firm. 
That is still high for what many companies regard as a hardship post, but nearly 25 percent below the peak.
Richard Ellis estimated that earlier this year there was 1.6 million square feet of office space suitable for foreign companies in Beijing, of which only 65 percent was occupied. 
The broker added that many new buildings have only let about 25 percent of their office space.
Apartments designed for foreigners - with central air-conditioning and Western-style toilets - have the same problems. 
A 1,600-square-foot three-bedroom apartment at the World Trade Center complex, a joint venture between a Hong Kong company and a Chinese Government entity, is going for about $4,000 a month -compared with $6,000 a month for the same size unit at the Holiday Inn Lido complex, on the airport road. 
Those apartments, among the few modern apartments for foreign business executives when they opened in 1985, had been fully rented before they were even completed.
 
Apartments Go Begging
Even with the price drop, most new apartments have gone begging for tenants. 
According to Richard Ellis, which recently closed its Beijing office because of the slow market, only 75 percent of the 2,400 apartments built for foreigners in the last five years are leased.
Another 1,270 apartments are scheduled to come on the market this year, with another 150 expected next year. 
Rents for a 1,600-square-foot apartment could tumble to $3,000 a month.
Caught in the squeeze are a number of foreign property developers. 
But the blow has fallen hardest on Japanese companies, which were partners in 12 projects under construction as of early 1988, amounting to several hundred million dollars, according to a study done by the National Council for United States-China Trade.
The lengthy list the council compiled gave evidence of how Chinese entities had leaped blindly into the development fray. 
Among the Chinese partners in these projects, many of which have been completed, were affiliates of the People's Liberation Army, the Ministry of Justice, the provincial government of Inner Mongolia, the State Farm Bureau and an aluminum factory.
