
When Communist authorities cracked down on protesters on June 4, the blood was shed 1,200 miles from here, in Beijing. 
But the greatest financial aftershocks occurred in Hong Kong, sending many Chinese managers rushing to emigrate and leaving gaps in the middle and upper ranks of corporations.
Along with the shrinking pool of talented executives, Hong Kong is facing rising uncertainty about the growth of its economic relationship with China.
On Monday, June 5, the Hong Kong stock market lost about 22 percent of its value, or $16.6 billion in United States currency, in the territory's biggest stock plunge since October 1987.
Slump in Tourism, Too
In the aftermath, the tourism industry also slumped, mostly because fewer travelers were venturing into China, and in June only 385,000 tourists came to Hong Kong - or 20.5 percent fewer than a year earlier. 
Hotel occupancy rates were 71 percent in July, compared with 93 percent a year ago, according to the tourist bureau's most recent statistics.
No one is writing off Hong Kong's future, for the British colony has demonstrated enormous resiliency in the past. 
But the latest troubles have reminded Hong Kong that dependence on the Chinese market carries risks as well as rewards, and its 5.7 million residents are still grappling with several economic challenges that find their roots in the shootings on Tiananmen Square.
''Before June 4, one would have expected to see the economy slow down gradually,'' said David K. P. Li, chief executive of the Bank of East Asia Ltd. in Hong Kong. 
''Now, people are saying there will be more of a slowdown than before. 
This year, we will have a respectable growth rate, but next year will be slower.''
A renewed and even deeper distrust of the Chinese Government has intensified the desire to emigrate of many skilled, educated Hong Kong Chinese. 
Many are leaving for Canada, Australia and the United States; those with less money or fewer skills are inquiring about Panama, Colombia and Mauritius.
''Most people were sitting on the fence, but now, 90 percent of the people sitting on the fence have decided to emigrate,'' said Roderick W. Macneil, president of Macneil Pacific Ltd, a consulting firm based in Hong Kong.
''If your mind is on emigration, it's not on your work or on spotting opportunity in Hong Kong,'' he added. 
''That can't be a good thing for Hong Kong. 
If out of 100 entrepreneurs, 50 are thinking about how to start a business in Toronto, that's not a lot of energy going into creative venture.''
 
Emigrants May Not Return
Although some emigrants may return with new passports before 1997, when Hong Kong reverts to Chinese rule, most probably will not.
About 45,000 Hong Kong Chinese emigrated last year, and the Government has said that number will rise to more than 55,000 this year. 
The expected increase in emigration will put greater strains on businesses in banking, accounting, computers and other services that are crucial for Hong Kong's growth as a financial and headquarters center.
''Hong Kong Chinese used to be very choosy about what financial center they emigrated to,'' said one foreign trader in Hong Kong. 
''Now some of them think it's O.K. to get a job as a dishwasher in Mexico.''
Experienced Chinese managers and technicians will be costlier and harder to find, and companies will be forced to meet the shortage by bringing in foreign executives at higher salaries.
Another basic building block of Hong Kong's economy, business linked to the neighboring Guangdong province of China, is facing new uncertainties.
Hong Kong is China's largest investor, with small labor-intensive factories mostly in southern Guangdong, where Chinese speak the same Cantonese dialect as in Hong Kong. 
Likewise, China is Hong Kong's largest trading partner, accounting for 29.1 percent of Hong Kong's total trade last year, and 30.1 percent in the first seven months of 1989.
Moreover, many companies not directly conducting business in China are in industries, like real estate, transportation, hotels and some financial services, that are indirectly linked to China.
China began an austerity program last fall, however, and Chinese businesses have since been plagued by cash shortages and tight foreign exchange. 
The events of June 4 in Beijing have further aggravated cash-flow problems.
One long-time exporter of refrigerators to China said that since June, Chinese authorities had simply halted import licenses for luxury items, like his product, and he doubts he will make another sale this year. 
China is trying to slash its imports to help balance its trade deficit, and although trade with Hong Kong has increased substantially this year, it is expected to grow more slowly in the future.
Flows of Hong Kong capital into China have also slowed, economists and China analysts say, and most investors will wait to see if the Chinese Government will alter its economic policies in Southern China. 
Manufacturers are considering expanding, as some already have, into other Asian countries, like Thailand and the Philippines.
Yet for companies who can pay back their investment quickly and earn a significant return in a few years, the alternatives to China are not always appealing. 
Greater distances, unfamiliar customs and language barriers usually mean higher costs.
''Thailand's bureaucracy is bureaucratic, too,'' said Raymond K. F. Ch'ien, managing director at Lam Soon Hong Kong Group, a packaging company. 
''It's easier to operate in Guangdong.''
Companies may thus still prefer to expand in China, and presumably they would be flexible enough, as they have in the past, to find the pattern to survive.
While Hong Kong faces serious challenges, its problems are not fatal. 
The territory's economy had overheated and growth in gross domestic product was already cooling down from 13.8 percent in 1987 to 7.3 percent in 1988 to an earlier expectation of 6 percent this year. 
Mainly because of the turmoil in China, however, the growth forecast was revised to 5 percent.
There is talk about relocating the back-office operations of international service and financial businesses to cities that are more politically stable, like Singapore. 
But economists and executives say that even with political uncertainty Hong Kong is still more attractive. 
It is less regulated than Singapore, and its telecommunications network, the widespread use of English, low taxes and central location in Asia give it an edge over many other places.
