
Displaying the bravado and ambition that have fired China's economic growth in the last decade, this little village had originally expected to increase its industrial production by 50 percent this year.
But such high hopes are becoming dimmer here and in thousands of other villages along China's coast, where the nation's striking economic growth has been concentrated in the last decade. 
In the country's economic retrenchment, imposed after the political upheaval and bloodshed of May and June, the coastal regions stand to lose the most.
While not all will suffer real economic declines, these regions are sure to see their supercharged growth rates cool down.
Effects of Austerity Program
The nation is already feeling the effects of Beijing's general austerity program. 
In October, nationwide industrial production fell 2.1 percent, compared with October of 1988. 
That was the first such decline in a decade. 
Yet, the central Government has said the austerity program will last at least until 1991.
Officials in Beijing said they decided to re-impose stronger central economic controls to deal with inflation problems, supply-and-demand imbalances, economic inefficiencies, overinvestment in certain industries and deficiencies in others. 
The inflation rate has dropped to 8.7 percent in October from 27 percent in January. 
But some Chinese worry that the program will lower the growth rate but not necessarily raise economic efficiency.
''In theory it sounds very reasonable, but in practice it will be co-mingled with politics so that nothing will get done,'' a Chinese businessman said.
This village of 2,850 people still plans to raise its economic output, and so far the austerity program has hampered but not crippled most of the 14 factories here making everything from champagne to chemicals. 
But in the surrounding area of Qingdao, about two-thirds the way up the coast, officials expect economic growth to drop to 12 percent this year from 24 percent in 1988.
 
Businesses Are Closing
That pace may still seem remarkable compared with growth rates in Western countries. 
But the sudden slowdown is causing thousands of small factories and businesses to close and could lead to grave economic problems in the coastal areas.
It is difficult to gauge the economic discontent among local officials, who do not feel free to speak out, and reliable statistics are hard to come by. 
But the austerity measures are beginning to result in business closings and a reduced flow of money to support new ventures, and this is likely to increase resentment against the central Government.
Just a few years ago, growth in the coastal provinces was vigorously trumpeted as a means to infuse the rest of the economy with a new spirit.
The leaders in these areas harnessed the energy of peasants pent up over years of rigid control, and small collective enterprises cropped up throughout the countryside. 
Their work in making consumer and exportable products in thousands of small factories resulted in double-digit growth rates.
 
Plan of '39 Stipulations'
But since the military put down the student democracy movement last summer, and particularly after the Communist Party Central Committee met in November to discuss the economy, the Government has reinforced austerity with a blueprint of ''39 stipulations'' for the economy. 
The effect is to shore up socialist bastions in the economy: central control and state-run enterprises.
The Government announced in November that in the first nine months of this year, one million rural enterprises were shut down and several hundred thousand others halted production or were forced to switch product lines.
The casualties may even be higher. 
The official China Daily referred in passing recently to three million rural enterprises being closed. 
Part of the discrepancy may be that the larger number includes planned projects that have been canceled or postponed as well as those that have been shut down, merged or converted.
Instead of the nationwide annual growth of about 10 percent over the last decade, China's leaders want 5 to 6 percent a year.
 
Tight Credit Policy
They have tightened credit to bring down inflation and slow down the economy, leaving many small collective enterprises severely strapped for cash.
Recently, the Government eased credit slightly, but local officials and business managers say a prolonged lending squeeze without economic alternatives could cause the localities to stop listening to central directives. 
As they have with previous policies mandated from Beijing, local officials could prove adept at skirting obstacles.
In Liaoning Province in the northeast, about one-third of the state-run enterprises are losing money, said a Chinese businessman with access to high-level information.
Nationwide, that figure is about one-fifth. 
But Liaoning is part of China's industrial belt, with many steel plants and machinery factories, the kind the Government wants to shore up.
 
Payroll Problems
Some factories have even had trouble covering their monthly payroll. 
One Chinese executive said 80,000 employees in a large city in Liaoning were not being paid. 
The situation was so severe, he said, that one factory manager reportedly wept as he pleaded with a Government banker to provide a loan to pay thousands of employees.
In Shandong Province, there are clear signs that the situation is not yet as bleak as the national statistics would suggest, although the area is probably an anomaly. 
Two Party members said economic planners considered the province's economy to be among the most stable and orderly in the nation. 
They say that means the local authorities may be able to dance around the tough measures without much backlash from the central Government.
Indeed, officials in Qingdao, one of the province's two coastal regions, say that only about 165 companies -mostly medium-sized collectives -were shut down or merged, and most of them were product distributors, not manufacturers. 
Over all, Qingdao has tens of thousands of collective enterprises, which produce 70 percent of the area's output.
 
'Efficiency Is Important'
One of the few rural collectives closed was a brick maker in Xiaowang village, but the local officials insist the closing was based on their own economic decisions and not forced by the austerity program.
''No one told us to shut it down,'' said Sui Lishan, the village party secretary in Xiaowang. 
''Efficiency is important to us. 
The land is important to us. 
And this enterprise ate up a lot of energy and land.''
As in the past when faced with directives from Beijing, local officials here also seem adept at turning some austerity measures to their benefit.
Officials said that before the austerity program was implemented, they had planned several projects to produce energy because the supply of electricity and other energy was not enough to accommodate their plans for industrial growth. 
Now with the retrenchment, they found they could cancel some other ventures and channel money to the energy projects to insure their completion.
A result is that the growth rate in Qingdao crept up again in November, said Zhang Rui, a deputy secretary general in the municipal government.
''But we don't expect it to reach 30 percent again,'' Mr. Zhang said. 
''After all, 12 percent is not that bad.''
China's coastal areas, which enjoyed striking growth in the 1980's, may be the hardest hit by the Government's economic retrenchment. 
In the Shan dong Province, however, the the situation does not seem too bleak for some manufacturers like the Number Nine Rubber Factory in Qingdao. 
(NYT/Sheryl WuDunn); map of China showing location of Xiaowang (NYT)
