
Two years ago, the road to China was a winding, almost secret path for South Korean business executives, but one that was illuminated with hope. 
After a number of bitter encounters, that hope has given way to disappointment and frustration.
At the urging of North Korea, its political ally, China has canceled several multimillion-dollar deals that were about to be signed with South Korean companies, industry executives say. 
And trade between the two countries, which had been soaring since China opened its doors a crack in 1987, has started to fall.
The next few months are regarded as a critical time in diplomatic and business relations between the two countries as preparations for the Asian Games intensify. 
Beijing will be the host for these mini-Olympics this fall, and the games will have the sponsorship of many South Korean companies. 
South Koreans hope the games will be a steppingstone to rebuilding trade ties with China.
 
Eastern Europe's Allure
The relationship has also deteriorated because the difficulties of doing business in China have increased as relations warmed between South Korea and the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, other allies of North Korea.
''South Koreans were quickly disappointed'' in China, said a South Korean businessman living in China. 
He added: ''Now everyone is rushing to Eastern Europe. 
They have more favorable trade terms, and it's easier to invest. 
Naturally, the interest in China has declined.''
The strains have sharply reduced South Korean expectations. 
In the last few years, only about a dozen South Korean companies have established offices in China. 
There have also been only 10 or so relatively small South Korean joint ventures established there. 
Between October and February, South Koreans invested $30 million in 14 projects, the Korean Foreign Trade Association said. 
That is less activity than many expected.
 
Harsh Business Conditions
Because South Korea does not have diplomatic relations with China, its companies must contend with harsher business conditions than other foreign companies face. 
They pay higher tariffs, rarely see senior Chinese officials and must conduct their dealings quietly to try to avoid the irate protests of the North Koreans, who in the past have pursuaded the Chinese to call off deals.
Since its military crackdown a year ago, China has strengthened its ties with North Korea and has seemed to give South Korea the cold shoulder. 
Bao Tong, the secretary to the Politburo and reportedly an advocate of improved relations with Seoul, was arrested for his role in the democracy movement last year.
Trade between the two countries has fallen, largely because of China's austerity plan, which was intensified after the military crackdown. 
The Government curbed exports of raw materials and clamped down on imports, especially of electronic goods and appliances, many of which come from South Korea.
 
Sharp Trade Decline Expected
Trade between the two countries, which reached a high of $3.1 billion in 1989, is expected to fall substantially this year, South Koreans say. 
Trade through Hong Kong fell to $385 million in the first quarter of this year, down 25 percent from the comparable period last year.
Still, China has been careful not to brush off South Korea entirely because it trades more heavily with that country than with North Korea. 
In fact, China hardly showed any reaction to the startling meeting between President Roh Tae Woo of South Korea and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union. 
The Chinese-language press reported the meeting as a minor news item.
In a gesture of conciliation, China will allow Korean Air Lines to fly to Beijing for the Asian Games, in addition to the airline's normal twice-monthly flights to Shanghai.
China is also counting on financial support from Korea for the games. 
In recent months, giant billboards promoting Samsung, Korean Air Lines and Lucky Goldstar have been posted throughout Beijing. 
More South Korean billboards are expected to go up during the games.
 
Korean Contributions
South Korean businesses are donating cash and goods, including 200 to 300 cars and, according to some diplomats and executives, anti-riot gear. 
Some big Korean corporations admit to having made contributions of more than $2 million apiece. 
Chinese officials declined to comment on the contributions.
''They wanted more,'' said Chun Jin Hwan, a Hong Kong-based executive vice president at the Lucky Goldstar International Corporation, a large South Korean conglomerate. 
''Without Korean support, they couldn't do it,'' he said in a reference to the games.
Will it pay off?
Mr. Chun smiled, then shook his head in exasperation.
Still, South Koreans are hopeful that their financial role in the Games will at least help establish better trade relations and, in particular, reciprocal trade offices by the end of this year. 
The topic was raised two years ago, but the Chinese have been reluctant to discuss it in the last year for fear of offending North Korea.
But reports from Seoul indicate that shipping links will be expanded and that a passenger ferry service will soon begin between Inchon in South Korea and Yantai in China.
