
Ever since they sailed their clipper ships to China two centuries ago with cargoes of opium, foreign traders have brimmed with optimism about the potential of the vast China market. 
These days, however, on the first anniversary of the bloody suppression of the democracy movement, the flush of optimism is gone, along with much of the business.
While only a handful of American corporations have closed their doors and left China since the crackdown last June 4, and a few newcomers have set up shop, many companies say business is more difficult than ever, and in some cases slower than they had expected it would be.
For most traders with sales offices in China, business is in a deep slump.
''We feel that things just have to get better,'' said a foreign business executive in Beijing. 
''But I can't say we're past the bottom of the cycle.''
 
Curbs on Imports and Credit
Executives say these hard times stem from the austerity program China began in the fall of 1988 and intensified last summer, with the Government clamping down on imports and on credit to local companies.
But beyond that, they say the violent crackdown last year and the mixed signals about economic liberalization since then have made it nearly impossible to assess China's political risk with any confidence.
Doing business in China has always been difficult, particularly because China's bureaucracy often requires myriad steps and approvals before any agreement can be signed. 
Collecting and confirming seemingly simple information, like the amount of a new tariff, can often lead a company through a maze of bureacratic red tape without a definitive answer.
 
Sales Have Decreased
Now China has tightened credit, cutting off funds to many Government entities and industrial enterprises that would otherwise purchase from American companies, and so sales of American products are down.
For many foreign companies, this year has been marked by other obstacles, further tainting the business climate. 
Some obstacles, like martial law, are being removed. 
But in the meantime China has recentralized its decision-making process, so that the central Government and not just the local authority must agree to certain investment and trade proposals. 
This has created a more difficult and confusing investment environment.
It is also unclear how long China's leaders will stall decisions on economic changes, especially in such areas as freeing prices and expanding stock ownership. 
Many foreign companies had pinned their hopes on a more market-oriented business environment in China. 
Now, greater uncertainty about the direction of economic policy and about political stabilityII has led many companies to cancel or postpone plans for expansion in China.
 
Expansion Ruled Out
''We didn't set up any expansion plans before June 4,'' one executive said. 
''But of course after June 4, we wouldn't even consider it.''
The freeze on lending by the World Bank has also meant that loans from foreign institutions are few and far between, and business for bankers has slowed so much that two of the four American bank representatives in Beijing have been reassigned outside China. 
For many foreign bankers who remain here, much of their time is absorbed with loan problems, primarily hotel loans that need to be renegotiated because the debtors have not been able to meet their obligations.
''I guess I was wrong because I thought things would have picked up,'' one foreign banker said. 
''I've been disappointed too many times this year.''
 
Optimistic, but Restrained, Talk
Traders and corporate executives prospecting for lucrative investment possibilities have returned to China, and they fill the hotel coffee shops with optimistic, if restrained, talk of business. 
But the current economic recession in China has made prospects grim for new business and investment in the future.
''We're not seeing any new ideas in the pipeline,'' said John T. Frisbie, director of the United States-China Business Council in Beijing. 
''For traders, it'll be lean business years unless there is a significant change in trade policy.''
In the first quarter of this year, American companies signed 65 investment contracts worth $48 million, according to statistics from China's Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations and Trade. 
The ministry has not publicized comparable quarterly figures for previous years, but other statistics show that the latest figure is far below the level in the past.
In the first six months of last year, for example, American corporations signed contracts worth $382 million. 
That was nearly three times the new investment for the same period in 1988. 
At the end of 1989, the total amount of American contracts for investment projects was about $4 billion, an increase of about 20 percent over the amount at the end of 1988.
 
Investing Smaller Amounts
Industry executives say there are isolated cases of American and Japanese companies that are considering large investment projects of about $100 million. 
But in general, companies are investing smaller amounts -an average of $700,000 in the first quarter - and negotiations on contracts sometimes have become more cumbersome and protracted during the last year.
''The Chinese are generally strapped for money, so negotiating is as hard as it ever was before, and they are trying to extract as many concessions as they can,'' said Timothy A. Steinert, an American lawyer in Beijing who helps negotiate some deals.
Mr. Steinert added that there seemed to be a rising number of commercial disputes, as American companies become more willing to go to arbitration instead of turning a blind eye to what they believe are contract violations. 
''Problems that were swept under the rug before are now becoming conflicts,'' he said.
 
American Exports Down
United States trade statistics show that American exports to China had been on the rise, jumping 16 percent, to $5.7 billion, in 1989. 
The exports fell a percentage point during the first two months of 1990, to $876 million, compared with the same period a year ago.
Some companies say they expect the rest of the year to bring more business, and most companies in industries that China is strategically encouraging, including energy, telecommunications and transportation, say they are still closing sales. 
But most trade representatives say the last year has been a struggle, and they are cutting costs where they can to offset reductions in revenues.
The IBM China Corporation, for example, one of the most visible foreign companies in China, now has 100 employees in its office, compared with 127 a year ago. 
Many other companies have reduced their sales staffs and representatives. 
And most joint-venture hotels have cut down their expatriate staffing and electricity costs.
''The double whammy of economic retrenchment and political shock took the romance out of China,'' a Western diplomat said. 
''It takes a lot of vision and staying power to remain here.''
