
Still coping with a trading system that is puzzling to foreigners and Chinese alike, China's stock markets are likely to gain new importance as the Government proceeds with plans to bolster the economy by turning state-owned businesses into shareholder-owned companies.
The latest sign of high-level, if cautious, support comes from Zhang Yanning, vice minister of the state commission for restructuring the economy. 
Mr. Zhang said on Saturday that the establishment of stock markets would be a main area of economic experimentation this year.
Prime Minister Li Peng has also made several statements in the last month that hint at changes in China's system of public ownership. 
Many Chinese experts assume such changes would mean a move toward a shareholding system, because its supporters have seized the linguistic high ground by asserting that ''publicly held'' companies are simply another form of the ''public ownership'' that has long been a fundamental tenet of socialism.
In any case, a new research institution was established last month to draft securities laws and make plans for a major national stock exchange.
''So far, the markets are all local ones,'' said Wong Poming, an adviser to a team of financial institutions that are trying to create the national exchange. 
''Only a national stock market can serve the role of a real financial center and larger capital market to allow companies to raise the kind of funds they need.''
Until national standards can be set for shares, the Government has ordered companies to proceed very slowly in issuing stock.
Trading on China's stock markets at present bears little resemblance to activity at the stock exchanges in the United States, Japan and other nations. 
For one thing, stock prices, which are mostly $5 to $30 a share, are usually determined more by the Communist Government than by supply and demand. 
As a result, prices rarely fall.
 
'They Only Go Up'
''People come from abroad and say, 'What is your morning price or your afternoon price?'
'' said Luo Zhenzhong, a manager of the stock market in the northeastern city of Shenyang. 
''But our prices don't change for a month at a time, and when they change they only go up.''
For another, the ''stocks,'' unlike General Motors or I.B.M. common stock, do not in most cases represent ownership in the company but simply the promise of a dividend and perhaps a chance to win a prize.
A third characteristic of China's markets is that few shares are freely traded. 
In the last five years, more than 10,000 Chinese companies have issued shares, but nearly all went to the employees of the issuing company. 
On the Shanghai market, for example, only six stocks are listed, along with six bonds, and on the Shenyang market only one recently listed stock is traded.
 
'Nobody Has Come to Sell a Share'
The Shenyang market is actually a bank branch that also trades in 40 bonds. 
It is a seat-of-the-pants operation where officials make decisions as they go along.
Asked whether investors could sell back shares at their original purchase price, Mr. Luo said, ''Nobody has come to sell a share, so we don't know what price to pay.''
The one stock traded on the Shenyang market, the Gold Cup Automotive Factory, is regarded by Western diplomats and economists in Beijing as the closest thing China has to a Western-style stock because, for example, shareholders can vote for the company's management.
The Shenyang market was the first stock market in Communist China, opening in the fall of 1986. 
But the stock market in Shanghai best reflects the metamorphosis of the Chinese securities markets.
 
Deathly Silence Ends
Two years ago, the Shanghai market, in the lobby of a state-owned bank, was deathly silent. 
The bank rarely adjusted prices, and so a lucky investor who was able to buy a share was never willing to sell. 
Weeks went by without a trade.
Now, 1,500 shares a week are traded. 
And Shanghai, far more than China's other stock markets, allows supply and demand to determine prices. 
Almost all transactions are conducted at the true market price, and the bank lobby is full of eager investors watching the show and looking for deals.
Not only do investors make money, but, perhaps more important for the development of the market, they sometimes lose money.
''There are no restrictions on price movements,'' said Huang Guixian, manager of the Shanghai stock market, who has the sensitive task of creating a capitalist-style stock market in Communist China. 
''And people can buy as many shares as they want,'' he added.
 
No Legal Underpinning
The greatest problem is that there is no legal underpinning for the shareholding system, Mr. Huang said. 
China has scarcely any securities law or company law, which accounts for why no one knows whether the shareholders really own the companies or what would happen if the shareholders tried to oust the management.
Because of the lack of a legal framework, as well as the proliferation of different pieces of paper that are all called stocks by the issuers, the Chinese Government announced in February that it would sharply restrict new stock issues over the next two years.
One Chinese official expects a new securities law to be implemented later this year, which he thinks will spur an increase in stock activity. 
Meanwhile, shares are being issued, but cautiously.
In Shanghai, a $6 million stock issue went on sale last week from the Shanghai Vacuum Electronic Component and Cell Company. 
That issue will bring a 60 percent increase in the total valuation of the stocks traded on the Shanghai market.
 
Lack of Understanding
In addition to the lack of a legal foundation, very few people really understand how a stock market works.
''People under the age of 50 don't understand stocks,'' Mr. Huang said. 
''We heard all the news about Black Monday in America, when stock prices plunged, and about an investor who was so upset that he shot his broker. 
But the good aspects of the stock system aren't reported. 
And so some people are suspicious.''
Until the Communist revolution in 1949, Shanghai's stock exchange was the biggest in Asia. 
But it was closed in 1950 and reappeared only three years ago.
Chinese officials still mostly endorse stock ''markets'' rather than stock ''exchanges,'' which they associate with capitalist speculation instead of socialist investment.
 
Very Simple Markets
''Today, the stock markets are very simple, and they're difficult to improve because people don't know much about securities,'' said Liu Guoguang, an economist who is an alternate member of the Communist Party Central Committee.
Mr. Liu pointed out that although Chinese stocks pay interest, they involve little or no risk. 
He said it was important to introduce risk in the markets, and he predicted that as the markets gained experience they would play a more important role in the economy.
Already, the Shanghai market has some of the paraphernalia of a Western or Asian stock exchange. 
There is an electronic ''big board'' listing the shares and their latest prices, and an electronic ticker tape that lists stock averages, not that they change very often.
The Shanghai market, primitive though it is, is far more advanced than those in cities like Beijing, Wuhan, Shenyang and Guangzhou.
 
Buy a Stock, Get a Prize
At Shenyang's market, for instance, there is no sign of the hustle and bustle found in Shanghai. 
In fact, one major reason that investors buy bonds on the Shenyang market is the chance of winning a prize. 
Companies have found that the way to make their bonds appealing is to attach lottery tickets, so that investors stand a chance at winning a television or a refrigerator.
Gambling is illegal in China, and so investing in bonds is the closest legal thing, even if the prices are almost guaranteed not to drop.
The Shenyang market's expansion plans included the offering of shares denominated in United States dollars to foreign investors, but so far the People's Bank of China in Beijing has not given the necessary approval. 
Mr. Luo, the exchange official, acknowledged that offering an issue to foreigners would be a bit more complicated.
''It's O.K. to issue locally, because people here don't really know what stocks are,'' he said. 
''But to sell abroad, with all those regulations and daily fluctuations, we'd have to make things perfect.''
