
In competing to supply the vast Chinese appetite for new airplanes, the Boeing Company and the McDonnell Douglas Corporation have taken two basic approaches: selling and manufacturing.
Until now, Boeing has emphasized the first, and it has been enormously successful here in the last decade. 
McDonnell Douglas, as a latecomer, has taken the second approach, with a joint production arrangement aimed at erasing Boeing's headstart.
The stakes could scarcely be higher: China plans to buy 300 to 400 planes in the next decade, and one expert here says the nation needs 1,000 more planes if it can afford them. 
Just last month the Government announced that it would buy 90 planes in the next four years to add to its commercial fleet of 420.
A Last Great Frontier
Depending on its economic performance, this enormous country may be one of the last great frontiers for air travel, as a people used to crowding on trains discovers the convenience of planes.
The competition has gained special urgency because China says it will pick a foreign partner this summer for its most ambitious aviation project ever: manufacturing its own 150-seat aircraft, for eventual sale on the world market.
The winning bidder for the program will have a distinct advantage in the expanding Chinese market, so it is a contract that neither Boeing nor McDonnell Douglas is prepared to lose.
''It would be a bitter loss to us,'' said Edward Curtis, senior vice president at the Douglas Aircraft Company, the aircraft arm of McDonnell Douglas. 
''It might be career-shortening for some people.''
Stephen Y. Wong, manager of international business at Boeing Commercial Airplanes, said, ''It's one of the most important items on our list with China, if not No. 1.''
Although the loser would not be shut out of the China business, it would at the least lose a substantial portion of the market for twin-engine midrange aircraft.
 
Restricted Airspace
For all the limitations on China's aircraft industry - restricted commercial airspace, a primitive air traffic control system and foreign exchange shortages - companies involved in aircraft sales have been among the most profitable in China.
A year ago, a fierce battle did not seem likely. 
Boeing, which since the early 1970's has sold 61 planes for about $2.35 billion, was continuing to win contract after contract. 
Moreover, Boeing began years ago to help manufacture parts or assemble components, like the vertical fins made at a plant in the central city of Xian.
''You see Boeing staff at the factories and Boeing people at the airports,'' said a Western diplomat in Beijing who follows the industry. 
''Last December I would have said McDonnell Douglas had no chance. 
But now McDonnell is pushing harder.''
Since the days when Mao Zedong preached the principle of self-reliance, China has always preferred to build rather than buy. 
McDonnell Douglas saw that as an opportunity when it first contemplated entering the Chinese market, and in 1985 the company signed an agreement to co-produce its MD-82 midsize aircraft in a Shanghai factory.
 
'Deal With Old Friends'
''The Chinese people like to deal with old friends,'' Mr. Curtis said. 
''So we concluded that the way we could get an entry into the China market was by offering to work with the factories to co-produce airplanes.''
Like Boeing, Japanese companies have done well by selling foreign-made products in China. 
Those adopting this strategy set up a string of sales offices, avoiding the costs and headaches of producing in China, but they face increasing pressure from China to invest in factories and transfer some of their technologies.
Companies that choose the strategy of investing in Chinese factories and selling the products accept not only the financial burden but also the difficulties of maintaining quality control and obtaining electricity and raw materials. 
Chinese outside the country, particularly in Hong Kong, have shown that investing often pays off, especially if the products are intended for export and simply take advantage of China's cheap labor and land.
Whether Boeing or McDonnell wins the competition, China's efforts to upgrade its aircraft manufacturing capability will lead companies to undertake the riskier strategy of investing in plants here.
 
Two-Way Street
''China will not just continue buying and buying,'' said Robert W. Yeager, chief representative for the Rockwell International Corporation, which is bidding to supply the avionics for the aircraft program. 
''China will come to you after a while and say, 'We've given you $25 million. 
Don't you think it's time to do something for us?'
''
China's goal is for the midsize aircraft program to complete its first plane by the mid-1990's and build about 150 by the year 2000. 
Some would be exported and others deployed on domestic routes.
Still, few people expect it to go quite so smoothly. 
Skeptics say the country's recently adopted economic austerity program could delay the project. 
Others even doubt that China could decide on a partner as early as summer.
Even Chinese officials concede that the scope of the project is enormous. 
''It isn't easy to make aircraft,'' said Hu Yizhou, Director General of the Civil Aviation Administration of China. 
''If it were, the world would have as many aircraft companies as it has car manufacturers. 
Even Japan makes autos, but not commercial airplanes.''
 
Plagued by Delays
By McDonnell Douglas's own account, its MD-82 undertaking was plagued by delays and changes, ending up as an assembly-kit operation that was a greatly scaled-down version of the original intention to build an aircraft from scratch, pretty much what China wants to do now.
China paid $550 million for tools and other equipment for the project. 
McDonnell Douglas's contribution was the training of more than 400 Chinese engineers and workers, and it paid for the transfer of about 90 families and seven million technical drawings from the United States to China.
McDonnell Douglas concedes that it did not make money on the Shanghai operation, but it has been able to expand its subcontracting business so that the Chinese now make a number of parts and components, like cargo doors and the nose structure, for McDonnell Douglas aircraft that will be used elsewhere.
Although Boeing has also done subcontracting, it has never tried a co-production arrangement comparable to the McDonnell Douglas effort or the one envisioned now through the trunk aircraft program. 
And Boeing, which has now flown a team of Chinese engineers to its Seattle headquarters, acknowledges that its strategy has had its limitations.
''If anything, we believe we're a bit of an underdog in this area,'' said James T. Johnson, general manager of Boeing Commercial Airplanes. 
On McDonnell Douglas, he added, ''They are going to be awfully aggressive.''
