
When officials of the Shanghai Center told the Chinese customs bureau that the complex planned to import 50 to 60 cars, they received a strange notice: for each model of a Japanese car it imported, it would have to bring in two extra samples. 
These would be turned over to authorities for ''test driving.''
''It doesn't matter that the model you bring in is already on the streets of Shanghai,'' said Patsy Whitcomb, an American executive who is helping to prepare for the opening of the $195.5 million Shanghai Center, which is being financed by American and Japanese investors.
The request for extra cars is just the latest snag in what has been a long, twisted process of constructing Shanghai Center, which will be the city's largest hotel, office and residential complex when it opens in March.
 
Little Flexibility
The center's owner, Seacliff Ltd., hopes that the new rule, which comes on top of a 280 percent duty on the imported cars, will be negotiable, although customs officials have shown little flexibility so far. 
They have already prohibited the company from importing a Mercedes-Benz, a car that they say would not suit China's new style of ''plain living.''
The experience of Shanghai Center suggests that China remains as much of a headache as ever to many foreign investors, despite the eagerness of the Government to attract investment since its bloody crackdown last June.
Yet for the Shanghai Center, there is profound injury as well as insult: it is opening just as foreign business clients are staying away from China in droves. 
And for all its commitment to China, the center finds itself running up against the same problems that keep its clients away.
With its retail shops and 1,000-seat theater, the center is a showcase project intended to add a cosmopolitan air to China's biggest city. 
Thus, it would have seemed a likely candidate to get help from the Chinese Government as Shanghai tries desperately to regain its role as a financial and commercial center for Asia.
 
No Change Since Crackdown
So far, however, the Shanghai Center has not found business any easier since the crackdown, according to Seacliff, a partnership among the Portman Companies and the American International Group, both of the United States, and a Japanese concern, the Kajima Corporation. 
The Shanghai Center was designed by John Portman & Associates, the American architectural firm.
Investors had hoped the Chinese would offer better terms, both to overcome international outrage after the bloodshed in June and to dispel the gradual disillusionment of many Western investors in recent years, particularly after an economic austerity drive that began in late 1988 reduced prospects for economic growth.
Many business analysts in Shanghai say that the center would have been highly successful before the austerity drive began, but that the business climate is now much more sluggish. 
Uncertainty has also scared away many new investors and potential clients, although some who have been negotiating plans for years still plan to come.
''The real challenge is that there are no new people coming in,'' said Michael C. Kalyk, the general manager of the center. 
''New business has to start up again before there's real business for us.''
 
Foreign Investment Dwindles
Like the rest of China, Shanghai has seen foreign investment dwindle since the crackdown. 
From January to June last year, there were 133 new projects worth $260 million by American investors, a Western diplomat estimated. 
The diplomat said that from July to December, only 66 projects worth $150 million were started, and most of these were begun before the crackdown.
The first half of this year will be more telling, since those who have invested less time in start-up negotiations may not feel burdened to continue their projects. 
Some companies who tried to pull out of their contracts apparently were not allowed to do so by the Chinese, diplomats say.
After the crackdown, many foreign companies facing dimmer commercial prospects hoped that Chinese bureaucrats would be more conciliatory at the negotiating table to restore the confidence of overseas investors. 
Some were offered interviews with senior officials, ministry-level bureaucrats, and at times, an audience with the Communist Party General Secretary himself, Jiang Zemin.
Foreign companies that demonstrated their commitment to China were thanked effusively and given encouragement. 
Some hope still lies in the prospect this spring that China will change the joint-venture law, extending the allowable term of a venture and authorizing the appointment of foreigners as a venture's chairman.
 
No Widespread Concession
Yet so far the high visibility has not led to widespread concessions, diplomats and business executives say. 
Only a small number of companies have obtained better terms, notably a foreign real estate developer in Tianjin. 
In fact, executives say some authorities, in an attempt to prove they are not to be cowed by foreigners, have actually become less cooperative with foreign companies.
''Despite the public relations, the environment for getting concessions is not easier, but harder,'' a Western diplomat here said. 
''There are regulations that may have been in place already, but now there is a trend to enforcing the regulations that people overlooked before.''
Seacliff is negotiating with Shanghai's local government for greater concessions, primarily on property taxes and an extension on its current 18-year land lease. 
But the Shanghai government, which has auctioned off expensive land-use rights for 50 years to a foreign company, might not want to offer a 50-year or even 40-year lease to the Shanghai Center at a bargain price for fear of offending its other client.
A Chinese business official familiar with the negotiations indicated that Seacliff would probably get an extension, although it was not clear for how long.
 
Commercial Reputation
Shanghai has enjoyed a reputation as one of China's most attractive commercial centers for foreign investment and business representation. 
When the Portman Companies first conceived of building a mixed-use complex in 1979 and then when construction began in 1986, there was a severe shortage of first-rate commercial complexes in Shanghai.
The company had estimated that in 1986 there were about 4,000 hotel rooms for foreigners. 
But since then, officials all over Shanghai, and throughout China, moved as quickly as possible to sponsor hotel projects.
There apparently was no central plan governing construction projects in Shanghai, and for competitive reasons owners and builders tried to keep their development plans secret. 
As a result, the Portman Shanghai hotel will add 700 rooms, in March or soon thereafter, to a city that will have a total of 18,000 hotel rooms, Seacliff estimates. 
When the hotel opens, Seacliff expects occupancy to be around 40 percent.
So far, the company has pre-leased about 25 percent of its apartments, 20 percent of its shopping complex and 30 percent of its office space. 
The complex will not be fully open until July, when the theater is finished.
 
Complex Behind Schedule
In mid-1985, executives of the Portman Companies indicated that the project would be finished in the spring of 1988. 
Revised plans set the opening date for December 1989, which then was delayed three months when work halted for 30 days after the June crackdown. 
Crews were sent to their homes overseas or to other provinces in China, and it took about two months to be ready again.
In late summer, Seacliff injected an additional $20.5 million in capital to cover cost overruns and help start the construction process again, bringing the total project cost to $195.5 million. 
On Jan. 
24, the company and its bankers, including the First National Bank of Chicago, signed an agreement, apparently initiated before the crackdown, to restructure the project's $145 million in loans.
Mr. Kalyk of Seacliff said the Shanghai Center would be able to cover operating expenses as soon as it opened, and he said he was confident the center would be able to meet its loan repayments. 
About a fourth of all operating expenses, he said, go to pay salaries for expatriate employees. 
This sum should drop once the center is running smoothly.
