
As planes land at Kai Tak airport here, they swoosh down close enough to the windows of buildings to make passengers feel like peeping Toms.
So it is not surprising there is widespread agreement that a new airport is needed. 
But as the Hong Kong Government moves into the detailed planning stages for a $16.2 billion replacement airport, the project is beginning to symbolize the kinds of problems emerging as Britain prepares to hand over Hong Kong to China in 1997.
Even though the airport will be one of the largest and most intricate construction projects in the world, Britain and China have not been cooperating. 
Critics worry that if the two Governments cannot work together to plan and finance something as basic as an airport, the transition to Chinese rule will be difficult indeed.
The most crucial element to the project's success is the endorsement of the Beijing Government, which will inherit the airport. 
Beijing was apparently not officially consulted in planning the venture. 
So far, Chinese officials have been cagey about their views. 
Indeed, they have expressed a deep concern that after Britain builds the project, they will be stuck with the bill - a large debt package without the money to pay it off.
''I think China has a right to be angry,'' said Martin C. M. Lee, a prominent lawyer and legislator in Hong Kong. 
''The airport is clearly something that can't go ahead without their support.''
The British have chosen 1997 as the date when the first of the new airport's two runways will open. 
Many business executives here say they think the British set an unusually tight schedule to meet that deadline in building a modern airport in what is now an expanse of water near Chek Lap Kok island about 17 miles from downtown Hong Kong.
Still, many economists and financial analysts say the project, announced last year just a few months after the military crackdown June 3 and 4 in Beijing, will significantly help the local economy in the years before the Beijing takeover. 
Construction companies, technical and engineering consultants and financial firms already are lining up for a piece of the business.
''Because of June 4, domestic confidence was pretty low,'' said C. K. Law, a senior economist at Bankers Trust Securities (Pacific) Ltd. 
''Then the Government thought it had to do something to prop up confidence -like build an airport.''
 
More Than Just an Airport
Actually, plans call for much more than just an airport. 
The overall project will include the world's longest single-span suspension bridge, a high-speed railway, two port terminals and numerous expressways and transportation links.
Kai Tak airport is expected to reach capacity by the mid-1990's. 
The Government began an analysis of the need for a new airport nearly a decade ago, but shelved the plans when the economy went into recession and London and Beijing began talks on the question of Hong Kong's future.
Now Hong Kong is moving with a sense of urgency and determination, having formed a management team that will include Government and outside consultants, as well as a newly formed provisional airport authority.
With plans under way, many engineering and development experts are skeptical that the series of projects can be finished within budget and on schedule. 
And some critics still object to the location, timing and cost.
Moreover, the scale and the number of parties involved will turn the projects into a giant, intricate jigsaw puzzle: all the pieces must fit together before they can form anything.
To get to the new airport, about nine times the distance from downtown Hong Kong as the current airport, passengers will take a high-speed rail line to cross three land masses and two waterways. 
Since the suspension bridge will be the only means to cross the main water channel, it must be finished before the airport can be used, and likewise, the railway must be finished before the vast majority of the public can get to the airport.
 
Financial Challenges
''The problem is time and money,'' said David R. Butler, a partner at Scott Wilson, Kirkpatrick & Partners, consulting engineers who are involved in building an expressway that can help serve as an airport link. 
''If it were just one engineer building it with a pot of gold, it wouldn't be a problem. 
Clearly, there are so many other people involved besides the Government. 
It'll be a massive organizational task.''
One fear is that the project will drain Government reserves, which now exceed $9 billion, and the benefit will go mainly to British and foreign contractors and consulting firms. 
So far, the major consulting contracts have gone to British or American companies.
The Government has said it would try to raise 40 to 60 percent of the financing, both direct investment and loans, from private sources, and the rest by digging into its own pockets or by public borrowing. 
Since it rarely borrows long-term money, the Hong Kong Government has a strong credit rating and should not have trouble raising cash in the financial markets.
While financial institutions, particularly Japanese ones, have expressed interest, raising such large sums of money without assurances from China will not be an easy task. 
The Government ultimately hopes the Chinese will help finance the project, either directly or indirectly.
''The greatest challenges are the finances,'' said Malcolm F. Williams, director at Kleinwort Benson Ltd., a British firm hired by the Government as financial adviser for the main airport links, including the railway. 
Mr. Williams would not estimate how much could be raised privately. 
He did say that equity investments would more likely come from corporate airport users like airlines or project contractors, rather than from third parties.
With the cost of building the main bridge alone estimated at $2.3 billion, some analysts say the price of a train ride to the airport could be $20, more than double the cost of taxi fare now to the current airport.
 
International Competition
Projecting how well the new airport may do in terms of air traffic and revenues is complicated. 
Substantial returns will not begin until the airport has been operating for some time, and by then, it will be in the hands of the Chinese Government. 
There also will be competition from international airports being built in nearby Macao and in Shenzhen, China.
China is evaluating the project and is said to have investigated cheaper alternative sites, including one suggested by a group of academics and another by Gordon Y. S. Wu, managing director of Hopewell Holdings Ltd., a large construction company. 
The Hong Kong Government says it will not change the site, something that would cause a great loss of face and shake confidence in the Government.
''Everyone is looking for a perfect structure, but life is not perfect and so you have to manage the process,'' said Henry D. Townsend, consultant project manager for the Bechtel Group, the advisers on the first phase of the project. 
''Time has come to put aside all alternatives and get on with the project.''
