
Perhaps the boldest single project envisioned during the last decade of China's economic restructuring was a plan to copy the success of Hong Kong, 300 miles to the northeast, here on southern China's Hainan Island.
The Yangpu Port project, as it is known, came to symbolize the vaulting aspirations of Hainan, where a chunk of land was to be leased to a foreign company for a transformation into a duty-free port and a modern city of several hundred thousand people. 
The project was the centerpiece of a broad program to promote a market economy on Hainan.
But Hainan's progress has been stalled, along with the Yangpu project. 
There are several reasons for the slowdown, but they seem to add up to the clearest example yet of how Beijing's political crackdown has spilled over into, and put a damper on, some areas of the nation's economy.
Trend to Recentralization
Foreign investment was supposed to make the difference here, but getting it depended on the central Government's willingness to allow Hainan unprecedented autonomy. 
Since the June crackdown, many foreigners say, Hainan's autonomy may be evaporating in the general trend toward a recentralization of authority.
The Yangpu project has not yet been approved by Beijing and some officials say Premier Li Peng has rejected the idea that it become a free port. 
And while some foreign investors have come to take a look, they have been reluctant to put their money down.
Worst of all for Hainan, three of the most widely known supporters of the province's bold plans - Communist Party General Secretary Zhao Ziyang; his son, Zhao Erjun, a businessman, and Hainan's Governor, Liang Xiang - have all fallen from power in the last six months.
The island still has an industrial growth rate of more than 10 percent while most of the mainland is suffering a drop in industrial output. 
But Hainan officials are coming to realize that it may be difficult to get the foreign investment the island province of 6.7 million people needs.
''The central Government gives us lots of policies, but it's short of money,'' said Jiang Wei, an economic planning official. 
''So we depend on foreign investors. 
We have lots of good projects, but we need investors to develop them.''
Hainan, an agricultural backwater, lacks the basic roads, water and communication structures to develop a modern base that will attract Western-financed export companies.
In the early 1980's, the central Government plowed enormous sums into other special economic zones, like the town of Shenzhen, next to Hong Kong, but these are times of austerity, and Beijing is giving Hainan much less money than it gave Shenzhen.
''There's been some impact since June, and development will be a bit slower,'' acknowledged Li Huiliang, a Canton native who is now running Haikou's Southyang Footwear Factory, a Taiwan- and Hong Kong-financed company that exports athletic shoes to the United States.
But Mr. Li and others here are reluctant to accept defeat. 
Mr. Li says Hainan can still prosper, given its advantages over parts of the mainland. 
There is no electricity shortage, he said, and land costs are lower here than in some other coastal areas. 
Mr. Li says his company makes a profit of 30 to 40 cents on a pair of shoes and the profit would be 20 to 30 cents a pair if they were made in Taiwan.
 
Headaches for Executives
Another manager of a foreign venture, Rennie Velasco, is less enthusiastic. 
Miss Velasco, who is from the Philippines and runs the Haikou Lone Star Cafe, an American-financed fast-food restaurant, said that while Hainan might prosper if it became more flexible, for now it gives foreign executives the same headaches as the rest of China. 
''It's so difficult to do business here,'' she added. 
''It's so frustrating.''
To many foreigners, still waiting to see what will happen here, the Yangpu project is a barometer of the conditions in Hainan, and these days it is not a reassuring one.
The initial plan was for Kumagai Gumi Ltd. of Hong Kong, a 35 percent-owned subsidiary of a Japanese construction company, to lease 12.5 square miles at Yangpu. 
There, on the northwest side of Hainan, the company was to develop a free port, like Hong Kong.
Kumagai Gumi was to pay for the construction of local roads, power plants, water systems and other infrastructure projects. 
Foreign companies would then be expected to swarm to the area to take advantage of the cheap labor force.
Kumagai Gumi has already paid the equivalent of $6.75 million as the first installment on its lease. 
And the province's party secretary, Xu Shijie, and other leaders all insist the Yangpu project will go through.
 
'Won't Be Like Hong Kong'
But local officials and foreign business executives note that the project has yet to be approved by the State Council in Beijing. 
''There must be some differences between Yangpu and the rest of Hainan, but Yangpu won't be duty-free,'' said Mr. Jiang, the economic planner. 
''It won't be like Hong Kong.''
A foreign executive close to the project said that if Beijing did not allow the area to be duty-free, it might no longer be worthwhile for foreign investors.
Despite the Yangpu uncertainty, Hainan is still trying to arrange other long-term land leases, including 21.1 square miles near Haikou. 
Ye Zhanghe, an official in the province's economic cooperation bureau, said the province wanted the area to become a recreational zone with hotels, golf courses and other resort facilities.
''Certainly there has been an influence from June 4, but it hasn't been so great,'' Mr. Ye said, referring to the day Chinese troops moved against protestors and crushed the democracy movement. 
He added that since that time more than 100 foreign companies had come to Hainan to establish businesses.
But others, Chinese officials and foreign analysts alike, have less optimistic views, noting the apparent reluctance of foreign investors to commit themselves.
In addition, some Chinese and foreigners, contending that Hainan's dreams were never realistic, note that it lacks the geographic and developmental advantages of boom economies like Guangdong Province, which adjoins Hong Kong.
One of Hainan's clear natural advantages is its southern shore, which boasts beautiful palm-lined beaches. 
If the southern coast could be developed into a winter resort, it might attract residents of Hong Kong, Taiwan and Japan who now go to Thailand.
 
Six Hours From Beaches
But the island's only international airport is here at Haikou, six hours by car from the southern beaches, and it will probably be at least five years before an international airport is built and resorts are put along the sandy beaches.
The province acknowledges that it is relatively new to the tourism business, and there are signs that it does not perfectly understand how to promote itself to attract foreign tourists.
''The scent is not obvious, not stirring, but internal, harmonious and penetrating in the air,'' reads an account about a suggested local culinary specialty. 
''Dog meat is superb if black or brown dogs with smooth skin and short fur are used.''
