
Everyone knew the project would be impressive, but when the Government last week announced plans to develop a huge new airport and container shipping port served by a whole new town and linked by a high-speed rail system, a six-lane highway and a new bridge and tunnel, the pure scope of the project was stunning.
Experts have estimated that to build the airport alone, Hong Kong will have to import 10,000 workers. 
Indeed, critics contend that the grand plan may be too ambitious and warn that if private investors fail to provide substantial backing, the colony could suffer a humiliating loss of face and confidence.
Government officials maintain that they are optimistic, and a number of business leaders have expressed their faith and support in the project.
A Sign of Britain's Faith
''It's going to change the face of Hong Kong,'' one top Government official declared. 
Perhaps as important, the development would be a visible sign of Britain's faith in Hong Kong's future, a sign that colonial officials hope will encourage the free-wheeling capitalist residents as they prepare for a transfer of control to communist China in 1997.
''The airport package will create the impression in the minds of businessmen that no matter what the political developments here, there will still be forward economic development, still be money to be made in Hong Kong,'' said Robert Broadfoot, managing director of the Political and Economic Risk Consultancy Ltd.
''The project,'' he added, ''will help counter the impression, the fear, some people have that Hong Kong will be a ghost town in 1997.''
China, which has been advised of the project, appears to be sending mixed signals. 
The Bank of China, the official bank of the mainland, recently called on the British colonial government to begin the development projects for the future, and even recommended using money that has been put aside for the Hong Kong Government after 1997.
 
Some Criticism
But in a weekend editorial, Wen Wei Po, a newspaper here that supports the Beijing Government, warned that the project may be too grandiose. 
''If the scale is too great and the speed too hasty,'' the newspaper added, ''it will leave behind rampant inflation in 1997.''
Some critics say the Hong Kong project will be a white elephant, given that China is investing in a new airport in nearby Shenzhen, and that Macao, a tiny Portuguese enclave that is to revert to Chinese control in 1999, is building a new airport as well. 
But Hong Kong officials say the Shenzhen airport is likely to be used mostly for domestic Chinese flights and Macao's airport would simply ''complement'' Hong Kong's'' not compete with it.
Supporters argue that Hong Kong must build for the future, to prevent China from building those same kinds of projects on the mainland.
''We have to make ourselves vital to China and the development of south China,'' one Hong Kong banker said. 
''Our very existence as a commercial center depends on this.''
 
Big Effort Required
In a key policy address last Wednesday, the governor, Sir David Wilson, conceded that the huge project would ''require an immense amount of effort from both the public and private sectors.''
He said the airport, together with the new container port, transportation links and supporting industrial and commercial centers, would cost a total of $16.2 billion in American currency between now and 2006. 
But he said that sum was affordable, ''especially if we involve the private sector in as many projects as possible.''
Analysts say the Hong Kong Government, which has collected growing surpluses in recent years, could finance the airport project itself. 
The accumulated surplus in 1989-90 is expected to be $9 billion American. 
But one businessman said: ''Government spending is not the issue. 
A key issue is whether the private sector has the faith in Hong Kong to invest.''
Whether investors are willing to gamble on the projects remains uncertain, analysts say, and a failure by the Government to attract broad support from the private sector would be seen as one more sign that business confidence in Hong Kong is waning. 
The Hong Kong Government has relied on the private sector to finance totally a number of large community development projects in the past.
 
Private Financing Expected
Hong Kong's Kwai Chung complex, the world's busiest container port, is the only privately owned and developed port in the world. 
The Government says it expects 40 to 60 percent of the project to be financed privately, and hopes to have detailed investment plans within a year.
Treasury Secretary Hamish Macleod said he was confident the package would attract investments from financial conglomerates, especially projects like the new port's container terminals and the road and rail links that are to join the new operations to Hong Kong and the Kowloon Peninsula.
The airport, to be built on Chek Lap Kok, a small slip of land off Lantau Island, will cost $4.5 billion, and officials hope to have the first of its two runways operating in the first half of 1997, before the Chinese takeover. 
The airport and surrounding support facilities will open up development of Lantau Island, which could become as populous as Hong Kong island, property experts said.
 
Famous Airport Will Be Replaced
The airport at Chek Lap Kok will replace Hong Kong's famous Kai Tak Airport, where planes land and take off in the densely populated section of Kowloon, skimming over rooftops of high-rise apartments. 
In Asia, Kai Tak is second in passenger traffic only to Tokyo's Narita Airport, with 15.3 million passengers last year.
Consultants have estimated that Kai Tak will reach its saturation point in 1996 and Sir David Ford, the colony's chief secretary, said if a new airport were not built soon, ''the economic disbenefits of living with Kai Tak and the congestion would amount to some $13 billion between 1996 and 2010.''
The rest of the $16.2 billion cost of the project would cover a new container port to be built on the western part of the colony, along with transportation links, the dredging of a new shipping channel, construction of a sheltered anchorage and reclamation projects for added commercial space for port loading, storage and parking.
When Chek Lap Kok is operational, Kai Tak will close, opening new property development in that area that could be worth billions of dollars, analysts said.
