
The Supreme Soviet is about to take up legislation giving the State Bank of the U.S.S.R., or Gosbank, authority to issue foreign-exchange licenses to domestic banks, Yuri Ponomorev, a board member of the bank, said at the annual meeting of the International Monetary Fund and World Bank here today.
The Soviet Union is still not a member of the global lending institutions 45 years after their founding, but Mr. Ponomorev's attendance at these meetings is seen as in keeping with the perestroika, or restructuring, put in place by Mikhail S. Gorbachev. As one of his country's top bankers, Mr. Ponomorev has offered new details on Soviet banking reforms to finance officials from 152 countries as well as to thousands of commercial bankers who have been here for the weeklong meeting, which ended today.
The moves envisioned would enable many more Soviet institutions to handle their own currency transactions and provide new opportunities for Western financial institutions in the Soviet Union, Mr. Ponomorev said.
GATT Membership Sought
The Soviet Union wants to join the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, and although Moscow was rebuffed when it initially applied in 1986, most analysts here see GATT membership remaining a high Soviet priority.
Ed A. Hewett, a Soviet affairs specialist at the Brookings Institution, noted that Moscow is making numerous changes in its way of doing business and could approach GATT as a market economy, as Hungary did in the early 1970's.
While Moscow has not yet applied to either the I.M.F. or the World Bank, it has been closely following the experience of two of its neighbors that are members, Poland and China, which are using the organizations to advance their own domestic economic reforms.
Poland has used the meeting here to mobilize international assistance. 
The Governor of the People's Bank of China, Li Guixian, said at the meeting that his country's annual average growth had reached 9.6 percent in the last 10 years since it joined the institutions, compared with 7.1 percent from 1952 to 1988. 
He said membership in the world organizations had ''injected vitality and dynamism into the Chinese economy.''
China has been a substantial borrower from both the bank and the fund. 
Until June, when a violent crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators in Beijing led the World Bank to suspend seven loans, China had borrowed $7.64 billion from the World Bank since 1980. 
In addition, China has taken two loans from the I.M.F., one for $600 million and the other for $500 million.
 
Smaller Countries Joined
Although the Soviet Union was part of the postwar discussions at Bretton Woods, N.H., that led to the formation of the I.M.F. and World Bank, Moscow pulled out and has remained outside organizations that manage financial relations among capitalist countries. 
But smaller Communist countries, like Yugoslavia, Poland, Hungary and Rumania, have joined the organizations to try to give a lift to their economies. 
Now Mr. Gorbachev insists he wants to reintegrate the Soviet economy into the world economy.
''We think the Soviets want to come into a more cooperative posture,'' Barber B. Conable Jr., president of the World Bank, said at a news conference.
Michel Camdessus, managing director of the I.M.F., acknowledged at another news conference that Soviet membership could produce ''a world that is less dangerous and more stable,'' although he added, ''For me it is very difficult to enter into hypothetical scenarios.''
 
Opposition Called Softening
The United States continues to oppose Soviet membership in GATT as well as the bank and the I.M.F., although some Administration officials say that Washington's opposition to GATT membership is softening.
The main fears are that once in the international organizations, the Soviet Union would prove obstructionist, possibly reneging on repayment obligations to the fund and bank and packing the institutions with ideological Soviet staff members.
''Soviet participation in international economic institutions will be one big headache for everyone,'' said Senator Bill Bradley, Democrat of New Jersey, at a forum here held in connection with the annual meeting.
Others contend there could also be benefits, including a strengthening of the agencies' claim to be truly universal bodies.
