
Last year was a nightmare for the Wanbao Electric Company: 100,000 refrigerators sat for months in warehouses, it could not pay its debts, a potential American partner put off a deal and its general manager fled to Canada.
The Chinese company, the nation's largest refrigerator manufacturer, blames fickle consumers for the problems. 
Buying evaporated as a result of the program of economic retrenchment begun 18 months ago.
Across China, factories have been wrestling with a problem: what to do if no one buys their products?
It is a new challenge for many of China's makers of luxury consumer goods, like color televisions, washing machines, ovens and refrigerators. 
After years of selling to an eager market, manufacturers had begun to learn how to speed up production to meet soaring demand, which culminated in 1988 in an inflation-inspired buying spree that had consumers grabbing goods from the shelves.
Now, Wanbao has responded with fundamental changes, including lower prices, new models and a production cutback to meet the diminished demand.
''In the past, we would sell according to how much we produced,'' said Chen Canguang, a deputy manager at the company. 
''This is our lesson from last year. 
We won't produce in excessive quantities. 
We don't want stockpiles again.''
 
Stockpiles Dwindle
Stockpiles of refrigerators have dwindled, and the company has cut its production to 30 percent of operating capacity to match the consumer demand.
The company says it designed seven models last year, after sticking with the same basic types for about six years. 
It says it also slashed office and travel expenses by 60 percent and reduced its storage of raw materials. 
Previously, it had piled up a year's worth.
The company also acknowledges that a nationwide tightening of credit severely hampered the company, and that it was saved, in part, by an injection of loans from Government banks. 
Rumors about bankruptcy swirled for a while, but Wanbao says it ended the year with large profits.
 
Big Share of the Market
''We have one-sixth of China's refrigerator market,'' Mr. Chen said. 
''How can we go into bankruptcy?''
The state has never allowed so reputable a company as Wanbao, which has 30,000 workers and can make one million refrigerators a year, to go into bankruptcy.
It used to seem that there would always be enough of a market for consumer products. 
But now the effects of the austerity plan seem to have been more severe than leaders expected, leaving many large producers at a loss to pay their payroll and other bills.
To avoid stockpiling their products, many have stopped production and sent their workers home with as little as 50 percent of their salaries. 
Some factories have even resorted to paying employees with products, leaving it to the workers to sell the products if they need cash.
 
Government Loans
In turn, the factories have turned to the Government for loans. 
The Government provided credit late last year and again earlier this year, when it made about $2.2 billion in loans.
But the hue and cry from factory managers and local leaders has been so vociferous that Prime Minister Li Peng is already believed to be searching for policies to ease the economic problems.
The austerity policy may be having a positive effect on a small number of companies, especially ones like Wanbao that are trying to gain worldwide attention. 
These companies may be learning how to overhaul themselves to compete on price and quality. 
At least for the moment, it appears that some of them are picking up the ways of the market, even if that means starting with the basics.
The China Refrigeration Industry Company, a Wanbao competitor that is one-quarter owned by a Hong Kong company, began formulating a design to better compete in the high end of the market in 1989, its first year.
 
Storing 'Half a Pig'
The company, based in a suburb of Canton, says it did extensive market research and came up with a refrigerator that has a middle section, which is adjustable so that it can be turned into either a freezer or a simple cooler.
''In the northeast, they don't buy pork like they do here in Guangdong,'' said Hua Hei Li, the general manager. 
''Up there, they buy half a pig at a time. 
In the winter, they can leave it outside, but they can't do that in the spring, or the meat goes bad, so they want a large freezer space.''
Wanbao also has a new three-section refrigerator, and so China Refrigeration, whose brand is Hualing, may be only keeping up with the competition.
The sluggish market last year also forced Hualing, which is about 10 times smaller than Wanbao, to slash refrigerator prices from the equivalent of $595 early in 1989 to $470 early this year. 
Wanbao also cut prices.
Last year's hardships embarrassed the company, especially as it was trying to lure the General Electric Company into a joint arrangement to export refrigerators to the United States. 
The factory's party secretary took over in November after Deng Shaoshen, its general manager, slipped into Canada while on a business trip in the United States.
It is not clear how much the company has learned from its experiences, but Wanbao is betting on a boom year again, hoping that refrigerator sales will top one million this year.
