
It used to be that in Communist countries the factories were owned by the state and made things that local people could use and understand, like steel or boots or buckets.
Such outmoded visions of Communism elicit patronizing smiles in the fastest-growing areas of China, like this village in eastern Jiangsu Province. 
Here in Chengbei, there are more than 100 factories, not one of them state-owned, and several export to the world market: surgical gloves to New York, glass slides to Britain and West Germany, and telephone cables to Hong Kong.
The factories in Chengbei, all of which were started in the last decade, reflect the rise of the non-state economic sector in China. 
In some areas, particularly here in the fertile expanse around Shanghai, collectively owned and private ventures have flourished to the point that now it is they - not state-owned companies -that dominate the economy.
Is this still socialism, with the state controlling a dwindling minority of production?
Everyone insists that it is, but economically it is a world apart from the Stalinist models of the past. 
The small-scale economic dynamism of the fast-growing Jiangsu, Zhejiang and Guangdong Provinces is still far from capitalism, but it is just as far from China's Maoist past. 
Already the changing patterns of production are reshaping social and political attitudes.
 
'True Businessmen'
When a visitor asked the mayor of a town in Guangdong Province why it had attracted so much foreign investment, the mayor had a quick answer.
''Foreign investors like dealing with us because they know they're dealing with true businessmen, not Communist officials,'' he explained. 
That is not quite true, but clearly the local governments are becoming more business- and market-oriented.
In Jiangsu Province, state-owned companies last year accounted for 43 percent of industrial production, compared with 52 percent for the collective sector and about 5 percent for private enterprise. 
The non-state sectors are not only the biggest part of the local economies in some areas but by far the most dynamic.
When the Industrial Revolution began in England two centuries ago, it emerged not in what were then the biggest cities - London, Norwich and York - but in the backwaters of Manchester, Liverpool and Birmingham. 
Similarly, China's economic revolution is concentrated not in big cities like Beijing and Shanghai but in the smaller towns of Jiangsu, Zhejiang and Guangdong Provinces.
 
Remarkable Growth Rates
Each of these three provinces has seen industrial production grow by 15 percent to 20 percent a year, making their economies among the fastest-growing in the world. 
Indeed, some of this growth has been wasted - the result of zealous expansion even when it was not efficient - and the Government is trying desperately to rein in the overheated economies.
''It's a little sad,'' said Gu Songnian, the director of Jiangsu's Economic Research Institute. 
''It's not sustainable. 
We have to lower our growth rates.''
Already, some collective enterprises are feeling the pinch of the national retrenchment, as the Government cuts off credit and supplies of raw materials. 
In Wuxi County, where collectives have flourished in the last decade as almost nowhere else in China, one-third of the 12,000 township enterprises will have to close or merge, official news organizations have reported.
Despite some hard times, Jiangsu is expected to continue to prosper and its collectives to gain ground relative to the state sector.
As the state sector diminishes, Jiangsu Province and the other advanced areas fall into an uncertain economic zone that defies easy definition. 
They are like no other socialist economy, for the state is responsible for only a minority of production. 
And yet they are by no means capitalist or market economies, for various layers of the Government still control the prices and allocation of important ingredients, from labor and capital to electricity and steel.
In this, Jiangsu is only a more developed and extreme form of the national economy. 
Nationally, the share of industrial production from state-owned companies has fallen to less than 59 percent, from 81 percent a decade ago, while the share of collectives has risen to more than 36 percent, from 19 percent in 1978. 
Private businesses rose to 5 percent of industrial output from almost nothing.
 
'Collective' Means Many Things
But even if the share of collective enterprises rises further, it does not quite mean that private enterprise has taken over. 
Collective enterprise is a term that includes a variety of kinds of companies, from family enterprises to worker-owned factories to companies that are effectively owned by local governments.
''Our concept of individual and collective enterprises is different from yours,'' Jiangsu Province's governor, Gu Xiulian, said in an interview. 
Many of the collectives, for example, are operated by former workers' communes, with the profits shared by everyone in the township.
Even if collectives are not quite free-market enterprises, it is clear that they follow the market more closely than state-owned companies. 
A collective company that loses money, for example, is driven out of business, while a state-owned company simply picks up a subsidy from the Government. 
Collectives also have greater flexibility to pay employees according to their work, and to react to market conditions.
''China now has a problem,'' said Xiao Bin, director of the Dongfeng Auto Industry Corporation in Jiangsu's capital, Nanjing. 
''If workers work harder, they usually don't get much more than those who are lazy. 
More and more collectives will appear, because at collectives those who work harder will get a bigger bonus.''
 
The Freedom to Reward
Mr. Xiao's own company is an example of the flexibility that collectives enjoy. 
One of the biggest collectives in Jiangsu, with 1,020 employees, Dongfeng has to buy most of its raw materials on the free market instead of from the state at fixed low prices. 
But it also has the right to sell its trucks and vehicle parts at market prices, and to use the money to reward employees.
Yet in Jiangsu, as collective enterprises multiply, state-owned companies are feeling pressure to become more flexible than state-owned companies elsewhere.
