
Israel and China are expected to establish diplomatic relations for the first time during a trip by Foreign Minister David Levy to Beijing toward the end of the month, senior officials here said today.
The Levy trip has been veiled in secrecy, and the Foreign Ministry declined to confirm either that he would be going to China or that an agreement to create formal ties was imminent.
Nonetheless, other Israeli officials said the Foreign Minister would probably leave for Beijing in two weeks, adding that he would not be setting off on such a journey unless Israel expected to fulfill its long-held desire for normal relations with the Chinese.
Once such ties were established, they said, it would clear the way for China to take part in the third phase of the Middle East peace process, scheduled to begin in Moscow on Jan. 
28. That is the so-called multilateral talks on water resources, arms control and other regional issues that might include as many as 35 countries.
 
High-Level Contacts
In late November the Palestinian news agency reported that the Palestine Liberation Organization had been told by the Chinese that they want to take part in the multilateral round. 
But Israeli officials said China was well aware that it would first have to give Israel the diplomatic recognition the Israelis have long wanted.
High-level contacts have picked up considerably in recent months, with the Israeli Defense Minister, Moshe Arens, making a secret trip to Beijing two months ago, followed by a return visit to Jerusalem two weeks ago by China's Deputy Foreign Minister, Yang Fuchang, the highest-ranking Chinese official ever to come here.
Although Israel was quick to recognize the People's Republic of China after the Communist revolution in 1949, the countries never developed diplomatic relations.
But they have long had trade, scientific and other contacts that include arms sales by Israel to China that are said to total several billion dollars.
"It's been substantial, and it's been going on for 5 or 10 years," said Gerald M. Steinberg, a strategic-studies specialist at Bar Ilan University near Tel Aviv. 
According to Professor Steinberg, Israeli sales to China have included tanks, aircraft technology, avionics and electronics. 
There have also been reports about Israeli help for China's missile program, he said, probably including the new M-9 surface-to-surface missile that Israel now fears China might try to sell to Syria and other Middle East countries.
He and other Israelis say they expect Beijing to view Israel as a possible source of Western technology and military expertise. 
For Israel,perspective, a major aim is to slow China's arms sales to the Middle East, and Professor Steinberg said a high priority is to keep Syria from getting the M-9.
Israel is also concerned that China is negotiating sales of nuclear technology to Algeria and Iran.
On diplomatic issues, Israel hopes for a more even-handed Middle East policy from the Chinese, who support Palestinian demands for self-determination and for Israeli withdrawal from the occupied territories. 
But they have been quoted recently as accompanying such familiar calls with appeals that Israel's security be guaranteed.
