
The capital crackled with fireworks today as millions of Chinese ushered in the Year of the Monkey, which tradition suggests will be filled with good fortune.
All of China seemed to come to a standstill for the nation's most important holiday, as workers stayed home to celebrate with their families and visit friends. 
Almost everyone gets a three-day holiday, and some take several weeks off.
Deng Xiaoping, the nation's 87-year-old senior leader, appeared on Chinese television for the first time in a year, to extend holiday greetings from Shanghai, where he is spending the holiday. 
He seemed feeble but took a few steps on his own and shook hands with Communist and military officials.
To insure a holiday mood, the Communist Party leaders arranged that meat and other supplies were plentiful in the markets. 
The authorities arranged shipments of 34,000 metric tons of pork to Beijing markets alone, 17 percent more than last year and enough for everyone to eat pork dumplings for weeks.
Along with the festivities, there is also concern among officials that the new year in the 12-year lunar cycle will bring a small baby boom and strain China's family planning policy. 
Last year was the Year of the Sheep, which is considered inauspicious for having babies, and many couples apparently put off having a child.
"There were fewer babies this year because it was the Year of the Sheep," Wu Dongfang, director of obstetrics at the Beijing Maternity Hospital, said recently as she led a visitor past a ward with many empty beds. 
"It should pick up again next year."
According to Chinese tradition, a child born in the Year of the Monkey will be clever, bright and lucky. 
A child born last year, however, is expected to have a bitter life, full of hunger and ill fortune.
In Gaomi County in the coastal province of Shandong, 54 out of 60 newly married couples applied for permission to bear children in 1992, according to a recent article in the Beijing Evening News. 
Those who were given approval to have children last year waited until this year, it added.
These traditional views are most common in the countryside, but the belief lingers in the cities as well. 
One college-educated Beijing woman had an abortion last year because she and her mother did not want the child to be born in the Year of the Sheep, her husband said. 
She got pregnant again is keeping the baby because it is due well into the new year.
"People believe that a child born in the Year of the Sheep will have a hard, difficult life," said an official in the central Government. 
"Why just today, my boss was saying that the Year of the Monkey should be a terrific year for our department. 
The Year of the Monkey is supposed to be lucky for everything."
Likewise, many people considered the Year of the Sheep simply an unlucky year. 
As an example, Chinese often cite last year's floods, the worst since 1954, in which 3,000 people died.
The Family Planning Commission has preliminary data on the number of births and the birth rate for 1991, but it refuses to make them public.
In an effort to dispel the superstitions, newspaper articles have also pointed out that the Year of the Sheep may even have been a good year to have children: there will be less competition for them in school and at work.
