
In the 20 years since President Richard M. Nixon made his breakthrough trip to Beijing, the scenery and the players in the diplomatic drama between the United States and China have almost all been recast.
But the framework for the Chinese-American relationship, as it was spelled out in a piece of paper called the Shanghai Communique, has remained standing, if a bit battered, since it was devised in 1972 by Mr. Nixon and his foreign-affairs adviser, Henry A. Kissinger, and their Chinese counterparts.
Last night, Mr. Kissinger and about a hundred of his favorite China hands gathered at the St. Regis Hotel in New York to celebrate the 20th anniversary of the Shanghai Communique, which was issued on the final day of Mr. Nixon's trip in February 1972.
The gathering was timed, in part, to welcome a delegation from China headed by the Mayor of Shanghai, Huang Ju. 
Mr. Nixon declined to attend.
In essence, Mr. Nixon and Mr. Kissinger agreed to disagree with their Chinese counterparts, to keep their differences over ideology and recognition of the Chinese Nationalists from getting in the way of common interests like keeping the Soviet Union at bay. 
Every Administration since, with some amendments, has endorsed that view.
"The Shanghai Communique changed the basic dynamic of the cold war at the time," said Richard H. Solomon, now Assistant Secretary of State for East Asia and the Pacific, who helped draft the communique as an aide to Mr. Kissinger. "There was a great sense of relief and elation in the breakthrough that was achieved."
The China trip was one of the crowning moments for the Nixon-Kissinger diplomatic duo. 
At the time, Mr. Nixon described it as "the week that changed the world."
Apart from its geopolitics, the trip gave American newspaper readers and television watchers a long-awaited glimpse of China, which charmed and fascinated them with images of the Great Wall, panda bears and Ping-Pong players. 
But after another watershed event, the crushing of the student-led democracy movement in 1989, a significant number of Americans begin to question the "agree to disagree" framework.
At last night's gathering, however, most people seemed to prefer Mr. Kissinger's approach.
"That framework continues today," said Cyrus R. Vance, who was Secretary of State in the Carter Administration. 
"I remain concerned about human rights issues in China, but I also see progress in the economy."
Yesterday, Mr. Kissinger recalled the diplomatic to-and-fro with Qiao Guanhua, the Chinese Deputy Foreign Minister, and the tough negotiating sessions in between banquets and outings.
"Our basic concept was that despite our differences, we were able to agree on certain issues," Mr. Kissinger said.
"The formula we came up with was rather elegant," he said of the communique's two-sided format. 
"It's the only communique that I know of in which two sides expressed distinctly different views."
Mr. Kissinger has been accused of a conflict of interest in supporting continued contact with China's Communist Party leadership at the same time that he advises American businesses in China through his firm, Kissinger & Associates.
Last night's event, where the guest list no doubt overlapped with many of his firm's clients, was sponsored by the America-China Society, of which Mr. Kissinger is co-chairman with Mr. Vance.
"This is Henry's show," said Richard C. Holbrooke, a former Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian Affairs and now an investment banker at Shearson Lehman Brothers. 
"It is remembering one of the greatest moments in his career."
Han Xu, China's former Ambassador to the Washington, who has accompanied the Mayor of Shanghai as an adviser, also praised Mr. Kissinger's role and the strength of the communique.
"The Shanghai Communique laid down the principle of how we deal with each other," said Mr. Han. "It still has a lot of vitality and relevance today."
