
Two leading Chinese dissidents, each serving a 13-year jail term for his role in the Tiananmen Square democracy movement, have started hunger strikes to protest poor prison conditions, relatives and people close to the families said today.
One of the prisoners, Wang Juntao, a 33-year-old editor and democracy advocate, told his parents on Tuesday that he would start refusing food that day, as a protest against prison conditions and in response to the authorities' sudden cancellation of a visit by his wife, usually a monthly event.
"If some people are going to use this opportunity to do some bad things, then I must go on a hunger strike," Mr. Wang declared, said a Chinese who has access to prison authorities.
Mr. Wang, who was obliged to wear handcuffs during the visit with family members, is said by them to have contracted Hepatitis B since his arrest. 
The disease can be fatal, and Mr. Wang is being held in solitary confinement without access to regular medical care, relatives say.
The other dissident, Chen Ziming, who was also a newspaper editor and advocate of political change, began a hunger strike on Wednesday, said his mother, Wu Yongfen. 
Mr. Chen, who is 39 years old, apparently is holding his hunger strike in support of Mr. Wang and as a protest against poor prison conditions, including the authorities' refusal to allow him to see his wife.
"This is for the health of my friend," Mr. Chen said before he began refusing food, a Chinese close to Mr. Chen said.
Mr. Chen was allowed to see his sister, who had to sign a guarantee that she would not speak to foreigners about what was said, but he was denied access to his parents and his wife, Wang Zhihong. 
It was not clear why his wife, and Hou Xiaotian, the wife of Mr. Wang, were suddenly denied access this month, although it is likely that the authorities want to suggest to the families that they should not to talk to foreign reporters.
Family members have been warned that if they discuss the prisoner's conditions with the foreign press, their monthly visiting privileges will be revoked.
The two men, who had established a private research institution specializing in social and economic studies, were given the longest sentences handed out to intellectuals during a series of trials earlier this year. 
They were charged by the Government with masterminding the pro-democracy demonstrations in the spring of 1989.
Mr. Chen's mother, Ms. Wu, confirmed by telephone that Mr. Chen had begun a hunger strike.
"We fear bringing more trouble upon us, but for the interests of his survival, we can't help but tell you," she said.
The two men are being held in the Beijing No. 2 Prison, each in solitary confinement, and both families say they fear the prisoners' health is deteriorating. 
Mr. Chen suffers from a skin disease.
Chinese prison authorities could not be reached for comment. 
In a dispatch released Tuesday by the official China News Service, a prison spokesman denied that Mr. Wang had hepatitis, and Government officials told a Congressional delegation visiting earlier this week that Mr. Wang was not ill. 
The dispatch also said that Mr. Wang had eaten dumplings given to him by his family.
"He was chatting with his father and mother and eating the dumplings at the same time," the dispatch said.
