
Japan has deported another group of Chinese seeking to stay here, including a Chinese woman who sought political asylum. 
But lawyers for Chinese dissidents here say they are still hopeful that students who may face political persecution in China will be allowed to stay in Japan.
But the lawyers said they were somewhat shaken by Japan's abrupt decision on Wednesday to deport the 62 Chinese, sending them from the southern city of Nagasaki to Shanghai on a chartered Chinese plane. 
They called on the Government to provide a fuller explanation of its actions.
Nearly 2,900 refugees from China and Vietnam have arrived in boats in Japan since 1989, and the Government has insisted that they be sent back, saying they are seeking jobs, not political freedom. 
Of these, 2,425 have been sent back, including the 62 on Wednesday.
The latest deportations drew particular attention because they came after Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu had spent several days in China, toasting Japanese-Chinese friendship as the first leader of a major industrial democracy to visit China since the crackdown on the democracy movement at Tiananmen Square in 1989.
Under Mr. Kaifu, Japan has resumed its aid to China and sought to plead Beijing's case that it not be "isolated" because of its human rights violations. 
Japanese business executives are also eager to see ties resume to protect and increase trade and investments.
Japan has been severely criticized by human rights groups for its handling of Chinese students. 
Asia Watch, based in the United States, said last year that Japan had "forcibly repatriated" dissidents, impeded their access to lawyers and shown hostility to their political concerns.
Among those deported on Wednesday was Lin Guizhen, 24 years old, who had fought deportation because she said she had taken part in the pro-democracy protests in 1989 at Tiananmen Square in Beijing before the Chinese Government's crackdown.
But Japanese officials, explaining her expulsion, said today that she fell into a different category from the Chinese students in Japan who engaged in anti-Government protests at the time of the Tiananmen crackdown, in that she arrived by boat with so-called "economic refugees" in December 1989.
"This lady is not a political refugee," a Japanese official said. 
"She was not a student in Japan. 
She arrived with 230 other people on the same boat."
According to Asia Watch, 15,000 Chinese students were in Japan last year, and 48,000 more were in language schools, the largest number in any country outside of China. 
But in recent months, news reports have focused on about 70 or 80 students who are seeking political asylum.
 
Status Is Precarious
Supporters of this group say that although Japan has promised to deal with them case by case and has not forced them back, their status is very precarious and they cannot find employment. 
Some supporters of the students said recently that progress had been made on their status.
A Government official, asking not to be identified, said today that a first group of 23 students would probably be given formal political asylum soon. 
And a lawyer for the students said asylum might be granted to more than this first group.
"We are convinced that we are making progress with other students," said Katsutoshi Fujimori, a Tokyo lawyer supporting the Chinese students. 
"If we don't make progress, we will have to raise our voices again."
He said the case of Ms. Lin did not discourage him, although he opposed her deporation.
Supporters of Ms. Lin said today that she was in danger of being persecuted when she returned home to China, and that she and other refugees also had political motives because they were seeking freedom. 
They said Japan was belittling their cause unfairly.
