
Japan's postwar mistake has been selling its soul to the West along with its cars and computers, several Japanese novelists and critics told an international literary conference here this week.
''With prosperity, the economic miracle, has come cultural and spiritual degeneration,'' said Masao Miyoshi, a critic and professor of literature at the University of California at San Diego, who moderated a panel of Japanese writers on Monday. 
''Japan has surrendered to Western cultural hegemony. 
We are represented in industry but not in cultural matters.''
The same point was made more informally by the novelist Kenzaburo Oe, a perennial candidate for the Nobel Prize. 
''You know why Honda is great,'' Mr. Oe told his American dinner companions at a gathering that opened the conference. 
''But we don't care about Honda. 
We care that our cultural life is unknown to you.''
 
A Shift in Focus
The panel discussion, one of a dozen here this week at the War Memorial and Performing Arts Center, was part of the Wheatland Foundation's fourth annual conference on world literature, which until this year has been dominated by Central European and Soviet writers. 
But in this most Asian of American cities, the conference organizers shifted the focus and, for the first time, invited novelists, poets, playwrights and essayists from Japan, South Korea, China and Southeast Asia.
The Chinese panel, scheduled for Thursday, is expected to be the most provacative because of last year's massacre in Tiananmen Square. 
Most of the participating Chinese writers, all living in exile, are members of the younger generation, but they were joined here by Liu Binyan, the eminent journalist who has twice been expelled from the Communist Party.
The Japanese panel was considered the most distinguished assemblage of the week, with several of the country's foremost writers. 
Among them were Mr. Oe, whose books include ''A Personal Matter'' and ''Teach Us to Outgrow Our Madness,''and Yuko Tsushima, daughter of the prominent novelist Osamu Dazai, who committed suicide shortly after World War II. 
Ms. Tsushima's novels include ''Child of Fortune'' and ''The Shooting Gallery.''
 
Prize for Translation
Mr. Oe's work is distinguished by twists of syntax and sentence structure more common in English and the European languages than in Japanese, said Van C. Gessel, a professor of Japanese literature at the University of California at Berkeley, who attended the conference. 
Ms. Tsushima's novels, he said, are full of the mundane details of domestic life and grapple with the struggles of a divorced mother in a country that is harsh on nonconforming women. 
Later in the week, Ms. Tsushima's translator, Geraldine Harcourt, will be awarded the Wheatland Foundation's translation prize, which has previously gone to Arpad Goncz, the new interim President of Hungary.
The Wheatland Foundation was established in 1984 by Ann Getty, the philanthropist who is married to the heir to the Getty oil fortune, and Lord Weidenfeld, the British publisher. 
Together, Mrs. Getty and Lord Weidenfeld bought Grove Press in 1985, subsequently losing millions of dollars. 
They put the publishing house on the market and found out last month that it was virtually unsalable because of its liabilities. 
Mrs. Getty lives here in San Francisco in a lemon yellow stucco mansion with sweeping views of the bay and is the hostess at the city's grandest dinner parties.
 
The Getty Touch
Mrs. Getty's touch was evident at the conference, held in the Green Room of the War Memorial and Performing Arts Center, a high ceilinged chamber that opens onto a stone loggia overlooking City Hall. 
It was here, in brilliant spring sunshine, that conference participants nibbled chocolate-dipped strawberries during the breaks between panel discussions.
The discussions, more often than not, left participants yawning, whispering among themselves like school children or trying to sneak a look at the baseball box scores without rustling the newspaper. 
But occasionally sparks flew, as they did when Mr. Oe made it clear that he did not think much of Yukio Mishima, Japan's most famous postwar novelist, who committed hara-kiri after a failed attempt to take over a military base.
Mr. Oe argued that Mishima shaped his life to ''live up to the image of Japan created by Europeans.''
Mishima's decision to die in the ''traditional way,'' Mr. Oe said, was the final proof of his ''perverted relationship with the image of Japan'' and ''a great betrayal of his fellow Asians.''
This incensed Pierre Mertens of Belgium, a novelist and lawyer who writes frequently about war crimes and totalitarianism. 
''Mishima is accepted in other countries as a great writer,'' Mr. Mertens sputtered into his microphone, calming himself with a sip of cool water. 
''I don't think the Japanese have a right to decide he's not a great writer. 
And once we've thrown the suicides out of literature, what happens to Primo Levi?
We'll be getting into cultural genocide before too long.''
 
Two Confessions
While Mr. Oe lamented that Japanese writers are too obeisant to the West, rather than ''turning our eyes to the Asian literature,'' his life and career follow the same pattern. 
He was 10 when the war ended and vividly recalls the truck full of American soldiers who rolled into his village with chocolate bars and chewing gum, copies of ''The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn'' and ''Black Beauty'' and volumes of Walt Whitman and William Butler Yeats.
''This was the beginning of my literary life,'' Mr. Oe said, dipping his head apologetically. 
He went on to study French literature at Tokyo University and write a thesis about Sartre.
Ms. Tsushima, too, offered a contrite explanation for a lifetime spent reading Western literature in translation rather than indigenous Japanese works. 
''Women seemed so free and liberated in the foreign literature,'' she said. 
''There were very few books written by Japanese women and to read them made me feel I was going back to the olden days. 
That aspect within me has changed recently.''
