
Two days before Emperor Akihito begins the first visit to China by a Japanese monarch, Tokyo is once again consumed by a familiar battle: how to avoid apologizing for Japanese war atrocities while still appearing deeply apologetic.
From the moment the trip was first proposed by Beijing, the Government here has tied itself in knots over how to phrase Akihito's first words to a nation where millions died at the hands of the Japanese. 
Influential right-wing politicians tried to scuttle the trip altogether, protesting that the Emperor, and with him modern Japan, will be humiliated by seeming to kowtow to China.
Publicly at least, Tokyo has tried to shrug off the problem, insisting that the trip, like the Emperor himself, is apolitical. 
But few seem convinced, especially after seemingly conflicting statements by the top officials dispatched to put their spin on the Emperor's comments.
On Tuesday, the Foreign Ministry's chief spokesman, Masamichi Hanabusa, told reporters that the Emperor "is not on a mission to make an apology."
That was all taken care of 20 years ago, he said, when the two countries resumed diplomatic relations.
Koichi Kato, the chief Cabinet secretary, who is reportedly presiding over the last-minute honing of the Emperor's every utterance, said, "The purpose of the Emperor's visit to China is not to issue a new apology," adding that Akihito would "invoke previous statements."
That was interpreted as a reference to past expressions of "regret" whose vagueness has angered many Asians, who say the comments typify Japan's continuing inability to face up to its past.
The Emperor's comments are the subject of particular scrutiny because of the tremendous symbolism: in the 2,000-year history of the monarchy, no emperor has been to China.
But despite the efforts by the Government to portray the trip as a mission of good will, it has been attacked by both the left and the right.
"The Chinese intend to reconstruct a bilateral relationship favorable to them by starting from 'the past,' " Seiichi Eto, a conservative member of the ruling party's delegation in the lower house of Parliament, wrote in a popular magazine recently. 
"We cannot disregard the worry that this kind of Chinese attitude could lead to a surge of antagonism and hatred in the Japanese public against China."
There is already considerable speculation that the right wing may try to force Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa from office if Akihito is viewed as paying homage to the Chinese.
"This whole trip is planned for the sake of China, not for Japan," said Toshiro Mayuzumi, a prominent composer who has led an opposition movement against the trip. 
"Japan did not invade China. 
It fought for the liberation of Asia. 
It is absolutely improper to send the Emperor to apologize."
Opponents on the other end of the spectrum have protested that Japan is legitimizing the authoritarian Government in Beijing and ignoring human-rights issues to placate its neighbor.
Akihito, of course, will refer specifically to none of that. 
In the post-war traditions of the royal family, the Emperor must remain studiously apolitical while still setting a tone, if not an agenda, for the nation. 
The Constitution specifies which acts he is supposed to carry out in Japan's name; none of them, strict constitutionalists point out, include missions to foreign nations.
The unknown factor, of course, is whether the Emperor himself feels moved to say something beyond Japan's usually elliptical references to the war. 
When Akihito ascended to the throne in January 1989, many expected that he would set a very different tone. 
Freed of the questions of responsibility that followed Hirohito to his grave, it seemed he would have a far freer hand to erase the trail of enmity that Japan had left throughout Asia.
But at a small news conference at the palace last week for reporters who will be traveling with him, the Emperor barely budged from his father's parlance. 
Speaking slowly and deliberately, he noted that "in recent times there was a period of unfortunate history" between the two countries.
