
Despite the lifting of martial law in Beijing last week, Government officials say Japan is not prepared to resume talks on arranging $5.6 billion in loans suspended after the Chinese crackdown in Tiananmen Square in June.
Sounding a similar cautionary note, Japanese businessmen who welcomed the suspension of martial law, which took effect in Beijing on Wednesday, also said in interviews that they would be slow to resume a high level of investment activity in China because of concern about the country's political stabilityI.
As the biggest donor of economic assistance to China, Japan has reacted cautiously to its neighbor in recent months, frequently reminding the United States and other countries that it was not in their interest to impose heavy sanctions on Beijing.
At a New Year's news conference, for instance, Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu reiterated Japan's position that sanctions would only reinforce a feeling of defensiveness in China, perhaps driving it into the Soviet Union's camp or making it dangerously mistrustful of other countries in Asia.
Opposes Isolation of China
''To isolate China will not be good for world peace and stabilityI,'' Mr. Kaifu said. 
Apparently mindful of public outrage over the crackdown last year, he said he hoped that China would ''carry out the consolidation of its environment in a way easily understandable to the West.''
Mr. Kaifu said that Japan intended to renew the aid it had frozen after Beijing imposed repressive measures last year, but that talks on the matter would probably not come until the spring.
Japanese officials said they still intended to send back a Chinese man who is charged with hijacking an Air China plane on Dec. 
16 and forcing it to fly to Fukuoka, in southern Japan.
The hijacking suspect, identified as Zhang Zhenhai, asserts that he took part in the demonstrations in Tiananmen Square. 
He has said he will appeal in Japanese courts for permission to seek political asylum in Japan.
 
Suspect Claims Political Status
Lawyers from the Fukuoka Bar Association's human rights committee have said Mr. Zhang argues that he is a political refugee. 
But the Japanese Government said it understood that he was charged with embezzlement in China and was free on bail when he committed the hijacking.
''Even if Zhang was involved in June's pro-democracy demonstration, resorting to inhuman methods like hijacking can never be pardoned,'' said Mayumi Moriyama, the Chief Cabinet Secretary.
Mr. Zhang was transferred to Tokyo this week from a hospital near the airport. 
He was injured when someone pushed him out of the plane and onto the tarmac at the airport in Fukuoka after the hijacking.
The centerpiece of Japanese aid to China was a $3.3 billion loan program that is near completion, although most of the projects were unfinished when they were frozen in June. 
Japan has resumed many of them since August.
 
Talks, but No Pledges So Far
Future aid for China, including a $5.6 billion program announced in 1988 by Noboru Takeshita when he was Prime Minister, remains suspended. 
That program is to run from 1990 to 1995.
In the last week, Japan has announced that it will step up discussions of general economic matters with China by sending a high-level aid official to Beijing after the visit here this month of the head of the Chinese State Planning Commission, Zou Jiahua.
Prime Minister Kaifu also has decided to send Koichiro Matsuura, director general of the Foreign Ministry's Economic Cooperation Bureau, to Beijing next week. 
Mr. Matsuura has been traveling with Mr. Kaifu in Europe, where he announced an aid program for Poland and Hungary this week.
But a Foreign Ministry spokesman said those talks would not necessarily lead to the resumption of aid to China. 
He said only that officials wanted to learn about Chinese plans, including measures to liberalize its economy.
''A simple visit by the director general does not mean the start of extending yen loans,'' said Taizo Watanabe, the Foreign Ministry spokesman.
