
Rejecting criticism by human rights groups, Japan said today that it acted properly last year in deporting a Chinese refugee seeking political asylum here, even though she was jailed upon her return to China.
The case of the refugee, Lin Guizhen, 25 years old, has drawn some attention in Japan and become the focus of criticism by human rights groups, which say Tokyo has tried to curry favor with China at the expense of the rights of Chinese dissidents.
Ms. Lin arrived in Japan aboard a boat in 1989 along with thousands of other refugees, but she was the only one among them who asserted that she had taken part in dissident activities and would be jailed if she returned.
 
Appeals Were Still Open
Japan ignored her pleas and forcibly sent her back, even though she had not yet exhausted all her legal appeals. 
The action drew criticism from Amnesty International, Asia Watch and Sadako Ogata, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, who is Japanese.
Tokyo officials had hinted at the time that they had received assurances that the woman was not a dissident and would not be jailed, as she predicted. 
Then in December, Japan was embarrassed when a Japanese journalist traveled to China and found that she was imprisoned.
Masamichi Hanabusa, the Japanese Government spokesman, said today that the situation was acceptable because she was "under a kind of educative correctional measure" -- that is, held in a re-education camp -- rather than being imprisoned outright. 
"It is not a penal measure," he asserted.
Most rights groups draw little distinction between imprisonment and re-education camps as means to punish dissidents in China.
The Chinese Ambassador to Japan, Yang Zhenya, said at a news conference today that Ms. Lin had been jailed not because of anti-Government activities, but because she left China in violation of its laws against emigration.
His assertions were contradicted by Japanese journalists who had visited the prison. 
They said the other Chinese refugees who were deported back to China had not been imprisoned for more than two days, so Ms. Lin must have been held for broader reasons.
