
Japan backed away today from its offer to harbor a group of Chinese dissidents trying to transmit pro-democracy messages to the mainland.
It was the latest nation to turn the broadcasting mission into a symbol of how deeply China's neighbors have come to fear any action that could anger Beijing or slow the normalization of relations.
The announcement in Tokyo came as the crew of the Goddess of Democracy, a converted cargo ship that the dissidents hoped would be the platform for the multi-million-dollar broadcasting effort, were preparing to sail the ship out of Taipei harbor after the Taiwanese authorities had blocked them from installing a radio transmitter.
They had hoped to find a transmitter in Japan and begin broadcasting before June 4, the first anniversary of the crushing of the democracy movement in Tiananmen Square.
Already the ship has become an embarrassment to several countries, forcing them to choose between their avowed sympathy for the dissidents' cause and their desires to improve commercial and diplomatic relations with China.
The dissidents assert that the United States pressed several Asian countries to scuttle the project for fear that the broadcasts from international waters would provoke China to take military action against the ship. 
That would make it nearly impossible for the Bush Administration to renew most-favored-nation trade status for China in coming weeks or to begin to lift sanctions against Beijing.
 
Also Refused by Hong Kong
Hong Kong's Government, saying relations with Beijing were already tense enough as the territory prepares to revert to Chinese control, had previously refused port facilities to the ship.
Taiwan, after much debate within the ruling Nationalist Party, declared it could not help the ship because broadcasts from sea are ''against international conventions and the clear trends in international law.''
Japan did not actually forbid the ship from entering its waters today but laid out conditions for its entry that it seems unlikely to meet.
