
Emperor Akihito, opening the first visit to China by a Japanese monarch, acknowledged today that Japan's wartime occupation had "inflicted great suffering on the people of China," but he stopped short of the apology demanded by a growing number of Chinese.
The Emperor's statement, made shortly after his arrival, unambiguously placed the blame on Japan for its wartime aggression, marking the clearest acceptance ever by Tokyo of responsibility for its conduct in the 1931 seizure of Manchuria, the 1937 invasion of China and the brutal occupation that followed.
But the statement was also consistent with the position of the Japanese Government that no outright apology for Japanese actions was necessary. 
In addition, many prominent right-wing political groups in Japan had opposed issuing any kind of an apology on the Emperor's trip.
At a banquet tonight in the Great Hall of the People, the first of many to be held for the Emperor and his wife, Empress Michiko, the Emperor said: "In the long history of relationships between our two countries, there was an unfortunate period in which my country inflicted great suffering on the people of China. 
About this I feel deep sadness."
The Chinese authorities refused to say whether they considered the comments satisfactory. 
"It is up to the Japanese side to decide what remarks the Emperor will make during his visit to China," said Wu Jianmin, spokesman for the Chinese Foreign Ministry.
 
Beijing Seeks Economic Aid
The Emperor's arrival here, hailed by both countries as the first such visit in their 2,000-year relationship, was accompanied by a 21-gun salute and military bands that sent the strains of Japan's anthem once again wafting across Tiananmen Square. 
Eager for economic help and international recognition, Chinese officials said the visit represented "a new stage in relations."
The Japanese Government clearly hopes for the same, broadcasting videos on Chinese television this week to introduce Akihito as the symbol of a new, peace-loving and technologically advanced Japan.
The trip also has great import diplomatically. 
China is worried that Washington will take a harder line against Beijing on human rights issues if Gov. Bill Clinton is elected President, and it wants to show its appreciation for Japan's support while other countries have expressed disapproval.
Japan, on the other hand, is increasingly worried about signs of growing Chinese military strength and wants to improve the climate for greater economic and political cooperation with Beijing.
 
Limits on the Emperor
According to the Japanese Constitution, the Emperor has no independent powers and all of his statements on sensitive matters are prepared by the elected Government and the Foreign Ministry bureaucracy, which have made it clear that they hope his six-day visit will increase popular support for Japanese-Chinese friendship.
In recent months, the Japanese business community has become convinced that China's economic reforms are real and has revived its interest in investing in China. 
A consortium of Japan's biggest trading companies announced just before the Emperor's departure for Beijing that it was considering a $4 billion investment in a petrochemical complex in China, and other companies are investing heavily.
But the war issue always threatens to create strains, with some signs that Chinese popular animosity toward Japan has even increased. 
Indeed, there is a widespread feeling throughout East Asia that Japan has been slow to face its militaristic past.
 
Rejects Reparations for Women
In recent years, the Chinese have protested things like the way the war is described in Japanese textbooks, visits by Japanese political leaders to a shrine for Japanese war heroes and statements by some Japanese politicians that China has exaggerated the number of people killed in the war.
In recent months, Chinese feelings were inflamed by Japan's refusal to pay reparations to the families of Chinese and Korean women who have come forward after decades to silence to say that they were kidnapped during the war and forced to provide sex to Japanese troops.
Japan maintains that it settled the issue of the war with China in 1972, when it established diplomatic relations with Beijing. 
At that time, China dropped its demand for reparations but cleared the way for large amounts of investment and trade.
In the nearly four years since Akihito ascended to the Chrysanthemum Throne, Japanese officials have reluctantly edged the new Emperor beyond the vague locutions of his father, Hirohito, who often referred to the "unfortunate" and "regrettable" past, but never acknowledged Japan's specific responsibility for the invasions launched in his name.
Akihito has been more forthcoming, especially at a 1990 dinner with Roh Tae Woo, the President of South Korea, and during a tour last year that the Emperor took through Southeast Asia. 
But in China, where 20 million people were killed or wounded at Japanese hands, sensitivities are especially acute.
 
Echoes of Pearl Harbor Issue
The debate in Tokyo over how to word tonight's speech cast a shadow over the Emperor's departure for several weeks. 
It also echoed a similar debate on the 50th anniversary of the bombing of Pearl Harbor last Dec. 
7. At that time, Japanese officials said they were reflecting deeply on Japanese deeds but did not think an apology to the United States was appropriate.
Most younger Japanese say they see no reason that the Emperor should not apologize. 
Some express resentment at what they say is the tendency by Japan's neighbors, including China, to bring up the question of apologizing in order to embarrass Japan into giving more foreign aid or trade concessions.
But powerful voices in the right wing of the governing Liberal Democratic Party say an apology would humiliate the country and the new Emperor. 
They also say Japan did nothing worse in China than Britain, the United States or other colonial powers trying to carve up its territory.
 
No Signs of Protest
One of Japan's largest dailies, Mainichi Shimbun, noted today that the Chinese Government "has promised a nationwide welcome" and cleared the streets of dissenters seeking apologies and monetary compensation.
In fact, on the streets of Beijing today, few seemed to be paying much attention to the 58-year-old monarch. 
He was greeted at the airport by young Japanese students waving paper flags, and at the official guesthouse by 500 Chinese children.
Only small crowds gathered for the formal arrival ceremonies on Tiananmen Square. 
There were no protests, perhaps because some of those leading the campaign for Japanese compensation have reportedly been sent away on business trips or detained by the police.
Chronology: "A Century of War and Peace" 1895 -- Japan defeats China in Korea. 
China agrees to cede Taiwan to Japan, and Korea falls under Japanese influence.
1931 -- Japan, taking advantage of the Chinese Nationalist government's preoccupation with a Communist insurgency, seizes Manchuria, in northeast China, and eventually sets up a puppet state called Manchukuo.
1937 -- Japan invades the Chinese heartland and eventually captures nearly two-thirds of China's provinces. 
In eight years of war, Chinese casualties are estimated at upwards of 20 million.
1945 -- Defeated by the Allies, the Japanese withdraw from China.
1949 -- Communists take control of mainland China.
1972 -- After President Nixon's surprise opening to China, Japan establishes diplomatic relations with China. 
But business and investment are slow to develop.
1989 -- Hirohito, the emperor in whose name China was invaded, dies. 
After the crushing of the democracy movement in Tiananmen Square, Japan is relatively quick to restore aid to China.
1990 -- Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu becomes first leader of anindustrialized democracy to visit China after Tiananmen.
1992 -- Emperor Akihito goes on a goodwill mission to China.
