
A court decision this week upholding the Government's right to censor history textbooks has revived the long-running debate over Japan's willingness to teach all aspects of the nation's role in World War II.
The ruling by the Tokyo District Court, upholding the right of the Education Ministry to tone down references to what was depicted as Japanese atrocities, was another setback for Saburo Ienaga, a retired history professor who has been battling against Government censorship of textbooks since the 1960's. 
After the decision on Tuesday, Mr. Ienaga said he would appeal, although he acknowledged that prospects for winning were not bright. 
But he added: ''To lose without fighting would be worse than losing after a fight. 
I am 76 years old and exhausted, but I will continue this fight until my death.''
The court decision was also criticized in South Korea, which was colonized by Japan from 1911 until the end of the war in 1945. 
In Seoul, a spokesman for the ruling Democratic Justice Party said the decision reflected efforts by Japanese leaders who were ''trying to justify'' past aggressions.
South Korean newspapers also urged Japan ''to stop glossing over its history of atrocities and brutalities,'' as one of the newspapers put it.
Praising the decision, however, the Ministry of Education said it would make further efforts ''to make sure that textbooks will be appropriate.''
The court decision was not entirely negative for Mr. Ienaga, since it ruled that the Education Ministry's revision of a reference to a 19th-century volunteer army established to support the Emperor did constitute an abuse of authority. 
The Government was ordered to pay him about $700.
The reaction to the main ruling underscored the continuing sensitivity of an issue that was most recently brought to the attention of most Japanese when Emperor Hirohito died last Jan. 
7 after a 62-year reign.
At that time, Japanese television showed footage of military actions in World War II, especially in China, exposing young people to a side of Japanese behavior that has generally been kept out of school curriculums.
 
Latest of 3 Law Suits
At the trial on Professor Ienaga's lawsuit, which was the latest of three he has filed since 1965, Mr. Ienaga testified that the Education Ministry had tried to change the word ''invasion'' to ''advance'' in China but eventually accepted the original word.
Mr. Ienaga, a former professor at the Tokyo University of Education, added that the Government toned down references to the killings of civilians and rape of Chinese women by Japanese soldiers in the capture of Nanjing in 1937 and sanitized other references to Japanese behavior in Asia.
Also deleted, he said, was a reference to an army unit that he said used several thousand Chinese for ''human body experiments.''
In his lawsuit, Mr. Ienaga charged that the censorship of his textbooks had amounted to a violation of the Japanese Constitution's guarantees of free speech. 
But the district court disagreed, saying it was ''necessary and appropriate'' for the Government to screen the textbooks.
''Probably I am very un-Japanese,'' Mr. Ienaga said in an interview, referring to his lawsuits. 
''I am a very individualistic person. 
Of course there are many people who eagerly support my court cases. 
But among the younger generations, the issue has been fading.''
He said that the more that Japanese young people are not taught the true history of the war, the more risk of a ''similar danger'' exists for Japan.
Mr. Ienaga's first lawsuit, in 1965, sought to recover royalties lost from the rejection of a high school textbook, ''New History of Japan.''
He also sought compensation for mental stress caused by the demands for 300 alterations before the text was approved.
A second lawsuit on different grounds, filed in 1967, was actully won at a lower level court before being thrown out on a technicality. 
The latest lawsuit was filed in 1984 after Mr. Ienaga said he felt alarmed by a new censorship campaign by some politicians, businessmen and scholars.
