
The new head of the Chinese Communist Party has asserted that the leaders of the democracy movement should be ''severely punished'' and shown ''not an iota of forgiveness'' for their role in what he called a ''counterrevolutionary rebellion.''
The remarks by the party leader, Jiang Zemin, came on Wednesday in his first public appearance since he took over as General Secretary from Zhao Ziyang, who was dismissed on Saturday.
In the speech, which was published in the official press today, Mr. Jiang reiterated the policy toward dissidents, some 1,600 of whom have been arrested since the army crushed the protest movement on June 4.
While he said intellectuals and others who only gave verbal support to the protest movement should be given ''ideological education,'' Mr. Jiang said there would be no tolerance for the ''adversaries of socialism'' or for ''those who stubbornly stick to bourgeois liberalism,'' a code phrase for Western freedoms.
Mr. Jiang was speaking to a meeting of members of the non-Communist parties allowed to exist here. 
His comments tended to support the view of many specialists that China's leaders intend a thorough and harsh repression of the protest movement.
''We should thoroughly expose and mete out according to law timely and severe punishments to the plotters, organizers and behind-the-scene commanders'' of the protest movement, Mr. Jiang said.
''As for those cruel enemies of the people, we shouldn't have an iota of forgiveness or we are making a serious mistake in history,'' he continued. 
His remarks appeared to be a paraphrase from Mr. Deng's speech June 9.
For several days, China's leaders and press have been reiterating a distinction first made by Mao in the 1950's between those who are ''enemies of the people'' and those who merely made ''mistakes.''
The second category, Mr. Jiang seemed to be saying on Wednesday, amounts largely to the students and intellectuals who only took part in rallies and demonstrations.
In suppressing the movement, the leadership has so far been harshest with those it has accused of attacking soldiers during the military assault on Tiananmen Square on June 4.
As the Chinese press reported on Mr. Jiang's remarks, the Standing Committee of China's legislative body, the National People's Congress, opened a previously postponed meeting today expected to endorse the party's suppression of the protest movement.
