
When Christopher Patten was named Governor of this British colony, the British tabloid press -- and even the more staid newspapers -- gleefully detailed his impressive pay and perquisites.
As Governor of Hong Kong, Mr. Patten, a former Member of Parliament, will receive a tax free salary of $273,000 -- larger than the British Prime Minister's -- and be chauffeured about in a Rolls-Royce that bears a crown instead of a license plate. 
He will have a 90-foot yacht, a weekend villa, and a household staff of 56. 
The Governor's household will cost close to $1.5 million dollars a year.
The Sun newspaper in London said: "Now Patten is King of Hong Kong," and "Nice Work If You Can Get It."
Mr. Patten, who was offered the governorship after he lost his parliamentary seat last April, wryly conceded, "Sweet are the uses of adversity."
 
A Time of Transition
It is this colony, where 98 percent of the six million people are ethnic Chinese, that provides the sumptuous perks, sets the Governor's salary, pays it and exempts it from taxes.
If he serves out his five-year term, Mr. Patten will be here in 1997, when Britain hands over this capitalist center, with its glass office towers, cricket clubs, race tracks and yachts, to China.
And while many may envy his new life, few would covet his new job -- balancing the demands of leaders in London and Beijing while governing an anxious Hong Kong as it completes its transition back to China.
 
To Face a Range of Issues
People in Hong Kong have become vocal about wanting a Governor who is more than London's man in the colony. 
And Mr. Patten's appointment has created some new expectations.
The former Conservative Party chief, who directed his party's surprising victory in Britain's last elections, will not only head the colony's 190,000-member civil service and command the 8,000 soldiers in its military force. 
But he will also face a range of issues from a growing crime problem to constant questions and quarrels with China over the expensive new airport project, which Beijing fears may deplete the colony's coffers.
Then, too, there is the continuing demand by liberals here that Britain fulfill its promise of more democracy in the years before the handover, a demand China has rebuffed.
A smart, pragmatic politician who learned some of his earliest political lessons on the streets of New York as a volunteer for a John V. Lindsay mayoral campaign, Mr. Patten succeeds David Wilson.
 
Political Ties Welcomed
While Lord Wilson was a China expert, and Mr. Patten is not, most here welcomed the change to a sharp politician with strong ties to Prime Minister John Major of Britain.
John Walden, a political commentator and former Hong Kong Government official, said, "He will be a breath of fresh air, and many feel that's what we need."
Business interests here hope Mr. Patten will have more clout with the British political establishment. 
Those seeking democratic change hope he will be more sympathetic to their calls for more democracy.
The Joint Declaration, signed by Britain and China in 1984, spells out the general terms of the handover, and promises Hong Kong "a high degree of autonomy" as a special region of China, with Hong Kong people governing Hong Kong. 
But Beijing has begun to meddle in the colony's affairs more and more. 
In the meantime, Britain has been perceived as giving in to China's demands to limit democracy.
 
Caretaker or Best Hope?
Some cynics have said that Mr. Patten will merely be a caretaker charged with protecting British interests. 
But others say he may be the colony's last best hope.
"From all the reports on Patten, he's an experienced politician, a man of principles and ambition, and not a man to be content to act as a caretaker," said Mr. Walden. "He is one of Britain top politicians, and Major wouldn't send him here if it were a dead end."
Mr. Patten will step into a world in many ways as elegant and anachronistic as the dress uniform and swan-plumed pith helmet that Hong Kong governors traditionally don for ceremonies.
But there are signs that Mr. Patten, who is 47 years old, plans to change and update the office whenever he can.
He has already declined to wear the formal costume, and passed up the traditional peerage bestowed on Hong Kong governors. 
Both changes have been well received.
