
As our caravan of air-conditioned tour buses lumbered into Chongjin, a port town in the barren northeast corner of North Korea, housewives and schoolchildren -- most of whom had apparently been ordered off the streets before we arrived -- stared in amazement from their windows and schoolyards. 
For the inhabitants of the world's most hermetically sealed nation, we were, without doubt, an odd sight: a hundred or so Japanese businessmen, a few American academics and journalists, even a couple of South Korea's leading industrialists thinly disguised as "academics" and "consultants."
But the biggest oddity was not us. 
It was our buses.
North Korea is so broke these days that buses are rarely seen. 
Not only are there virtually no tourists, but gasoline is so scarce there are few moving vehicles. 
Furthermore, conditions in the last few years have deteriorated so much that this notoriously secretive nation is doing the unthinkable. 
It is welcoming its traditional enemies, urging them to build megaports and factories in areas they would have been shot for entering a year ago.
For the North, this reflects the total failure of juche, the national religion of self-reliance. 
These days, the North Korean Government is busy amending its laws for international joint ventures and wooing many of those it has openly despised. 
Last month, it passed its first comprehensive foreign investment law, specifically aimed at drawing in South Korean investors and those from other "enemy" states.
"We want to develop our technology," Kim Dal Hyon -- the Deputy Prime Minister and a man believed to be in the vanguard of a tenuous reform movement -- admitted to us in a rare flash of candor in Pyongyang, the capital. 
"It is for our own survival."
Yet, with characteristic bravado, North Korea's officials also insist they can do what Eastern Europe could not: reform their economy without backing off an inch from the hard-line Communist ideology that has kept this nation tightly controlled since the division of North and South in 1945.
The harsh reality sweeping through this country is this: After 45 years, North Korea has been virtually abandoned by its longtime allies. 
Throughout the cold war, while the United States supported the South, the Soviet Union and China provided the regime of Kim Il Sung, who is now 80 years old, with food and fuel and technology. 
Every day freight trains rumbled across the single-track bridge spanning the Tumen River. 
But with the end of East-West hostilities, both Moscow and Beijing -- faced with their own economic problems and pragmatically preferring the capitalist South's steel plants and car factories to the North's Stalinist rhetoric -- have opened diplomatic relations with Seoul.
In late September, China -- the country that sent more than a million troops swarming over the border more than 40 years ago to crush the South -- welcomed South Korea's President, Roh Tae Woo, on a historic first trip. 
Roh brought what the Chinese wanted: news that this year South Korea's trade with the Chinese will double to more than $10 billion, and that even more South Korean-owned electronics factories and clothing plants would be built in the special economic zone of Guangdong Province, adjacent to Hong Kong. 
In a few days President Boris N. Yeltsin is scheduled to make his first visit to Seoul, and to talk about rebuilding Russia the way South Korea had transformed itself into one of Asia's industrial dragons.
No one knows for certain what kind of panic this is touching off in Pyongyang, but on North Korea's side of the Tumen, Li Song Pil, the spry stationmaster, can measure the country's isolation with precision. 
A few years ago, six or seven freight trains crossed the river every day. 
These days, he said: "Sometimes we see one. 
Sometimes, nothing comes."
But if this nation of 22 million is opening its door, it is opening it just a crack. 
The regime of the "Great Leader" and his son and heir apparent, "Dear Leader" Kim Jong Il, is determined not to let capitalists undo more than 40 years of rigid political training.
On our 10-day swing through the country several months ago, we were honored guests, even treated to a giant picnic on a beach along the northeastern coast near an area that North Korea hopes to turn into a thriving port. 
But an electric fence separated us from North Koreans living nearby. 
One morning, a group of us touring one of Chongjin's decaying shipyards wandered toward the shipyard entrance, hoping to get to the street and talk to people passing by. 
We never got the chance. 
As we approached the big iron gate, it slammed shut and armed guards emerged from their posts, shouting, "Seot!
Seot!"
("Halt!
Halt!"). One of our well-groomed guides, clearly annoyed by our temerity, explained that although the country is open, mixing with the populace "could be dangerous."
The regime seems equally insecure in its new international forays, alternating welcoming gestures with standard cold-war charges against the United States and its "puppets" in Seoul. 
Indeed, little that has happened in North Korea in the past year has eased fears that the regime might once again lash out, especially since it could soon gain nuclear capability.
There is far less of that fear than there was just a few months ago when the Central Intelligence Agency asserted that a 20-year effort by North Korea to build a crude nuclear device could be only months away from completion. 
American satellites had picked up a near-completed plutonium reprocessing plant, the last major hurdle before a bomb can be assembled. 
Under pressure from Washington, Tokyo and Moscow, Kim Il Sung was forced to let in international inspectors. 
Many believe that Pyongyang, surprised by the harshness of the West's reaction, may now have given up its nuclear card. 
Skeptics in the United States and Japan, however, note that the North Koreans are past masters of deception.
Oddly enough, among those who feel less threatened by Pyongyang's nuclear capabilities are the South Koreans, who appear confident that the end game in a four-decades-long conflict has begun. 
Even President Roh, in his last months in office, is talking like a general who sees victory on the horizon.
The North's "determination to develop nuclear weapons has become weaker," he told me in September at Blue House -- the giant new presidential palace on a hillside above Seoul, only about 35 miles from the border -- that is surrounded by elaborate defenses against possible North Korean terrorists. 
"North Korea is much more isolated this year than it was last year. 
Their economic situation is deteriorating, and their people are suffering from the lack of food. 
They have decided they must gradually open up. 
They have no choice. 
The waves of liberalization are rolling in."
In fact, the main fear in Blue House today is that the waves may crash in too quickly. 
Mindful of the enormous cost of creating an united Germany, Seoul still talks of achieving its dream of reunifying the Korean peninsula but seems in no rush to realize it. 
Some say that the price tag may be as high as $400 billion. 
And those who once argued for pressing the North to the wall are saying they want to avoid forcing a collapse.
South Korean companies are urging their Government to permit them to begin investing in the North, rebuilding its infrastucture and creating jobs and access to cheap labor, so that the South's economy will not be forced to absorb crippling costs when reunification arrives. 
Last month, even with the nuclear questions unresolved, the Government allowed a delegation of industrialists to visit the North to explore moving old textile factories and aging equipment to its industrial zones.
"We would like to encourage North Korea to change gradually, to change peacefully," one of Roh's most senior advisors says. 
"But this is not the kind of thing where you get to pick your timing."
Says Donald Gregg, the C.I.A.'s station chief in Seoul at the height of the cold war and now the American Ambassador there: "There is already a subliminal feeling of victory in the air -- that unification will come, and it will come on the South's terms. 
That is an enormous change. 
Three years ago, a Russian came to me here, one of the first who was allowed into Seoul, and he said with some surprise, 'You know, the South is scared to death of the North.'
That was true then. 
It's not true anymore."
In the tightly ordered world of Pyongyang, North Korea's show city, every Government project is a "gift" from the Great Leader. 
This year, marking the 80th birthday of Kim Il Sung and the 50th birthday of his son, Kim Jong Il, there have been a lot of gifts. 
Some are buildings, like the Reunification Housing Project apartments, functional two-to-four-room units that would be welcome public housing anywhere in New York -- save for the speakers in most hallways constantly blaring Government propaganda.
With basic necessities in shorter supply than at any time in memory, the most prized gifts are food and clothes. 
China celebrated the senior Kim's birthday in April -- a few months before giving diplomatic recognition to the South -- by sending several hundred thousand tons of pork. 
When our group visited the Pyongyang High Middle School No. 1, Li Chun Ran, a 17-year-old, removed her lab smock to show us her new blue school dress. 
She wears it every day. 
"Kim Il Sung and the Dear Leader, Kim Jong Il, gave me the dress," she said.
The school, a Government showcase, boasts of classrooms filled with Japanese personal computers, advanced science laboratories equipped with up-to-date microscopes and even a room for driver's education, complete with a Chinese car and a screen projecting scenery racing by on the road. 
The only hitch is that almost no one in Pyongyang can buy a car. 
Indeed, the only cars on the streets are Volvo taxis (priced so that only foreigners can hire them), a few aging Mercedes limousines for V.I.P.'s and some modern-looking trams made in Eastern Europe. 
At night, the city is virtually pitch-black, with only a few buildings lit.
In a city of grandiose Stalinist-style monuments, the biggest one is the 105-story Ryu Gyong Hotel, designed to be the tallest in Asia. 
A bit more than half-finished, the pyramid towers over the city. 
No official would comment on the project, but rumors abound that it is out of money, and it is visibly in need of structural repair. 
But clearly utility is not an issue. 
Only about 100,000 tourists visit North Korea each year, all on group tours and most from the dwindling family of Communist or socialist countries. 
Most of them could not afford the Ryu Gyong if it were open.
What strikes a visitor to Pyongyang, a city of two million, is the total absence of spontaneity. 
It is perhaps the only Asian city without the chaotic, open markets that are plentiful in other Communist capitals, from Hanoi to Beijing. 
The department stores seem well stocked; there are few, if any, shoppers.
"Anything of value is rationed," explained a diplomat stationed in Pyongyang. 
"You might have coupons to get a few things, but almost no one buys in the stores."
When two of us asked on a Saturday to go to a restaurant where ordinary Koreans eat lunch, our guide had to take us on a 45-minute drive around town until he found one that was open. 
When colleagues visited an off-the-tourist-path apartment building and found it run-down and filthy, they were brought in for questioning.
Although officials take great pains to keep visitors from seeing any sign of poverty in Pyongyang, they are unable to do the same in the countryside. 
Early one morning, not long after our train began its journey up the coast, we saw women hoeing the hard earth by hand in the villages passing by our window. 
Oxen were few and far between. 
According to diplomats stationed in Pyongyang, malnutrition is widespread, with many people not getting their full allotment of 4.4 pounds of red meat and chicken a month. 
Earlier this year, the regime adopted the slogan "Let's Eat Two Meals!"
Every few months there are reports from ethnic Koreans living over the border in China about food riots breaking out in remote towns in the North. 
The stories are impossible to check, but with so many accounts most experts believe they carry at least some truth. 
"What we think happens," says Kim Chang Soon, the director of the Institute for North Korean Studies in Seoul, "is that people are supposed to receive rice every 15 days, but they get only enough for 10. 
So for the last 5 days they eat grass and vegetables and when the 15th day arrives, they go to get their rice. 
If it isn't there, they raid the warehouse."
Rice is not the only scarce commodity. 
From our train, we saw armed guards standing atop piles of coal at rail depots; later, North Korean officials conceded that theft had become a growing problem. 
Since 1990, Moscow has refused to deliver oil at what were called "friendship" rates, far below the market value. 
By some estimates, North Korea is getting only a third of the petroleum supplies it needs.
South Korean officials, who have an interest in painting a bleak picture, estimate that Pyongyang's economy shrank by 3.7 percent in 1990 and by 5.2 percent last year. 
Exports last year were about $1 billion -- roughly what the South exports in five days. 
Many economists, and the American intelligence community, estimate that things are actually much worse in the North. 
But because the North Korean Government guards most economic data as state secrets and because almost every economic "fact" is an extrapolation from anecdotes, it is easy for North Korean officials to issue blanket denials.
"We do not face any economic crisis that is not found in Russia or any East European country," one senior official insisted to us. 
The "only economic trouble we face," he said, was that "we cannot export or import any goods from the formerly socialist countries."
In most countries, sudden privation of the sort North Koreans are experiencing would be tinder for revolution. 
But North Korea is unlike most countries. 
So far, there is no sign of the kind of discontent that brought down Communism in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union. 
Unlike East Germans a few years ago, who knew -- from television and from a steady stream of visitors -- about life in the West, North Koreans seem to know almost nothing about the heady prosperity in the South. 
There is no television from the outside world, only a few shortwave radios in the hands of the elite, and endless propaganda about the abuse of workers, crime and homelessness in South Korea, Japan and the United States.
In short, after 35 years of brutal Japanese occupation, followed by 44 years of strong-arm Communist dictatorship, few North Koreans are in a position to question what they are told. 
And what they are still being told is that North Korea remains a "socialist paradise on earth."
At the "mass games" for Kim Il Sung's birthday, where 100,000 schoolchildren performed precision gymnastics, a huge sign proclaimed "We Envy Nobody in the World!"
Public devotion to the Great Leader seems undiminished. 
If the South's economy was built on entrepreneurship and industrial policy, the North's has been built on a personality cult: a quasi-religious loyalty to the "great sun of mankind," Kim Il Sung. 
On the outskirts of Pyongyang, workers still line up to see North Korea's equivalent of Abe Lincoln's cabin -- the primitive thatched-roof house where the Great Leader was born.
When you ask North Koreans why they work so hard -- a national characteristic shared with the South -- the answer is predictable. 
"These buildings were made for us by the Great Leader, Kim Il Sung, who wants to give greatly to his people," Cho Ho Sun, a 35-year-old construction worker, said, pausing for a moment from his work planting trees around the just-completed Reunification Housing Projects. 
"They were built on rice fields," Cho continued. 
"By planting trees, we pay solicitude to Kim Il Sung and the Dear Leader, Kim Jong Il."
People in North Korea really talk this way. 
North Korean authorities -- unlike their counterparts in China, for example -- hardly blink when you walk up to almost anyone in the capital, where people seem accustomed to handling foreigners, and start a conversation. 
They have little reason to fear that something untoward will slip out.
Although the few people we managed to speak to -- always under the gaze of a Government functionary -- invariably spoke of the Great Leader and the Dear Leader almost as one, it wasn't clear during our visit if the succession from father to son was as certain as it once seemed. 
North Korean officials seemed hard-pressed to name even a few things the Dear Leader had done for his nation. 
We pressed one young official dining with us one night at the Communist Party's guest house in Pyongyang -- a 14-course meal, including quail soup and steamed piglet, followed by a Las Vegas-style floor show. 
He struggled for a few moments, said something vague about the Dear Leader's management of the economy, then came up with: "He is competent at many things."
In September, however, North Korea's Foreign Minister Kim Yong Nam, in New York to attend a session of the United Nations, reportedly told South Korean reporters that all power had been transferred to Kim Jong Il, and that the senior Kim, while he was still President, was playing only an "advisory" role. 
In a rare move, the younger Kim recently entertained a delegation of foreign businessmen on his yacht; until then, handling foreigners had always been his father's job.
Whether Kim Jong Il becomes the next Great Leader, though, depends largely on a segment of North Korean society about which little is known: the ruling elite. 
By most estimates, the 1.5 million or so members of the "intelligentsia" are the ones who have everything: education, social status, whatever wealth there is to go around. 
Within this group are 10,000 to 15,000 senior officials with access to the best medical care and special shops.
There is widespread speculation that many of the top military brass -- presumably the key figures in succession politics -- were deeply unhappy when Kim Jong Il was named head of the armed forces earlier this year. 
The younger Kim is reputed to be a spoiled playboy with a pronounced taste for liquor and women. 
(Japanese intelligence agents learn what little they can about him by seeking out the foreign "hostesses" he is said to import for "entertainment.") The most commonly discussed scenario for North Korea after Kim Il Sung is that the Dear Leader will be told that he can keep his cars and "entertainers" -- as long as he does what he is told.
NORTH KOREA'S Military ranks as the world's fifth- or sixth-largest, with about one million men, 710 ships and 850 combat aircraft (mostly older Russian-made MIG's) and a budget accounting for 21.5 percent of the country's gross national product. 
The military is also the country's most successful exporter: North Korean-made versions of the Scud missile are becoming a favorite among Middle Eastern nations.
American and South Korean commanders acknowledge in private, however, that respect for the North's military prowess is declining. 
Many of the troops spend their days putting up new buildings and rebuilding the fractured rail network. 
South Koreans, who for years based their enormous military budgets on the size and skill of their Northern enemies, are now cutting back the rate of growth.
Pyongyang's nuclear capability is quite another matter. 
Attention was suddenly focused on its bomb-building plans when post-mortems of the Persian Gulf war uncovered shocking intelligence lapses, chiefly the failure of the International Atomic Energy Agency to detect the scope or progress of Iraq's nuclear bomb project -- although Iraq had submitted itself to regular agency inspections.
Until a few months ago, North Korea had never let agency inspectors into Yongbyon, the sprawling, secret installation Kim Il Sung began building in the mountains north of the capital in the 1960's. 
The first part completed was a small, Soviet-supplied research reactor. 
A much bigger reactor opened in the mid-80's, capable of producing enough waste plutonium to build a crude bomb.
Around 1988, American satellite cameras began to pick up another giant building that seemed perfectly suited for reprocessing plutonium -- turning waste into bomb fuel. 
It is a complex technology that many thought was beyond North Korea's talents. 
But apart from satellite pictures, intelligence about the project was sketchy. 
"In Iraq we had oil people coming in and out, we had some scientific exchange, we had commerce," one American intelligence official with long experience in Asia said this year. 
"With North Korea, we had nothing. 
Zip."
Kim had long justified barring outside inspectors by saying he would not permit them as long as the United States kept nuclear weapons in the South. 
But last December the Bush Administration removed the remaining American nuclear weapons from South Korea. 
Under intense pressure from Washington, Seoul agreed to forswear any reprocessing of its own -- making it easier to demand that Pyongyang do the same.
Once the North Koreans allowed inspectors in, the atomic energy agency discovered a vast reprocessing center. 
But the C.I.A. had guessed wrong about the innards of the cavernous building. 
The reprocessor was less than half completed, the equipment unimpressive. 
The North Koreans admitted they had experimented with reprocessing tiny quantities of plutonium in laboratories -- far too little to make a bomb -- and insisted their work was part of an energy research project.
Early this year, however, before inspectors arrived, satellite photographs showed trucks pulling up to the reprocessing facility, perhaps to cart away equipment. 
Bolstering suspicions that critical equipment might be hidden, Hans Blix, the director of the atomic energy agency, noted in a report he circulated to several governments that the North Koreans may have built a "pilot plant" to process plutonium, out of satellite view, before taking the risky leap to the building at Yongbyon.
The United States and South Korea are still insisting on an agreement to allow South Korean teams to look around in the North, while North Koreans inspect sites in the South. 
Because South Korean inspectors speak the same language and share the same culture, it is hoped they might be able to uncover what the agency cannot. 
A nuclear-armed North could overturn the delicate balance that has kept the region in check for decades. 
If North Korea succeeds in producing a nuclear bomb, the South would be forced to build one of its own (it tried once in the 1970's, before the United States quashed the project) and Japan might be forced to rethink the wisdom of its own ban on nuclear weapons.
AS INSPECTORS WERE combing through the North's nuclear reactors in late July, a North Korean journeying to the South was escorted across the miles of tank traps and mine fields and barbed wire that make up the demilitarized zone and onto the highways that feed into Seoul. 
He was Kim Dal Hyon, one of the new breed of economic "pragmatists."
He was the one who had told us in Pyongyang two months earlier that the openings were "for our own survival," that juche had been a philosophy of necessity, not of choice. 
"We have been isolated by the world community," he had said, "because of pressure from certain superpowers."
In Seoul, Kim was given a tour of everything from advanced electronics factories to noisy markets overflowing with consumer goods. 
He visited the country's industrial heartland. 
When he was finally escorted to Blue House, his message to President Roh was simple: South Korea, for its own good and the North's, should allow its giant chae bol -- the industrial conglomerates like Samsung, Daewoo and Hyundai -- to invest in the North.
"I know that without prospects for profit, they will not come," Kim said. 
"I promise that they will make profits."
The energetic North Korean knew precisely what he was walking into: a quiet but significant split between the United States and South Korea over how to deal with the North. 
Meeting with North Korean representatives at the United Nations early in the year, Arnold L. Kanter, a senior State Department official, made it clear that the North would get nothing -- not even mid-level talks with the United States -- until the nuclear questions were completely resolved. 
South Korea, with far more at stake, has gradually moved toward a different view.
Scores of economists sent to study the obvious parallel -- the integration of East and West Germany -- had come back with the message that if Seoul wanted to avoid economic disaster, it better start now. 
"The best guesses are that it would cost $250 billion to $400 billion," says Kongdan Oh, a Korean-born policy analyst with the Rand Corporation, a research institute based in Santa Monica, Calif. 
"So there are a lot of contingency plans under way. 
If the South can get management know-how and technology into the North and begin to train people, it will bring the costs down."
Bowing to United States pressure, until recently President Roh resisted negotiating with the North while the nuclear issues remained unresolved. 
But with an election approaching, the pressure is building for a major initiative with economic promise. 
During Kim Dal Hyon's visit, Roh agreed to allow a team to visit the North and explore business opportunities. 
According to South Korean press reports, when Roh met recently with the heads of the South's largest conglomerates, Koo Cha Kyung, chairman of the Federation of Korean Industries, used the one argument that he knew would strike a nerve. 
South Korea, he said, "should consider investing in labor-intensive and consumer goods industries in the North because Japan is showing great interest in North Korea's labor pool."
In fact, no one has been more heavily courted by Kim Il Sung these days than the Japanese. 
It is hardly a natural alliance. 
In his recently published reminiscences, Kim's hatred for the Japanese is writ large in almost every chapter, as he recalled his early days battling the nation's occupiers. 
"While visiting various parts of the world," he wrote, "I have had the opportunity of seeing many former colonial countries, but I have never seen imperialism so hideous that it deprived people of their language and surnames and even plundered them of their tableware."
Now, though, North Korea looks across the Sea of Japan (in Pyongyang it is called the East Sea of Korea) and sees a giant bank vault. 
For more than a year, delegations from the former colonizer and the former colony have been meeting regularly -- and getting no place.
"The meetings are very strange," says one Japanese official involved in the talks. 
"The North Koreans send maybe 15 people, but most of them don't speak at all."
Although the negotiators claim to be diplomats, "most don't have any experience abroad," he says.
Pyongyang has also been making overtures to the business community of Niigata, one of Japan's major ports, which is a few hundred miles across the sea from the Tumen outlet. 
But even with the help of the United Nations Development Program, North Korea's initial presentations to potential investors in the Tumen have been rambling and vague. 
China and Russia are less than enthusiastic, because they view the project as competition for their own ports.
On our visit, Japanese executives who toured the region found that very little of the infrastructure had improved since the Japanese occupiers left in 1945. 
"The river is too narrow to carry ships," one executive of a major trading house said. 
"They are wasting our time."
WHEN ROH TAE WOO LEAVES office next February, he will go down in history as the man who brought the beginnings of democracy to South Korea. 
Just as remarkably, he brought about diplomatic independence. 
The "northern policy" that brought Pyongyang to the negotiating table was not hatched in Washington but in Seoul.
So far, though, the apparent progress is far greater than the reality. 
The "reconciliation and nonaggression" agreement signed nearly a year ago calls for regular exchanges of family members, air and mail links. 
But almost every effort to put specifics of the agreement into effect have failed. 
The North, for example, has blocked installing a military "hot line" until the United States and South Korea halt their joint military exercises. 
North Korea's rulers know that as soon as news and people move across the border the "paradise on earth" line will quickly wear thin. 
Meanwhile, diatribes and sometimes gunfire are still exchanged. 
Earlier this year, an apparently accidental incursion into South Korean territory led to the killing of three North Korean soldiers.
South Koreans have no doubts that managing reunification will be the task for the next decade. 
Managed well, it could turn Korea into the region's newest economic powerhouse, fusing the technology of the South with the eager, cheap work force of the North. 
Managed badly, it could bring chaos, with new battles along the DMZ -- a conflict that could involve China, Japan and the United States.
It is easy to forget that for all their common roots, North and South Koreans are virtual strangers to one another. 
They have grown up in different worlds, fought a war against each other and rebuilt vastly different societies. 
That has been driven home to South Korean negotiators who, visiting Pyongyang, have opened their hotel-room doors to long-lost relatives. 
Instead of a tearful embrace, they have gotten lectures on the wonders of the Great Leader's rule.
