
Yang Guojun, a tall, plump man who buys grain for the state, smiles shyly as he talks about the summer's bumper harvest that he and his crew collected over 10 days from the baskets of the local peasants.
''We worked through the night sometimes, just so that the peasants could go home the same day they came,'' the 45-year-old Mr. Yang said as he gestured to the seven storehouses reserved for this township in Henan province, in north-central China.
Grain buyers like Mr. Yang have been busy throughout China, for the nation has just completed its largest summer grain harvest on record. 
If expectations for the autumn crops come true, the year-end bounty may break the record previously set in 1984 at 407.3 million metric tons of grain.
Some estimates say that if the weather is good this fall, the harvest could total 420 million metric tons. 
If the weather is bad, the total is not expected to exceed 405 million metric tons.
This rosy outlook for the harvest comes at a crucial time for the Chinese Government, whose support has been severely weakened by the crackdown on protests in the capital and in 85 or so other cities throughout the country. 
While the bumper harvest reduces the danger of major peasant unrest, the Government, whose cash supply is diminishing quickly, still faces the daunting challenge of paying for the crops.
Last year, officials issued i.o.u.'s, or ''white slips'' as they are called here, instead of cash to pay for wheat, tea, cotton and other crops. 
Peasants have been understandably indignant, and there has been concern that they will simply refuse to turn over crops in the future unless they are paid in cash. 
Rural residents make up 59 percent of China's population.
There are no Government estimates for how many white slips were issued, although at least one economist put their total value at $19 billion, most of this apparently later redeemed. 
This year, in an effort to avoid a similar uproar, the state took greater pains to see that money set aside in its budget for grain was used precisely for that. 
It also called in the Chinese central bank to help finance grain procurement.
This summer's bumper harvest of more than 93.55 million metric tons of grain eases the pressure on the state, since farmers should have substantial amounts of leftover grain, after they fulfill their state quotas, to sell for cash in the market.
Even so, the Government has had to pay the value of $6 billion to $7 billion for the summer harvest and other seasonal agricultural products, according to statistics reported in the official press.
But the summer harvest, mostly grain, is less important than the fall crops, which make up three-fourths of the total harvest. 
Already, there are reports that this spring and summer, white slips were issued in Shandong, Sichuan and Zhejiang provinces.
It is often difficult to determine when these i.o.u.'s are issued, often because official press reports contradict each other and also conflict with what officials say.
 
Better Times Seen
For example, in Henan province, an official at the agricultural bank said the bank financed all three million metric tons of grain, at a cost of $486 million, through increased deposits, a reduction in loans to rural enterprises and a decrease in long-term construction loans.
''There will be no white slips this year,'' an official said. 
Last year, the province issued $135 million in white slips, which the aide said were cashed early this year.
But an article in the newspaper Peasant Daily late last month said that in Henan's northern county of Miyang, more than $55,000 in white slips had been issued to 1,000 peasants.
''I have been here four to five times for this cursed sum of about $11,'' the article quotes a peasant, Zhang Dongfa, who was trying to cash his slips at a grain-procurement center.
The farmers are forced to sell a certain percentage of their grain to the state, and the amount varies with the region, the crop and the harvest. 
In central Henan province, where Mr. Yang procures grain, the percentage is generally 17 percent of a farmer's production.
 
Tricks of the Trade
The farmers can then sell the leftover grain to the market, at market prices, which this year are generally twice the state price. 
But often, even this price is administered by the Government, which collects the ''market'' grain from the peasants to distribute and sell it to the market on their behalf. 
Only if a peasant transports the grain himself to the market, usually a long distance away, does he get a true market price.
While local governments are short of cash, the authorities acknowledge that there is another reason they issue white slips - because funds earmarked for grain are misappropriated and used for rural enterprises that bring in more cash for the locality.
Moreover, many small villages, especially those in mountainous areas, are far from the county and city centers, and so central and provincial authorities may not even know when white slips are issued.
''There is a question about whether they get accurate information filtering up,'' a Western diplomat in Beijing said.
