
Despite public assurances by China that it has stopped sending military aid to the Khmer Rouge guerrillas since September, Chinese arms continue to flow across the Thai border to all the opposition factions fighting the Phnom Penh Government, including the Khmer Rouge, senior Western diplomats say.
It is impossible to tell whether these Chinese arms left China after September, the diplomats say. 
The arms supplies, they say, could represent shipments that were already on the way or had been previously warehoused in Thailand.
In any event, the diplomats say, the arms supplies seem intended more to keep up morale among opposition fighters as the peace process drags on into the dry season, when fighting usually intensifies, than to have a significant effect on the balance of forces.
China, like the Soviet Union, had previously said that it would stop all arms supplies in the context of a comprehensive peace settlement, but that it would not do so unilaterally.
Last month, a Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman, Li Zhaoxing, said, "Since the five member countries of the Security Council adopted the five documents on Cambodia, China has not provided any military assistance, including weapons, to the Cambodian resistance."
 
U.N. Council Offers Plan
The five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council agreed on the framework for a comprehensive peace plan for Cambodia on Aug. 
28. The permanent Council members include China, the United States and the Soviet Union, the main proxy powers of the conflict, as well as Britain and France.
Fighting the Vietnamese-installed Government in Phnom Penh, led by Prime Minister Hun Sen, are three opposition organizations that have formed a loose alliance: the Communist Khmer Rouge, under whose regime more than a million Cambodians died from 1975 to 1979; the followers of Prince Norodom Sihanouk, and the Khmer People's National Liberation Front of Son Sann, which groups rightists who overthrew Prince Sihanouk in 1970 and who were ousted by the Khmer Rouge in 1975. 
The Khmer Rouge were driven from power in 1979, after the Vietnamese invaded.
China has been the main backer of the Khmer Rouge, which has the strongest guerrilla army, and the two other guerrilla groups. 
The Soviet Union has backed Vietnam and the Cambodian Government. 
The United States gives nonmilitary aid to Prince Sihanouk's followers and to the Khmer People's National Liberation Front, but has withdrawn diplomatic support at the United Nations for the coalition of rebel groups.
"There is movement of arms, but we don't take it too seriously," a senior Western diplomat said. 
"Partly it's a definitional problem. 
Did the Chinese stop shipping that day?
Some may have been already at sea, and some in warehouses in Thailand, now being delivered."
 
Hurting Beijing's Image
But because China had announced a halt in shipments, he said, any supplies make Beijing look bad.
The Associated Press reported on Saturday that Western intelligence figures said the Khmer Rouge were loading "trucks and trucks of new Chinese ammunition" in violation of Beijing's pledge to stop military aid.
As usual, an Asian diplomat said, military claims and developments in Cambodia have to be evaluated in the context of the negotiations, which have been faltering.
In a conference on Sept. 
9 and 10 in Jakarta, after a secret summit meeting between Vietnamese and Chinese leaders, the Cambodian Government and the three guerrilla factions agreed to accept the United Nations peace framework in its entirety.
But since their September meeting, the four parties have been dragging their feet. 
With the support of the Khmer Rouge, Prince Sihanouk first rejected any role for himself on a Supreme National Council that would represent Cambodian sovereignty in a settlement. 
Then he insisted on being chairman of the council but said Mr. Hun Sen could not be the deputy chairman. 
Later he rejected any role for himself once again.
The United Nations plan calls for the national council to have a largely symbolic role. 
United Nations officials would monitor, control and, if necessary, run five important ministries -- finance, interior, defense, foreign affairs and information -- and insure that the elections for a new government are free and fair.
A meeting of the Cambodian factions this month in Paris, to discuss a draft of the peace plan, was inconclusive.
