
Former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger met today with three Politburo members and China's Foreign Minister in the first of a series of talks that both sides hope will help ease the strains between China and the United States.
In his remarks at a banquet given by the Foreign Minister, Qian Qichen, Mr. Kissinger said that while China and the United States should work to improve understanding, American policy must reflect ''our historic democratic values as well as our national interest,'' according to a paraphrase by the New China News Agency.
Mr. Kissinger's trip comes as an important meeting of the Communist Party Central Committee is being held in Beijing. 
The meeting, expected to conclude on Thursday, may produce one dramatic development, according to a senior Chinese official. 
He said that Deng Xiaoping, China's senior leader, might resign as chairman of the Central Military Commission. 
That is Mr. Deng's only remaining official post.
The Kissinger visit, which is to end on Friday, follows a visit with Chinese leaders last week by former President Richard M. Nixon.
Like Mr. Nixon, Mr. Kissinger will probably meet with Mr. Deng, but he has not released details of his schedule.
He has been to China more than a dozen times since 1971, when he came on a secret mission to lay the groundwork for an official trip the next year by Mr. Nixon, who was then President.
Chinese leaders have always warmly received Mr. Kissinger, and his influence with some of them may even have risen since June, when he indicated sympathy for the Chinese leadership at a time when it was being widely criticized for the military crackdown on the democracy movement.
''Some in America feel that China should make the first move in the present situation, while some in China feel the United States should move first,'' the agency said in paraphrasing Mr. Kissinger's comments.
Since both sides have an interest in stabilityII and peace, the agency account went on, ''both countries should take steps together to put relations onto a smoother path.''
Mr. Kissinger, who arrived in Beijing on Tuesday evening, has met with Wu Xueqian, a Deputy Prime Minister and Politburo member, and with Li Ruihuan, a member of the Standing Committee of the Politburo.
President Kim Il Sung of North Korea was reported to have made a secret visit early this week to Beijing. 
North Korean Embassy officials denied that the visit took place, and officials at the Chinese Foreign Ministry were unavailable for comment.
