
OUR sober national mood seems to have permeated the world of cookbooks, for the book list this holiday season looks as restrained as anything in recent memory.
Gone are the expensive, all-encompassing, how-to-cook books like Julia Child's and Anne Willan's that delighted gift givers and recipients last year. 
Gone too are the picture-packed coffee-table books that said more about the depth of the giver's pockets than they did about the recipient's needs or desires.
Still, even without the glitter, there are solid and worthy offerings available, possibly even something for everyone on your list.
For Sinophiles, THE TASTE OF CHINA (Simon & Schuster, $29.95) by Ken Hom, is a laudable exception to the usual coffee-table gift book. 
The indefatigable Mr. Hom, well known as an authority on Chinese food, set out to discover the state of Chinese cuisine today, after decades of upheaval.
He takes us into private homes; state-run, big-city restaurants; village eating halls, and market stalls. 
Along the way we are introduced to good chunks of Chinese history and culture, both ancient and modern.
The book is handsomely produced, with photographs that are both evocative and frank. 
Nothing is prettified here: hunks of meat displayed in the market, spare, dusty kitchens, waiters with stained and dirty aprons. 
But the distinctive current of delight, even joy, that pervades pictures and text creates enchantment from the humblest of scenes.
For the dedicated griller, the one who's out in the backyard under an umbrella, turning hamburgers while the snow drifts down, there is THE THRILL OF THE GRILL (William Morrow & Company, $24.95) by Chris Schlesinger and John Willoughby, full of wonderful ideas and recipes from grilled tuna steaks with a do-ahead nectarine-red-onion relish to instructions for different types of barbecue (North Carolina, Texas, etc.).
The tone is as relaxed as if Mr. Schlesinger, co-owner of the East Coast Grill in Cambridge, Mass., had pulled up a chair next to the cook: "You have to figure out your own personal refueling policy," he advises. 
"The one I like is one handful of coals or wood chunks to every beer."
Not all recipes require a grill, and many can be adapted to an oven broiler. 
My only quibble is the book's format (recipes and commentary are displayed side by side on the same page), which can cause confusion.
For Italophiles: The Italian food book category grows every season. 
This year's is a particularly fine crop. 
One of the most exciting is Carol Field's CELEBRATING ITALY (Morrow, $24.95), a look at Italy's still vibrant traditions of festivals and celebrations and the foods (and recipes) that form a significant part of them. 
These include Christian festivals like Christmas and Easter, as well as more obscure holidays like the Feast of the Redeemer in Venice in July.
There are also regional festivals, many with strong, if unstated, pagan origins: the Festa dei Serpari, a snake festival in an Abruzzese village east of Rome, or the magnificent Carnival battles in Ivrea in the Piedmont, in which bands of youths spend the days before Lent pelting each other energetically with oranges trucked in from Sicily, until the whole town reeks of fermented orange juice. 
"Not a single orange," Ms. Field writes, "is squeezed into juice or transformed into a ritual dish."
There are plenty of ritual dishes in the book, however, from breads and sweets to robust bean and lentil stews, pastas of all shapes and sizes and baked, roasted, grilled and braised meats, fish and sausages, all characteristic of one part or another, and of one season or another, of this country that is still as remarkably and intimately connected with its past as any place on earth.
Nancy Verde Barr's WE CALLED IT MACARONI (Alfred A. Knopf, $21.95) is a celebration of the Italian community in Providence, R.I., where the author grew up. 
Many of the recipes are "classic" Italian-American adaptations of traditional southern Italian foods, while others were developed from her trips back to the homeland. 
There are period photographs and interviews with members of this still very strong community.
LA CUCINA DI LIDIA (Doubleday, $24.95) by Lidia Bastianich and Jay Jacobs, is similar in tone, an affectionate memoir of the cooking of the author's youth in Istria, a remote region northeast of Venice where Italy and Yugoslavia meet.
Ms. Bastianich is the chef and co-owner, with her husband, Felice, of Felidia, an esteemed New York restaurant. 
Here she records the robust and rustic preparations of her home, where sauerkraut and soft-shell crabs are considered as authentically Italian as risotto and balsamic vinegar. 
The recipes are delightful, though sometimes rather labor- and time-intensive. 
Many are unusual regional preparations not found in standard Italian cookbooks.
Also in the Italian category is Giacomo Castelvetro's FRUIT, HERBS & VEGETABLES OF ITALY, written in 1614 and translated into English for the first time by Gillian Riley (Viking, $29.95), with handsome illustrations from period art.
As a Venetian exile in England, Castelvetro set himself the goal of persuading the British, even then known as prodigious consumers of meats and sweets, to eat more fruits and vegetables. 
There are no recipes as such, but his good humor and good sense are attractive, and his attitude toward food would not be out of place in Italy today.
For the culinary scholar who wants a cookbook that goes beyond recipes to tell an enthralling story, there is Jennifer Brennan's CURRIES AND BUGLES (HarperCollins, $25), subtitled "A Memoir and a Cookbook of the British Raj."
With affection and wit, Ms. Brennan, raised in India in the last days of Britain's empire, shares memories of prodigious hunt breakfasts, Christmases, birthday parties, regimental teas and ladies' nights, along with more everyday fare.
Recipes are both Anglo and Indian, with dishes like peshawari pasande (lamb marinated and simmered in yogurt and spices, cardamom, turmeric, saffron and coriander) sharing space with Karachi Club champagne cup and Granny Whitburn's Scottish whisky marmalade. 
The recipes are not as clear as one might wish and should be read with care before proceeding. 
But given that precaution, the fascination of the period and the author's endearing tone make the book worth savoring.
For fish-lovers, FISH: THE BASICS (Simon & Schuster, $24.95) by Shirley King, is possibly the last fish cookbook you'll ever buy. 
Even expert cooks will find this useful, while beginners who follow the book's wise and measured guidance will quickly feel comfortable with seafood, in the fish market, in the restaurant or at the kitchen stove.
The book includes advice about buying and storing different types of fish; an intelligent discussion of seafood's health benefits; basic cooking methods and individual recipes with variations. 
The book may appear dauntingly encyclopedic at first, but anyone with even a slight interest in fish should press on.
For irrepressible meat lovers there is THE USEFUL PIG (HarperCollins, $22.95), by Roberta Wolfe Smoler, a collection of traditional and unusual pork recipes from around the world, with a few of the author's own devising -- pork with Moroccan preserved lemons, for instance.
This is a savory compendium with one disappointment; I would have liked an acknowledgement that pork is peculiarly a subject on which the world is divided between adorers (Chinese, Europeans) and abhorrers (Jews, Muslims). 
No one has ever satisfactorily explained why.
For lovers of African-American food, an increasingly difficult cuisine to define, there is FAMILY OF THE SPIRIT COOKBOOK (Simon & Schuster, $24.95) by John Pinderhughes, a compendium of recipes from black cooks, along with portraits taken by the author, a New York photographer. 
Some of these are familiar: Verta Mae Grosvenor from National Public Radio and Leah Chase, chef and co-owner of Dooky Chase's Restaurant in New Orleans. 
Others are obviously much-loved relatives and friends.
What makes the food African-American seems to be simply that African-Americans cook it. 
From crab cakes to bread and butter pickles, this is more or less the traditional good food of country folk in the eastern part of America -- which is, to my mind, as fine a definition as any.
There are two books for bakers: Susan G. Purdy's AS EASY AS PIE (Collier Books, $14.95) details all manner of pies, sweet and savory, cream pies, fruit and berry pies, dumplings and cobblers, meat and fish pies, a few pizza recipes and even that old suburban standby, grasshopper pie, without a trace of the dreaded frozen whip. 
Recipes are clear, and there are enough basic pastry instructions to turn the most fumble-fingered neophyte into an expert pie maker.
KEN HAEDRICH'S COUNTRY BAKING (Bantam, $24.95) is a down-home book with recipes for breads and muffins, pies and tarts, pizzas, cakes, cookies and crackers. 
This is a back-to-the-land sort of book, with plenty of whole-grain preparations but not at all hortatory in tone. 
Reading through it, you might dream of installing Mr. Haedrich in your own kitchen; his recipes are the next best thing.
Finally, for Canadophiles: Here is A TASTE OF QUEBEC ( Macmillan of Canada , $21.95) by Julian Armstrong, food editor of The Montreal Gazette. 
Dishes like blueberry oat crumble and suet fruit pie might not be familiar to sophisticated chefs, but the book is a welcome introduction to the region and to comfortable, appealing foods that never forget their rural roots. 
More than a collection of recipes, the book is also a useful traveler's guide to foods and restaurants.
 
Sneak Previews of What's Inside All Those Pages
 
Cranberry Apple Pie (Adapted from "Ken Haedrich's Country Baking")
 
Total time: 1 hour, 20 minutes, plus time for cooling
 
Flour for dusting wax paper
Pastry for a two-crust pie, chilled
1 12-ounce package fresh cranberries
2 large Granny Smith apples, peeled, cored and chopped coarse
1 1/4 cups packed light brown sugar
1 1/2 tablespoons quick-cooking tapioca
Finely grated zest of 1 lemon
Juice of a half lemon
1/4 teaspoon ground cloves
1 teaspoon light or heavy cream.
1. Preheat oven to 425 degrees.
2. On a sheet of lightly floured wax paper, roll half the pastry into a 12-inch circle and line a 9-inch pie pan with it, letting the edge hang over. 
Cover with plastic wrap and refrigerate.
3. On another sheet of lightly floured wax paper, roll the other half of the dough into an 11-inch circle; set aside. 
Combine cranberries, apple, sugar, tapioca, zest, lemon juice and clove and turn into the refrigerated pie shell, then lightly moisten the outer rim of the shell with water. 
Invert the top crust over the filling and press around the edge to seal. 
Trim overhang to about 1/2 inch, then turn the edge of the pastry down and under, sculpting it into an upstanding ridge.
4. Brush top of pie sparingly with cream, then poke a few steam vents with a fork or paring knife. 
Bake 20 minutes, reduce heat to 375 degrees, then bake another 40 minutes. 
When done, the top of the pie will be a rich gold and the juices should bubble thickly. 
Transfer pie to a rack and cool at least 30 minutes before slicing.
Yield: about 8 servings.
 
Grilled Shrimp With Greens, Bacon and Sweet Potato (Adapted from "The Thrill of the Grill")
 
Total time: 50 minutes
 
16 medium-size shrimp (about 1 pound)
Salt and freshly ground black pepper to taste
1/2 pound slab bacon, cut into small cubes
1 cup cooked sweet potatoes (about 1/2 pound, diced)
1 pound chicory, cleaned, washed and dried
1/2 pound mixed greens, cleaned, washed and dried
1/4 cup balsamic vinegar
Pinch of sugar.
1. Preheat the grill.
2. Peel and devein the shrimp but leave the tails on. 
Thread on skewers, season with salt and pepper, and grill over a medium fire, 3 to 4 minutes per side. 
Remove and set aside.
3. Saute bacon over medium heat until crisp, about 5 minutes, and remove from pan. 
Do not pour off bacon fat. 
Add sweet potatoes and cook for 2 minutes. 
Then add chicory and greens and toss, just until leaves are well covered with bacon fat.
4. Remove greens mixture from the heat, add vinegar, sugar and salt and pepper and toss. 
Place a portion on individual plates and put a skewer of shrimp on each.
Yield: 4 servings as an appetizer, 2 as a main course.
 
Bouillabaisse la Coulee Douce (Adapted from "A Taste of Quebec")
 
Total time: 1 hour
 
1 salmon steak, 1/2 pound
1 halibut steak, 1/2 pound
1 cod fillet, 1/2 pound
1/2 pound scallops, halved if large
3/4 pound shucked clams
1 pound raw shrimp, shelled and deveined
1/4 cup olive oil
2 medium-size onions, chopped
2 cloves garlic, chopped fine
4 ripe tomatoes, peeled, seeded and chopped coarse
1/2 teaspoon ground coriander seed
1 tablespoon chopped fresh parsley
1 tablespoon chopped fresh herbs (marjoram, oregano, basil, chives, alone in or in combination)
Salt and freshly ground white pepper to taste
8 cups fish stock
1/2 cup white wine
Hot garlic toast as an accompaniment.
1. Cut salmon, halibut and cod into large chunks. 
Combine with scallops, clams and shrimp; set aside.
2. Heat oil in a large saucepan or stock pot over medium heat and saute onions and garlic until softened. 
Add tomatoes, coriander, parsley and herbs; season with salt and pepper.
3. Add fish stock and wine; bring to a boil. 
Let simmer 10 minutes. 
Add seafood mixture all at once. 
Return to boil, then lower heat and let soup simmer for 8 to 10 minutes more, or until fish flakes when tested with a fork. 
Serve in large warmed bowls accompanied with garlic toast.
Yield: 8 servings.
