
In the battle over Tiananmen Square - the one at 42d Street and 12th Avenue - the exchanges between the People's Republic of China and the City of New York are turning increasingly hostile.
The mid-Manhattan intersection, at which the Chinese Consulate General is situated, was renamed last month by Mayor Edward I. Koch to honor those who were killed this year when student demonstrations were crushed in Beijing.
After a protest by Ambassador Weng Fupei, the Consul General, Mr. Koch urged the diplomat ''to defect and seek asylum here in the United States and then to tell the truth'' about his Government's actions at Tiananmen Square.
''Your letter of Oct. 
6, 1989, is hereby rejected on account of the insulting language,'' Mr. Weng answered Mr. Koch, in a communique dated Oct. 
20 that the Mayor's office released last week.
 
Mr. Weng Declines the Offer
''You have gone so far as to brazenly urge me to defect,'' Mr. Weng said. 
''This is a gross insult to the dignity of the Chinese diplomats and an unreasonable provocation against the Chinese people. 
Thus I express my indignation and lodge my protest against such an imprudent act on your part.''
Mr. Koch has not backed down. 
''I am sorry that you are turning this matter into a personal one,'' he answered. 
''I am speaking on behalf of most Americans, and certainly most New Yorkers, when I say that what your Government has done in violating the human rights of its own citizens is shocking and unacceptable and must be changed.''
''Obviously, we are not going to war with the People's Republic of China over this matter,'' Mr. Koch said. 
''Therefore, the only way we can influence the actions of your Government is through public denunciation.''
The Mayor described Mr. Weng's letter as a ''demarche'' - ''one step short of a declaration of war.''
He was smiling as he said it.
 
Washington Is Not Laughing
In Washington, and slightly less amused, a spokesman for the State Department emphasized that ''Mayor Koch does not speak for the United States Government and it is not the policy of the United States Government to encourage foreign diplomats here in the U.S. to defect.''
Even in the context of Mr. Koch's celebrated astringency in commenting on foreign affairs - the United Nations is a ''cesspool,'' the Soviet Government is the ''pits'' - the current imbroglio stands out, by virtue of the harsh and personal nature of the communiques.
It began on Sept. 
16, when Mr. Weng protested the impending renaming of the intersection in front of the consulate as ''Tiananmen Square Corner,'' telling the Mayor that this would amount to ''an out-and-out interference in China's internal affairs.''
Nine days later, the Mayor signed a bill authorizing the new name. 
Mr. Weng lodged a stronger protest, warning Mr. Koch that ''any condemnations or sanctions against our Government in this regard are unwise and in the long run will rebound on those imposing them, and you will be no exception.''
In the letter, Mr. Weng said it was ''a sheer rumor to talk about a 'Tiananmen bloodbath' and 'thousands of people massacred.'
'' That prompted Mr. Koch to call for his defection.
