
When she was growing up in the 1970's and 80's, Wang Kui was virtually a prisoner in her room, unable to go to school or to play with other children. 
Her links to the outside world were her radio and her daydreams.
Miss Wang, a small, articulate woman, is disabled by polio and unable to go up or down stairs by herself. 
Her mobility was severely limited during her childhood for a simple reason: her family lived on the third floor of a building without an elevator.
"It was tough, because I couldn't go out and play," Miss Wang recalled as she sat in a wheelchair in her room, on the ground floor, in a rehabilitation center in Kunming, in southwest China. 
"So I listened to the radio, and when the radio began to broadcast English lessons, I started to teach myself English."
Miss Wang's childhood, defined by the stairs, is a poignant reminder of the difficulties that the disabled face in China and parts of the third world. 
Because of disease and relatively low safety standards, a far higher proportion of the population is handicapped in China and other developing countries than in the West.
 
Law Forbids Discrimination
While China is most often thought of in the West in terms of the areas in which it lags -- developing democratic institutions and an efficient economy -- there are other areas in which the Communists have made significant progress: in nuclear weapons; in applied sciences like rocketry and agronomy; and perhaps even more so in literacy, health care, equality for women and assistance for the disabled.
In China, while people still often scorn the handicapped, the Government has made enormous progress in easing their plight. 
The latest action is a national law forbidding discrimination against the handicapped. 
While the disabled are clearly not as well off in China as in the far richer countries of the West, they are immeasurably better off than in most other poor countries of the world.
The improvement in the status of the handicapped took place mainly in the years since Deng Xiaoping achieved supreme power in 1978. 
And that is not a coincidence: The prime advocate of the handicapped in China is Mr. Deng's eldest son, 48-year-old Deng Pufang.
The younger Mr. Deng is in a wheelchair because of mistreatment suffered at the hands of Red Guards in 1968 during the Cultural Revolution. 
Over the last half-dozen years, as head of the China Disabled Persons Federation, he has worked energetically to ease the problems of the handicapped and to formulate Government policies to help them. 
Deng Pufang seems to be quite broadly disliked by the public because of unproved rumors that he is corrupt, but there is no doubt about what he has done for the disabled in China.
 
'A Revolution'
"Deng Pufang has created a revolution here," said a Western diplomat in Beijing. 
"He's probably done more to civilize China than any other person, but a lot of work remains to be done. 
Public attitudes toward the handicapped are still antediluvian."
Miss Wang is a measure of the progress that handicapped people have made in China. 
Now 24 years old and a fluent English speaker, Miss Wang is a speed typist in both Chinese and English, and thus has a marketable skill that can earn her a living. 
She has entered national competitions for handicapped people intended to build their pride and showcase their accomplishments.
She is one of 52 million people in China who are handicapped in one way or another: 5 million blinded by cataracts, 1.2 million disabled by polio, and innumerable mentally retarded children, people who cannot hear or speak and war veterans who have lost limbs.
 
Vaccine Could Have Helped
While the polio vaccine was developed in the 1950's, it did not become widely administered in China until the 1970's and 80's. 
Miss Wang, who contracted polio as an infant in 1967, is one of many whose disability could have been prevented by a sugar cube treated with the polio vaccine.
Yunnan Province, of which Kunming is the capital, counts 6.35 percent of its population of 37 million as handicapped, a higher percentage than any other province in China. 
One family in four in Yunnan includes a disabled person.
"The proportion of handicapped is higher here because Yunnan has many remote and undeveloped areas, where attitudes are backward and there is inbreeding that leads to mental retardation," said Zhu Zhengyu, an official of the Yunnan Federation for the Handicapped. 
But he noted that health care was improving and that marriage within families was declining.
Wang Kui said the public's tendency to look down on handicapped people was gradually changing, and she now holds a job teaching typing to others disabled by polio. 
She took up typing when her grandfather gave her an English typewriter, in the days when she was sitting at home all day studying English, and soon she found that she could do freelance typing of letters and articles.
"We can't give financial support to everyone with a handicap," Miss Wang acknowledged, "but if we can help them support themselves, then that will be a major accomplishment."
