
For hundreds of years Malaysia, the southernmost tip of mainland Asia, was an important crossroads for the great civilizations of China and India. 
A quirk of geography - the country's strategic position just north of the Equator, between the Indian Ocean and the South China Sea - made it a historic meeting place for traders and travelers from West and East.
This mix of cultures is reflected in the country's eclectic architecture, especially in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia's most developed city and its capital. 
Kuala Lumpur is filled with Moorish buildings out of North Africa, colonial and Tudor structures from the English countryside, Chinese temples, Buddhist pagodas and Muslim mosques.
One of the particularly strong influences is the indigenous Malay house - cool, infinitely expandable or contractable, movable and well adapted to the exigencies of heat, rain, floods and large families. 
Another is the south Chinese shop house - here elongated in plan with louvered windows and verandas borrowed from Malay architecture, often with ornamented facades. 
Also influential are the Southern Indian and Mogul styles, with their exuberant domes and minarets, introduced by the British in the late 1890's.
During the last 30 years the skyline has shot skyward with an amazing variety of supermodern architecture. 
Even here, however, the international influence is mitigated by the solutions to the tropical climate. 
Many of the later buildings are also now striving for a more Malaysian identity - bringing back large overhanging roofs, verandas and columns.
Of the many memorable places to see in Kuala Lumpur, often called K.L., several are especially noteworthy.
National Art Gallery The city's last major colonial hotel was designed by a Dutch architect in 1932, and conveys some sense of its former grandeur with a curved driveway, mock-Roman columns and detailed cornices. 
The whitewashed Art Deco building on the Jalan Sultan Hishamuddin now houses the National Art Gallery and its 1,700 works of art, in 38 small oddly shaped former hotel bedrooms and bathrooms. 
The hotel-cum-museum was built around two open spaces that serve as sculpture courts. 
Historically a meeting place for planters and politicians, the hotel is now meant to serve as the showcase for Malaysian artists. 
There were plans to replace the building with a 22-story high-rise when the Government designated it a historic building, and in 1984 leased it to the National Art Gallery. 
It was opened as a museum on a permanent basis in January 1985. 
The works of art are arranged in chronological order, and room numbers have been replaced by picture labels. 
The inner courtyard has exposed, cheerfully painted slender pipes, a modestly tropical version of Paris's Centre Pompidou. 
The museum is directly across the street from the K.L. train station, and next to the fine and frequently overlooked Railway Headquarters building.
Admission is free, and the museum is open daily from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M., except on Fridays when it is closed from noon to 3 P.M. Kuala Lumpur Railway Station. 
Constructed in 1911, this is one of the most famous landmarks in Malaysia. 
Built in the northern Indian Mogul style with a variety of arched colonnades and domed and canopied turrets, this palatial station houses a hotel above the entry, and it has large glass and cast-iron roofs over the platforms. 
The Moorish exterior conceals large glass and iron train sheds, similar to those built in England at the end of the 19th century. 
The splendidly exuberant building was built by the firm of J. A. Russell. 
One of the brothers, P. C. Russell, was the architect, probably working under the direction of A. B. Hubbock, the official architect of Selangor State, of which Kuala Lumpur is the capital. 
Legend has it that the design was taken from a 1911 Moscow Trade Fair pavilion and that the roof is designed with snow gutters and the ability to withstand about six feet of snow, a condition that has never been seen in Malaysia.
In 1986 the entire building was gutted, renovated and enlarged in order to modernize the interior. 
Unfortunately, some of the original rhythm of the design has been lost, as the architects were not entirely successful in reproducing the shapes of the arches. 
Sultan Abdul Samad Building Infokraf (the Handicraft Information Center) is in the 1897 Sultan Abdul Samad Building, also known as the Clock Tower, on Jalan Raja. 
Kuala Lumpur's oldest landmark, it is of distinct and graceful Moorish design, and one of the most popular and photographed buildings in the city. 
Formerly the Selangor State Secretariat, it now houses the Federal and High Courts at one end, and at the other end, the country's official craft center, the function of which is to elevate the status and qulaity of local goods. 
The building, designed by C. E. Spooner, the state engineer, is topped by a large dome covered in copper sheet, with a 135-foot-high clock tower. 
Previously, the building had numerous pinnacles along the parapet. 
These were removed during World War II, and subsequently lost. 
In 1984, the building was restored by Haji Hajeeder, to accommodate the courts and the crafts showrooms. 
Kuala Lumpur National Museum. 
This building, completed in 1963 on Jalan Travers, is based on old Malay, Minangkabau architecture. 
(The word Minangkabau means buffalo horns, and the roofs in that style have two hornlike peaks.) On either side of the entrance hall are two immense Italian glass mosaic murals, 175 feet long and 115 feet high. 
Outside the museum a World War II airplane on permanent exhibition strikes a jarring contrast. 
The two-tiered pagodalike roofed building houses several collections of historical artifacts of Malaysia and a number of displays that relate to the country's history. 
There is an example of a Malaysian wedding feast, traditional costumes (of unusual interest was the beaded net work, worn under a wedding gown to protect the gown's fragile brocaded satin), Royal headdresses, demonstrations of customs, Malaysian etiquette, and more.
Admission is free, and the museum is open daily from 9 A.M. to 6 P.M., except on Friday when it is closed from noon to 2:45 P.M. Karyaneka Handicraft Village. 
This is a cluster of 13 small gaily painted wooden traditional Malay buildings, one from each state, around one main structure on Jalan Raja Chulan. 
The main building in this complex was built in 1982, along the lines of a traditional Malay house. 
In 1984, the additional houses were added. 
Inside each of the smaller buildings is displayed the indigenous crafts of every state. 
Demonstrations of techniques for various crafts are held daily from 9 A.M. to 5:30 P.M., except Sundays. 
The two most interesting houses to visit are the Sabah and Sarawak regional buildings.
The largest building has a comprehensive inventory of all that is housed in the individual cottages including handsomely shaped black, brown and terra cotta clay pots that I would guess are too fragile to mail. 
There are embroidered velvet purses, gold and silver threaded fabric and some elaborate weavings and carvings. 
Recently a Malay garden was added, including all the Malay indigenous plants and herbs.
Open Sunday to Friday from 9 A.M. to 6 P.M., and Saturday 9 A.M. to 6.30 P.M. Jame Mosque. 
This building, on Jalan Kuntun Perak, is in the style of a North Indian Mosque. 
The mosque is situated at the confluence of the Klang and Gambak Rivers, the birthplace of Kuala Lumpur (which means muddy waters). 
Built in 1909 on the site of the first Malay cemetery, the Jame Mosque is the oldest mosque in the city. 
Designed by the British architect A. B. Hubbock, who also designed the city's railway station, it has a walled courtyard and three domes flanked by two minarets. 
Fully renovated in 1984 the arched, white stucco building with gray granite floors is filled with strong white columns with gray capitals and bases. 
Non-Muslim visitors can walk around the grounds and the periphery of the building but generally are not admitted inside.
Multiracial, multicultural, multireligious - whatever their differences, Malaysians are all Asians, with a common heritage. 
The layering of cultures throughout Malaysia (in a country of 17 million, approximately 53 percent are Malay, 33 percent are Chinese, 10 percent are Indian and 4 percent are expatriates, with a smattering of Americans) is reflected in its ceramics, in the country's architecture, and the activities that go on in its colorful markets. 
In spite of the enormous problems of nation-building, they have managed to establish a political culture of compromise, and fashioned one of Southeast Asia's most dynamic cities.
This year, which has been proclaimed Tourism Year in Malaysia, the buildings of Kuala Lumpur are being displayed to special advantage: every element of the cityscape, from palm tree to street lamp, has been fitted with tiny sparkling lights.
