
Tibet's exiled spiritual leader, the Dalai Lama, speaking to a receptive gathering of members of Congress today in the Capitol rotunda, appealed to the United States to aid Tibet in its struggle against Chinese Government control.
Setting aside his prepared text to speak in halting English about what he termed the "universal responsibility" Americans should feel for conditions in Tibet, the Dalai Lama was greeted with applause and cheers from several hundred people in attendance.
China filed a formal protest objecting to the Dalai Lama's travels, which included today's address to Congress and a meeting at the White House on Tuesday with President Bush.
The Chinese Government has maintained that the Dalai Lama, a Buddhist monk, is an outcast and troublemaker who is encouraging other countries to meddle in China's affairs.
Until this visit, the White House has maintained its distance from the Dalai Lama in favor of cordial relations with China. 
But this time the Dalai Lama gained entry to the highest levels of Government when President Bush, once an American envoy to China, met with the religious leader at the White House for 30 minutes on Tuesday.
Marlin Fitzwater, the White House spokesman, said the President's meeting with the Dalai Lama had led to a protest, but the White House expressed no regret over the decision.
Mr. Bush's decision to meet with the Tibetan drew praise from ideologically disparate members of the House and Senate who had initially wanted the Dalai Lama to address a joint meeting of Congress. 
House Speaker Thomas S. Foley and the Senate Majority Leader, George J. Mitchell, who shared the stage with the Dalai Lama, turned down that request and gave permission for the rotunda ceremony instead. 
"The joint session is not taking place because of various reasons," Senator John F. Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts, said in remarks on the floor of the Senate today, "but I think most realistically because we do not want to offend China."
An aide to Mr. Foley said holding the ceremony in the Capitol rotunda was unusual enough to convey heightened respect for the Tibetan leader and sympathy for his cause.
"As His Holiness and the people of Tibet move forward on their own great journey, we stand with them," said the Senate Minority Leader, Bob Dole. 
"We stand with them and we want the People's Republic of China to hear this message. 
We stand with them."
The Tibetan leader, who has lived in exile in India for 32 years, wore the scarlet and yellow robes of a Tibetan Buddhist monk and acknowledged the applause with his palms pressed together and his fingers pointing upward.
"Here I enjoy the freedom of speech, freedom of talk, freedom of movement," the Dalai Lama said. 
"You, this nation, I think very much involved or very much cherish these principles. 
However when I was about 15, I lost that freedom."
 
Nobel Prize in 1989
The Dalai Lama, who was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1989, governed Tibet until his flight in 1959, after Chinese forces took control. 
The United States officially recognizes Tibet as a part of China.
A spokesman for the Chinese Embassy said that Beijing was "firmly opposed" to the Dalai Lama's travels on behalf of a Tibetan state and that it had lodged a strong protest with the United States Government. 
"It is unacceptable to the Chinese Government for officals of any country to meet the Dalai Lama or his representatives in any form," he said.
But the Dalai Lama, in his prepared remarks, urged other nations to take a "stronger stand" toward China on the matter of human rights in Tibet.
"Recently, the United States has led the international community in freeing a small country from cruel occupation," the Tibetan leader said. 
"I am happy for the people of Kuwait. 
Sadly, all small nations cannot expect similar support for their rights and freedoms."
A "new world order" without freedom is oppression, he said.
The Dalai Lama won support from his supporters in Congress and the Senate passed a resolution supporting Tibet's right to self-determination.
