
The Group of Seven major industrial democracies agreed today to give financial assistance to Poland and Hungary, as well as emergency food supplies, and called for the European Community to organize a meeting in the next few weeks to coordinate efforts.
In a smooth session this morning in a 35th-floor conference room in the modern Arche de la Defense building, the allies issued a ''Declaration on East-West Relations'' that had been negotiated in advance by advisers.
''We recognize that the political changes taking place in these countries will be difficult to sustain without economic progress,'' said the political communique on Poland and Hungary. 
The statement was one of four on East and West, terrorism, human rights and China that made up the communique.
 
Boon for European Community
By asking the European Community to coordinate Western aid to Poland and Hungary, the seven nations acknowledged the organization's growing importance as Western European integration approaches in 1992. 
[Page 16.] President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union surprised the summit leaders by sending them a letter calling for greatly expanded economic cooperation and said the Soviet Union wanted to take part in such efforts. 
Officials said it was the first time such a letter had arrived at a summit meeting.
Warning to Beijing
The allies condemned China's ''violent repression'' and warned Beijing not to isolate itself. 
They also called on China to ''do what is necessary to restore confidence in Hong Kong,'' and expressed concern over the fate of the colony, which returns to Chinese sovereignty in 1997.
The communique's section on China recalled the limited sanctions imposed so far by various nations. 
It announced no new steps.
Officials of the Bush Administration acknowledged that the Senate's 81-to-10 vote Friday to impose more stringent sanctions against Beijing had put President Bush at loggerheads with Congress. 
Some legislators have suggested the President has lost control of his China policy.
Yet at the summit gathering, Mr. Bush aligned himself with Prime Minister Sousuke Uno of Japan and Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of Britain in opposing half-hearted efforts by President Francois Mitterrand of France to toughen the comminique's language on China.
The harmony at the Arche de la Defense was so pronounced, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d said after the morning and afternoon sessions, that the allies might take the unprecedented step of wrapping the summit up early on Sunday.
Indeed, they were supposed to emerge from Friday night's working dinner at the Navy Ministry overlooking the Place de la Concorde at 10:30. 
They finished 20 minutes early, and came out on the balcony to watch the parade at 10:10 P.M. [Reuters, quoting a spokesman for Mr. Mitterrand, reported late Saturday that the summit meeting would conclude after an early session on Sunday to complete a final economic statement.] Last-Minute Decision The seven leaders did not engage in the customary wrangling over sentiments and wording when they met this morning, according to Administration officials. 
The leaders even decided at the last minute, at the urging of President Bush and West German Chancellor Helmet Kohl, to insert a line about planning a meeting on Poland and Hungary.
Mr. Baker said the President had written letters to the six other leaders - the hallmark personal missives that he has used to build political coalitions throughout his career - before arriving in Paris. 
In the letters, he urged them to agree to specific steps that he felt were necessary to keep up the momentum of democratic change in Eastern Europe.
One key to the exceptional harmony of the summit appeared to be the warm relationship that has developed between Mr. Bush and Mr. Mitterrand since the French President visited Kennebunkport, Me., last May.
Although the French respected President Reagan, they could not refrain from questioning his basic competence in foreign affairs. 
They consider Mr. Bush to be much more of a ''European'' politician, someone who has worked his way up through various Government positions, gathering experience as he rose.
At the same time, according to some high-level participants in the summit meetings, Mr. Bush's affable and gracious personality somehow fits the perception of an America that is no longer sufficiently powerful to give orders to its European allies.
Mr. Bush arrived in Paris with fresh insights into the economic misery in Poland, where he heard first-hand tales of meat shortages and long lines for basic commodities.
It appeared to have been out of Mr. Bush's personal concern that the communique today noted ''the urgent need for food'' in Poland. 
There is a general concern within the Atlantic alliance that short-term economic hardship could undermine those who have taken the gamble on democratic politics.
This morning Chancellor Kohl brought up the idea of a meeting - a proposal that could be decided only by the leaders themselves - and Mr. Bush chimed in to urge that it be part of the communique. 
When the declaration was typed up, and the wording indicated that the meeting would deal only with sending food rather than organizing European economic support, Mr. Bush and Chancellor Kohl once again pressed to reword the passage to make clear that the meeting is to take a broader approach.
President Bush arrived at the summit meeting with the idea of creating what one top adviser called a ''clearing house'' on assistance for Eastern Europe. 
But to the astonishment of a number of Western Europeans, the American President took the back seat, easily agreeing to the idea that the European Community should coordinate initatives toward Eastern Europe.
 
Changes in the East
The European Community will be able to move quickly since it has already established loose links with the Warsaw Pact trading bloc, and has an association agreement with Hungary.
The seven - the United States, Canada, Britain, France, West Germany, Italy and Japan - agreed to consider ''economic assistance aimed at transforming and opening their economies in a durable manner,'' so that Poland and Hungary can ''sustain the momentum of reform.''
They said they would consider an array of economic issues, including investments, joint ventures, professional training and sending in skilled managers.
While past summit meetings have dwelled at length on the problems of dealing with the Soviet Union, the deliberations here were unusual in that they focused on Eastern Europe. 
But a passage in the communique called on Moscow to ''translate its new policies and pronouncements into further concrete action.''
The statement stressed that both NATO partners and Japan were committed to ''a strategy of deterence based upon an appropriate mix of adequate and effective nuclear and conventional forces'' - an implicit rejection of Soviet calls for a denuclearized Europe.
 
An Uncommon Unity
President Bush had hoped to enlist support for helping Eastern Europe, to give grist to his largely symbolic visit this week to Warsaw, Gdansk and Budapest. 
But Administration officials expected to have a harder sales job on their hands, especially with the French, who have a reputation for being contentious at summit meetings.
The uncommon unity reigned partly because as host, President Mitterrand wanted things to go smoothly, and partly because several of the leaders -including Prime Minister Uno of Japan, Prime Minister Ciriaco De Mita of Italy, Mrs. Thatcher and Chancelor Kohl - face tricky political situations at home and need to return with a positive showing in Paris.
The seven agreed to impose somewhat less stringent conditions than the International Monetary Fund would normally impose on a debtor nation. 
In effect, the allies committed themselves to postpone payment of $5 billion due in 1989 on a $39 billion total debt by Poland owed to foreign governments.
 
Pledges From Bush
Mr. Baker was asked if any of the other countries were going to pledge new money to stimulate private investment in Poland and Hungary. 
On his visit this week to the two countries, the President pledged start-up investment monies of $100 million for Poland and $25 million for Hungary.
''We made it very clear before we got to Paris that this would not be a pledging effort,'' said Secretary Baker, ''but we believe we've gotten parallel efforts in the form of commitments to support the reform efforts that are being undertaken in Poland and Hungary.''
In the spirt of the Bicentennial of the French Revolution, the seven issued an unusual declaration on human rights, touching on such areas as ''rights of the child'' and the delicate issue of genetic engineering. 
But largely because of British objections, the declaration fell short of French wish to boldly proclaim a new charter of human rights, including for example, the right to a clean environment.
At the end of his briefing this evening, Mr. Baker was asked by a reporter if ''these summits are still worth all the trouble?''
''Yes,'' he replied smiling, as he left the podium.
