
The Communist Party Politburo announced today that the children of senior officials would be banned from engaging in business and that China's leaders would no longer have access to private supplies of food that are not available to the public.
The announcement was clearly intended to relieve popular outrage over the way children of top officials have used their connections to run trading companies and reap huge profits. 
Many people have also been indignant at the life of privilege and extravagance that top officials lead, and the announcements were apparently intended to show that top officials will live more simple and frugal lives.
Such objections to official privilege were often voiced this spring during the democracy movement, which was crushed by the Chinese Army, and there have been many attempts before to curb privilege and abuse of family connections among officials. 
The announcements today were more specific, but it was not clear whether they would be more effective than those in the past.
Deng's Speech on Corruption
The most striking of the announcements, which followed a two-day Politburo meeting that ended today, banned children and spouses of top officials of the party and the Government from commercial activities, and called on those holding business positions to give up their posts by Sept. 
1.
The Politburo also ordered the abolition of the Kanghua Development Corporation, which was closely linked to Deng Pufang, the eldest son of Deng Xiaoping, China's senior leader. 
The company grew extremely quickly and was widely resented because of suspected corruption.
Deng Pufang and the organization of the disabled that he heads announced late last year that they had cut their ties to Kanghua Development.
In an unpublished speech last month Deng Xiaoping called on the party to wipe out corruption, said a Chinese who read the speech.
Mr. Deng's youngest son, who is working for a international investment company in Beijing, will apparently not be affected, as the new rules cover only the children of members of the Politburo, the Communist Party Secretariat and the Executive Committee of the State Council, which is China's cabinet. 
Mr. Deng has retired from the Politburo.
 
Economy and Family Ties
The Politburo's statement called for an audit of the China International Trust and Investment Corporation, also known as Citic, one of China's best-known companies. 
The audit is then to be published, but there is no indication that Citic will be otherwise affected.
Family ties are particularly useful in Chinese businesses because the economy depends only partly on market decisions. 
A company's success depends greatly on its ability to get scarce resources that are rationed not by price, as they would be in the West, but by officials who give them out to friends or relatives or those who offer bribes.
If a company can get permission to buy steel or coal at the low Government price, for example, then it is certain to make a fortune if it can resell the material at the higher free-market price. 
Partly for that reason, and partly because family members of senior leaders can cut through the bureaucracy, children of top officials have been extremely successful doing business in China.
The Politburo also decided that all top leaders will use Chinese-made vehicles instead of the Mercedes-Benzes that everyone from Mr. Deng down has enjoyed and that have been widely resented among ordinary people who complain about the drain on foreign exchange. 
In fact, the Government had said this year that no new cars would be imported for officials, so it is not clear whether this regulation represents much of a change. 
Food Rations for Leaders?
The Politburo also said leading officials should not entertain domestic guests with public funds, and should not accept gifts from subordinates. 
From now on, officials are to travel abroad only when it is relevant to their jobs, and they are not allowed to accept invitations from foreign business executives or from Chinese-financed companies that are based abroad.
It is not clear how the Politburo will interpret its ruling that officials should no longer have special supplies of food available to them, and that they will be assigned the same rations and made to pay the same prices for food as everyone else.
Until now, top leaders have been given everything they need - from cooks to maids to cars to food - and it would be quite a change if they were obliged to pay for the fancy meals that are served in the Zhongnanhai compound, where they live and work.
