
Anyone unfamiliar with Saugus might consider a little place like this an unlikely spot to construct a giant copy of Beijing's Imperial Palace where 1,500 people can eat Chinese food, some of it kosher.
But the opening of Weylu's, one of the largest Asian restaurants in the country, amid the liquor stores and muffler shops on Route 1 comes as no surprise to people who know the Boston area. 
The section, about nine miles north of downtown Boston, is known locally as a kind of highway version of Restaurant Row on West 46th Street in Manhattan.
The customers wait in line for hours to be served, or make reservations weeks in advance. 
Unlike Manhattan restaurants, the ones here serve thousands of meals a day and have parking lots larger than some city blocks. 
And Weylu's, which opened April 10, is the largest of them all.
''From Day 1, we have had waiting lines from noon until closing,'' said Rick Chang, the owner of the restaurant and several others by the same name in the Boston region.
Weylu's has been serving 5,000 meals a day - the average check is around $14 a person - and turning away some customers. 
The parking lot is full from 11:30 A.M. until closing (1:30 A.M. every night but Sunday, when it is 11:30 P.M.).
Mr. Chang predicted that Weylu's would become the highest-grossing Chinese restaurant in the country (it's not a faint hope: the nation's top-grossing restaurant of any style, Hilltop Steak House, is only a mile away and has 100 fewer seats). 
Before Weylu's opened, Hilltop was considered the most riveting of Route 1's offerings; it has a 68-foot neon cactus and a kitchen that cooks 20,000 pounds of red meat a week.
Food is only part of the attraction of the Saugus restaurants, which resemble small amusement parks. 
In addition to Hilltop, there is the Ship Restaurant, which is shaped like a schooner and serves seafood, and the Prince Restaurant, with a leaning tower marked ''pizza.''
Weylu's stands up to the architectural competition. 
A circular driveway leads up a hill to an imposing drive-through pagoda. 
Customers ride an escalator to the main dining room, where arched footbridges span a waterfall and a Chinese rock garden. 
The menu includes Mandarin, Sichuan and Hong Kong-style dishes.
The first floor has a room for catered kosher functions with its own kitchen and supply room, where Chinese dishes are prepared under the supervision of an Orthodox rabbi. 
The regular menu does not now include kosher meals.
''About 40 to 45 percent of my clients are Jewish,'' Mr. Chang said. 
''When they have a function that is kosher, they have a limited choice. 
I wanted to offer them more of a choice.''
The room is already booked for months in advance, and Mr. Chang said he would consider adding kosher food to the regular menu if the demand remains high.
There seems to be little competition among the restaurants: the owners agree that there are more than enough customers to go around. 
Other Route 1 restaurants put up signs in April wishing Weylu's good luck.
''We feel any business that comes to the area is good for all of us, not a detriment,'' Mr. Chang explained. 
''People like to try different cuisines and different restaurants.''
The Peking Acrobats performed at Weylu's last month to celebrate the restaurant's opening (The New York Times/Rick Friedman)
