
At the Qingdao Brewery, the vice director, Zhang Jianhua, held up a glass of Tsingtao beer and downed it with a smile.
''Americans have a misunderstanding that you get fat from beer,'' said the thin executive, back from a marketing trip to the United States. 
''You can't get fat just from drinking beer. 
There is no fat in beer.''
He and two other scrawny colleagues say they are living proof that drinking a great deal of their comparatively heavy beer does not automatically bring an extra layer of flesh. 
Every evening the directors gather to taste the day's beer, and that usually means drinking at least two big bottles.
But for all the talk of beer not being fattening, the brewery, which has sold beer in the United States since 1973 and now supplies about 90 percent of the Chinese beer sold there, is hard at work on a new product - light beer.
Tsingtao's importer, the New York-based Monarch Import Company, says the lighter product probably will not be sold in the United States until late 1990 at the earliest, after it has been marketed in China and test-marketed in the United States. 
''If you don't have a light beer, you forfeit a big chunk of potential business,'' said Michael J. Mazzoni, general manager of Monarch.
The move toward light beer seems to be a savvy one by one of the most savvy companies in China. 
Tsingtao has already redesigned its packaging and downsized its bottles to please the American market. 
Many of its top officials have traveled overseas, and at least one has studied beer-making in West Germany.
In the extraordinarily competitive imported beer market in the United States, it would be difficult, under the best of circumstances, for Tsingtao to significantly expand its sales. 
But the situation is complicated by obstacles facing Chinese manufacturers - a domestic credit crunch; a government that confiscates profits; a work force that is unused to international standards and often sees little incentive in diligence, and a relative lack of experience with foreign markets.
And, like other state enterprises in China, the brewery is struggling with an austerity program dictated by the central Government. 
China is now in the second year of a vigorously promoted three-year retrenchment, and a renewed emphasis on boosting exports makes American consumers a particularly important source of foreign exchange earnings for a company like Qingdao.
In addition, there is lingering international outrage at the repression of the democracy movement last June, although there is no formal boycott of Chinese products by American consumers.
The company does not admit to difficulties, however. 
Plant tours for visitors are confined to a sparklingly clean bottling production line set up with machinery imported from Germany, and extracting information is very difficult. 
It says only that its exports in general will show little growth this year.
Qingdao executives, like those at other Chinese companies, are unwilling to say much about anything. 
During a recent interview, officials sat sipping tea and beer and reciting statistics without notes, but they gave little hint of the company's aims or dilemmas.
The company says it has not been deprived of raw materials, although it admits it has had to pay higher prices. 
Executives say that sometimes their raw materials, like barley, are in short supply, and that they face stiff competition for the materials from collective and private enterprises that are sometimes willing to bid high prices. 
While they are granted a portion under quota at the low fixed price, they do not always get it, because the local or even national supply is short. 
This forces the brewery to buy raw materials at higher prices in the market or to use its precious foreign exchange on the international market.
Regardless of its export performance, companies like Qingdao are assuming greater prominence in China these days because the Government is trying to restructure the economy so that growth is driven by the state sector. 
For the last decade, China's economy has surged forward at an annual rate of about 10 percent, and in recent years, the greatest expansion has taken place in a sector composed of small and medium-sized collectives and even private enterprises, something that makes the Government uncomfortable.
The company voices support for the program, but it admits that the tightening of credit has created cash shortages. 
Loans, it says, have been ''limited'' - the company declined to say by how much - and payments for beer deliveries have slowed from local buyers also short of cash.
Nonetheless, the company expects to increase its pre-tax profits this year to the equivalent of $16.2 million, or about 22 percent more than the 1988 figure. 
The company also says it expects production to rise by only 3,000 tons this year, or less than 3 percent.
Since Qingdao is a state-run company, about half of its profits this year will be turned over to the state, a larger proportion than last year, leaving the company with the equivalent of $8.1 million, an increase of only 11 percent in after-tax profits over last year's figure. 
Typically, the better a company does, the larger the share confiscated by the state. 
As with most state enterprises, a large chunk of the brewery's profits is spent on bonuses for workers and other kinds of employee welfare, like housing.
Since the brewery's exports earn foreign exchange, most of which it turns over to the state for local money, it receives Government subsidies that sometimes come in the form of tax breaks. 
While Qingdao is extremely keen on exporting, its profit margin on exports is lower than on domestic sales because, it says, the market is so competitive and the costs are high.
The company exports about 60 percent of the beer it makes. 
The largest market is Hong Kong and Macao, followed by the United States with 10 percent of the company's overall production. 
Tsingtao beer is among the most visible Chinese consumer products sold there.
Imports of all Chinese beer to the United States this year through August have dropped 46 percent from 845,000 cases for the same period last year to 454,500 cases this year, according to statistics provided by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets. 
Volume for the month of July also dropped 77 percent over last year, while in May, the decrease was only 21 percent.
Monarch, Tsingtao's importer, says that high inventories and difficulties transporting the beer from China during the summer helped create the changes. 
It uses sales, rather than shipments of imports, to gauge Tsingtao's popularity. 
According to its statistics, sales of the beer in the United States have increased slightly from 1988 to an expected volume of 1.1 million cases in 1989.
In the United States, Chinese beer is sold mainly in Chinese restaurants of major cities, although it is distributed in many states. 
''It's a curiosity beer that people might order because they're in a Chinese restaurant,'' said Allan Kaplan, a beverage industry analyst at Merrill Lynch. 
''I don't think it's characterized as a high-quality brand beer that people must have because it's a fine beer.''
Bottling Tsingtao beer in China's Qingdao Brewery (NYT/Sheryl WuDunn); graph of Tsingtao sales in the U.S., 1983-1989 (Source: Monarch Import Co.)
