
Once this was an international haven for spies and smugglers and political refugees, as colorful and corrupt as wartime Casablanca. 
But today most of Macao's waterfront sin and swagger have disappeared, leaving a small backwater port whose faith in the future and ambitious plans to become a commercial center have been rocked by the turmoil in China.
Macao, a tiny piece of mainland China appropriated by Portugal 400 years ago, does not return to Chinese control until 1999. 
But citizens of the oldest remaining European settlement in Asia already live in the shadow of Beijing and are careful not to try its patience.
''The people here have freedom -the freedom to fly around in a cage,'' said Nip Kwok Shi, a student leader at the University of East Asia here.
Always circumspect in its dealings with China, today Macao is just plain fearful.
''The people of Macao have lost their confidence,'' conceded Murteira Nabo, Under Secretary for Education, Health and Social Welfare, and the acting Governor of the territory.
Macao, with its narrow streets, city square and stucco houses, has the look and feel of a small Mediterranean town. 
But from their park benches under the banyan trees of the Avenida da Republica residents can look out over the Pearl River and see the rooftops of a Chinese village and watch battered fishing junks chugging back to China at twilight.
 
Retaliation by Beijing Feared
Just 50 minutes away by hydrofoil, in the British colony of Hong Kong, the ruthless military crackdown on students in Beijing galvanized residents politically, and many there are demanding speedier democratic initiatives in the colony and new rights of resettlement in Britain itself as a 1997 return to China draws near.
By contrast, Macao's 500,000 residents, 90 percent of whom are ethnic Chinese, appear to have grown quieter and more cowed. 
Having expressed their passionate support of the student movement in Beijing in rallies drawing up to 100,000 people, many now fear retaliation.
Some who once crossed into China almost daily just to buy cheap bananas and melons or sell appliances and blue jeans will not enter China for any reason. 
''After the demonstrations, there were rumors that if you crossed the border you would be kidnapped and punished,'' Mr. Nabo said. 
''That has not happened, but some people think it is so.''
Still, newspapers here and in Hong Kong have reported that Macao was part of an underground network helping students and dissidents escape from Beijing to Hong Kong and the West. 
''We do know there is a network,'' a Western consular official in Hong Kong said, ''and it makes sense that Macao would play a part.''
Many Macao residents still stroll through the handsome colonial arch that marks the border, most using only coupons they are issued as visas in packages of 100. 
The Chinese guards lounge on wooden chairs, barely glancing at the coupons or the people passing into China, including a young man in jeans and flip-flop sandals pushing a new refrigerator on a dolly and two men in business suits carrying briefcases.
Normally about 18 million trips a year are made into and out of the town of Zhuhai, one of China's special free trade zones. 
Macao officials say border traffic is almost back to normal, but scores of residents insisted recently that it was down by a third or more.
Most of Macao's political diffidence stems from the fact that, outside of the gambling casinos, much of its tiny economy - from wholesale foods to high-rise construction - is dominated by Chinese investment companies. 
And pro-Beijing officials control many of its labor unions and civic and neighborhood associations. 
Porfirio Gomes, a Portuguese lawyer who has lived in Macao for 10 years, said: ''Mention politics here and the locals will ignore you or change the subject. 
Here people cannot afford to be as open as in Hong Kong.''
The Chinese have promised that after 1999 Macao will continue to operate, as Hong Kong, with ''a high degree of autonomy,'' even tacitly approving the casinos. 
But as in Hong Kong, many here prefer to take no chances. 
''Many plan to leave Macao in three or four years,'' Mr. Gomes said. 
''They don't want to meddle in politics because that might mean trouble.''
 
Some Have Passports
While Portugal was described by one Macao businessman as ''a ghost government that does nothing real,'' it has given the 100,000 residents born here before 1981 the protection of citizenship, and they will be able to resettle in Portugal if they wish. 
There are also about 10,000 native Portuguese like Mr. Gomes living here.
When Macao begins this year to draw up its basic law - the constitution that will govern the territory under China - those with Portuguese passports, who make up the educated and professional class of the territory, have no incentive to get involved. 
Still, officials point out that the security of a passport means Macao today is a more stable place than Hong Kong, which is experiencing a brain drain as talented residents seek foreign abodes.
In the hard bright sun, much of Macao looks old and seedy. 
But several boxy new high-rises and a huge new horse racing complex are under construction. 
Plans are under way to make little Macao a regional commercial center. 
Three big projects - an airport, a deep-water container port and a bridge to China - are being considered.
''If China's political situation normalizes soon, we will have no problems,'' Mr. Nabo said. 
''But these projects are vulnerable because they need international financing and investors may be nervous about coming into this area now.''
