
A CHINESE ODYSSEY
The Life and Times of a Chinese Dissident.
By Anne F. Thurston.
440 pp. 
New York:
Charles Scribner's Sons. 
$24.95.
THE Chinese dissident Ni Yuxian first had the chance to answer his Communist Party persecutors when the great investigative reporter Liu Binyan made him a hero of an essay, "A Second Kind of Loyalty."
Now, with Anne F. Thurston's biography, "A Chinese Odyssey," he has yet another opportunity. 
But sometimes those who try to clear their names get themselves into even more hot water by presenting their cases in public. 
Mr. Ni comes across in this book as a thoroughly unpalatable character -- abrasive, unfaithful, opportunistic and arrogant, a man who even as a dissident disappoints us.
What distinguishes Ni Yuxian from most well-known Chinese dissidents is that he is not a member of China's intellectual elite. 
Born in 1945 into a working-class family in a town near Shanghai, he got himself admitted to the army (one of China's sole routes of upward mobility) when he was 16. 
Eventually, the "dissident soldier" managed to attend the Shanghai Maritime Academy.
But he was in constant trouble from early youth. 
As Ms. Thurston explains, he organized fellow soldiers, workers and students against the authorities, wrote angry letters to Mao Zedong and put up written posters defying ultraleftist policies. 
During the Cultural Revolution, he was arrested and detained for printing a pamphlet of sayings from Lenin (even Lenin could be considered counterrevolutionary at the height of the fervor). 
In 1977, he was thrown into a detention center in Shanghai for putting up a poster attacking the Gang of Four. 
He spent two years in fear that he would be executed, until the authorities released him in early 1979.
Mr. Ni, Ms. Thurston tells us, was then reinstated at the Maritime Academy, where he was given work in the propaganda department. 
But he felt discriminated against when party leaders refused to facilitate his efforts to obtain a passport. 
He traveled to Beijing and headed to The People's Daily to join the lines of petitioners seeking to interest Liu Binyan in their cases. 
Finally, a letter caught the journalist's attention. 
In 1984, Mr. Liu went to Shanghai to meet Mr. Ni and investigate further.
At the Maritime Academy, Ms. Thurston says, officials tried to persuade Mr. Liu that Mr. Ni was no antileftist hero during the Cultural Revolution: on the contrary, they said, he was an extremist who attacked teachers and cadres; he had stolen a bicycle; he was an egregious philanderer and had once been accused of rape. 
But Mr. Liu persisted despite his reservations. 
"A Second Kind of Loyalty" appeared in 1985. 
The ensuing furor was one cause of Mr. Liu's expulsion from the Communist Party for a second time.
Fearful of being arrested again, Mr. Ni slipped into an elevator in the United States Consulate in Canton, eventually finding a sympathetic official who helped him obtain a visa. 
He arrived in the United States in 1986, where he became entangled with China Spring, a politically controversial emigre Chinese faction rumored to be funded by Taiwan. 
According to Ms. Thurston, he is now accused by former supporters of having misused funds from his own one-man organization, the Committee for the Promotion of Democracy in China.
GIVEN the questions that have been raised about Ni Yuxian's character and motivations, the reader cannot but wish to know more about Ms. Thurston's doubts concerning Mr. Ni's self-presentation or her own commitment to explore his life. 
For she suggests in her preface that he is "a narcissist" who "often failed in his basic obligations to those closest to him, disappointing, sometimes bitterly so, his wife and his family, his teachers, his loves, and his friends."
With this unimaginatively titled volume, Ms. Thurston, the author of "Enemies of the People," a book about victims of the Cultural Revolution, appears to have wanted to write both an academic biography of Mr. Ni and an impassioned history of the contemporary Chinese democracy movement. 
The fit is an awkward one, in part because Mr. Ni is a peripheral political figure who acted largely alone. 
In Shanghai, he had little connection with events in Beijing, and he was in the United States during the 1989 democracy movement. 
As biography, Ms. Thurston's account is oddly impersonal and distanced, though she spent hundreds of hours talking to Mr. Ni, and though she describes the relationships she developed during the years she spent interviewing his family as deep ones. 
We get only hints of the pain of Mr. Ni's wife or the bitterness of his mistress, even when the two meet in a minibus. 
Mr. Ni himself does not capture us, either as a man of courage or as one of interesting flaws.
Still, the book has gripping moments. 
When Mr. Ni is dismissed from the army in 1964 for his "mistaken, capitalist, and revisionist thought," he stumbles on an opportunity to wipe his slate clean when a lazy official allows him to carry his own file to his new workplace. 
Terrified, he eases it open: "Every transgression he had ever committed was recorded there, many of which had long since faded into the dark recesses of the mind."
By the time Mr. Ni is done burning the damaging evidence, the file is nearly empty.
Ms. Thurston's powerful description of Mr. Ni's experience in a Shanghai detention center in 1977 rivals that of Nien Cheng, who recounted her solitary confinement in the same city in "Life and Death in Shanghai."
Mr. Ni is placed in a 6-by-4-foot cell containing 19 men. 
Threats of execution, torture, disease and false accusations are constant. 
So filthy are conditions that soon "the prisoner's skin is marked by sores, his bottom covered with pimples, and the pimples are filled with blood and with pus, and when the pimples burst open the pus and the blood stick to his bottom like glue, so that when he has to remove his cotton trousers to use the matong the sores pull painfully open and frequently become infected, and every trip to the matong becomes a matter of dread."
Mr. Ni wakes one night to find himself covered with sticky liquid -- the blood of the man next to him, who has slit his wrists.
Ms. Thurston tells us that she was drawn to this story because she wished to write about "those rare cases where individuals manage to stay good" amid totalitarianism. 
But Ni Yuxian seems to have presented far more problematic a hero than either she, or Liu Binyan, had hoped.
