
A fundamental tenet of Buddhism is that the path to salvation runs between the extremes of self-denial and self-indulgence. 
Therein lies a hint of the path by which the Dalai Lama, spiritual and temporal leader of Tibetan Buddhists, eventually hopes to return from exile.
The cause of 54-year-old Tenzin Gyatso, the Dalai Lama, 14th earthly incarnation of Avalokiteshvara, Lord of Compassion, was bolstered yesterday when he was named winner of the 1989 Nobel Peace Prize.
Sixteen months ago, when the Chinese, who have occupied Tibet for 39 years, said they would let him return if he renounced independence, the slight, soft-spoken, seemingly ever-smiling Dalai Lama rejected the offer, but left the door open to compromise.
''I am trying to find some other way, a middle way,'' he said. 
''We need more patience.''
Two months later, he recognized China's right to determine Tibet's foreign policy and even to maintain troops on Tibetan soil, but called for creation of a ''self-governing, democratic political entity'' in association with China.
 
'A Question of Holiness'
With hard-liners holding the upper hand in Beijing, that middle path seems blocked. 
And so for now - in the humble, detached manner that has irritated militant Tibetans and impressed the Nobel Committee -the Dalai Lama may have to continue preaching nonviolence as the only practical path to Tibetan freedom.
''Nonviolence is not a question of holiness,'' he once said. 
''It is a question of reality.''
There are six million Tibetans and a billion Chinese, he pointed out, and China has tens of thousands of troops in Tibet.
Still, practical detachment is no measure of ardor. 
In an interview in August, the Dalai Lama observed that freedom is a human need, adding, ''It may be even more than human.''
''I have a cat,'' he said. 
''People feed this cat. 
They pet this cat. 
They give the cat everything he needs. 
But every time the window is open just a little, he runs away.''
 
The Awaited Sign
The son of peasant parents from the Kokonor region of northeastern Tibet, the future Dalai Lama was born on June 6, 1935 - the day the 13th Dalai Lama died. 
By Mayahana Buddhist tradition, that passing inspires a wide-ranging search by the most venerated monks for the next god-king.
And so, when an array of objects was placed before the 2-year-old and he immediately grabbed one that belonged to the 13th Dalai Lama, it was the awaited sign that the embodiment of Buddha had been reincarnated. 
On Feb. 
22, 1940, in the holy city of Lhasa, he was enthroned and immediately moved into the Potala, a 1,000-room palace overlooking the city.
But there was a prophecy at the time, that the 14th Dalai Lama would one day leave Tibet, to return later, still the Ocean of Wisdom, which is what Dalai Lama literally means.
In 1950, the 12th year of his reign, China invaded and grabbed power from the Dalai Lama. 
Then, after Chinese troops crushed an uprising in 1959, he trekked across the border into India, soon followed by 100,000 other refugees. 
Since then, he has headed a government in exile based in the Himalayan town of Dharmsala.
In exile, the god-king's way of life is ascetic. 
Rising at 2 A.M., he meditates for several hours a day, eats two small meals, putters in his garden, tinkers with machines and studies world issues.
 
Of Wide Learning
Although schooled exclusively by the monks in his childhood, the Dalai Lama has shown a prodigious capacity for learning about the more material aspects of life. 
Among his studies have been mathematics, geography, English and the social sciences.
He is the author of several books on Buddhist theology and practice and has written an autobiography. 
In 1987, he won the Albert Schweitzer Humanitarian Award.
The purpose of his exile, the Dalai Lama insists, is to rally world support for the preservation of Tibetan culture until the day independence is restored. 
''The world community has a responsibility to preserve one of its ancient cultures,'' he said in March. 
Tibetans assert that more than 6,000 of their temples have been destroyed by the Chinese since 1959, their treasures often stolen and sold.
But he also sees his role as promoting world harmony, particularly through the Buddhist notion of self-improvement. 
''Without inner peace, it is impossible to have world peace,'' he told 5,000 people on a visit to St. Patrick's Cathedral in New York in 1979.
''Through compassion, through love, it is possible to become a true human family,'' he said. 
''Through love, we can have true happiness, real disarmament.''
Global though his concerns may be, the Dalai Lama never seems to lose his impish sense of delight. 
Asked once what he missed most about Tibet, he said, ''Yaks.''
