
The publication of a secret cable from Mao to Stalin in 1950 has provided the first documentary evidence of the Chinese leader's intentions in making the risky decision to enter the Korean War and engage American forces in combat.
Answering questions that have haunted scholars for decades, the telegram and other documents that have recently been smuggled to the West lend support to the theory that Mao acted out of fear that an American victory in Korea would threaten China. 
The documents have also convinced historians that Stalin agreed to, and then abruptly canceled, a Chinese request for Soviet air cover during the attack.
"If we allow the United States to occupy all of Korea," Mao wrote in the Oct. 
2, 1950, cable, "Korean revolutionary power will suffer a fundamental defeat and the Americans will run more rampant and have negative effects for the entire Far East."
 
Threat of U.S. 
Bombing
The cable explicitly recognized that the United States might bomb Chinese cities in retaliation for its entry into the war, but asserted that the destruction of the American forces in Korea was a goal worth the risks.
Two weeks after that summary of Chinese strategic thinking was sent to Stalin, Chinese soldiers invaded North Korea, where they surprised the American troops who were spearheading the United Nations military effort to protect the South Korean Government of Syngman Rhee.
The cable is among hundreds of documents that were published in Beijing in 1987 and 1990 as a collection of Mao's 1949-1951 papers. 
Although they were intended only for the eyes of senior Chinese officials and historians, several copies have been smuggled out of China and obtained by scholars in the United States.
 
Stalin's Air Cover
The documents also offer a glimpse at diplomacy between the Communist giants. 
Scholars now assert that after Stalin reneged on air cover and army supplies for the Chinese invasion, originally set for Oct. 
15, Mao froze preparations and reassessed China's position, but decided with his Politburo by Oct. 
13 to go ahead with the advance anyway. 
It began on Oct. 
19.
The invasion, by 260,000 Chinese troops, horrified American commanders in Korea and forced them into the greatest retreat in United States military history. 
The deadlock that followed, after three years of bitter and inconclusive fighting, left the Korean Peninsula divided, as it has remained ever since.
At the time the telegram was sent, Gen. Douglas MacArthur, the commander of United Nations forces in Korea, openly doubted China's willingness to enter Korea with an army that was fatigued from years of its own civil war. 
The Americans also ignored warning signals sent by Beijing as United Nations troops advanced north of the 38th parallel, which had separated the territories under Soviet and American control since the Japanese withdrew from the country in 1945.
Because the Chinese troops moved undetected at first, and then orchestrated successive feints, the size of their military presence was not fully grasped by MacArthur until late November, when the Chinese began unleashing huge nighttime assaults -- sometimes called "human wave" attacks -- on the Americans.
 
'Inside Information'
At the time, some policymakers in Washington believed that the Chinese troops had been sent on orders from the Soviet Union, and that Moscow controlled a monolithic Communist bloc. 
Although historians have since learned of the complex antagonism between Mao and Stalin, no documentary evidence has before been seen about what led Mao and his colleagues to their fateful decision.
"Now we really have inside information about decision-making," said Allen S. Whiting, a professor of political science at the University of Arizona who wrote "China Crosses the Yalu," a 1960 book about China's entry into the war. 
"These papers have been very illuminating."
Mr. Whiting, whose theory that Chinese leaders entered the war out of a feeling of defensive necessity has been borne out in the documents, said he was surprised by the extent to which Mao worried about anti-Government forces within China at the time of the war.
Mao at first hesitated to enter the war, Mr. Whiting said, partly because of what he perceived as a threat of lingering opposition to the Communist Government set up only a year earlier, in October 1949. 
But by late September 1950, Mr. Whiting said, Mao became convinced that a significant American presence in Korea might lead to an American-backed offensive by the Communists' enemy, the Nationalists, who had been expelled from the mainland but still posed a threat from Taiwan.
 
Altered Chinese Papers
Scholars who have studied the documents warned that they should be viewed with the knowledge that in the past, Chinese papers have often been altered to paint political leaders in a favorable or unfavorable light. 
Although the complexity and internal consistency of those documents point to their authenticity, there are other limitations.
"The problem is that they are fragmentary," said Michael Hunt, professor of political science at the University of North Carolina, who is also writing about the documents. 
"This is a cable in a series of exchanges between Mao and Stalin. 
We don't know what's been said so far."
In the Oct. 
2 telegram, Mao refers to much-needed assistance from Moscow. 
Stalin apparently agreed in the following days to provide air cover, but then reversed himself on Oct. 
10.
Prime Minister Zhou Enlai went on a secret trip to Moscow to try to persuade Stalin to support the Chinese attack, but was unsuccessful. 
In a cable to Zhou on Oct. 
13, Mao wrote that China's Politburo had backed the decision to go to war anyway.
Moving with stealth once they crossed the Yalu River border into Korea on Oct. 
19, Chinese troops were not discovered by American intelligence until they clashed briefly with United Nations soldiers on Oct. 
25. By drawing back, Chinese commanders created the illusion that they were retreating to China and deliberately drew the Americans northward before China launched a full attack in the final week of November.
About 53,000 American soldiers were killed in the war. 
The documents do not reveal a total of Chinese deaths in the war, believed to be in the hundreds of thousands. 
The documents also fail to reveal whether Chinese leaders were part of any direct planning for the June 25, 1950, attack by Kim Il Sung that began the war. 
It is likely, scholars say, that Mao knew of Kim's intentions but not of his timing.
Correction
