
SIR PIERS JACOBS, Hong Kong's financial secretary, is out ''beating the drum'' for the bustling market at China's door.
In New York, London and Paris last week, the No. 3 man in the Government worked to counter the the negative impact of June's massacre in Bejing's Tiananmen Square.
But the victory by the hard-liners in Bejing has raised some serious doubts among foreign investors who had been bullish on Hong Kong. 
And this attitude will affect the way the market is viewed until China's intentions are much clearer.
Several international funds are scaling back their exposure in Hong Kong. 
They are now looking at the market, said Gavin Dobson of Murray Johnstone International Ltd., as a trading market in which to see an opportunity and get in and get out quickly. 
The long-term view, for him, has become less attractive.
The stocks these funds are looking at are also different. 
The funds are moving away from companies with large property holdings, which had been popular. 
If there is a problem with China, property values will drop the fastest. 
Even with the recovery since June, prices are 10 percent to 15 percent below where they were, economists say.
''We see quite a lot of potential if developments in China are reasonable,'' said David J. Warren, executive vice president of Rowe, Price, Fleming International in London. 
''But we think there is a danger that hard-line forces allied with the army will consolidate their power, put a wall around China and say the capital road is not for us.''
Mr. Dobson of Murray Johnstone adds: ''With so much money to be made in politically safe countries, I don't see any reason to be overweighted in Hong Kong.''
The Hong Kong market tumbled in wake of the repression of the democracy movement and it stopped short only of its record fall in October 1987. 
But more important, the turmoil brought to the fore new concerns about what will happen to this free-market haven on July 1, 1997, when China takes over. 
The promise to continue the capitalist system for 50 years does not look so good now.
Sir Piers is optimistic, but he has to be - that is the party line. 
''I think we're going through the most difficult time now,'' he said. 
''In 1995, the situation could look good, far more optimistic than 1989 and 1990.''
Sir Piers argues that there are two factors favoring Hong Kong. 
The first is that China needs Honk Kong. 
''China is not going to turn its back on the world,'' he said. 
He and others estimate that there are now about 1.5 million to 3 million Chinese working across the border from Hong Kong in Guangdong Province that are directly or indirectly employed by businesses in Hong Kong. 
A major portion of foreign loans and foreign investment since 1979 has also come from the colony.
The other factor is the resilience of the Chinese in Hong Kong. 
It is assumed that they can bounce back from almost anything, as they did from the crash of 1987, the impact of the Chinese Cultural Revolution in the 1960's and as, Sir Piers says, they are bouncing back now from June 4.
He acknowledges the problems of the worker shortage and the resulting inflation. 
And he says the future does not promise economic growth so strong as in the past.
But, he notes, the stock market, according to the Hang Seng index, has recovered 732.60 points since June 4 and at 2,809.96 on Friday is poised to break through 3,000 by year-end. 
That the market did not close on Monday, June 5, shows the new Securities and Futures Commission is working well. 
And trade between Guangdong and Hong Kong continued during the crisis, he also said.
Sir Piers lists the deals that have been completed since June and the 11 new banking licenses. 
And he says an announcement on a new airport will come this week. 
He will not say what the decision is, but he does not deny that there have already been many stories saying the Government will go ahead. 
But he cannot dismiss the real problem -the problem of confidence that is so much more real now than it was nine months ago. 
''What you need to hold it together is the confidence,'' he said.
The so-called brain drain - the emigration of talented Chinese - is continuing. 
And it is not clear if the new British policy of guaranteeing ''essential'' people the right to move to England will help.
Andrew F. Economos, manager of the Scudder New Asia Fund, is not worried. 
''Before Tiananmen Square, people were overly optimistic about the People's Republic of China,'' he said. 
''Now they are overly bearish.''
But Mr. Dobson of Murray Johnstone and Mr. Warren of Rowe, Price, Fleming are not convinced. 
They have been cutting back their exposure in the stock market since Tiananmen Square and are now below the normal average in Asia.
Mr. Warren says many stock sales to foreigners now are by local Chinese, which he does not take as a good sign. 
And Mr. Dobson worries that even the best intentions, like the orderly transition to Chinese sovereignty, can go awry. 
''What seems to be totally impossible and can't happen,'' he said, ''can happen through sheer pigheadedness.''
