
The world's major economic powers showed they could act together, for one day at least. 
And the world's stock markets showed they too could move in the same direction. 
They went down.
The carnage around the world last week was somewhat obscured in this country by the fact that Wall Street did relatively well. 
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 45.93 points, or 1.4 percent, to 3,285.71. 
Intervention by the world's central banks to support the dollar seemed to ease concerns over American stocks, but did not help shares in the rest of the world, where fears of slow economies combined with a host of local factors, not to mention the possibility of bombs over Baghdad, to produce selloffs.
Even Hong Kong went down, with the Hang Seng index losing 5.8 percent, its worst week since the fall of 1990. 
But it still is up 34 percent in 1992, and remains this year's craze among foreign investors, who now own about half the shares available for trading.
The news in Hong Kong that has justified that kind of performance has been the pending takeover, in 1997, of Hong Kong by China. 
To hear Hong Kong bulls tell it, what really is going to happen is the reverse, as Hong Kong's economic system takes over China, producing a wave of prosperity and a boom in consumer spending. 
"The potential growth of just changing China from an inefficient economy to an efficient one is staggering," says Victoria Goodwin, a Hong Kong watcher for James Capel Inc., the British firm.
Just three years ago, the prospect of a takeover of Hong Kong by the regime that brought the world Tiananmen Square was viewed as a reason to panic. 
But now investors are confident that, however repressive the politics, the movement to economic reform is irreversible. 
And Hong Kong is seen as the way to play China.
So what can go wrong?
A significant part of China's growth comes from its rising trade with this country. 
The American trade deficit with China, at $5.7 billion for the first five months of 1992, is now larger than with any other country except Japan. 
And while the Japanese figure is up 15 percent this year, China's has soared 60 percent.
President Bush has been China's best friend in Washington, staving off Congressional efforts to mess with most-favored-nation trade status, and the House vote to tie trade to human rights issues will not change the situation. 
But what about Bill Clinton?
"It's an issue where Clinton could be protectionist and wear a white hat at the same time," said David Shulman, the chief equity strategist for Salomon Brothers. 
"This could be a very big negative for the Hong Kong market," he said, adding that it also could hurt American companies that buy Chinese exports, ranging from Tyco and Toys "R" Us to Liz Claiborne and the Limited.
Occidentals have a way of applying straight-line forecasting to China, assuming that whatever trend is in place will continue forever. 
It won't, of course. 
Hong Kong stocks may have seen their highs for this year.
