
A mass migration officially estimated at more than 2.5 million Chinese has flooded this city in the last few weeks, responding to the lure of southern China's prosperity.
''I'd heard that it was easy to make money here,'' Long Zaohong, a 30-year-old peasant from neighboring Hunan Province, said as he sat on a bundle of his possessions in front of Canton's railway station. 
Mr. Long arrived Wednesday with four friends, part of a human wave that reached a peak of 100,000 arrivals a day and has since receded to about 6,000 daily.
If the reports are not exaggerated, the flow of people exceeds the entire emigration from the Chinese mainland to Taiwan at the end of China's civil war in 1949. 
[Citing a threat to law and order, the Government in Beijing has ordered local authorities to halt mass migrations of peasants into Canton and other major cities, Reuters reported on Monday.] The authorities acknowledge that the existing figure on Canton's population, officially said to be 3.2 million in 1985, is a considerable underestimate. 
But by any reckoning, the latest influx, if most of the newcomers manage to stay, would place an extraordinary burden on the city.
The mass migration reflects the extent to which the economic revolution of the last decade has divided China into regions of markedly unequal wealth and prospects. 
The green rice paddies of Guangdong Province, in the south, used to be famous as the part of China that people left, on their way to America or Southeast Asia. 
Now, Guangdong is famous throughout China as the promised land to which people dream of moving.
A decade in which Guangdong has pursued wealth more than Communism, in which it has served as an experimental zone for all of China, has made it the richest and most envied spot in the nation. 
The migrants in front of the railway station bear the same dreams that inspired some Chinese a century ago to seek a fortune in Old Gold Mountain, as San Francisco is known in Chinese.
Rumors of the fortunes that could be made in Guangdong apparently spread during the Chinese New Year festival in the first half of February, for that is when the migrants began to arrive. 
At the peak, 100,000 arrived each day from all over the country. 
Guangdong officials frantically alerted their counterparts about the crisis, and spread the word that no jobs were available.
Perhaps more effective was the decision by railroad officials to suspend some services to Canton and to institute three special trains a day to take people back from Canton to their hometowns. 
Many thousands are stranded at railway junctions throughout the country and hope to continue to Canton, but officials think the worst is over for this year.
Nonetheless, thousands of people remain camped with their luggage in front of the Canton train station or living in parks or open spaces in the city.
''It's like an explosion,'' Yang Zhanchu, a manager in Guangdong's labor department, said in an interview. 
''They don't know the facts. 
They just come blindly.''
That such a wave of migrants could occur at all suggests the increasing loss of order and control on the part of the authorities, particularly in southern China. 
It used to be that changing jobs or residence was nearly impossible, but now many people simply ignore the rules and go.
Many of them seem to have come quite casually, planning to have a look around and take a job if they can find it.
Most do not use the Cantonese dialect spoken in Canton, which is also known as Guangzhou, and that makes job searches more difficult.
''I learned some Cantonese on the train here,'' said Yao Shanlong, a 33-year-old craftsman from Zhejiang Province. 
''My wife said, 'You should go and sell some handicrafts.'
''
A similar influx occurred after the Chinese new year in 1988, but this year has been much larger. 
Apparently, the 1 million to 2 million migrant laborers already in Guangdong went home for the new year and spread tales - often exaggerated - of the money to be made in Guangdong.
Some migrants have found jobs, and others have returned home. 
Many others apparently have dispersed throughout the province to continue their search.
Guangdong appears to be giving no warmer a welcome than America gave Chinese immigrants in the last century.
Local people say that thieves and prostitutes are disproportionally from other provinces. 
A lawyer in the southern city of Shenzhen says that local prostitutes include many college graduates from all over China who are earning money to study in the United States.
Guangdong's Governor, Ye Xuanping, warned this week that the migrants may be forcibly repatriated, and as a stark warning, the authorities have set up a display case near the railway station reporting the recent execution of 17 criminals.
But most of the migrants are looking for honorable jobs, and many seem to be giving up hope.
''We had heard that there was lots of work,'' said 21-year-old Zhu Wai, a gawky, wide-eyed peasant from Henan Province who came with four friends. 
''But we've been looking for 10 days now and there is none. 
We're going home.''
