
The Chinese and Soviet Foreign Ministers met today in western China for a hastily called conference on the Persian Gulf crisis, and afterward declared in a joint statement that the world should work for a peaceful solution if at all possible.
While the statement emphasized the Soviet and Chinese view that every effort should be made to avoid war, it did not rule out military intervention. 
Indeed, it could be read as a final warning to Iraq that Moscow and Beijing might endorse the use of force if Baghdad did not change.
The statement suggested that the United Nations Security Council would pass additional measures and said the Soviet Union and China would continue to work to insure the strict implementation of resolutions already passed, which call for an Iraqi withdrawal.
China and the Soviet Union have been the most reluctant of the permanent members of the Security Council to endorse a resolution authorizing the use of military force to drive Iraqi troops from Kuwait. 
While the statement was ambiguous, the two countries appeared to be positioning themselves so that they could, if necessary, declare that there was no longer hope for a peaceful solution and that they had no alternative but to back the use of force.
 
More Than 3 Hours of Talks
The meetings between China's Foreign Minister, Qian Qichen, and his Soviet counterpart, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, were held in the northwestern Chinese city of Urumqi and lasted more than three hours. 
Plans for the meeting were disclosed only on Thursday, suggesting that it was called on very short notice.
"Both sides stand for a political solution to the gulf crisis on the basis of relevant U.N. Security Council resolutons and support the positive efforts of Arab countries to resolve the conflicts," the joint statement said, according to a version released by the official New China News Agency.
"They strongly appeal to Iraq and demand that it withdraw its army from Kuwait unconditionally and immediately," the statement continued. 
"They hold that so far as there is still hope for a peaceful solution, the international community should continue to work to that end and try its best to avoid a war."
The statement was only a little bit different from a formula China has used in the last three weeks. 
But that formula is in itself a step away from China's initial reaction, which emphasized its opposition to force and seemed to offer no exceptions.
 
Political Credit for Support
A Western diplomat said he expected China to vote in favor of the Security Council resolution authorizing military moves against Iraqi troops. 
Mr. Qian is reported to have said that China would not veto such a resolution, and the diplomat said China believed that it would gain additional political credit in Western capitals if it voted for the resolution instead of abstaining.
"The two foreign ministers agreed that the two sides will continue to hold consultations with each other when the United Nations Security Council adopts additional measures, so as to insure that the relevant resolutions adopted previously by the Security Council will be implemented in real earnest," the statement declared. 
"The two sides are willing to work for a solution to the gulf crisis together with the other member states of the Security Council."
Mr. Qian and Mr. Shevardnadze had 90 minutes of private talks, accompanied by only one translator and assistant for each side. 
That meeting was followed by another 90 minutes of consultations in the presence of a larger group of Foreign Ministry officials. 
Mr. Shevardnadze returned to the Soviet Union late this afternoon.
The two foreign ministers also discussed bilateral relations, but the communique gave no details. 
Chinese-Soviet relations have improved dramatically in recent years, but a projected purchase of Soviet military equipment by Beijing has stalled in negotiations in recent months.
The statement said that Mr. Qian and Mr. Shevardnadze favored "further deepening of the good-neighborly and mutually beneficial relations in all the fields between the two countries."
