
The Bush Administration announced today that China's Foreign Minister had been invited for talks in Washington on Friday, in what appears to be compensation to Beijing for not blocking the American-sponsored United Nations resolution authorizing force against Iraq.
The announcement by the State Department that Foreign Minister Qian Qichen will meet in Washington with Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d followed a meeting between Mr. Baker and Mr. Qian in Cairo on Nov. 
6. In those talks, Mr. Baker told Mr. Qian that any assistance Beijing gave for the American policy in the Persian Gulf "will not be forgotten and the meaning of that assistance will not be lost on the domestic audience in the United States," an Administration official said.
Hours after the Chinese Foreign Ministry announced in Beijing this morning that Mr. Qian had been invited to Washington, Chinese diplomats at the United Nations, who had been waivering on whether to support the proposed Security Council resolution authorizing the use of force against Iraq, signaled definitively that they would not oppose it.
[In Beijing, Mr. Qian on Wednesday labeled as "groundless" reports that China would support the resolution, Reuters reported. 
Asked if his remarks meant China would not vote for the resolution, Mr. Qian replied: "I think so."
He stopped short of saying that Beijing would use its veto to stop the resolution.]
While Mr. Baker has met with the Chinese Foreign Minister four times since the June 1989 killings of pro-democracy demonstrators in Tiananmen Square, it was always either at the United Nations or overseas. 
This will be the first time Mr. Qian, who will be in New York for the Security Council meeting, is being invited to Washington, and it seemed to symbolize an end to the 18-month-long official chill in Chinese-American relations that resulted from the Tiananmen Square incident.
The Deputy State Department spokesman, Richard A. Boucher, insisted that the invitation to Mr. Qian did not contravene the sanctions imposed by the Bush Administration on China, because those banned "official exchanges," such as military or commercial delegations from one country visiting another, but not "contacts."
"We've consistently said that we would hold meetings with Chinese officials in pursuit of vital U.S. interests," Mr. Boucher said. 
"While Minister Qian is in Washington we intend to explore ways to strengthen cooperation on global and regional issues and seek understandings on ways to achieve improvement in bilateral relations, including further progress in the area of human rights, that would permit a gradual return to normal high-level exchanges.
"We have vital issues with China right now, in the Persian Gulf and with the progress on Cambodia. 
We have always made the distinction between contacts and exchanges."
Mr. Boucher also noted that the Commerce Department Under Secretary, Michael Farren, has invited China's Deputy Minister of Trade, Gu Yongjiang, to come to Washington on Dec. 
10 and 11 for trade talks.
That visit, Mr. Boucher said, was "consistent with U.S. policy of continuing our commercial relationship with China and maintaining official contacts that serve important U.S. interests."
The Administration's efforts to enlist Beijing's support for its Persian Gulf policy, even at the price of warming relations before Beijing makes any fundamental change in its human rights policies, appears to have general support from Congress, even from among those lawmakers who were the strongest advocates of punishing China for Tiananmen Square.
Representative Stephen J. Solarz, the Brooklyn Democrat who is chairman of the House subcommittee on Asia, said: "We are now confronting in the gulf the most serious crisis since the end of the cold war. 
How this is resolved is going to determine the shape of international relations for decades to come. 
We need the Chinese to support our efforts and if this is a price that had to be paid to secure their support, it is a price worth paying.
"I hope Baker uses the opportunity, though to remind the Chinese that progress on human rights will be indispensable for any continued improvement in relations."
The invitation to the Chinese Foreign Minister is only one of the many apparent ramifications of the Administration's decision to seek a Security Council resolution that will authorize the use of force against Iraq if it does not withdraw its forces from Kuwait by Jan. 
15.
For instance, Representative Lee H. Hamilton, the Indiana Democrat who chairs the House Foreign Affairs subcommittee on Europe and the Middle East, said today that the imposition of this deadline made it incumbent on the Bush Administration to open up a dialogue, either directly or indirectly, with President Saddam Hussein of Iraq to make sure he understood that if he did withdraw from Kuwait he would not be attacked.
 
CHINESE SEEM DELIGHTED
BEIJING, Nov. 
27 (Special to The New York Times) -- A diplomat who met with Foreign Ministry officials today said they appeared delighted that Mr. Qian had been invited to the United States.
In another sign of the importance the Chinese place on the visit, the one-sentence dispatch on the visit by the official New China News Agency was read as one of the lead items on national television news tonight.
Chinese leaders have seen the gulf crisis as an opportunity to divert attention from China's human rights problems and to win greater stature for its role in supporting recent United Nations resolutions against Iraq, said a Chinese official who cited recent confidential documents on the Middle East crisis.
China hopes this new stature will be a prelude to normalization of commercial and official ties to the United States and other Western countries, the official added.
Despite the sanctions imposed by many Western countries after the crackdown, relations with most of them are gradually being restored, with Japan leading the way. 
The World Bank, for example, has resumed lending to China, although not at the levels reached before the crackdown.
