
The United States is ready to seek a United Nations resolution this month authorizing offensive military action against Iraq, provided that final consultations with other members of the Security Council go as anticipated, a senior American official said today.
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d arrived in Brussels tonight to begin an intensive round of country-by-country conferences, involving at least 9 of the Security Council's 15 members. 
He is seeking the backing of a half-dozen small countries, and confirmation that the Soviet Union and China will also cooperate.
The meetings will conclude on Nov. 
24, with a meeting in Bogota with Foreign Minister Luis Jaramillo Correa of Colombia, and the resolution could be introduced at the United Nations two days later.
"We do not know yet whether we will be able or not to go forward, because we don't know for certain that a country might not say no," said the senior American official, who spoke on condition of anonymity. 
"We haven't yet heard from China and the Soviet Union finally."
 
Congress Weighs Special Session
But other Americans involved in the talks said Washington had strong indications that most of the pivotal countries were ready to go along, despite statements made today in New York by a top Gorbachev aide, Yevgeny M. Primakov, who called for a political initiative to persuade President Saddam Hussein of Iraq to give up Kuwait peacefully.
United Nations action would greatly help an operation led by the United States to drive President Saddam Hussein's forces out of Iraq. 
All of Washington's major European allies except Britain and all of its major Arab allies have made Security Council approval a precondition to taking part in such an operation, according to a ranking European Community official.
Leading figures in Congress from both parties have said they would back a special session, in the event of a favorable vote in the Security Council, to debate President Bush's policy in the gulf. 
But it might prove difficult for critics of the policy to vote against it with a United Nations resolution already on the record. 
Congressional leaders decided Wednesday not to call for a special session now but reserved the right to do so later.
The Bush Administration considers it crucial that any resolution be brought to a vote before Nov. 
30, when the United States yields the chairmanship of the Security Council to Yemen. 
That small Arab nation has seldom been an American ally in the Persian Gulf crisis and could tangle a new resolution in parliamentary complexities, the senior official said.
 
'Don't Act Like Cowboys'
Top Administration policy makers have said in the last week that despite Mr. Bush's deployment of about 150,000 fresh troops to Saudi Arabia and the surrounding region, no decision has been made yet to start an offensive. 
No attack is likely, they have said, before January or February at the earliest.
A United Nations resolution, like the troop deployment, would be part of the effort to persuade Mr. Hussein that his only options are retreat or destruction. 
But it, like the troop deployment, runs the risk of frightening the American people, too, and convincing many of them that a war is imminent.
The senior American official said that, following Congressional and other advice, the Administration was making an effort "to not move precipitously, don't act like cowboys, proceed through the United Nations to the extent that you can."
Under Security Council rules, approval of a resolution authorizing the use of military force requires at least nine affirmative votes, and all of the five permanent members -- the United States, the Soviet Union, Britain, France and China -- must either vote yes or abstain.
 
Soviet and Chinese Votes
The Soviet Union and China have given preliminary indications, the senior official said, that they will not block a resolution along the lines the United States seeks, although there has been no sign that Soviet forces would play an active role in an offensive. 
Mr. Baker will try to clarify the Soviet position at a meeting in Paris on Sunday with Eduard A. Shevardnadze, the Soviet Foreign Minister.
Another American official said a definitive statement from China is expected within the next few days. 
Mr. Baker, who met Foreign Minister Qian Qichen in Cairo last week, is said to be confident that the Chinese will not veto the resolution but is not sure they will vote for it rather than abstain.
A Soviet decision to vote yes would probably have a major influence on the Chinese vote.
Britain and France have already signed up, as has Canada. 
Mr. Baker made a hasty trip to Bermuda on Tuesday to win the agreement of Joe Clark, the Canadian Minister of External Affairs.
 
No Overture to Cuba
If the Soviets and the Chinese eventually go along, that would give the United States the votes of all the permanent members and that of Canada, for a total of six. 
On Sunday, Mr. Baker will seek the backing of Finland, which is considered a likely supporter, and of Romania, whose support is thought to be a bit less certain.
That same day, he will also meet Douglas Hurd, the British Foreign Secretary, and Roland Dumas, the French Foreign Minister.
The United States hopes to get commitments of another two to four votes, giving it a total of 9 to 12, at the meeting in Colombia and at Mr. Baker's session in Geneva on Saturday with the Foreign Ministers of three African countries -- the Ivory Coast, Ethiopia and Zaire. 
State Department officials said a substantial margin was important to impress on Mr. Hussein his isolation from almost all of the world's other countries.
The other three members of the Security Council this year -- Cuba, Yemen and Malaysia -- are considered the least likely to support the United States, and Mr. Baker does not plan personally to solicit their backing. 
But the Administration has written off only Cuba, which has voted for only the mildest of the 10 resolutions on the crisis adopted by the Security Council.
Mr. Baker, who will spend Friday in Brussels, will be joined in Paris on Sunday by President Bush. 
Both will be there for the 34-nation summit meeting of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, marking the end of the cold war, which runs from Monday to Wednesday.
After the summit conference, Mr. Bush will head to Saudi Arabia to spend Thanksgiving with American troops there and offshore, and then to Cairo.
 
BUSH PLAN FOR IRAQI ARMS
WASHINGTON, Nov. 
15 (Special to The New York Times) -- President Bush said tonight that an Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait should be followed by international guarantees that would eliminate Iraqi chemical weapons and halt that country's nuclear weapons program.
In an interview on Cable News Network, Mr. Bush stopped short of making the elimination of chemical and nuclear weapons in Iraq a military goal of the United States. 
He said any effort to control those weapons after the current crisis is over would have to be carried out under United Nations auspices.
Mr. Bush went somewhat further than he had been willing to go in saying that in addition to forcing an Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait, the United States was eager to eliminate Mr. Hussein's arsenal.
"Having demonstrated this recklessness," he said, "I don't think the rest of the world would say this is good enough, just what they call the status quo ante, going back to the way things were before the invasion."
Mr. Bush said that even if Iraq withdrew peacefully from Kuwait, "I think you'd see an understandable cry in the reinvigorated United Nations, under the peacekeeping function" to have controls on Iraqi weaponry.
