
China's Foreign Minister, Qian Qichen, suggested today that he would not vote in favor of a United Nations Security Council resolution authorizing the use of force against Iraq.
His comments were ambiguous. 
As a permanent member of the Security Council, China could veto the resolution, although most diplomats believe this is unlikely. 
An abstention by China would diminish the international support that President Bush would like to have before moving to drive Iraqi troops from Kuwait.
It is possible that Mr. Qian's comments were intended to increase his bargaining power in negotiations with the Secretary of State, James A. Baker 3d, before the vote. 
In exchange for supporting the resolution, China would like the United States to drop sanctions and its criticism of Chinese human rights violations.
Mr. Qian tried today to dispel any notion that China had promised the United States that it would vote for a resolution endorsing the use of force if Iraqi troops do not leave Kuwait by Jan. 
15. He said, "Such reports are groundless."
 
'You Will Know After I Vote'
In a brief meeting today with reporters at the airport before flying to New York for the Security Council session, Mr. Qian refused to specify whether China would veto the United Nations resolution or abstain. 
Asked whether he meant that China would not vote for the resolution, he replied, "I think so."
When pressed on whether China would veto the resolution, he replied, "I didn't say so."
Asked if China would abstain, Mr. Qian said, "You will know after I vote."
The United States will have one final chance to lobby Mr. Qian before the vote, as Secretary of State Baker is expected to meet Mr. Qian after his arrival in New York and before the Security Council session, expected on Thursday.
On Tuesday, Bush Administration officials said that Mr. Qian would make an official visit to Washington at the invitation of Mr. Baker. The official visit would symbolize an end to the 18-month-long chill in official relations since the military crackdown in Beijing in June 1989. 
But an Administration spokesman said Mr. Qian's visit would not constitute an "exchange" and would therefore not contravene the Administration's ban on exchanges with senior Chinese officials.
 
Regained Some Legitimacy
Mr. Qian, however, said he saw no difference between contacts and exchanges, and said that his visit would be a "fairly important" event in American-Chinese relations.
A deputy trade minister, Gu Yongjiang, is also scheduled to visit the United States, on Dec. 
10-14, at the invitation of J. Michael Farren, Under Secretary of Commerce for international trade.
China has gradually regained some of its legitimacy in the world after many Western countries scaled down ties in response to the crackdown. 
But China would welcome a return to normal relations with the United States because it would help restore lending and commercial ties as China's economy is in its worst slump in more than a dozen years.
The World Bank has resumed lending to China, but not at the levels that preceded the crackdown. 
Although Iraq is an ally, China has viewed the Gulf crisis with a bit of relief because attention has been diverted away from China's human rights issues.
 
Editors Charged With Sedition
Because of its position on the Security Council, China has been able to assume a significant role in United Nations actions toward Baghdad, and Mr. Qian recently concluded a few weeks of hectic diplomatic activity, visiting several Middle East capitals.
While China's recent role may help boost its profile in the world, there are signs that China is continuing a tough line against dissidents jailed after the crackdown in June last year. 
Two men, Wang Juntao and Chen Ziming, were charged last week with counter-revolutionary sedition and trying to overthrow the Government.
Relatives of the two men, who are well known for their peaceful efforts to promote democracy and economic change in China, were notified of the charges. 
But they were not told when the trial would be held. 
Hundreds or thousands of other people are still in Chinese prisons or labor camps for their role in the democracy movement.
So far, China has voted in favor of the United Nations resolutions against Iraq. 
Initially it emphasized its opposition to the use of force, but in recent weeks there has been a change of emphasis, so that officials now say that so long as there is a glimmer of hope, peace should be pursued. 
Mr. Qian echoed this position again today.
Diplomats have said that China could be positioning itself so that it could eventually announce that there is no longer even a glimmer of hope for a peaceful resolution and that thus it is obliged to endorse a use of force against Baghdad.
