
The Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, will fly to China Friday for talks on the Persian Gulf crisis that are expected to focus on United States efforts to win international support for an attack on Iraqi forces, diplomats said.
Mr. Shevardnadze will meet his Chinese counterpart, Qian Qichen, in the western Chinese city of Urumqi. 
A Soviet Embassy spokesman in Beijing confirmed that Mr. Shevardnadze would visit China Friday. 
He gave no further details.
Of the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Councilwith the power of veto, China has expressed the most reluctance to endorse using force to oust Iraq from Kuwait. 
The others are the United States, the Soviet Union, France and Britain.
"Our position is clear cut," China's foreign ministry spokesman, Li Zhaoxing, told reporters today.
 
No Hurry for Force, China Says
"As long as there is a gleam of hope for a peaceful settlement, unremitting efforts should be continued toward this," he told a news conference.
"This is a very serious and complicated issue, which would have a major impact. 
So it must be handled withgreat care and should not be hurried through."
The danger of war is increasing but so is the push for a peaceful settlement, Mr. Li added.
President Bush said in Paris this week that the United States and the Soviet Union were "on the same wavelength."
But diplomats said there was still doubt over how China would vote on a United Nations resolution.
China has repeatedly denounced Iraq's invasion of Kuwait and called for an unconditional withdrawal. 
But at the same time it has criticized superpower intervention.
A Soviet official in Beijing said it was possible both the Soviet Union andChina would abstain on a use-of-force resolution.
The Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister, Aleksandr M. Belonogov, discussed the Persian Gulf crisis today with Crown Prince Sheikh Hamad Isa bin al-Khalifa of Bahrain, the Gulf News Agency in Bahrain said.
Mr. Belonogov and Vladimir F. Petrovsky, another Deputy Foreign Minister, have been touring Arab nations for President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, urging greater Arab efforts to solve the Gulf conflict peacefully.
President Francois Mitterrand has said France is ready to take part in discussions to draw up a text allowing for eventual recourse to force.
Such a resolution was likely to be adopted within the next three weeks, Mr. Mitterand told a news conference in Paris.
The five permanent members of the 15-nation United Nations security council are China, the Soviet Union, the United States, France and Britain.
