
China's Foreign Minister signaled to Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d today that Beijing would not block the United Nations Security Council from authorizing force against Iraq if diplomacy proved futile, a senior Administration official said.
The Chinese official, Qian Qichen, told Mr. Baker that his country rejected any "partial solutions" to the Persian Gulf crisis and insisted instead on a total Iraqi pullout from Kuwait, the Administration official said.
Mr. Baker and Mr. Qian met for 90 minutes while they were passing through Cairo. 
Earlier in the day, Mr. Baker met with President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt. 
Mr. Mubarak indicated his country's support for a United Nations authorization of force against Iraq if sanctions could not induce the Iraqis to pull out of Kuwait, which they invaded on Aug. 
2.
 
Trying to Galvanize Support
At each stop of his eight-city visit to the Middle East and Europe, Mr. Baker has been trying to galvanize support for a United Nations resolution authorizing force to enhance the credibility of the American military threat against Baghdad.
American officials say such United Nations approval would emphasize to President Saddam Hussein of Iraq that the international coalition arrayed against him would not crumble if there was a resort to force.
The Administration has still not decided when to press for such an authorization or exactly how. 
It apparently wants a blanket authorization that could be invoked when the United States and its allies chose.
Administration officials say they do not want to seek such authorization too soon and then simply wait around and do nothing, because that would undermine their credibility. 
But they do not want to wait indefinitely, because that might keep President Hussein from taking their threat seriously.
Since Sunday, Mr. Baker has won Bahraini, Saudi, Egyptian and Chinese support for some type of resolution. 
His strategy appears to be to try to line up support from Arab nations and China before he visits the Soviet leadership in Moscow beginning on Thursday.
 
Moscow's Critical Role
If Moscow can be brought around to endorse the idea, the Administration officials say, then any French hesitations would probably be overcome.
"If the Soviets come on board, I don't think the French would stand in the way," one official said. 
"The French can't be more Soviet than the Soviets."
At the opening of the Baker-Qian meeting, the Chinese Foreign Minister was asked whether his Government was willing to consider a United Nations resolution authorizing force, and he said: "The U.N. resolutions are intended to increase the pressure on Iraq for a peaceful solution. 
All of the armed forces have two roles to play. 
One is to fight a war, the other is to seek peace."
After the meeting, though, a senior Administration official said the Chinese official made it clear that Beijing would not block any such United Nations effort, which it could do by exercising its veto power as a permanent member of the Security Council. 
It would either abstain or vote in favor.
Considering the reluctance the Chinese have shown in the last few weeks about piling on more sanctions against Iraq, this apparently came as a pleasant surprise to American officials.
Mr. Qian renewed an invitation to Mr. Baker to visit Beijing, but the Secretary was noncommital, officials said.
 
Meeting Alone With Mubarak
As for the Baker-Mubarak meeting, the two men met alone, without even an interpreter, and both declined to speak to reporters about the substance of their discussions.
Margaret D. Tutwiler, the State Department spokeswoman, was asked whether Mr. Baker had won Egyptian approval for the basing of 20 American B-52 bombers on Egyptian territory, as some recent British newspaper reports suggested he would try to do. 
She responded, "No comment."
American officials said the two men agreed that there should be no partial solution to the crisis and that force should not be ruled out. 
They also discussed logistical support for Egyptian forces in Saudi Arabia, officials said, but disclosed no details.
Assistant Secretary of State John H. Kelly will go to Damascus on Wednesday to brief the Syrian leadership on American thinking about the gulf crisis. 
He will also go to Brussels to brief NATO representatives. 
Asked if anyone would go to Israel, American officials traveling with Mr. Baker said there were no such plans.
