
In the most substantial step to improve relations with China since the crackdown on democracy demonstrators around Tiananmen Square, President Bush met here today with the Chinese Foreign Minister, Qian Qichen, and declared that Beijing and Washington had "made common ground in terms of standing up against aggression" by Iraq.
Earlier this month, Chinese officials led the Administration to believe that they would support a United Nations Security Council resolution authorizing the use of force to expel Iraq from Kuwait. 
China abstained when the Security Council approved the resolution Thursday by a vote of 12 to 2.
In his comments today, Mr. Bush said "the Chinese Government knows that we have some differences on this whole broad question of human rights" in China.
Mr. Qian had a working lunch with Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d before meeting the President in the Cabinet Room of the White House for a little more than half an hour.
 
Exchanges Barred in '89
White House aides said the President's meeting represented the highest official contact between China and the United States since June 1989, when hundreds of people were killed in the suppression of the democracy movement. 
Mr. Baker has met Mr. Qian several times in the last year, in Paris, New York and Cairo. 
This was their first meeting in Washington since the repression began last year.
In June 1989, the Administration barred high-level exchanges with China to show its displeasure over the crackdown, in which hundreds of Chinese were killed by troops or crushed by army vehicles.
Merle Goldman, a professor of Chinese history at Boston University and a leading authority of the democracy movement in China, expressed dismay at the White House meeting. 
China's human rights record has not improved, she said. 
Indeed, she reported, in the last week China has filed serious criminal charges against a top student leader, Wang Dan, and against two intellectuals who advised the students on how to organize the democracy demonstrations: Wang Juntao and Chen Ziming.
"This is an opportune time for the Chinese to persecute people like Wang and Chen because the world isn't watching and the U.S. needs their help in the Persian Gulf and doesn't want to antagonize the Chinese Government," Professor Goldman said.
 
The 'Wrong Message'
Representative Nancy Pelosi, Democrat of California, said the White House meeting sent "precisely the wrong message about our concern for human rights in China."
In a letter sent to Mr. Bush on Thursday, she and 18 other members of Congress said, We strongly protest your Administration's resumption of high-level contacts with China in light of the escalating prosecution of democracy advocates and the massive repression that continues in the wake of last year's June 4th massacre."
Some scholars and members of Congress said they saw the Bush-Qian meeting as a reward to China for not vetoing the Security Council resolution. 
The Chinese Foreign Ministry denied on Thursday that there was any link between China's stand on the resolution and Mr. Qian's invitation to visit Washington.
Mr. Bush, a former United States envoy to China who prides himself on having special insight into the world's most populous country, said Beijing's opposition to Iraqi aggression showed how much Washington had in common with "this very important country, China."
At the start of his meeting with Mr. Qian, President Bush was asked by a reporter if he intended to lift sanctions against China. 
"I am always inclined to emphasize the positive," Mr. Bush said. 
"And there are many positive and very important aspects to this relationship, very important, not the least of which is that China and the United States have made common ground in terms of standing up against aggression. 
That is important to every American. 
It is important, I think, to the Chinese side as well."
