
Trying to smooth over tensions in the American-Japanese trade relationship after President Bush's trip to Japan this month, Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa assured Mr. Bush last night that Japan would make good on its promises to import more American products.
The two met shortly after Mr. Bush arrived in New York for a special session today of the United Nations Security Council.
Officials traveling with the President said he and President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia hoped to use a meeting at Camp David tomorrow to agree on a date for Mr. Yeltsin to return to the United States in the spring for the first formal Russian-American summit conference.
A senior Administration official also told reporters that Mr. Bush and Mr. Yeltsin hoped to agree on a "process" for discussing the new arms control proposals made by both countries.
 
A Series of Meetings
Other officials said this process would stop short of setting in motion formal negotiations on the proposals, which envision cuts of more than half in the Russian and American arsenals of long-range nuclear weapons, but could involve exchanging delegations of arms-control technicians to compare the two countries' positions.
Mr. Bush met with Mr. Miyazawa as part of a series of meetings between the American President and other leaders on the eve of the Security Council session.
As they were being photographed in a Waldorf-Astoria suite, Mr. Miyazawa made a point of turning to reporters and declaring, "Let me tell, Mr. President, to all the audience that we will deliver all we promised you."
He added, "There will be no misunderstanding about it."
Since Mr. Bush returned from Japan, there have been questions about whether the Japanese would carry through on promises to buy more American automobiles, auto parts and other products. 
The White House has pointed to those promises as the central achievement of what has been widely viewed as a diplomatically inconclusive and politically damaging trip by the President.
 
To Meet Chinese Leader
A senior Administration official told reporters that Mr. Bush was using his discussions with other leaders in New York to make certain that he still had support in the Security Council for further punitive action against Iraq should it resume its harassment of the United Nations teams that are trying to inspect and destroy its nuclear, poison-gas and germ warfare installations.
But the official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said that there was no sign that such harassment was continuing and that the United States had no plans for further diplomatic or military action against Iraq.
Today Mr. Bush is to meet briefly with Prime Minister Li Peng of China. 
The United States has been trying to cast the meeting as a simple formality to avoid criticism of Mr. Bush's China policy at a time when Congress is considering the President's proposal to renew China's trading privileges.
The Bush Administration has been trying to strike a balance between its desire to appear tough with China on human rights, nonproliferation of military technologies and other issues and Mr. Bush's wish not to offend the Chinese publicly.
The senior official last night echoed Mr. Bush's argument that it is valuable to remain "engaged" with China.
