
THE modern dancer Yung Yung Tsuai has introduced us to her ancestral China and now she will bring us a view of a culture within our own country.
The founder of Yung Yung Tsuai and Dancers, who is also the artistic director of the Byrdcliffe Performing Arts Center in New Rochelle, has participated since last September in the Visiting Artists Program of North Carolina. 
Based at Isothermal Community College, about an hour's drive from Asheville in the Blue Ridge Mountains, she gave school and community lectures, presented modern-dance demonstrations and performances and led workshops.
One product of Ms. Tsuai's experience is a new dance, ''Blue Ridge Blues,'' which Ms. Tsuai and her company will present in its Westchester premiere next Friday and Saturday at 8:30 P.M. at the Emelin Theater in Mamaroneck.
Folk Ballads and Songs
The story depicts the way contemporary life has weakened the Southern American mountain culture, particularly its folk-dance tradition. 
It is danced to folk ballads and songs that will be performed by the husband and wife team of Lynn and Liz Shaw, fiddlers and singers from North Carolina. 
They are producing a folk-music series for the Public Broadcasting System to be broadcast next year.
As a cultural footnote, Christine Morris, a mountain clogger from West Virginia, will perform the traditional clogging steps upon which ''Blue Ridge Blues'' is based. 
(The work will also be presented outdoors, free of charge, at Untermeyer Park in Yonkers on July 8 at 8 P.M.) Other dances to be performed on the Emelin program will include Ms. Tsuai's autobiographical ''Song of the Great Wall''; ''Ekstasis,'' choreographed by Anne Tobias, and ''Trading Places,'' which the North Carolina choreographer Lynne Tanner created with Ms. Tsuai.
 
Where the Tradition Grew
''Blue Ridge Blues'' is a departure from Ms. Tsuai's past work, which has delved into East-West relationships. 
The dancer, a native of Taiwan, said she went south with only a vague idea of what she would find. 
A New York City-area resident for most of the 18 years since she came to this country, on a scholarship from Martha Graham, Ms. Tsuai said she felt it was time to explore. 
''I was looking for inspiration for other sources of creativity,'' she said.
Aware that ''bluegrass and clogging and the mountain-dance tradition came from this area,'' Ms. Tsuai set out at the beginning of her stay to find the region's folk musicians and dancers. 
It was a measure of their declining numbers that she spent three months looking.
''When I first heard I was going to meet a modern dancer from New York, I thought, 'Oh, sure - fine,' '' said Ms. Shaw, who conceded that she had been skeptical about finding anything in common with Ms. Tsuai. Speaking by telephone from North Carolina, she added that she did not know in advance the dancer was Chinese.
''When Yung walked in, carrying a little gift of two jade Buddhas in a glazed box, I thought 'Wow!'
'' said the fiddler, explaining that taking gifts to new acquaintances was a mountain custom as well as a Chinese one. 
It was the beginning of a collaboration that revealed surprising similarities in outlooks.
Ms. Shaw is a fifth-generation fiddler as well as a fifth-generation practitioner of shape-note singing - singing based on an 18th-century musical system in which each note of the scale is assigned a geometric shape. 
(''The harmonies break all laws of music, and have their own distinctive sound,'' Ms. Shaw said.) The shape-note tradition took hold and survived in parts of the South, and Ms. Shaw is determined to keep it alive. 
Ms. Tsuai, she said, understands this goal.
''Her culture respects her ancestors and traditions, and honors that in you that has lived before you,'' said the fiddler, who referred to the two of them as ''the Chinese lady and the mountain girl.''
The Shaws and others became Ms. Tsuai's teachers of mountain music and dance. 
''Here was this Martha Graham scholar asking me questions!'' exclaimed Ms. Shaw. She described Ms. Tsuai as ''unassuming'' and ''a great student.''
Ms. Tsuai stressed that she studied ''traditional'' clogging, as opposed to ''precision'' clogging, which was developed after 1920 and has become more ''commercial.''
She described clogging as ''similar to Chinese folk dance'' in its ''uplifting spirit'' as well as its ''rhythm.''
''The fire inside of you comes out,'' during the dance, Ms. Tsuai said. 
She added that clogging had its origins in Scotland and Ireland, but had also been influenced by the American Indian and black cultures.
Traditional cloggers wear hard soled, high topped shoes, but ''Blue Ridge Blues'' will be danced barefoot. 
The work ''is inspired by clogging but is still a modern-dance form,'' Ms. Tsuai said.
Movements based on such steps as ''ringing the cow's tail,'' where one leg goes around in a circle behind the other, and the ''shuffle'' will be danced to songs like ''Handsome Molly,'' ''Pisca'' (a shape-note song), ''Young Emily,'' ''Soldier's Joy'' and ''Kitchen Girl.''
The stage set has been created by James Byrne, an artist from Central Piedmont College in North Carolina, to show industry encroaching on the mountain way of life. 
Ms. Tsuai's 13-year-old daughter, Tysan, will be among the featured dancers.
While Ms. Tsuai noted that ''there is almost no trace of the Chinese'' in ''Blue Ridge Blues,'' many of her experiences in North Carolina resonated with her background. 
The dancer told of the time she visited a fox hunter, who called to his 80 dogs with a high-pitched song. 
''About 30 dogs showed up,'' Ms. Tsuai said. 
''It stirred up a lot of Chinese fox stories.''
The main impulse for the dance, however, came from her belief in tradition. 
''I feel sad about the cultures dying,'' she said, adding that there had been some progress in reviving the Blue Ridge art forms.
Ms. Shaw said Ms. Tsuai had ''captured the spirit'' of the mountains in her work. 
''This dance of hers has a special message for me,'' she said.
