
Mongolians go to the polls Sunday, in some areas by horse or camel, to vote in sharply contested parliamentary elections that are in part a referendum on the pace of the nation's transition to democracy and a market economy.
The campaign is a triumph of pluralism, with a dozen political parties representing the interests of everyone from shepherds to capitalists. 
But many Mongolians say they have lost the enthusiasm that they felt for the first competitive election, held two years ago in the aftermath of the democratic revolution that ended seven decades of Communist rule.
"I was very excited by democracy when it first arrived," Ninj, a 55-year-old housewife, said as she prepared dinner over a fire in her ger, the traditional white felt tent in which many Mongolians still live. 
"I thought everything would get better, but in fact not much has changed. 
I'm very disappointed."
 
At Issue: Pace of Change
While each party has a different platform, the main issue facing the new Parliament is the pace of democratic change. 
The governing party, the former Communist Party, is privatizing the economy and freeing the press, and seems committed to continue doing so, but an opposition victory would probably accelerate the process.
Ms. Ninj, who like most Mongolians uses one name, said she would vote for the former Communist Party, formally known as the Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party. 
The Party had intended to modernize by dropping the word "Revolutionary" from its name, but in the meantime, a Buddhist monk registered his own party called the Mongolian People's Party and so the former Communists are stuck with their old name.
"I got used to the Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party when I was young," said Ms. Ninj as she sat in her ger, which is 20 feet in diameter and has a smoke hole in the top. 
"And so that's who I'm going to vote for."
The generation gap cuts across this ger, as it does all Mongolia. 
Ms. Ninj's 25-year-old daughter, Ulziy, said she would vote for the newly formed Capitalist Party. 
Ms. Ulziy said she thinks the Capitalist Party will lower tariffs and allow the import of the food and clothing that Mongolia lacks.
Ms. Ulziy has another reason to support the new democratic forces: They helped overturn the Communist policy that banned abortion and all forms of artificial birth control. 
The Communists felt that Mongolia needed more than its 2.1 million inhabitants in a country about three times the size of Texas. 
But Ms. Ulziy already has two children and thinks that is plenty.
The voting here in Mongolia could reverberate across the border into the Inner Mongolia region of China, where nationalism has been rising among ethnic Mongols ever since Mongolia's free elections in 1990. 
The Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party won those elections after it renounced Communism, and China clearly hopes that it will win again on Sunday.
 
Beijing Aids Party Paper
Last year China even intervened in Mongolian politics, donating 500 tons of newsprint to the newspaper published by the Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party. 
China apparently worries that if the former Communists are voted out of power in Mongolia, China's Mongols will be inspired to seek democracy or independence.
The elections will choose the members of a new 76-member Parliament, which will replace the previous, much larger legislature. 
President Punsalmaagiyn Ochirbat, a former Communist who says he has turned a new leaf, is not up for re-election.
The architect of the democratic revolution two years ago, Zorig, is today the chairman of the main opposition coalition. 
Mr. Zorig, who now teaches politics, is 29 years old and reflects the general youthfulness of the campaign. 
Nearly 40 percent of the 300 candidates are 30 years old or under, while only 25 percent are 46 or more.
