
Gong Daifang, a 36-year-old peasant, has made a decision that her ancestors probably would never have understood: her 10-year-old son is enough, and she will not have another child.
Even when local leaders in this brick-and-mud village in Sichuan province offered to allow her to have a second child, she decided that for practical economic reasons she would have only one, instead of seven like her own mother.
''My husband and I thought it over, but we believe that this way we can save money and lead a better life,'' Miss Gong explained. 
China's population, the world's largest at 1.1 billion, is still increasing. 
But there are indications of a revolution in attitudes, with more and more Chinese couples falling in line with the nation's one-child policy as a matter of choice rather than compulsion. 
In view of the changing attitudes, some experts are predicting that China's population will actually decline after peaking in the early 21st century.
Coercion still underlies the one-child policy, and the rationing of the right to become pregnant remains a source of tension and bitterness in many parts of China. 
Many peasants grumble that the policy is not always carried out fairly, or should not be applied to them until they give birth to a son. 
Even Government officials acknowledge that some women are probably still forced to have abortions, and that many parents would like more children than they are allowed.
But there is little doubt that young people's attitudes are changing and that China's family planning campaign has much broader support than it did.
Interviews over the last year with families in scattered parts of China, including rural areas in Sichuan, Hunan and Gansu provinces as well as in Beijing, suggest that many young people today want only one or two children and that the traditional Chinese enthusiasm for large families is rapidly declining.
Deng Daoyun, a 24-year-old peasant who lives in the picturesque Sichuan hamlet of Sancun, 40 miles north of the city of Chengdu, is proud of her 3-year-old son but said she was happy to stop where she was.
''One child is enough. 
More kids, more nuisance,'' she said, mocking the old saying that goes, ''More sons, more joy.''
Liao Zhenxiu, a housewife in Duanjiaba, pointed at her television set and tape recorder as the reasons for not having a second child. 
''If I had lots of kids, how could I afford these things?'' she asked. 
''If you have lots of kids, you're poor.''
 
The Bottom Line Is Money
Two factors underlie the changing preferences. 
The first is the emergence of a quasi-market economy, in which a mother can get a job and earn more money if she has fewer children. 
The second is the institutionalizing of the Chinese Government's system of incentives and penalties that give enormous advantages to those who have just one child.
The incentives vary by region, but often a couple with just one child will get more land, a better house, a reduction in grain taxes and a subsidy amounting to about $15 a year -equivalent to more than a month's income for many poor peasants. 
On the other hand, those who have children without permission must pay fines annually for 10 years, amounting each time to 5 to 10 percent of the parents' income.
The upshot is that there is much less need today to drag women to abortion clinics, because cool calculation of the penalties may well lead them to seek abortions voluntarily.
It is clear that without the system of incentives and penalties, there would be more children. 
In Qinmi in Sichuan, 24-year-old Tan Wenbi cuddled her 20-day-old son and said she would have no other child. 
But asked what would happen if there were no one-child policy, she thought for a moment and then said that if that were the case she would like a girl as well.
In Tongzhi, a village in Hunan, 28-year-old Rong Maozi said she was delighted to have one boy and one girl. 
But if there were no pressure whatever, she said, she would continue to bear children.
''I'd like more kids, boys and girls, but they won't let me,'' she said. 
But her voice held no rancor, suggesting that more than a dozen years of propaganda about family planning have had an effect.
 
Acknowledging the Problem
''The lessons really have sunk in,'' said Aprodicio Laquian, a Filipino who recently completed a five-year assignment in China as country director of the United Nations Fund for Population Activities. 
''If you ask a person on the street if China has a population problem, they'll immediately say 'yes.'
''
Despite the new attitude, however, foreign experts and accounts in China's official press say the family-planning program faces severe problems in meeting its short-term targets. 
Chinese officials acknowledge that it will be extremely difficult to meet their goal of holding the population to 1.2 billion by the turn of the century. 
China now has 1.1 billion people, and the number is growing by more than 15 million a year. 
The principal challenges are these:
* China's baby boomers, born after the famine at the beginning of the 1960's, are now in their reproductive years and will produce an echo of the earlier baby boom.
* Many young Chinese are now so prosperous that they can afford the fines for having a second or third child. 
In some areas these fines are called the ''extra baby fee.''
* The Government no longer has such tight control over the country as it used to.
In Sancun, the family planning official, a woman named Zhuang Dazi, keeps record books of the menstrual cycles of all women in the village, and there has not been an unplanned child in a decade. 
But control mechanisms are disintegrating in some other parts of the country. 
Some women now travel away from their hometowns when they become pregnant, and give birth without ever registering their baby. 
And because of the decline in control, it is also possible for women to bribe doctors to remove their intrauterine devices, or IUD's, the most common form of birth control in China.
 
Misguided Short-Term Goals
China's population goals are at risk partly because the Government relaxed the Draconian controls it began implementing at the end of the 1970's. 
Some foreign diplomats worry that the authorities could institute a new policy including forced abortions and other harsh measures. 
But officials here, recalling the bad publicity China received around the world for such measures, say that will not happen.
''The situation is rather grave,'' said Shen Guoxiang, a spokesman for the State Family Planning Commission. 
''But that doesn't mean we should tighten control over family planning.''
While China will almost certainly miss its target for the turn of the century, that goal is widely regarded as misguided. 
If China had been more successful in carrying out its one-child policy, experts say, a result would have been a rapid aging of the population and social strains as a relatively small number of workers supports an unusually large proportion of retired people. 
Concern about this problem appears to be one reason why China is not implementing the one-child policy as strictly as it used to.
China's continuing population increase has more to do with demographics - half the population is 25 or younger, and so is still producing children or is yet to produce children - than with family size. 
But after this demographic bulge reaches middle age and retirement, the population is expected to contract. 
Accounts in the official Chinese press even muse that the nation's ''ideal'' population is 700 million, implying that this figure could be a longterm goal.
 
A Closer Look at the Statistics
Chinese officials and foreign commentators frequently say that Chinese women still have an average of nearly 2.5 children, despite the one-child policy. 
But this is misleading, Chinese and foreign demographers say. 
While China's total fertility rate is about 2.3, this statistic measures births for all women in their reproductive years, ages 15 to 49. 
Thus the figure includes some women in their 40's who bore three or four children long before family planning controls were introduced.
A more accurate reflection of the present situation is the distribution of births. 
More than half of all births are of first children, and an additional 25 to 30 percent are of second children. 
Only 15 percent of all births are of third children.
The family planning rules that achieved the declines in fertility differ by province, but here in Sichuan, couples can apply to have a second child if the first is sickly or if the parents are disabled and need help. 
In remote areas, couples can normally have two children and occasionally they are allowed three. 
Partly because of this relaxation, there are scarcely any accusations within China these days about forced abortions.
''The Government absolutely doesn't allow forced abortions,'' said Tan Sushun, director of the Sichuan College for Family Planning Professions. 
''When a woman is pregnant outside the plan, we give her education and tell her not to give birth. 
But if she really wants to, she can.''
Miss Tan acknowledged that some village officials do resort to force, against the rules, but villagers interviewed said they did not know of such cases. 
Indeed, force is usually unnecessary, for even the most strong-willed couple will normally wilt and agree to an abortion after months of reprimands and threats from village officials.
