
The 430 or so Soviet citizens who work for the United Nations Secretariat got a welcome New Year's gift this year: Starting Jan. 
1, they are no longer expected to hand over a chunk of their salaries to the Soviet Mission.
The change is one of several introduced by the Soviet Union since President Mikhail S. Gorbachev achieved power there. 
And while Chinese staff members are still forced to give part of their pay to the Chinese Mission, the events of the last year have meant changes not only for United Nations workers from the Soviet Union, but also for their colleagues from Eastern Europe and even for the Chinese.
One change is in the nature of United Nations assignments. 
Most countries believe the United Nations should be staffed by an independent, international civil service loyal only to the principles of the United Nations Charter. 
They encourage their citizens to take lifetime career posts.
During the cold war, Moscow, its East European satellites and China sent workers to the United Nations for limited periods, frequently housing them in diplomatic missions. 
Many were intelligence agents and all were Communist Party loyalists expected to follow government orders at work.
 
Discarding 'Obsolete Approaches'
In some cases they were made to surrender a part of their pay that varied with rank and marital status but was intended to leave them with as much spending money as a diplomat of equivalent rank.
Two years ago, the Soviet Union agreed to allow staff members to live outside the mission compounds in New York and elsewhere and promised to reconsider its policy on personnel.
Last October Deputy Foreign Minister Valentin M. Nikiforov told the General Assembly that Moscow was discarding "obsolete approaches to personnel problems" and that Soviet workers for international organizations would be treated in a manner "fully -- I repeat, fully -- consistent with international norms and standards."
Moscow has said it will now allow those who wish to take career posts. 
But it will continue making some short-term appointments, arguing that these bring expertise and new ideas to the United Nations.
 
New Permanent Contracts
In 1990, 84 Soviet and East European staff members, including 65 Soviet citizens, came to the end of their fixed-term contracts. 
Instead of being replaced by other Soviet citizens or receiving other short-term positions, 16 of the 84, including 9 Soviet citizens, were given permanent or probationary permanent contracts by the United Nations, which informed their governments without asking their permission.
Another 13 got new fixed-term contracts after saying they did not want the permanent jobs the United Nations offered them. 
A further 37, all Soviet citizens, have been given short-term extensions while the United Nations decides whether to offer them permanent posts.
And the United Nations plans to begin awarding permanent posts to competent Chinese employees without consulting Beijing.
