
In a move that is undercutting efforts to stem the spread of arms, Russia is selling missile-guidance technology, rocket engines and other advanced weapons systems to China, its onetime adversary, American officials say.
The exports to Beijing worry Bush Administration officials, who fear that a main reason the Chinese are acquiring the technology is to develop new weapons to sell to the third world.
"Re-export is a big problem," a Pentagon official said. 
"You don't know what the Chinese will do with the stuff once they get the high-tech capabilities."
Russia's arms sales have become a growing worry for Washington even as its military threat has shrunk. 
Moscow's reduction in military spending, combined with a desperate need for hard currency, has led arms factories and military-related institutes to look abroad for orders to survive. 
At the same time, conversion of military industries to civilian production has proved difficult.
 
Enriching Uranium
In addition to weapons, a senior Bush Administration official said, Moscow is selling technology to the Chinese that can be used to enrich uranium. 
Washington is concerned that Beijing will use the technology to improve the design of its nuclear power plants, making them attractive to third-world buyers and further undermining efforts to stop the spread of nuclear arms.
Despite a cooperative relationship with non-Communist Russia, the United States has so far been unable to stop the Russian sales. 
Russian officials seem to have decided that the proceeds from arms and technology sales are worth the risk of irritating American policy makers.
The Administration, for its part, seems to have concluded that supporting reform in Russia is more important than drawing a firm line against weapons sales and threatening a reduction in financial assistance.
 
U.S. Formally Complains
Moscow is proceeding with the sale of diesel submarines to Iran, and a Russian company, Glavkosmos, is selling a rocket booster to India in violation of an agreement restricting technology for ballistic missiles. 
A senior American official said the Administration had complained to Russia and China about the sale, apparently with no effect.
Undermining its leverage, the protests by Washington have come as Western nations, including the United States, have shown little restraint themselves in selling arms. 
The Administration, although it has exhorted governments of other industrial nations to control the spread of destabilizing weapons, appears to have placed emphasis on competing with its allies for arms deals as it faces a faltering economy and a difficult election campaign.
Two such deals -- the sales of combat jets to Saudi Arabia and Taiwan totaling $14.8 billion, announced in September -- exceed the value of American arms sales to all nations of the third world last year. 
Administration officials say that the Russians would be selling weapons to Iran and China regardless of American sales. 
But Russian officials have cited such deals to justify their exports.
The pattern of Moscow's arms sales has changed considerably since the cold war, when it provided billions of dollars in arms to nations like Cuba, Iraq and Libya, often at concessionary terms, in an effort to extend or maintain its military influence.
What the Russians are after is cash, not influence. 
That, plus the defeat of Iraq in the Persian Gulf war, which effectively removed Baghdad as a potential client, has limited the number of prospective customers. 
Two of the major customers are Iran and China.
 
Risky Business
"In absolute figures Russian exports have gone down," an Administration official said, "but the reality is that the customers that still want to buy from them are questionable."
And Richard F. Grimmett, an expert on conventional arms sales at the Congressional Research Service, observed: "The Russian focus is on those countries that are willing to pay cash. 
There is a tremendous focus on Iran. 
China has picked up, too. 
The Chinese cannot get high-technology weapon systems from other suppliers. 
What you have there is a marriage of convenience."
Russia has sold diesel submarines and SU-24 and MIG-29 aircraft to Iran, and is providing spare parts for some of the Iraqi aircraft that were flown to Iran during the gulf war -- planes that the Iranians have said they will not return. 
And along with Czechoslovakia, Russia has sold T-72 tanks to Syria.
 
Better Guidance Systems
American officials say Moscow has sold missile-guidance technology, rocket engines and rocket technology to China. 
China's air-to-air missiles are not well equipped to seek out enemy planes, and Russian technology is expected to enable Beijing to improve them. 
China's surface-to-surface missiles are also considered to have inferior guidance systems and could benefit considerably from Russian exports, American officials said.
Moscow has sold S-300 surface-to-air missiles to China, the officials say. 
The S-300 is a Patriot-like system designed to shoot down planes and missiles.
In addition, Russia has sold 24 SU-27 fighters to China. 
American officials believe that Beijing is buying the planes in hope of acquiring production technology so that future aircraft can be assembled at home. 
Adding to the American concern, there are indications of discussions between Russians and Chinese officials about the joint production in China of tactical missiles and other weapons systems, an Administration official said.
Russia is also selling tanks and tank technology to Beijing.
A further worry, a senior Administration official said, is the sale of advanced Russian dual-use technology, which can be employed to enrich uranium for nuclear power plants. 
The United States is worried that this technology transfer will help China modernize its nuclear power plants and make them more marketable in the third world.
Both Russia and China have recently announced the sale of nuclear power plants to Iran, a transaction that disturbs Washington. 
The Administration believes that even ostensibly peaceful nuclear programs will enhance Teheran's expertise and help it develop nuclear weapons.
 
Yeltsin Lays It Out
The Russians have not been secretive about arms sales. 
In February, President Boris N. Yeltsin said weapons exports would be a cushion for the Russian arms industry as the country tried to make the transition to a civilian economy.
More recently, a Russian Foreign Ministry spokesman justified the sale of three diesel submarines to Iran in blunter terms, saying it was a way of raising cash during a difficult period.
"Russia cannot in principle, taking into account the economic situation in this country, give up the receipts of freely convertible currency through the sales of armaments abroad," the spokesman said.
Whatever the rationale, Moscow has been stepping up sales efforts. 
In August, it held a major air show and used the occasion to promote arms, displaying surface-to-air missiles and self-propelled artillery. 
Signs in Russian and English said customers could buy military aircraft out of existing inventories or purchase specially configured planes off production lines. 
Chinese and North Koreans were among the foreign officials examining the weapons systems.
Norman Friedman, an American military expert, remarked, "They have got one product that is worth buying and they are selling it."
