
The most immediate tangible result promised here today from Mikhail S. Gorbachev's Beijing visit was Peking duck and a dozen other dishes. 
The arrival of 29 Chinese chefs is being expedited because of the summit meeting, according to officials working on the refurbishing of Moscow's dowdy, long-Russified Chinese restaurant.
Aside from that tidbit, Muscovites were stolidly unoptimistic in interviews about any short-run hopes for additional consumer goods from Mr. Gorbachev's mission. 
But they were genuinely relieved about the pledges of greater tranquility on the border after 30 years of hostile relations.
''We're tired of quarreling with the Chinese and I pray to God relations get better,'' said Olga M. Strepikheyeva, a 79-year-old retiree whose main point was that it is a long way from the Beijing talks to the empty shop shelves here.
 
The Fruits of Heroism
''Gorbachev is taken as a hero in China, but here his heroism has brought us nothing in the stores,'' she said. 
Then spotting a group of Chinese tourists passing her on Gertsena Street, the tiny woman smiled cherubically under her spring babushka and gestured to them with mock gaiety, ''Yes, let them see our fabulous life under Mr. Gorbachev.''
Muscovites were outspoken and well informed about the trip, but only within the limits of the official Soviet news reports on the Beijing events. 
These were notably deficient in explaining the mammoth size and libertarian politics of the Chinese demonstrations that disrupted Mr. Gorbachev's itinerary.
''The line people like to say about Gorbachev is that he is the stormy petrel of perestroika,'' said Yuri Bospalko, stressing the troubled seas that bring change. 
Word From the U.S. 
Mr. Bospalko was one of the few Muscovites to have an accurate idea of the street scenes in Beijing because he is deputy chief editor of the American news desk at Tass, the Soviet press agency, and privy to foreign dispatches not circulated here.
''I know about the one million demonstrators because we get Cable News Network on the dish upstairs and our correspondents fax us summaries of the American press,'' he said in the street outside the Tass office, asserting that fuller reports on the demonstrations would be made available in the Soviet press tomorrow. 
''I think Gorbachev is handling things in Beijing about as well as he handles things here in the Central Committee,'' he said admiringly.
Aleksandr G. Davidov, a construction engineer, said it was important to understand that the summit meeting was about ''more serious global problems'' and ''certainly not'' about the Soviet consumer's relentless troubles with scarce goods and the current panic buying of such commodities as matches and salt.
''To tell you the truth I have only a very vague idea about the demonstrations by the Chinese,'' he said when asked, reflecting the fact that Soviet television has been showing fleeting and colorfully serene pictures of the street crowds.
 
'I Am a Capitalist'
It was not until Mr. Gorbachev's televised news conference Wednesday night that viewers could tell from the emphasis of Western correspondents' questions that the Soviet leader was in a delicate position, being identified with the demonstrators' demands for political change.
''I know all about the demonstrations and I praise the students' reason,'' said Arkady P. Zorkin, who said he was a devotee of Western radio news broadcasts here. 
''They should get rid of their bureaucracy just like here.''
A retired veteran, Mr. Zorkin smiled and proclaimed, ''I am a capitalist,'' as he showed a dozen telescopes he has set up so visitors to the Lenin Hills promenade can rent peeks at the Moscow skyline below, an enterprise that was forbidden not too long ago. 
Such entrepreneur's savvy is what Mr. Gorbachev's summit meeting is all about, he said, predicting impressive economic growth from the visit, ''especially in the Far East.''
Farther up the hill wends Friendship Street, no longer an ill-fitting name for the address of the Chinese Embassy compound.
''There were awful incidents, tense relations,'' Valery I. Lukyanenko recalled of the cross-border fistfights and fatal shootings 20 years ago between the two nations' soldiers. 
''But now all around the world things are becoming more normal,'' he said in the sunshine.
''It's a revolutionary visit, a step beyond all the old problems and troubles,'' said Sergei A. Zhdanov, another passer-by outside the embassy.
 
A Time for Fantasies
Downtown at the Peking Restaurant, which saw its last Chinese chef over 30 years ago before the Chinese-Soviet troubles, Galina F. Gorinova, was preparing for a visit to Beijing on Saturday with five other Russians to make final arrangments for the 29 Chinese chefs and assorted restaurant managers who will be moving to Moscow. 
''The summit has expedited everything,'' she said. 
''And these chefs will be participating in the joint venture with a personal stake in the enterprise.''
Out on the street, Yuri Bychkov and Arkady Kostrolitin allowed themselves post-summit fantasies.
''Carpets, towels, sprinting shoes, hats,'' said Mr. Kostrolitin, summarizing what China means to him. 
''Remember those good raincoats in the old days?''
Both were curious about the demonstrations in Beijing. 
''Political freedom?''
Mr. Bychkov said when told what they were about. 
''We're also demanding political freedom,'' he said, smiling. 
''Some of the great Taiwan sound equipment would also be all right.''
