
Karen A. Krusich earns less than the other M.B.A.'s in her class back home, just $200 a month, but in her current job she does get plenty of respect. 
The first time she walked into a classroom here, the students applauded.
"Around here, they're not bitter and know-it-all," she said. 
They tend to be adoring -- and persistent.
"Every time I'm on my bike, people say, 'Hello, can I talk to you in English?'
" Ms. Krusich said with a grimace. 
"Sometimes I love it. 
Sometimes I want to scream."
Thousands of Americans like Ms. Krusich are getting respect, if not a lot of money, teaching English for a year or two at colleges throughout China. 
They leave an indelible mark.
In some cities, people sometimes cannot identify the Mayor but gossip knowledgeably about the foreign teachers. 
And English-speaking officials or academics often reminisce about American professors who taught them how to pronounce the "th" sounds, which are not found in Chinese, or introduced them to ideas of democracy.
 
An Experience to Relish
About 30,000 "foreign experts," including 9,000 or so Americans, work in China. 
Most are teachers, but their ranks also include doctors, crop specialists and even editors who polish English-language translations of Chinese propaganda.
Here in Nanchang, a provincial capital in east-central China, about 30 foreigners teach English in colleges.
"At first the little children here cried when they saw me, and ran away," said Ms. Krusich, a 42-year-old businesswoman from Chicago. 
"But then I started giving them candy, so now they're very friendly."
Now the children call Ms. Krusich "Auntie," and like most Americans she says she relishes the experience in China. 
Still, there seem to be two frequent minefields for foreign experts: romance and politics.
Many of the American teachers are single and in their early 20's, hormones coursing through their arteries in the same way that the veins of Chinese officials pulsate with prudishness and paternalism. 
While foreigners sometimes date and even marry local Chinese without difficulty, officials in some areas try to swat Cupid away.
Such officials tend to feel that when around foreigners, Chinese should never let down their guard, much less their clothes, and they fear infiltration of relative Western casualness about sex as much as Western seriousness about democracy. 
Such officials sometimes act as match-breakers and punish the Chinese involved.
Two years ago, a Chinese woman in Beijing was imprisoned on accusations of prostitution because of her steady relationship with a British boyfriend.
Today's foreign teachers are the latest in a long line of Western adventurers -- at least since the Jesuits of the 16th century -- who have come to China to teach Western ideas, technologies or languages. 
Early in this century, many Christian missionaries taught in schools throughout China, and then too some Chinese were suspicious of "foreign devils," as well as apprehensive about any intimacy.
Another delicate subject is politics. 
During the 1989 Tiananmen democracy movement, many foreign experts took to the streets with their students, but now most teachers and students alike seem to try to avoid direct criticisms of the Government, except in private conversations.
Still, teachers often introduce Western ideas in more subtle ways. 
Yingling Chin, a Chinese-American from Illinois who teaches in Nanchang, said that when he had a choice of two American films to show the class he asked the students to take a vote. 
Initially confused by the idea, the students have now caught on.
"It's an exercise in democracy," Mr. Chin said with a grin.
Salaries for teachers range from $120 to $200 a month. 
Most say they came because they wanted to experience life in an exotic foreign country, or because they wanted to learn more about China in particular.
They normally get rent-free apartments, with a telephone and often a maid. 
The accommodations are palatial by Chinese standards, but Westerners are often put off by the power failures, water shortages, and doormen who make Chinese visitors register their names.
"They tend to complain when they're there and rave when they come back," said Robert M. Pease, the executive director of the Princeton-in-Asia program, which has placed 25 college graduates in China in each of the last two years. 
"I don't think anybody regrets doing it."
 
The Numbers Are Up Again
Mr. Pease said the number of Americans in the China program peaked at 43 in 1988-89, right before the army fired on pro-democracy protesters in Beijing. 
The killings caused a sharp drop in applications, but now the numbers are up again.
Some foreign experts come through university programs like the one Mr. Pease administers. 
Others get in touch with Chinese embassies to volunteer their services, or write to the Foreign Affairs Office in the city or province where they want to work.
Chinese officials go out of their way to make their visitors feel at home. 
Some years ago, a group of American experts in the city of Chengdu were planning a grand Thanksgiving dinner and searched the region for a turkey, with no success. 
To universal delight, the Chinese hosts presented them on Thanksgiving Day with two turkeys, which were consumed with great merriment.
"Finally, someone asked them where they got the turkeys," recalled Jane Kenyon, a New Yorker who was then teaching English in Chengdu and who attended the dinner. 
"They said, 'The zoo.'
"
