
CONSTRUCTION of an $8 million, 109,000-square-foot shopping center begins next month to serve a growing Asian population here.
The project, Asian Square, is scheduled for completion in mid-1992, said Roger Lin, general partner in a group of Chinese businessmen developing it. 
Space is being leased or sold, and so far 30 percent of it has been committed, he said.
The shopping center will have a supermarket as an anchor that will carry specialty foods appealing to Asian tastes. 
It will rise just northeast of Atlanta, in the town of Doraville, home to many of the Asian immigrants moving to the Atlanta area. 
The architect is Gerald Tirella of Atlanta.
The partners are financing the project themselves, said Mr. Lin, a native of Taiwan who has lived in Atlanta for eight years.
Although the Atlanta region has a glut of retail space, Mr. Lin said the partnership was encouraged to pursue the project because of the growing Asian population and the success of a similar shopping center nearby.
About 70,000 Asians -- among them immigrants from Taiwan, Hong Kong, Korea and Vietnam -- live in the Atlanta area. 
The population is expected to jump to about 82,000 by 1995.
The smaller Asian shopping center, China Town, built by another group of Chinese businessmen, is almost fully leased. 
The center, which includes a bank, a newsstand, a video store and several restaurants, attracts large crowds, particularly on weekends.
"There certainly is a need for another Asian shopping center," said James Yeh, president of the Atlanta Taiwanese Chamber of Commerce.
Although Asian Square may struggle initially because of its large size, Mr. Yeh said the project should be successful in the long run. 
The vacancy rate for retail space in Atlanta is 15.7 percent, according to a study by Jamison Research in Atlanta.
Mr. Yeh said Asian businesses are now scattered along a corridor between Doraville and Chamblee, another Atlanta bedroom community northeast of the city. 
Business leaders hope that the shopping centers will concentrate merchants in a Chinatown arrangement of the sort found in other major cities.
Kim Nguyen, a clothing store owner who plans to move to Asian Square, said several Asian businesses had outgrown their current space and were looking for new locations.
"I think it's going to be a good place to have a business," said Mr. Nguyen, a native of Vietnam who has lived in Atlanta for about 10 years.
