
Hussein Jaber, a Palestinian who moved from Jerusalem to Brooklyn 12 years ago, has creatively adapted himself to life in Sunset Park -- one of New York City's most ethnically diverse neighborhoods -- by hanging a sign in his bodega's window, which caters to the area's large Hispanic population, saying "Mexican grocery."
A few blocks to the north, along Eighth Avenue, a thriving community of recent immigrants from China have created New York's newest Chinatown, replete with dim-sum restaurants, Asian groceries and -- merchants uneasily acknowledge -- Chinese and Vietnamese gangs bent on extortion.
This rapidly changing polyglot community is the heart of the new 38th City Council District, created this spring by the city's Redistricting Commission. 
The ethnic mix is just one of the district's complications and contradictions.
The district -- which meanders along the waterfront from the edge of Brooklyn Heights south to Red Hook and Sunset Park and includes a substantial number of Irish-American, Italian-American and black residents -- has torn apart adjacent, traditionally close-knit neighborhoods, incorporating slivers of Park Slope, Cobble Hill, Carroll Gardens, Windsor Terrace and Bay Ridge.
 
'It's Been a Wash'
All of which conspires against the expectation of the city's Redistricting Commission that a Hispanic candidate would be elected from the 38th District. 
A principal goal of redistricting, which will expand the City Council from 35 to 51 members in this fall's election, was to increase minority representation. 
Hispanic leaders have been particularly unhappy with the way district lines were redrawn, asserting that many districts like the 38th, intended as Hispanic, may not be represented by Hispanic Council members.
Although many City Council races have large fields of candidates, the field is particularly large in the 38th District, indicating the level of interest and the degree of jostling to shape the agenda for New York City in the 1990's.
Most of the nine candidates for the Sept. 
12 Democratic Party primary and many district residents complain loudly about how redistricting has divided neighborhoods and pitted one ethnic group against another.
"The redistricting butchered communities," said Robert Acito, the district manager of Community Board 6, which represents the neighborhoods of Red Hook, Carroll Gardens and Cobble Hill, and is now divided between three City Council districts: the 33d, the 38th and the 39th. 
"And if the ideal was to promote minority participation in government, it's been a wash."
Mercedes Pagan, the director of Unidad Latina, a Hispanic community organization in Sunset Park, is also pessimistic that redistricting will bring new power to Puerto Ricans, Dominicans, Mexicans and other Hispanic residents, who are most heavily concentrated between Fourth and Seventh Avenues in Sunset Park.
"Minority people just don't vote," she said, because they feel that city government cares little about them or their neighborhoods.
In District 38, statistics seem to bear her out. 
Of the district's 140,000 residents, 99,000 are of voting age. 
Just over 50 percent are Hispanic, about 30 percent are white, 11 percent black and 7 percent Asian. 
But among registered voters, Hispanic and white residents each account for about 40 percent of the population. 
Only about 10,000 people -- or roughly 10 percent of the electorate -- are expected to vote, most candidates and others in politics say.
The area was originally settled by Irish immigrants in the 1840's, who were followed by waves of Scandinavians and Italians drawn to the thriving waterfront at the turn of the century. 
Since the Depression, waterfront industry has slowly declined, and many descendants of these European immigrants have moved. 
They have been supplanted by Puerto Ricans, Chinese, Palestinians and Latin Americans.
 
As Few as 2,000 Votes
Among the candidates, three are Hispanic, one is black and five are white. 
Most have roots in Sunset Park or Red Hook -- the two intact communities within the district. 
Yet several have either recently moved into the district in order to run, or are creatively calling themselves Sunset Park residents despite their Park Slope or Windsor Terrace addresses.
The race could be close; a candidate may need no more than 2,000 or 3,000 votes to win. 
The favorite, even other candidates acknowledge, is Louis Valentino, an official with local 1814 of the International Longshoremen's Association, which still wields considerable power on the Brooklyn waterfront. 
Other candidates are Joan Griffin McCabe, an education lobbyist from Windsor Park who has been endorsed by much of Brooklyn's Democratic Party establishment, and Ann English, another longtime party figure.
The three Hispanic candidates are Pedro Velazquez, Javier Nieves and Ismael Morces, all involved in community activities. 
Beatrice Byrd, the president of the Brooklyn chapter of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, is the one black candidate. 
The two other white candidates are John Kennedy O'Hara, a lawyer and unsuccessful candidate for the State Assembly, and Martin Krongold, a political newcomer.
Candidates and residents generally agree on the major issues. 
At the top of the list are drugs and crime, the need for affordable housing for the district's largely poor and working-class population and the future of the decaying industrial waterfront.
 
Drugs in Sunset Park
"This community's in bad shape," said Julio Torrez, a barber at the Park Barber Shop on Fifth Avenue near 44th Street in Sunset Park, and one of many Puerto Ricans who settled in the community a generation ago. 
"There are drugs and vandals all over."
Areas like Fourth Avenue between 59th and 61st Streets and Fifth Avenue near 49th Street have become prime areas for drug dealers, attracting suburban buyers coming over the nearby Verrazano Narrows Bridge -- much as Washington Heights' proximity to the George Washington Bridge has made that upper Manhattan neighborhood one of the city's most drug plagued.
"Several years ago, a lot of middle-class suburban kids started coming over the bridge looking for safe neighborhoods like Sunset Park to buy drugs," said Tony Giordano, the president of the Sunset Park Restoration Committee and Mr. Velazquez's campaign manager. 
"The more customers who come, the more suppliers who show up, and the crime rate has soared."
Crime is also an issue in the burgeoning Chinese community near Eighth Avenue. 
In the last five years, tens of thousands of Chinese immigrants have poured into Sunset Park, opening restaurants, groceries and other shops along the avenue and transforming the area into New York's third Chinatown, with Manhattan and Flushing, Queens.
 
Prisons, Garbage and Prostitutes
"This area has been growing so fast because Manhattan's Chinatown is too crowded and unsafe," said Danny Tsoi, the owner of the Ocean Palace restaurant on Eighth Avenue and 55th Street. 
"But the Chinese and Vietnamese gangs see this area as a golden goose" for extorting money from merchants.
There are other festering issues: a Federal prison proposed at Third Avenue and 29th Street, a city garbage-processing plant proposed in Red Hook, noisy truck traffic serving waterfront industries and warehouses, a concentration of prostitutes between the Gowanus Expressway and the waterfront and schools that are overcrowded even by New York City standards, because of the number of large Hispanic families, community residents say.
"It's a shame what they're trying to throw down our throats," said Mr. Velazquez, the president of the United Democrats of Sunset Park, whose redistricting proposal was largely adopted by the city.
But issues like crime and education have become somewhat overshadowed by mudslinging, much of it at the frontrunner.
 
Mudslinging and Lie Detectors
Several candidates have charged that Mr. Valentino is only running to protect waterfront jobs controlled by his union, which has previously been tied to organized crime.
A New York State Commissioner for labor affairs in the 1970's, Mr. Valentino testified at the 1979 trial of Anthony Scotto that he took a $50,000 cash contribution from Mr. Scotto for Mario M. Cuomo's unsuccessful 1977 mayoral campaign. 
Mr. Scotto, a leader of the Brooklyn longshoremen's union, was convicted of racketeering and served three years in prison.
But Mr. Valentino has denied the allegations against him, offering to take a lie-detector test and vowing, "If I fail, I'll buy a suit for every man, woman and child in this district."
 
