
As the struggles and torments of Chinese students in China became increasingly more vivid for New Yorkers over the last month, people in the city have begun exploring ways to defend the lives and views of those who are being hunted, arrested and imprisoned.
In Chinatown, the center of one of the largest Chinese communities in North America, young women have been stopping tourists to ask them to write to their representatives in Congress urging greater sanctions against the Beijing regime. 
At the Public Library on 42d Street, a Chinese graduate engineer sells T-shirts with the slogan ''Democracy or Death'' to raise money to open an office.
At a restaurant near Columbia University, scholars from China meet with American political scientists to discuss how far they should go in lobbying for international ostracism of the Beijing Government. 
And in SoHo, an auction is held of contemporary Chinese art works, with the money to be used to publish a book memorializing the soldiers' brutality.
Identifying a Criminal
And in one of the more dramatic responses, Chinese students in the metropolitan area joined hundreds of others throughout the United States in a campaign to call and overload special police numbers in Beijing that were set up to take details from people seeking to turn in participants in the student demonstrations.
''There were many thousands who called from here,'' said Dr. Fu Xin Wuan, a chemist at the Rockefeller University. 
''Our idea was mostly to tie up the exchanges,'' Dr. Fu said. 
''But some people who called from here said first that they could identify a criminal, and when they were asked who, they said, 'Deng Xiaoping.'
'' Dr. Fu added that other callers tried to talk seriously about democracy and liberty with the people on the other end. 
The campaign ended after a few days.
Dr. Fu was a founder of the Chinese Human Rights Organization, which united several hundred visiting scholars and scientists even before the students in Beijing began to occupy Tiananmen Square. 
After the protests and, more particularly, after the army's attack, the group turned its attention from theoretical to practical goals, forming links with other student groups, Chinese-American organizations and human rights advocates.
''The most important thing we are doing is getting information about what happened and leting the world know about it,'' said Dr. Fu, who conceded that it has been hard to determine facts among the many rumors. 
''We are talking with people who just came from Beijing or tracing reports of names of people who were killed or are arrested. 
We have lists of names. 
A friend will say that somebody is missing. 
We will check with other friends and relatives.''
Another project that the rights group is working on is the publication in seven languages of a book of photographs documenting the killings. 
His group has been working closely with Asia Watch, one of several organizations working out of offices at 485 Fifth Avenue that monitor human rights.
The director of Asia Watch, Sidney Jones, who was in Beijing early in the protest, has been collating the material gathered by several groups, including Dr. Fu's organization, into daily releases, noting such items as the names of those arrested.
One recent release noted that a report from London said that a young student who had been shown facing down a moving tank as the students held the square had been arrested and identified as Wang Weilin, a 19-year-old son of a factory worker.
 
A Positive Tradition
Ms. Jones noted that expressions of anger and indignation in the United States seemed to her to be more muted and confused than those that followed such events as the use of martial law and the suppression of Solidarity in Poland or the overthrow of President Salvador Allende Gossens in Chile.
''One reason people have been slow to react,'' Ms. Jones said, ''is that there never has been a tradition of China-bashing here, as there has been with Soviet-bashing, and the negative side of the Chinese political system has not been demonstrated here. 
Since relations with China were restored, it's been just mutual admiration, and the dark side has not really emerged.''
She also said the muted outcry could be partly explained because the Chinese here had not been a ''high-profile political community like the Poles are in Chicago.''
Finally, she said, the lack of an identifiable figure among the protesters, someone like Lech Walesa, had made it hard to project the conflict in terms that Americans could easily grasp.
Dr. Fu and other Chinese said that they understood that and that they had tried to use the image of the young man and the tank as a symbol of their struggle. 
''We have designed a T-shirt with the picture on one side and the plea for democracy on the other,'' the chemist said. 
''We are selling them on the street for $8 though some people are giving us much more.''
Another fund-raising effort is being planned by Ethan Cohen, whose Art Wave gallery at 52 Greene Street has shown the works of Chinese artists who abandoned and defied socialist realism.
The 28-year-old Mr. Cohen has spent long periods in China, where his father, Jerome Cohen, directed the codification of laws. 
Now, with Chinese artists, he is planning to put on a daylong street fair in SoHo this summer calling attention to the protest.
One artist in the show, Ai Weiwei, recently ended an eight-day hunger strike. 
He is also a member of a recently formed group called Solidarity for China, which, he said, was made up of artists, scientists and professionals from China, Taiwan and Hong Kong.
 
'We Want to Bear Witness'
''We are contacting all human rights group to prepare for a renewed democracy movement,'' he said. 
''We want to bear witness to what really happened and we want to pressure the Chinese Government to be less brutal, because we know that the Chinese Government wants relations with the West and, especially, with the United States.''
As for the appeals for broad economic sanctions, Mr. Ai said the issue was extremely tricky. 
''We need sanctions to show our moral stance, but we cannot push too far.
''China's relationship with the West is what really keeps the hope of democracy alive, and we do not want to encourage anyone to go back to the old ways that existed under Chairman Mao. 
That would be too terrible.''
