
As China's trade surplus with the United States rises sharply, diplomats and business executives say relations between the two countries could worsen because of China's import restrictions, software piracy and other issues.
"The tremendous growth in the trade deficit, and the proliferation of Chinese measures to restrict access to the market for imports, taken together, constitute a meaningful, significant trade problem," Joseph A. Massey, assistant United States trade representative, said at a news conference Friday night after two days of talks with Chinese officials on intellectual-property issues.
 
A Soaring Trade Surplus
China's trials of pro-democracy demonstrators seem to be largely completed, and so the human rights issue is expected to subside after two years in which it was the focal point of contention between the two countries. 
But since the Tiananmen crackdown in 1989, China has enjoyed a soaring trade surplus with the United States.
Kenneth G. Lieberthal, a China scholar at the University of Michigan who is visiting Beijing, said, "There is good reason to be concerned about the potential deterioration in Sino-American relations in the coming months."
While Beijing and Washington have differences on a range of issues, as well as in their ideologies and vision of the emerging international order, most people believe that trade disputes will be crucial in determining relations in coming months.
The United States trade deficit with China reached $10.4 billion in 1990, up from $6.2 billion in 1989. 
The only larger United States deficits are with Japan and Taiwan. 
By some estimates, the deficit with China will soar to more than $15 billion this year.
American imports from China include clothing, toys and shoes, with the value of the footwear more than double the level in 1989, according to figures for the first nine months of 1990. 
But while American imports were increasing sharply, American sales to China dropped sharply, from $5.8 billion in 1989 to $4.8 billion in 1990.
This trade imbalance, coupled with continuing indignation in the United States at the Chinese human rights situation, is expected to lead to another effort on Capitol Hill this year to withdraw China's "most favored nation" trade status. 
The effort failed last year, after the Bush Administration moved to quash it, but some experts say that Congress will try harder this year and that the Administration may devote less energy to the issue.
"Most favored nation" status is the key issue likely to emerge in coming months, executives say, and in the end most think it will be preserved after a fight. 
But they do not rule out the possibility that it will be revoked. 
That could cause a sharp drop in Chinese exports to the United States, retaliation by China and a significant chill between Washington and Beijing.
 
Property Rights at Issue
Another trade issue under negotiation concerns intellectual-property rights, which were the focus of Mr. Massey's talks with the Chinese. 
China has always ignored copyrights, to the point that pirated copies of President Bush's autobiography are available from a number of Chinese publishers.
American software manufacturers are particularly concerned and estimate that pirated software in China may cost them $400 million a year in lost sales. 
Mr. Massey said the piracy problem in China was one of the most serious in the world.
To address the criticism, China has adopted its first copyright law, to take effect in June. 
But its effectiveness will depend on carrying out regulations that have still not been published or completed.
If the United States is dissatisfied with Chinese progress on the issue, the Office of the Trade Representative could initiate an action under section 301 of the Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988. 
After an investigation, that could lead to imposition of retaliatory tariffs against Chinese exports to the United States.
 
'Dumping' Charged
There are also disputes about Chinese garment exports, and allegations that China breached its quotas limiting such exports to the United States. 
China is also accused of "dumping" certain products, at unfairly low prices, in the United States market.
John Frisbie, director of China operations for the United States-China Business Council, said that in the last few months China had begun to increase its imports and that this may help ease trade frictions.
Underlying the disagreements, Washington and Beijing seem to have fundamentally different perspectives on where the fault lies. 
In the United States, China is often viewed as recalcitrant, deceptive and repressive, as well as determined to adopt a mercantilist policy of bolstering exports and curtailing imports.
In China, officials complain that the United States is trying to subvert the Chinese Government and has ignored positive steps Beijing has taken, like the release of many dissidents from prison and the adoption of a copyright law.
