
Over the next month or so, China is expected to have to deal with a new irritant: the Goddess of Democracy, a 225-foot ship that is preparing to broadcast a stream of pro-democracy news and commentaries to the Chinese people.
The ship is expected to reach Taiwan within a few days, and then to take on supplies and a transmitter so that it can begin its broadcasts.
But the project encountered an unexpected obstacle today, according to reports from Taiwan, when Taiwan declared that while the ship could dock now, it would not be allowed to return if it made unauthorized broadcasts to the mainland. 
That could create major problems, for the ship will need to take on supplies, and there are few other ports in the immediate area.
Music, News, Democracy Reports
The ship, a former oceanographic vessel with a French crew of nine and a group of journalists, will broadcast music, news, and reports of last year's democracy movement. 
The project is sponsored by a coalition of 19 publications from around the world, the Federation for Democracy in China.
The coalition, headed by the French news magazine Actuel, estimates that it will cost about $200,000 per month to broadcast from a stationary point in the ocean. 
It is not clear how long the money will last.
The Chinese Government has issued some blistering criticism of the plan to operate the radio ship, and it has refused to rule out the use of force to stop the broadcasts. 
Western diplomats and Chinese themselves say Beijing's response will be an important test of the Government's tactics and an indication of the extent to which it feels constrained by international opinion almost a year after the Tiananmen Square crackdown on the student democracy movement.
Taiwan announced today that an unidentified submarine, presumably Chinese, was spotted near the Goddess of Democracy off the southern tip of Taiwan. 
That raised suspicions that Chinese forces might be considering an attack on the ship. 
Officials in Taipei have pledged to defend the ship if it is attacked near Taiwan, but not if it is raided on the high seas.
 
What China Might Do
If the Chinese Navy were to seize the ship at sea or sink it, the result would almost surely be a new wave of international outrage as well as prolonged isolation for the hard-liners in Beijing.
An attack on the ship would also greatly increase the chance that the United States would revoke most-favored-nation trade status, which gives Chinese exports the same relatively low tariffs that the United States imposes on goods from most other coutries. 
The status is now under review, with a decision from the Bush Administration expected by June 3.
''If they do something stupid like that, it would shatter the relationship,'' a Western diplomat said. 
''I don't think they'll do that.''
The alternative for China is to jam the transmissions of the radio boat, in the same way that it now jams Chinese-language transmissions of Voice of America and the British Broadcasting Corporation. 
But jamming is expensive and not entirely effective, for many Chinese continue to listen to the VOA and BBC broadcasts despite the interference.
 
Immense Aggravation for Beijing
The Goddess of Democracy's planned broadcasts are likely to be an immense aggravation to the Chinese Government. 
Not only will they provide a rival source of information, but they will suggest that the hard-liners' victory has not been complete and that there is an organized opposition. 
So far the exiled democratic movement has not been very visible or effective within China, but that could change if its views can be broadcast into living rooms throughout much of the country.
''We're all waiting for the ship's broadcasts,'' said a university teacher in Beijing. 
''Quite a few people are talking about it.''
Already, the ship has caused a ripple of diplomatic embarrassment in the region. 
Hong Kong's British Government, which is often accused of kowtowing to Beijing, refused to let the ship dock in its harbor, saying that the territory should not become ''a battlefield for other people's political battles.''
Taiwan has said it will let the ship dock, but it is clearly concerned that the incident not interrupt the warming relations with the Chinese mainland.
''We have not and will not be involved in any activities of the democracy ship,'' The Associated Press quoted Taiwan's chief Government spokesman, Shaw Yuming, as saying in Taipei. 
''As a member of the international community, we do not support the ship's unauthorized broadcasts in international waters.''
 
Law on Broadcasting at Sea
The 1982 Law of the Sea Convention permits a country that is the target of unauthorized broadcasts from international waters to ''arrest any person or ship engaged in unauthorized broadcasting.''
While the convention has not yet taken effect, China could argue that the provisions simply reflect existing customary international law.
The United States has taken a similar action. 
In 1987, American officials boarded the Sarah, a pirate radio ship that was operating Radio New York International from the high seas off the East Coast. 
The station was closed, and the operators were taken to the United States and charged with the crime of broadcasting from outside the national territory.
But there were some differences. 
The Sarah was a commercial radio station, and the United States first obtained permission from its flag country, Honduras, before staging the raid. 
The Goddess of Democracy is not a commercial station, and it carries the flag of a Caribbean country, St. Vincent, which would have to be asked whether the Chinese authorities approved of plans to board the vessel.
