
Anticipating that President Bush's decision to renew trade benefits for China this year will ultimately survive any challenge, opponents in Congress have started lining up behind legislation that would impose human rights conditions before similar benefits are granted next year.
The strategy was disclosed at a hearing today of the House Ways and Means Committee's Trade Subcommittee, where members of the international business community warned that should China lose most-favored-nation trading status, China would retaliate by not buying $6 billion of foodstuffs and other products it now purchases from the United States.
The warning had resonance. 
Representative Beryl J. Anthony, Democrat of Arkansas, said he did not want to see ''innocent producers of farm commodities punished'' by retaliation. 
Many farmers in his district grow soybeans.
Others Will Pick Up Business
Representative Frank J. Guarini, Democrat of New Jersey, said that since no other countries were contemplating any kind of trade action against China, ''our allies will simply pick up the business that we lose.''
Noting that the United States gives the preferred status to Iran, Iraq and South Africa, he added that ''to single out China is hypocrisy.''
Representative Robert T. Matsui, a California Democrat, said that a majority of the Chinese in his district ''tell me that by continuing trade there would be a more positive atmosphere.''
The trade status, which China has enjoyed throughout the last decade, provides the lowest available tariffs. 
Many members of Congress want to deny renewal this year because of Beijing's crackdown on dissent.
Resolutions of disapproval of the President's action have been introduced and will probably clear both chambers. 
But legislative analysts say that opponents did not have the two-thirds support in either chamber needed to override an almost certain Presidential veto.
A leader of the opposition, Representative Nancy Pelosi, a California Democrat, acknowledged as much when she predicted that one of the compromise bills ''I believe will have a good deal of support in the Congress.''
She was alluding to legislation proposed by Representative Donald J. Pease, Democrat of Ohio, which postpones the China trade battle until next year.
Under the Pease measure, before such trade status is extended, Beijing will have to show ''significant'' improvement in human rights, end martial law in China and Tibet and suspend support for the Khmer Rouge of Cambodia.
''I view this as a middle course between stopping trade altogether and making harmless and meaningless statements,'' Mr. Pease said at the hearing. 
He said that among his co-sponsors are 6 fellow members, of 36 on the Ways and Means Committee.
 
Extension Suggested
On a parallel track is a bill of Representative Peter J. Kostmayer, Democrat of Pennsylvania, that would grant a six-month extension, again on condition that China improve human rights.
But members of the business community today took exception to this approach. 
''Conditionality creates insurmountable problems in practice,'' said Roger W. Sullivan, president of the United States-China Business Council, representing American multinationals in China.
''The fundamental problem is that the Chinese leadership, by its intransigence over the past year, has made clear that it is unlikely to make fundamental changes in internal policy to accommodate U.S. concerns.''
Last year two-way trade between the United States and China amounted to $18 billion. 
American investment in China, in place and planned, exceeds $4 billion.
If Congress decides to withdraw the trade status, said Howard Lewis 3d, vice president of international affairs at the National Association of Manufacturers, business decision-makers in this country ''will conclude that China is just too risky.''
He added. 
''They may also conclude that other countries in transition are also too risky, from Poland to the Soviet Union to certain Latin American countries.''
