
The White House was not exactly trumpeting it to the world, but Richard M. Nixon was back in the Presidential residence Sunday night, giving his former protege in the world of Chinese-American relations a firsthand report on his trip to China.
Mr. Nixon, who appointed Mr. Bush as the first American representative to Beijing since the Communist revolution in China, gave the President a confidential memorandum on his visit, on his view of Chinese-American relations after the crackdown on dissent and on the prospects for their improvement, Administration officials and associates of the former President said. 
Nixon aides and White House officials declined to make the report public.
But Marlin Fitzwater, the White House spokesman, and other officials suggested that the Bush Administration was not uncomfortable with Mr. Nixon's harsh comments to Chinese officials about the crackdown on dissent in May and June.
Mr. Nixon, who warned the Chinese against sinking into a ''backwater of oppression and stagnation,'' was much sharper in tone than Mr. Bush, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and other senior American officials had been in public.
Mr. Nixon spoke at length about his visit during the two-hour dinner in the White House residential quarters and then took questions from Mr. Bush, his wife, Barbara, Vice President Dan Quayle, Brent Scowcroft, the national security adviser, William H. Webster, the Director of Central Intelligence, and other top officials.
 
Crackdown 'Excessive'
The dinner was not announced in advance and was reported at the White House briefing today only in response to a question about Mr. Nixon's visit. 
During his visit to China, Mr. Nixon told his hosts that ''many in the United States, including many friends of China, believe the crackdown was excessive and unjustified.''
''The events of April through June damaged the respect and confidence which most Americans previously had for the leaders of China,'' he said during a banquet given by President Yang Shangkun in Beijing last Wednesday.
In response to the Chinese crackdown, the Bush Administration suspended sales of weapons and military visits and promised a sympathetic response to Chinese students who wanted to extend their stay in the United States. 
Critics in Congress and elsewhere called the response weak and, over the Administration's objections, both houses of Congress voted by large margins to impose stiffer sanctions. 
The Bush Administration and Mr. Nixon himself have been careful to note that Mr. Nixon was making a personal visit to China last week and was not representing the United States Government or Mr. Bush.
 
'Special Credibility'
But Mr. Bush has made a practice of taking relatively moderate stands on a variety of issues while letting surrogates deliver harsher messages. 
And Administration officials said they were aware that Mr. Nixon's comments carry a special weight, since his visit to China in 1972 paved the way for resumption of American diplomatic relations with that country.
''A tough message takes on special credibility when it comes from an old and very respected friend,'' one official said. 
''You may have noticed that we haven't said much about China since June, but I haven't heard any negative feelings about what Nixon said. 
Generally, my sense is that it was positively received.''
Asked about Mr. Bush's view on what Mr. Nixon told the Chinese, Mr. Fitzwater said: ''You know that the former President had some very direct things to say to the Chinese leadership about American reaction to what happened there. 
But we wouldn't want to embellish on those statements.''
Asked whether Mr. Bush agreed with Mr. Nixon's statements during his trip that China and the United States should put aside their differences and resume normal relations, Mr. Fitzwater replied, ''The President found those views quite interesting and productive but our general policy has not changed.''
Correction
In my previous column, I had President Nixon sending George Bush to China as envoy in 1974; it was President Ford.
An article yesterday about Richard M. Nixon's visit to the White House, where he discussed his recent trip to China, misidentified the President who sent George Bush to Beijing as chief American diplomat. 
It was Gerald R. Ford.
Correction-Date: November 9, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final November 8, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final
