
Poet in Full Rig
While Jean Cocteau thought of himself as a writer, his real talent was social gesture, in which he successfully combined outrageousness and a passion for French pop. 
Here is his induction into the French Academy, from ''Confessions of a Literary Archaeologist'' by Carlton Lake (New Directions).
At that moment a drummer began a deafening roll, the guards drew their sabres, and through the rear entrance filed the not-quite-forty immortals. 
Most of them were wearing dark business suits, but when Cocteau passed by, I saw that he was resplendent in his full Academy regalia: the embroidered green uniform (not actually green but midnight blue, with green facing), cape, cocked hat (all by Lanvin), and sword. 
Cocteau's sword was not the usual academician's sword. 
Executed by Cartier, its hilt bore various symbols relating to Cocteau's life and work. 
I was unable to make out all of them as he passed, but I could see the hand guard, at least - a profile of Oedipus - and, at the top, the ivory lyre, symbol of the poet.
His Bed Too Was a Canvas
Vincent van Gogh could find homely appeal in almost anything - in this case a streetwalker. 
He's quoted in ''Van Gogh: His Life and His Art'' by David Sweetman (Crown).
I hadn't far to look. 
I found a woman, not young, not beautiful, nothing remarkable, if you like, but perhaps you are somewhat curious. 
She was rather tall and strongly built; she did not have a lady's hands like Kee, but the hands of one who works much; but she was not coarse or common, and had nothing very womanly about her. 
She reminded me of some figure by Chardin or Frere, or perhaps Jan Steen. 
Well, what the French call une ouvriere. 
She had had many cares, one could see that, and life had been hard for her, oh, she was not distinguished, nothing extraordinary, nothing unusual. 
. . . Did we spend much money together?
No, for I did not have much, and I said to her, Listen you and I don't need to make ourselves drunk to feel something for each other; just put what I can spare in your pocket.
 
Table Manners of the Avant-Garde
W. H. Auden and Christopher Isherwood went to China during the Sino-Japanese War in 1938. 
This is a not untypical dispatch from them in ''Journey to a War'' (Paragon House).
We kept swapping specially dainty morsels with our neighbours. 
Auden and I developed a private game: it was a point of honour to praise most warmly the dishes you liked least. 
''Delicious,'' Auden murmured, as he munched what was, apparently, a small sponge soaked in glue. 
I replied by devouring, with smiles of exquisite pleasure, an orange which tasted of bitter aloes and contained, in its centre, a large weevil. 
On the whole the food was very nice, but our hosts disparaged it out of courtesy - and of course we had to protest: ''Horrible stuff, this. 
We must apologize. 
. . .''
''No, no!
Not horrible. 
Wonderful!''
''Very poor after your English cookery.''
''English cookery disgusting!
Chinese cookery marvellous!''
 
The Poem as a Put-Up Job
Students have every right to distrust a teacher who reads them his own poems. 
This is from ''Memories and Hallucinations: A Memoir'' by D. M. Thomas (Penguin).
I am frightened by the coincidences that seem to cluster around art - even bad art or non-art. 
Once, I was reading to a class of students a poem I'd written about a nestling. 
Our cat, grey Lucina, had mauled the baby bird before we could interfere. 
The poem was new, I thought it better than it was; it would later go into the wastepaper basket. 
As I was reading the weak verses to my class, my voice full of compassion and vanity, there was a knock on the classroom door. 
One of my colleagues entered, his hands cupped around something tiny. 
''I found this outside,'' he explained, in a troubled voice; ''can anyone suggest what I can do with it?''
My students gasped; he was showing us an injured nestling.
The students thought it was a put-up job. 
As though we'd have conspired to maim a nestling in order to amaze them.
 
Heaven Hangs On
Though contemporary life lends itself more easily to ideas of hell, a surprising number of Americans still believe in heaven. 
This is from ''Heaven: A History'' by Colleen McDannell and Bernhard Lang (Vintage).
In a Gallup Poll published in 1982, 71 per cent of the American public answered ''yes'' to the question: Do you think there is a heaven where people who have led good lives are eternally rewarded?
This figure was only one per cent less than in 1952, and showed a small increase since 1965. 
Those who believed in heaven outnumbered those who believed in reincarnation by more than three to one. 
When the pollsters, however, tried to ascertain what one actually does in heaven, the polls revealed that the images of the modern heaven, in existence since the eighteenth century, had greatly faded. 
While 54 per cent of those polled assumed that they would be in the presence of God or Jesus Christ in heaven or an afterlife, only 19 per cent believed that people would have responsibilities there. 
Less than half assumed that they would see their friends, relatives, or spouses. 
Although one third believed they would grow spiritually, only 18 per cent thought that they would grow intellectually. 
. . . Only 5 per cent of those polled thought that eternity would be boring.
