
China has started a new campaign against ''six evils'' in its latest attempt to restore a glow of revolutionary virtue to the national complexion.
The evils are prostitution, pornography, the sale of women and children, narcotics, gambling, and profiteering from superstition.
The official People's Daily and other newspapers have had front-page articles and editorials about the dangers of the ''six evils'' and the risk that they will subvert socialism and national stabilityI. 
A national conference in Beijing on the crusade has called for local authorities to place high priority on the campaign. 
What's Behind the Crusade?
''The duty of the Communists is to fight every form of evil and wipe it from the face of the earth,'' People's Daily declared in a front page editorial recently, adding: ''These are the vicious ways in which subversives and saboteurs will corrupt our party, our cadres and our socialist system.''
Fathoming the real reasons for China's campaigns is never easy, and most political analysts say there are at least two possible explanations for what is happening.
One possibility is that the campaign reflects an escalation of the crackdown on Western influences, a tightening of control on society.
The alternative explanation, they say, is precisely the opposite: that some leaders are trying to take the sting out of the political crackdown by changing it into a law-and-order campaign.
In any case, the latest crackdown captures the political spirit of the moment. 
China's history in the last four decades is punctuated by number-based slogans, which are as important to officials here as acronyms are to their Western counterparts.
Communist China has been a blur of them: the four modernizations; the five things to heed and the four beautifuls; the five black categories of people; and many others. 
The Eighties have been relatively free of such slogans, aside from folk ditties such as ''the three biggies'' - color television, radio-tape player, and refrigerator -that people want to acquire.
 
'4 Haves' or '5 Great Loves'
Now, numbers are again in the air. 
In their political classes, for example, some Beijing residents are being told to cultivate the ''four haves'': idealism, morality, culture and discipline. 
Others are diligently memorizing what are supposed to be their ''five great loves'': the motherland, the Communist Party, the socialist system, the capital city and their work.
Study sessions are likely to take up the ''six evils'' very soon.
The party's standard slogan also seems to have undergone revision during the central committee meeting last week. 
Before it was ''rectification of the economic environment''; now it is ''retrenchment of the economic environment and deepening of the reforms.''
What does this mean?
There is no explanation in the speeches or editorials that use the new formula.
The mystery is doubly confusing because some Chinese intellectuals regard ''retrenchment'' and ''reform'' as opposites. 
Embracing both seems to them nonsensical.
On the other hand, supporters of retrenchment deny that they are ''anti-reform. 
''Thus the revision of the slogan is seen by some as a compromise that serves both factions. 
It gives new hope to those who yearn for greater change, while it clothes the retrenchment in a blanket of respectability by suggesting that it is ''pro-reform.''
So far there has been little evidence that the extra lip service to ''deepening of the reforms'' will have any practical significance.
 
Lying, and Enjoying It
''I know every trick in the book,'' says a character in a 1980 short story by the Chinese writer Shen Rong. 
''Skirting issues, fancy intellectual footwork, turning issues on their head, spinning a yarn; if all else fails I'll just start admitting all ideological errors I can think of. 
By now we're all used to lying.''
Miss Shen's short story concerns a self-criticism session by a group of intellectuals and their wrenching discontent with the process. 
Now her story has sprung to life throughout the nation, as citizens meet in compulsory sessions to express their feelings and show support for the party.
''We sit around the room, and the leader asks people to comment,'' said a middle-aged intellectual. 
''At first the group is silent for a few minutes, and then the leader calls on someone. 
The leader doesn't want to, but he has pressure from his superiors. 
And then the lying begins.''
 
Bubbling With Sorrow
One common approach, for those who despise the sessions, is to go off on tangents. 
For example, some people bubble with sorrow at the deaths of young soldiers during the crackdown, without expressing their view on the protests themselves.
Another strategy is to make a game of it, and to flagellate oneself so enthusiastically that it becomes a joke. 
Indeed, where the leader of the session is thought to be only going through the motions, then the self-criticism sometimes becomes so exaggerated that the audience begins to titter.
''We all learn to lie,'' said one young businessman, ''and to enjoy it.''
