
As China fills out its official version of the crushed democracy movement, a single villain has emerged who is held responsible for the student turmoil and virtually all of the country's economic woes: Zhao Ziyang, the ousted chief of the Communist Party.
Last week, virtually every newspaper here was jammed with front-page attacks on Mr. Zhao, who has not been seen since late May, when he had a tearful encounter with the students in Tiananmen Square. 
By week's end, China's leadership had openly joined in the fray, rarely missing an opportunity to heap more blame on the purged party leader.
Not surprisingly, then, the chief topic of conversation in Beijing these days -second only to the constant speculation over whether Deng Xiaoping, the country's foremost leader, is alive and active - is Mr. Zhao's fate.
Many believe that the torrent of articles and speeches is simply setting the stage to put Mr. Zhao on trial, in what would be the first formal charges against a top party leader since the Gang of Four - Mao's widow, Jiang Qing, and three radical colleagues -were tried in 1980 for their roles in the Cultural Revolution.
But many others say they believe the Government will stop short of formal charges because Mr. Deng, too, is closely tied to economic changes that Mr. Zhao undertook, changes that are now being scaled back.
''To put Zhao on trial is to put on trial the whole past decade of economic reforms,'' a Western diplomat said the other day. 
''That may be a little more than they bargained for.''
Indeed, the attacks are coming just as China is greatly scaling back a number of changes that occurred under Mr. Zhao. Many private businesses he helped allow to flourish are being disbanded or consolidated by the Government, or being labeled tax cheats.
The latest attack came on Friday as Qiao Shi, a member of the Communist Party leadership, said at a ceremony to mark the beginning of the autumn term of schools and colleges that ''international hostile forces have never given up their attempt to subvert the socialist system.''
 
Bourgeois Connivance
''For a period, Zhao Ziyang's connivance with and weak attitude toward bourgeois liberalization resulted in a surge of ideological attacks against socialism and the leadership of the Communist Party.''
The attacks have not gone so far as to roll back all that Mr. Zhao stood for, especially the encouragement of joint ventures and technology transfer from foreign companies.
Instead, they have consistently held him accountable for diluting the power of the party by turning more economic decisions over to local governments and private enterprises, and for suggesting that Western economies provided a good model for China to emulate in some respects.
In fact, in his public speeches, Mr. Zhao rarely sounded themes too far out of line with those of other leaders, especially as the economy expanded at a rapid pace. 
But examining his speeches in retrospect, the official Chinese press has concluded that the party leadership had a counterrevolutionary in its midst.
''Zhao Ziyang often told some people that capitalism was actually better and our socialist system had problems,'' Workers' Daily said the other day. 
Many articles have reconstructed Mr. Zhao's role in the days leading up to the student occupation of Tiananmen Square, accusing him of violating the party's constitution by advocating reduced economic interference, and of deliberately ''escalating the turmoil.''
The People's Daily said Thursday that Mr. Zhao ''betrayed us all'' when he addressed student demonstrators sympathetically on May 4, a month before the crackdown, and said his speech played the role of ''supporting the enemy, confusing the masses, suppressing the cadres and splitting the Central Committee.''
In an article on Friday, by indirection, Mr. Zhao was blamed for virtually everything that is wrong today with the Chinese economy: rampant speculation, the shortages of raw materials, tax evasion.
