
A Chinese official was expounding the other day on the glories of the present hard-line Government as his two lieutenants sat beside him, nodding solemnly as if they agreed with everything he said.
But when the official stepped out for a moment, the assistants began to mock the Communist Party, until the boss returned. 
Then they resumed their posture of approval as the official declared that in his experience virtually everyone supported the Government.
Many Chinese say they believe that their highest leaders, like the official in that meeting, delude themselves about public opinion. 
They suggest that because no one dares to disagree with a superior, the propaganda spun by the Government ends up deceiving the leaders themselves.
"It's a major problem for China," said the daughter of a senior party official. 
"The leaders can get good statistics on material conditions, but it's very difficult for them to find out what people are thinking."
The fundamental problem is common to authoritarian governments: when expression of disagreement risks punishment as heresy, how can the Government find out what is going on?
 
Problem for Emperors, Too
China's emperors faced similar difficulties in cutting through the pomp and flattery to discover what was really happening outside the palace walls. 
The Ming Dynasty emperors employed young agents to go out in the provinces and act as their eyes and ears, and some emperors even disguised themselves and went about on their own fact-finding trips.
Since the military crackdown in June 1989, China's top leaders have emphasized the need to "go to the grass roots," and one Politburo member or another is constantly shown on television, gravely walking through a factory or strolling through a village in a remote province.
These visits are always choreographed by local officials, who accompany the leaders and insure that everything follows the script.
 
'Sound and Light Show'
"They never see anything at the grass roots," said an official in a provincial government that has seen its share of visits by national leaders. 
"It's very difficult for them to know what's really going on."
The "sound and light show" put on by provincial governors for a leader's visit do not necessarily suggest that everything is working perfectly. 
The current battle between the central Government and the provinces over taxes, for example, may lead local officials to point to financial difficulties to back their arguments for more money.
"The governors may exaggerate the problems, to try to squeeze more money out of the center," said an economic official in Beijing. 
"They may want to show how bad things are."
 
A Disastrous Strategy
Still, local officials are unlikely to acknowledge problems like political unrest, widespread evasions of family planning restrictions or local protectionist barriers that violate central Government policy. 
And even if a top official strayed from his escorts and asked ordinary people about their views, it is unlikely that people would respond.
Authoritarian traditions lasting thousands of years have taught most Chinese that outspokenness is a disastrous strategy. 
In the West a squeaky wheel may get the most oil; in China, a squeaky wheel is normally hammered until it stops squeaking.
"Those trips are just for show, because the leaders are only allowed to see the good things," acknowledged a relative of a senior Politburo member. 
But the relative added that the top leaders find other ways to stay well informed, and in particular that they use their staffs to keep a finger on the popular pulse and report to them in confidential memorandums.
A catastrophic instance in which China's leaders misled themselves came after Mao Zedong's attempt beginning in 1958 to try to catch up with the industrialized world. 
Responding to absurdly high production targets, local officials falsely reported that agricultural production had doubled, when in fact it had dropped. 
This obscured the beginnings of a famine in which about 26 million people died.
 
Videotapes Help Fill Need
The leadership has tried to develop several channels for obtaining accurate information from the provinces, including the establishment of a series of classified information summaries that appear each day and carry articles too sensitive to appear in the daily press. 
Top leaders are also said to receive updated summaries by fax, as well as a half-hour videotape each morning -- including film clips lifted from Cable News Network and other satellite transmissions -- to keep them up to date on news that is deemed inappropriate for television broadcasts.
Senior officials also rely on classified statistical summaries to follow economic and social conditions. 
Chinese businessmen say that Li Ruihuan, a Politburo member who used to be head of the city of Tianjin, even designed a system so that he could tap into his office computer and find the latest figures for Tianjin crime rates and other unpublished information.
But the public mood is not so easy to assess. 
One of the classified information summaries recently told of a gang of hoodlums who cut off the fingers of their victims -- an item that would never appear in the newspapers -- but these summaries would never report the mockery that intellectuals express for Prime Minister Li Peng.
In the absence of any reliable channel for information about the public mood, the children of the top leaders have sometimes taken on the job of advising their parents about popular opinion.
