
An immigration judge here has brought to light a conflict inside the Justice Department by granting political asylum to a man who asserted that he fled China after his wife was forced to have an abortion.
A branch of the department, the Immigration and Naturalization Service, is appealing the ruling, even though the department has declared that asylum may be given to Chinese refugees who refuse to cooperate with the Chinese Government's policy that each family should have no more than one child.
Immigration officials here say that resisting the Chinese family planning policies does not amount to ''political dissent'' and therefore is not legal ground for asylum.
But in a memorandum last August to the immigration commissioner, Alan C. Nelson, former Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d said that the defiance of Chinese policy might be considered an act of political resistance ''sufficient to establish refugee status.''
Fear of Persecution
Mr. Meese's memorandum said a finding of ''a well-founded fear of persecution,'' as required for political asylum status under the 1980 Refugee Act, was ''reasonable'' when considering petitions of Chinese nationals who have refused to end a pregnancy or undergo sterilization.
At the same time, Mr. Meese personally granted asylum to three Chinese couples who had been temporarily living legally in the United States and were afraid of returning to China because of the one-child policy.
Steven W. Mosher, a China scholar on a fellowship at the Heritage Foundation, the conservative Washington research group where Mr. Meese is now a fellow, said immigration officials in Washington ''never liked the former Attorney General's decision'' and thus never told immigration department staff members about it.
''It has become known only through immigration attorneys' circulation of it,'' Mr. Mosher said. 
A senior Justice Department official confirmed that the immigration service never put the policy into effect.
Duke Austin, a spokesman for the Immigration Service, said that all the service's district directors were made aware of Mr. Meese's memorandum at a conference held in San Diego last September, but that ''no corresponding additional instructions were put out.''
He said the district directors' understanding of the guidelines ''may not be complete.''
Jules E. Coven, an immigration lawyer in New York City, said his office was representing at least a dozen Chinese seeking asylum as resisters of the birth control policy. 
He said eight of the applicants had already been denied, including a man who said that he fled China the day before he was to have been sterilized against his will and a woman who contended that she had been forced to undergo an abortion near the end of her pregnancy.
 
Position of Immigration Agency
''Immigration is taking the position that this is a social policy that does not persecute any particular individual,'' Mr. Coven said. 
''We think it's wrong.''
In a March 21 memorandum opposing the appeal in the sterilization case, a lawyer in the New York office of the immigration service argued that China had established the family-planning policy to control population growth and had applied it to the nation as a whole. 
''Those persons subjected to the sterilization operations are not being singled out,'' the memorandum said. 
''Every family which has more than one child is being sought by the Chinese officials to submit to a sterilization operation.''
Dan P. Danilov, a Seattle immigration lawyer, said he had three similar cases in which Chinese women entered the United States illegally and were all denied asylum before the issuance of Mr. Meese's memorandum last August. 
He is now appealing those cases on the basis of the memorandum.
Mr. Danilov said the experience of immigration lawyers working on such cases was that local immigration judges would not grant asylum unless the petitioner could show that if they returned to China, ''a guard is waiting for you with a gun or a rope.''
Mr. Mosher has been writing and working in favor of people seeking asylum because of the one-child policy, which he called a ''human rights issue.''
He became nationally known when he was expelled from the anthropology department at Stanford University just before earning a doctorate after the Chinese Government accused him of trying to smuggle out ancient gold coins and trying to bribe Chinese officials. 
He has denied the charges and has filed a lawsuit against Stanford. 
He is also working on his third book on China while on a one-year fellowship at the Heritage Foundation.
In the San Francisco case, the first in which an immigration judge granted asylum to a resister of the Chinese family-planning rules, Lee Yuan Pan, a native of Fuzhou, was arrested at the San Francisco airport last October traveling on a forged passport. 
The ruling, which was issued Feb. 
2 by the immigration judge, Bernard Hornbach, came after Mr. Lee testified that he and his wife had been subjected to a heavy tax and had their electricity cut off after the birth of their second child. 
Mr. Lee said that he had also lost his work assignment as a carpenter.
 
'A Human Rights Case'
Jon Wu, the San Francisco lawyer who represents Mr. Lee as a volunteer for the American Immigration Lawyers Association, said he was baffled by the decision to appeal the case. 
''This is a human rights case,'' Mr. Wu said.
Philip L. Waters, the deputy district director for the immigration service here, said there was no evidence that Mr. Lee's case involved political dissent. 
''Our feeling is that in a situation where this law supposedly applies to everybody equally, he doesn't have a real basis'' for claiming a fear of persecution, Mr. Waters said.
Wu Zurong, a spokesman for the Chinese Embassy in Washington, said that allegations of forced abortions and sterilizations were ''groundless.''
He said his Government hoped that no further asylum cases would be granted on that basis.
Asked whether it was possible that Mr. Lee lost his work assignment for failure to follow the policy, Mr. Wu said, ''He should cooperate with the Government to put the interests of the whole nation first.''
