
In a rebuff to calls for a more democratic political system in China, Prime Minister Li Peng said today that China would not copy the Soviet Union's political restructuring and that China would not take ''hasty'' or ''excessive'' steps toward democracy.
''Democracy is a good thing,'' Mr. Li said, ''but it must arise from the conditions within a country. 
As far as China is concerned, we want to build a democracy, and we think that if we do this work well it will contribute to economic development and social stabilityI.''
He added: ''On the other hand, if the democratic process is carried out in haste, or excessively, then it will certainly affect our stabilityI and unity. 
If stabilityI is undermined, that will impair our work of reform and national construction.''
Mr. Li's statement follows a growing movement for more democracy and for an amnesty for China's political prisoners. 
Initially, some Government officials seemed sympathetic to calls for greater democracy, but in the last two months officials have seemed surprised and alarmed at the boldness and aggressiveness of the movement.
In a sign of official apprehension about the democracy movement, the Government-controlled press has mostly ignored the recent legislative elections in the Soviet Union in which challengers defeated many high-ranking Communist Party candidates.
 
Many Support Gorbachev's Views
Despite the lack of official interest in the situation in the Soviet Union, many Chinese intellectuals have emerged as strong supporters of Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, and his efforts at political liberalization.
For their part, Chinese leaders have seemed distressed by the unflattering comparisons with the Soviet Union.
Asked about the recent developments in the Soviet Union, Mr. Li said, ''China's conditions are different from those in the Soviet Union, and we cannot mechanically copy the measures or policies adopted by the Soviet Union.''
Several times in the two-hour news conference, Mr. Li pressed the same theme: that China favors democracy, but in prudent doses, and that too much too soon could affect social stabilityI and economic development.
The news conference was arranged by the National People's Congress, the national legislature whose annual session ends on Tuesday.
Asked about economic policies, Mr. Li said China's economic liberalization would continue, even during the present retrenchment and austerity. 
He specifically cited the policy of rapid development of China's coastal areas, which is a favorite project of the Communist Party General Secretary, Zhao Ziyang. 
Mr. Zhao is generally regarded as more enthusiastic about rapid change than is Mr. Li.
China will draw on Hong Kong's experience in economic development, but will not adopt capitalism, Mr. Li said. 
''Hong Kong will keep its current capitalist system, and the Chinese mainland will cling to its socialist system,'' he added.
Asked about human rights and the call for amnesty of political prisoners, Mr. Li said China would continue to improve its human rights situation but stressed that social stabilityI was the nation's greatest need.
