
The young money-changer beamed at the sight of a foreigner on the street of this bustling trading center, and excitedly quoted his black-market exchange rates for United States dollars and Taiwan dollars.
''But that would be bourgeois liberalism,'' the foreigner scolded, referring to the present national campaign to eradicate capitalist and Western vices.
''Never mind,'' the black marketeer said, not at all concerned. 
''I'll give you a very, very good rate.''
 
An Informal Agreement
That seems to be the attitude of many people in China's highly developed coastal areas: ignore the political polemics and upheaval in the rest of the country and concentrate on making money. 
The powerful local bureaucracies are paying lip service to the policies of the central Government, but little else seems to have changed.
There seems to have been an informal agreement. 
The people here will not bother the central Government if the central Government will not stop them from making money. 
Put another way, the people will pay homage to Communism if the party will let them indulge in small-scale capitalism.
These fertile fields and vibrant boom towns are the door frame of China's open-door policy. 
Here in Fujian Province, the strip of the Chinese mainland facing Taiwan, families watch Taiwanese television programs and sometimes run businesses for their wealthy relatives who live in Taiwan. 
Farther south, in Guangdong Province, everyone tunes to Hong Kong television and more than two million people work directly or indirectly for Hong Kong companies.
 
More Commerce Than Protests
But while Fujian and Guangdong have been the most subject to foreign influences, they were among the quietest during the student unrest in April and May. 
There were a few student demonstrations, but most people were far more concerned with the pulse of commerce than political demonstrations.
''We don't understand politics,'' said Ding Jinxiong, the 26-year-old owner of a shop that sells motorcycles in a town in the center of the Fujian coast. 
''What we want and care about is stabilityI.''
These days, Fujian Province seems remarkably unaffected by the turmoil in Beijing. 
No one has been arrested in Xiamen, a major port and ''special economic zone,'' and most people say they have been much too busy working to spend time on political study classes that many people in other parts of the country are obliged to attend.
 
Contentment Is in the Air
The rising prosperity seems, for now, to have made people tolerant of what they see as the shortcomings of the Government. 
Contentment is in the air as men and women stroll around Xiamen, listening to their Walkman tape players and showing off their gold rings and fake gold watches, stopping to buy some dried squid to snack on as they pass bookstands selling ''Lolita'' and magazines with titillating covers.
This is far from Beijing's vision of the Communist road, and the goings-on here are not easily reconciled with the paeans to ''simple living'' now in fashion, nor with the equally fashionable assertions that Communism and public ownership will always dominate China's economy.
Already in Xiamen, foreign-financed private companies account for 42 percent of industrial output, and the Government has mostly retreated from being the owner of enterprises to being the regulator.
But these areas may come the closest in China to reflecting the bottom line of what Deng Xiaoping, China's senior leader, apparently aims for, a combination of rapid economic development and political acquiescence.
 
No Fear of Foreigners
Very few foreign diplomats or scholars believe that China can reconcile for very long continued openness and development with continued political repression, but the experience here suggests that at least for the short term and at least in some areas such an arrangement is possible.
People here are not afraid to chat with foreigners, as they are in Beijing, but the political campaigns are having some effect here. 
Student leaders were ordered to register with the police, and they did so. 
Investigations are said to be under way in some Government departments to search for any ''bad elements.''
The Government is also preparing to crack down to some extent on bourgeois liberalization.
''We're going to do more to control gambling, prostitution and pornography,'' said Zhang Zongxu, the urbane Deputy Mayor of Xiamen. 
But Mr. Zhang, who was formerly the Chinese Consul General in Houston, stressed that the economic policy would remain unchanged, and he said the best way for the party to win popularity was to promote prosperity.
There has been an economic effect from the turmoil, of course. 
Foreign tourists have vanished, and most investment is on hold. 
But already the Taiwan entrepreneurs who are the region's lifeblood are cautiously returning - mostly to look around, rather than to invest. 
Hotel occupancy rates in Xiamen, which plunged from nearly 100 percent in the spring to less than 33 percent in June, rose to an average of 56 percent in late July.
Both local officials and Taiwan investors say it will be a year or two before Xiamen recovers its pre-June levels of activity, but the economy had been bounding so rapidly in the last 18 months that a respite is not entirely a bad thing. 
Industrial output rose 43 percent last year, and income from tourism doubled to $100 million.
Early this year, the pace seemed to be accelerating, with a flood of new visitors and investments from Taiwan. 
Foreign investment in the first half of the year was running triple the pace of last year, totaling $100 million, and the port, roads and other basic public works were showing the strains.
Of course, Xiamen's prosperity will ultimately depend on the willingness of the central Government to tolerate what amounts to a heresy against traditional standards of Communism. 
Even if Fujian and Guangdong did not directly challenge the party politically, they are developing an autonomous economic system that increasingly relies upon the market instead of central planning.
 
Drawbacks of Capitalism
Many of the woes of 19th-century laissez-faire capitalism, and of feudal China, have re-emerged in these coastal areas: child labor, prostitution, gambling, income inequalities, criminal gangs and unregulated production of goods that are useless or even dangerous. 
Already there are signs in Beijing that more pressure will be put on private enterprises, particularly those that evade taxes, and this could cramp the style of Xiamen and other free-wheeling towns along the coast.
It is difficult to tell just what people think of the central Government and how much people believe the official propaganda about the ''counterrevolutionary rebellion,'' as the democracy movement is now officially known, but the sense one gets is that the propaganda has not been very effective simply because most people spend at least as much time watching Taiwan television as mainland stations.
Interviews with many ordinary people in Xiamen and the countryside suggest that many remain sympathetic to Zhao Ziyang, the ousted Communist Party leader, and to the student movement. 
Still, they stress that what they value above all is stabilityI, which is also what the central Government has emphasized.
Indeed, most people seem determinedly apolitical.
''People were unclear about what happened at first,'' acknowledged Ye Wende, the Communist Party secretary in the village of Caitian, 10 miles north of Xiamen. 
''They thought that the student demands were very reasonable - eliminating corruption and so on. 
But then they could see from Deng Xiaoping's speech that a very small group of people used the movement for their own purposes. 
Now they have a clearer understanding of what happened.''
