
ARABIC IS A RICH language. 
There are words for losing one's children, for a carriage taking a virgin into battle, for a disease striking camels in the head. 
But when I was sweltering in Cairo in the early 1980's, while studying Arabic, what struck me most was that there was only one word, talg, that refers, if somewhat hazily, to either ice or snow.
At the time I was yearning for a good talg-fall in Cairo, I learned that the Eskimo language has several dozen words for "snow."
Which makes perfect sense: the diversity in a language reflects the interests and obsessions of the society speaking it. 
As a continuing student of the Chinese language, I find that Chinese is especially rich in the specific areas one would expect, given the culture.
There are at least 19 words for silk, for example, and 8 for rice. 
Why?
Well, gao refers to a tough, white silk; qi is a patterned silk; qian is a blue-red silk fabric; kuang is uncombed silk thread; si is regular silk thread; chou is another term for silk fabrics, and so on. 
As for rice, fan refers to the cooked product; dao to the rice when it is still in the paddy; xian to long-grained rice; mi to the husked kernels, and, in some dialects, gu means unhusked kernels.
Since the Chinese care even more for their families than they do for their rice or silk, there is a profusion of words for relations. 
For instance, Chinese has five words for "uncle."
It depends on whether he is your father's older or younger brother, or your mother's brother, or your father's sister's husband, or your mother's sister's husband. 
In English, the word "cousin" is applied to males as well as females, older people as well as younger people, maternal as well as paternal relations. 
Not so in Chinese; the rules that apply to "uncle" also apply to "cousin."
When Americans hurl abuse at each other, they sometimes question each other's paternity or bring in each other's mothers. 
But the Chinese denounce uncles and grandfathers as well as parents, and one common insult calumniates the preceding 18 generations of the accursed one's family.
Chinese has about two dozen expressions for "wife," but in this case the richness of the language doesn't indicate any special esteem. 
On the contrary, most of the terms are unflattering: "the inside person," "the old woman," "the one on the bed," "the children's mother," "the cook."
One reason for the many expressions may be that until early this century it wasn't unusual for peasant women not to have given names. 
As they grew up, they were identified by numbers: second sister, fourth sister and so on.
"My mother didn't have a name, as far as I know," says an octogenarian friend who grew up in the countryside. 
I asked him what his father called his mother, and his brow furrowed. 
Then his face lighted up. 
" 'Hey,' " he said triumphantly. 
"He called her 'Hey.'
"
Where English is particularly rich, and Chinese poor, is in the areas of science and democracy -- the two slogans that since 1919 have been a rallying cry for change. 
Indeed, "science" and "democracy" are sometimes known as S Xiansheng (Mr. S) and D Xiansheng (Mr. D), to signify that they are foreign guests who still have not taken up Chinese residency.
Although law, fa, is an ancient concept in China, it historically wasn't a champion of individual rights but a means of punishment. 
Indeed, the only area of the law in which the Chinese language distinguishes itself is in the designation of punishments. 
Gua refers to execution by slicing (a convict literally cut into pieces); yi refers to the cutting off of a felon's nose. 
(Both are mercifully no longer judicial sentences.)
Most of China's political vocabulary is relatively recent. 
Chinese expressions for "freedom," "politics," "democracy" and "economy" are all only about a century old. 
And words like "individualism" or "privacy" still have a negative connotation in Chinese, reflecting the traditional lack of concern for individual rights.
"This is a factional language, based on groups rather than individuals, and an inclusive language," says Geremie Barme, an Australian scholar whose mastery of the Chinese language gives other foreigners the "red eye disease" (one of the many expressions for "jealousy").
What's an inclusive language?
In English, we tend to hold each other verbally at arm's length; it's the opposite in Chinese. 
Friends address each other as "Big Brother" or "Big Sister," as a sign of respect, and children are required to address adults who are friends or acquaintances of the family as "Auntie" or "Uncle."
This has to be done carefully, however. 
I once disconcerted a Chinese friend by calling her "Little Sister" -- often a prelude to a pickup.
The two ways of saying "we" in Chinese help explain the usefulness of an inclusive expression. 
The first kind, women (pronounced waugh-mun), refers to the speaker and one or more other people but doesn't include the person being addressed. 
The second kind, zamen, includes the person being addressed. 
Thus, a young woman going out with her boyfriend might tell her parents that "women are leaving," but a group of boys flirting with some girls will suggest that "zamen go to a movie."
By comparison, English looks rather aloof and threadbare for lacking an inclusive "we."
But never mind. 
Za men have another area, besides science and democracy, where English triumphs: sex.
English seems to have far more words that are sex-related than contemporary Chinese. 
(Ancient Chinese pornography is another matter, but that rich vocabulary has been largely forgotten.) No one knows if this is because Americans are obsessed with sex or because the Chinese take lots of cold showers -- hot-water heaters still being a rarity in China. 
A researcher of sexuality in Shanghai is stumped by the linguistic challenge of polling Chinese about their sexual practices. 
There are no common expressions for "foreplay" or "orgasm," and so surveys must resort to vaguer terms that people will at least understand. 
Instead of inquiring about the frequency of "a sexual high tide" -- the technical term for "climax" -- the surveys simply ask women how often they enjoy "a pleasant feeling."
It would be rash to draw conclusions on what this says about the Chinese, especially when there are more than 1.1 billion of them. 
Still, it's nice to know that English has the edge in a few areas. 
Science. Democracy. 
Sex. A language could do worse.
