
Ron Silver's Tony Speech
Ron Silver provided one of the principal topics of conversation in the theater world this week with his unexpected (to most listeners) speech at the Tony Award ceremonies on Sunday night. 
Mr. Silver, a Tony winner himself (for ''Speed-the-Plow,'' in 1988), commended both the National Endowment for the Arts and the cause of freedom in China on the first anniversary of the military crackdown in Tiananmen Square before he and Tyne Daly presented the awards for best featured actor and actress.
Apparently a number of people involved in the ceremony ''informally knew'' that Mr. Silver would say something about the endowment but, in effect, did not want to be told. 
Although many people did not object to the commendation, there was some criticism about its length, and almost general criticism at what was described as ''the Chinese addition.''
''It abused a gentleman's agreement, and it defused the N.E.A.,'' said one man closely involved with the show.
Joseph Papp of the Public Theater said that a week or 10 days before the ceremony, he had asked members of the Tony committee to present a Tony to John E. Frohnmayer, chairman of the endowment, ''and let him say a few words and give some content to the evening,'' but that the proposal had received little support.
Mr. Papp said he did not believe that the endowment portion of Mr. Silver's remarks was unseemly, nor that it politicized the evening, but ''China was not necessary or appropriate at the time.''
But: ''I'm not going to criticize Ron Silver. 
I give him a lot of credit. 
He's really an activist.''
Gregory Mosher, director of Lincoln Center Theater, said, ''A lot us believed that it would not be inappropriate to say something about the N.E.A., because so much in the nonprofit theater started because of its support.''
Joseph Cates, the executive producer of the Tony Awards show, which is presented by the American Theater Wing and the League of American Theaters and Producers, said he had heard Mr. Silver was going to say something because there had been so much talk about the endowment. 
No one, though, ''thought it would be as lengthy as it was,'' he said.
''It was a kind of violation - taking advantage of a live show,'' Mr. Cates said. 
''Mr. Silver is a nice man, but I resent it.''
Mr. Silver said in a telephone interview that he believed his remarks were ''very nonpolitical'' and that part of the nature of a live show is the unexpected, ''the sense of excitement, of danger.''
As for the people in charge, ''they don't have to be responsible for what people say,'' he said.
He asserted, however, that he had submitted the endowment part of the script earlier in the day to several people involved in the show ''and there wasn't any criticism about length.''
The submitted script did not include his remarks about China. 
''No one knew that I was going to make them,'' he said. 
I did it because the show was exactly on the anniversary date.''
Did he have any regrets?
''I respect their opinion, but no.''
 
'Island' on Broadway
''Once on This Island,'' the critically acclaimed 90-minute Caribbean fairy tale, will be at a small Shubert house on Broadway as of Oct. 
2. It will be produced by the Shubert Organization, Suntory International and James Walsh, in association with Playwrights Horizons, where it ended its seven-week limited run on May 27. 
They are the group that took ''The Heidi Chronicles'' to Broadway.
 
'Roses' for Spring
Next spring, ''The Subject Was Roses'' will have its first major New York staging since the Broadway production in 1964. 
The Roundabout Theater Company production, planned for May 1991, will star John Mahoney (a 1986 Tony Award winner for ''The House of Blue Leaves'') and will be directed by John Tillinger. 
Todd Haimes, the company's producing director, said he had been working on the rights for five years with Frank D. Gilroy, who wrote the Pulitzer Prize-winning play. 
He said Mr. Gilroy had suggested both Mr. Mahoney and Mr. Tillinger and that the go-ahead came after the two agreed to take part.
Incidentally, Elaine Stritch will join Tony Roberts in the Roundabout's production of Moss Hart's ''Light Up the Sky,'' which begins Aug. 
1.
 
Clowning and 'Spunk'
Reggie Montgomery didn't think his parents would be too happy when, 21 years ago, he joined the Ringling Brothers and Barnum & Bailey Circus as its first black clown - and they weren't. 
They had hoped he would become an English teacher. 
But he said he has never regretted his decision. 
''I had never seen a circus in my life,'' said Mr. Montgomery, who is currently playing four roles in ''Spunk,'' including a con man and a city slicker. 
''But I was one of the first graduates of clown college, trained by Emmett Kelly and Otto Griebling.''
After the circus training, he went on to earn a theater arts degree from Florida A&M University and a master's degree in theater from Trinity University in San Antonio.
Before his arrival in New York eight years ago ''in search of a dream,'' Mr. Montgomery spent some years in both Dallas, where he founded the Minority Repertory Theater, and Los Angeles, where he worked in theater and soap operas. 
As for his clown training, he said, it has helped his career, both in projecting ''image without words'' and in giving him an element of what he described as ''getting in touch with the child in me.''
''I feel guilty when people ask me what I do,'' he said. 
''I'm getting paid to play, to do something I love.''
 
'Cemetery Club' Losing Money
Producers of ''The Cemetery Club,'' which has been running at a loss since its opening on May 15, are looking at the situation ''on a day-to-day basis'' but at present have no plans to close the show, said Philip Rose, one of the producers. 
He said he hoped that word of mouth and the 30-second television commercials now being broadcast would stimulate ticket sales, which totaled $33,888 last week. 
Mr. Rose, who is producing with Howard Hurst, David Brown and Sophie Hurst, said some of the money for the film rights, sold to Touchstone Pictures for a reported $850,000, would be coming through this week. 
He added, however, that Touchstone had not been asked for money to help with the $100,000-a-week operating costs.
 
Actor to Take Over at Trinity
Richard Jenkins will take over as artistic director of the Trinity Repertory Company in Providence, R.I., for the 1990-91 season. 
Mr. Jenkins, a longtime member of the acting company, is to succeed Anne Bogart, who resigned last month.
