
IN the wilderness of Shennonjia Forest in central China investigators are seeking an elusive creature that might be an unknown hominid or the product of farmers' imaginations. 
Whatever it is, the ''wildman'' of China has given members of the International Society of Cryptozoology new food for thought.
Since ancient times, legends have proliferated about unicorns, mermaids, dragons and countless other imaginary creatures, and the search for the Loch Ness monster and the yeti in the Himalayas will probably go on forever. 
The International Society of Cryptozoology does not dismiss the existence of such creatures out of hand, but the group is led by scientists who demand hard evidence supporting any claimed discovery of an unknown beast.
While the chances of finding any of the outlandish monsters that figure in popular myth are remote, members say, there are almost certainly some unknown animals left to discover, perhaps including the wildman.
Over the years, there have been hundreds of reports from farmers about a manlike primate that supposedly stands six feet tall, has human features and knows how to weave bamboo. 
In Hubei and nearby provinces, the ''ye ren'' - Chinese for ''wildman'' - has inspired a legend as pervasive as that of the yeti in the Himalayas and the sasquatch of North America.
Two Americans, Dr. Frank E. Poirier, a professor of anthropology at Ohio State University, and J. Richard Greenwell, secretary of the International Society of Cryptozoology, recently returned from China, where they were shown some hints that the wildman might be real. 
Not entirely persuaded, they did say the evidence was provocative.
The main evidence, Dr. Poirier said in an interview, is a series of analyses conducted by Chinese laboratories of a dozen hairs purportedly left by wildmen in bushes, trees and on the ground. 
Chinese biologists at Huadong University in Shanghai told Dr. Poirier and Mr. Greenwell that a scanning electron microscope had revealed the hairs' microstructure, the interior fibers and surface scales, to be characteristic of primates in general, but not of any known primate species.
A chemical analysis of the hairs was conducted by Dr. Zeng Xianzhaw using a particle accelerator at Fudan University in Shanghai, Dr. Poirier said. 
The analysis, using the photon-induced X-ray emission method, found a ratio of iron to zinc in the hairs characteristic of primates but higher than that of all known primates, including human beings. 
''The Chinese scientists told us that zinc-iron ratios in the hair of primates are highly indicative of species,'' Dr. Poirier said.
Most biologists reject the possibility that ape-men or hominids other than human beings still exist, and Mr. Greenwell acknowledges that the Chinese hairs are unlikely to persuade many doubters.
In 1984, two years after the International Society of Cryptozoology was founded by the French zoologist Bernard Heuvelmans, George Gaylord Simpson denounced cryptozoologists in general and searchers after yetis in particular. 
Dr. Simpson, now deceased, who led many expeditions himself and was regarded as the dean of American paleontologists, wrote that ''humans are the most inventive, deceptive and gullible of all animals. 
Only those characteristics can explain the belief of some humans in creationism, in the arrival of U.F.O.'s or in some aspects of cryptozoology,'' which is ''not a science in the acceptable usage of the term.''
Dr. Poirier himself dismisses most of the previous evidence brought forward by the Chinese authorities to support claims that wildmen exist. 
''Casts of footprints are often produced, but they are worthless for a variety of reasons,'' he said. 
''Feces purporting to come from wildmen have been collected, but they could have come from many common animals.''
 
'Exciting and Unexpected News'
But sightings of wildmen in China have been recorded for some 2,500 years, he said, and images of the ye ren appear on many paintings and even ancient currency. 
''This doesn't mean that wildmen exist, but I must say, I am somewhat less skeptical than I was before going to China,'' Dr. Poirier said. 
''I still doubt the existence of those other famous creatures, the yeti, sasquatch and bigfoot.''
The new hair analyses, he said, were the main factor in his change of opinion. 
''This is most exciting and unexpected news,'' he said. 
''For the very first time there is scientific evidence for the possible existence of an unknown primate.''
An analysis of the DNA in the hairs might be helpful, Dr. Poirier said, and Chinese scientists have said one is planned. 
But nothing short of an actual body or a live specimen of the creature would persuade most biologists, he said.
Mr. Greenwell of the cryptozoology society agreed and said that even the hair analysis may be of dubious value. 
''We have to remember that analyses of samples have often turned out to be erroneous, and one shouldn't attach too much significance to them,'' he said.
 
Species Thought to Be Extinct
Chances are much better for finding animals already known to science that are generally believed to have become extinct or to have disappeared from certain habitats, Mr. Greenwell said.
The Tucson-based International Society of Cryptozoology is particularly interested at present in reported sightings of thylacines, or ''Tasmanian tigers,'' in western and southeastern Australia. 
The thylacine, a marsupial carnivore, is believed to have died out in mainland Australia several thousand years ago, but thylacines survived until modern times in nearby Tasmania. 
The species is believed to have become extinct with the death of the last thylacine at the zoo in Hobart, Tasmania, in 1936.
''Mainstream biologists deny the possibility that thylacines might have survived in mainland Australia,'' Mr. Greenwell said, ''but they've been proved wrong on other suppositions.''
Among the many zoological surprises of the past century was the discovery of living coelacanths off the coast of Africa in 1938. 
The coelacanth, a large, primitive fish, had previously been believed to have been extinct for many millions of years. 
The logotype symbol of the Society of Cryptozoology, Mr. Greenwell said, is the okapi, a giraffe-like animal previously known only from fossils that was discovered living in the Congo jungle in 1901.
 
Looking for the Less Spectacular
The society welcomes the exchange of information on elusive species and is reachable by writing P.O. 
Box 43070, Tucson, Ariz., 85733.
Cryptozoologists are better known, however, for their interest in such elusive or fanciful creatures as the Loch Ness monster and the ''mokele-mbembe,'' a dinosaur supposed by some to be living in remote swampland in central Africa.
''The news media focus on our investigations of reputed monsters,'' Mr. Greenwell said, ''but we're also interested in the scientific search for less spectacular animals. 
The kouprey, a large wild ox, was originally discovered in Cambodia in 1937, and it was rediscovered in 1981 after many experts considered it extinct. 
That was exciting for us. 
We do what we can to help scientists look for such rarities and, if possible, keep them from dying out altogether.''
