
In a sign that the Communist Party may be loosening its grip on culture here, the Government said today that it had approved the domestic release of a Chinese film that was nominated for an Oscar this year.
The film, "Raise the Red Lantern," by China's most prominent director, Zhang Yimou, has received permission for distribution within the country and could be shown by August, the film's production company said.
A spokesman for the Ministry of Radio, Film and Television confirmed today that the film, which was first submitted nearly a year ago, had been approved. 
But he would not comment on when it would be released or why the release had been delayed so long.
The world of culture has been one of the bastions of hard-liners, who increasingly find themselves losing out in a power struggle within the Communist Party leadership. 
The film's impending release suggests that the authorities are willing to take a more permissive attitude toward censorship and may be a sign of wider liberalization in the arts.
The ministry's top film official, Teng Jinxian, said this month that his bureau was going to re-evaluate films that had previously not received approval, according to a recent report in the official Legal Daily. 
The article did not explain that shift in policy. 
But it noted that China's movie industry was in a financial crisis, with fewer and fewer people going to cinemas. 
It said that in the first four months of this year film revenue dropped by $13 million.
"They may be planning to become more flexible, but the pace will not be very fast," said Li Xiaohong, the director of two films that recently won approval for release. 
"They are being very careful."
One of Ms. Li's films, "Bloody Dawn," about the murder of an intellectual in a small town, recently received permission to compete overseas in a film festival in Montreal this summer. 
But the authorities suddenly changed their minds and said the film could be shown only for exhibition, not competition.
 
Attendance Fell 20% Last Year
Since the Tiananmen Square crackdown on democracy demonstrators in June 1989, the ministry has primarily endorsed films that hailed the moral spirit of Communism or recounted Communist victories in historic battles. 
Apparently as a result of that policy, the number of film viewers declined by about 20 percent in 1991 from the previous year and is expected to decline by another 30 percent this year, official press reports say.
Mr. Zhang and Ms. Li belong to China's Fifth Generation of directors and film makers, who emerged in the early 1980's after enduring the chaos of China's Cultural Revolution.
It is not clear why Mr. Zhang's film, nominated this year for an Academy Award for best foreign film, was not approved in the first place. 
Set in the pre-Communist era, "Red Lantern" is about a young woman who goes insane after she becomes the fourth wife of a rich landowner and is forced to live in his isolated compound and obey his strange customs.
The film illustrates the frustrations and the base status of women in those days, but has no direct political content. 
Like many other films that in recent years have not passed the censors, "Red Lantern" was never explicitly rejected.
