
The Michigan Department of Natural Resources has introduced a new strain of pheasant, which is native to Sichuan Province in China, into several areas in the south-central part of the state. 
Save for a small early shipment of the birds themselves, they have been raised in Michigan from eggs gathered in the wild by the Chinese.
For the last three decades, said Pete Squibb, a biologist with the department's Wildlife Division, the populations of ringneck pheasants have been dwindling alarmingly in Michigan and other Midwestern and Eastern states.
In Michigan alone, in the 1940's, 50's and early 60's, the opening of the pheasant season was regarded as an informal holiday in farm country. 
Today, the numbers of those who hunt pheasants has declined from a high of 500,000 to about 100,000, and the annual pheasant kill - cocks only - has dropped from about a million birds to 100,000.
There are various theories about the causes of the ringneck's decline, but there is general agreement that the bird has not been able to adjust to the habitat changes created by modern farming techniques in the prime agricultural country that has always been its habitat in North America.
To use big equipment efficiently, farmers eliminate fence rows and parcels of fallow fields, places that once provided cover and food for the birds. 
In Michigan and some other states, what is left for wildlife is marginal farm country, given over to brush, idle fields and woodlots.
The Sichuan pheasants were chosen because much of their habitat closely resembles that into which they were introduced in Michigan. 
They are also highly adaptable birds, whose native habitat in northwest Sichuan ranges from subtropical rice paddies to sub-Alpine meadows.
Although the ringneck pheasant, which was introduced into this country about a century ago, can be traced back to China, Squibb said that only one or two of those early shipments could have contained wild birds that came directly from China.
The birds that were stocked in the Eastern half of the United States, he added, were descendants of English and French game-farm stock imported to those countries from their native China in Marco Polo's time.
Squibb said that Michigan, other states and the Federal Government had tried to get wild birds from China since the 1940's, when it was first noted that the ringneck's numbers were diminishing in this country. 
The political tension between the two countries made that impossible, but, he said, President Nixon's visit to China in 1972 launched a new era.
In 1983, Michigan, which had sent a team of experts to China to aid Sichuan in developing hydroelectric power, let it be known that it was in search of wild pheasants from that province.
The aforementioned small batch -24 of 30 survived the trip - arrived in February 1985. 
Obtaining eggs rather than birds seemed a better approach, however, and in April 1985, Squibb and two other Michigan wildlife biologists went to Sichuan to learn more about the birds and to orchestrate the egg-gathering project.
Squibb remained in China deep into May supervising the egg-gathering endeavor. 
Most of the eggs were brought in by children, including one 14-year-old girl who hiked 14 miles through the mountains from a remote village to deliver six of them that had been found by her brother.
There have been two more egg-harvesting trips to China since then, and more than 2,000 pure Sichuans, plus 3,000 Sichuan-ringneck crosses, have been released in Michigan with the cooperation of farmers, landowners and fish and game clubs. 
Squibb's department no longer stocks traditional game-farm ringnecks, which once accounted for 40 percent of the state's annual hunter harvest of pheasants. 
Michigan uses only the Sichuans or crosses with them and ringnecks that were trapped in the wild.
''We are tremendously pleased with the reproductive success of both the pure Sichuans and the crosses,'' said Squibb, who then added that he had hoped that losses to natural predation - by hawks, owls, foxes and mink - would be lower.
The Sichuan pheasant has a strong tendency to remain motionless as danger approaches, so much so, indeed, that if it is spotted in its crouched-down position it can often be caught by hand or with a net. 
Predation is, nonetheless, much lower than it was with the game-farm ringneck, about 40 percent rather than 70 or 80 percent in the first month after release in the wild.
There are, said Squibb, about 30 subspecies of the common pheasant, a gold-brown bird with a blue-green head and a long barred tail. 
They may or may not have a white neck ring. 
The Sichuan does not.
''The birds with rings come from the northeastern part of Asia, from Korea and northeastern China,'' said Squibb. 
''As you move south and west from there, the birds very quickly lose the white ring.''
There is no record, he said, of previous introductions of the Sichuan pheasant, which is slightly smaller than the ringneck, outside of China.
''Somewhere down the road,'' said Squibb, ''we will be making these birds available to other states.''
