
The Pakistani Air Force, concerned about the possibility of Afghan or Soviet air attacks to the west and wary of the military power of India to the east, is modernizing its inventory of fighter and trainer aircraft, according to diplomats and news reports here.
Two major projects are in the final stages of discussion here, diplomats say. 
The Government of Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto is about to decide whether to go ahead with a purchase of 60 additional F-16 fighter planes from the United States and 75 upgraded F-7 fighters from China. 
In addition, Pakistan is planning to produce its own training plane with Chinese cooperation.
Pakistan already has 49 F-16's delivered or on order. 
The new F-16's would cost about $1.4 billion in all, at a time when Ms. Bhutto, who is also Minister of Defense, is under pressure to increase spending on social programs.
Diplomats expect that the moderization of the air force will provoke criticism from India even though the two nations have pledged themselves to establish better relations. 
In New Delhi, a spokesman for the Indian Government, declining Friday to comment on the newest Pakistani proposals, nevertheless called attention to earlier Indian statements deploring military and nuclear development in Pakistan.
A spokesman for the Pakistani Inter-Services Public Relations Directorate said he could not comment on aircraft purchases still under consideration, but did not deny Pakistani press reports of an air force overhaul.
The United States Congress has not been officially notified of the F-16 sale, pending final decisions by the Bush and Bhutto Administrations. 
But the notification to Congress, required by law, is expected within a month or two. 
Islamabad first raised the subject with the United States last fall. 
The purchase was also discussed during a visit here in January by three Democratic Congressmen - Stephen J. Solarz of Brooklyn, Ted Weiss of Manhattan and the Bronx and Chester G. Atkins of Massachusetts.
The Congressional delegation was left with the impression that Pakistan had yet to determine where to find the cash for the purchase, since there is no money left in the foreign military sales credit program for Islamabad under its current aid package.
The majority of fighter planes in the Pakistani Air Force are the 150 Chinese-built F-6's, which are based on Soviet technology of the 1950's. 
Pakistani military experts as well as diplomats in the region say these leave the air force well behind India's. 
Even with the additional F-16's, these experts say, Pakistan will still trail India by a ratio of 1 to 4 in aircraft numbers. 
In addition, India is building its own advanced fighter planes.
Under the regime of Gen. Mohammad Zia ul-Haq, Pakistan had also considered building its own fighter planes in cooperation with China.
Diplomats say the plan was abandoned last year because it became clear it would not be economically viable. 
But the Pakistani military had already budgeted $200 million a year in hard currency for the project. 
This can now be drawn on for the purchase of new planes, diplomats and Pakistani arms experts said.
Pakistan last month signed a final contract on an earlier order of 11 F-16's, which General Dynamics, the maker of the plane, has promised to begin delivering in 1992, diplomats said.
The Pakistani Air Force is already flying 38 of the planes.
The ease of incorporating new models of the same aircraft is one of the factors that makes the F-16 more attractive than the rival Mirage 2000, which France is offering to Pakistan, diplomats say.
Pakistan is beginning to test its own missiles and build guidance systems and other equipment locally.
A prototype of a new Pakistani-built jet training plane to replace 20-year-old Cessna T-37's and Saab MF1-17's may be ready in mid-1990, The Muslim newspaper reported today.
The Muslim, which has close ties to the Government, said the plane would be built in cooperation with China. 
Each plane will cost about $2.1 million.
