
THE ghosts of the Yi dynasty, whose kings ruled Korea from 1392 to 1910, still haunt the palaces of Seoul,those oases of serenity amid the incessant motion and noise of this vibrant city. 
But the tranquil halls and exquisite gardens, a refuge from the Hyundai cars and the purple and white buses that rumble like elephants through the streets, mask a past rife with court intrigue, betrayal and war.
The Yi (pronounced ee) kings who built the palaces in Seoul reigned over the most intellectual period in Korean history. 
In the capital then known as Hanyang, movable metal type was invented early in the 15th century. 
Shortly after, King Sejong fostered the spread of phonetic writing that made the Korean language easier to grasp than the Chinese ideographs in which it had been written.These innovations led to an outpouring of books on Confucian philosophy, history, art, medicine, music, agriculture, mathematics, astronomy and military science.
Palaces in Korea, like those in China and Japan, are not single buildings as in Europe but vast complexes with towering gates, imposing halls where the rulers received their ministers and generals in audience, lavish living quarters and lovely gardens sprinkled with pagodas. 
The palaces of Hanyang were modeled on those of China, with their tiled roofs and sweeping eaves, but were given a Korean touch with their exteriors left in subdued ocher reds or natural wood and their interiors decorated with intricate, bright ornamentation.
In the Kyongbok Palace, there were once 500 buildings within the walls. 
Today, the Ch'angdok Palace with its adjacent Piwon, or Secret Garden, that was reserved for the king and his women, covers 180 acres. 
Add the Ch'anggyong Palace, a detached palace next to Ch'angdok, and the Chongmyo Shrine, where tablets commemorating the Yi ancestors are kept, and the entire complex rivals the Forbidden City in Beijing and the Imperial Palaces in Kyoto, Japan.
The palaces of Seoul are the only ones remaining in Korea, this city having been the capital for so long. 
Another center of culture, however, is the city of Kyongju, in southeastern Korea, where the Silla dynasty flourished from 661 until 935. 
Kyongju today is the site of Buddhist temples and the tombs of kings that are being carefully excavated to yield the secrets and treasures of Silla. 
Between Silla and Yi, the Koryo period was filled with strife, the Mongol invasion and war.
The Seoul palaces, burned in war and partly rebuilt several times, are, not surprisingly, a source of national pride. 
On almost any given day, throngs of schoolchildren ranging from kindergarten through high school can be found there.
Everywhere in the palaces are signs in Korean intended to nurture the deep-seated animosity toward the Japanese who invaded the peninsula in the late 16th century (and were driven out after six years) and who occupied Korea from 1905 until 1945. 
Signs in English remind visitors of the Korean enmity. 
Perhaps the nearest analogy in the West is the Irish enmity for the English. 
Koreans now emulate the Japanese in economic development but in their hearts, as in Irish hearts, are dark broodings about their former colonial masters across a narrow sea.
Three of Seoul's four extant palaces are in the northern sector of the city, on the opposite side from the site of the Olympic Games a year ago, with their backs to the jagged, rocky mountains that once were a barrier against invaders from the north. 
As with most palaces in East Asia, they face south to ward off the evil spirits thought to come from the northeast and, in the bitter Korean winter, to capture the rays of the southern sun. 
The fourth palace, Toksu, is in the center of Seoul and is a pleasant place to stroll but lacks the size and grandeur of the others.
The northern palaces, which are landmarks known to everyone in Seoul, are within walking distance of one another and it is perhaps best to start with Kyongbok, the oldest. 
The palaces are open to the public from 9 A.M. to 6 P.M. from spring to fall and close an hour earlier in winter. 
The visitor might want to plan his trek around the times that Ch'angdok is open. 
Unlike the other palaces, in which one may wander at leisure, Ch'angdok can be seen only on a guided tour. 
English- speaking guides generally lead tours at 11:30 A.M., 1:30 and 3:30 P.M.
The Kyongbok Palace was built in 1392, a century before Columbus sailed to America, and was burned by the Japanese warlord Hideyoshi in 1592. 
It then lay in ruins until 1865 when it was rebuilt. 
Most of the palace buildings were torn down by the Japanese when they annexed Korea in 1910 and what remained was blocked from view by the Japanese capitol erected on the southern edge of the grounds in 1926. 
Kyongbok was again damaged during the Korean War (1950 to 1953) when American and South Korean forces fought twice with Chinese and North Korean troops over the city.
IN the 1960's, as South Korea got back on its feet, the Government began to restore Kyongbok. 
The main gate, called Kwangwha-mun, was reconstructed in front of the capitol in 1969 so that it would dominate a broad avenue through the center of the city - and hide the capitol built by the Japanese. 
Government offices were moved in 1983 to convert the capitol building to a museum, which was opened in 1986. 
Though the gate was reconstructed, much of the palace is original and the restoration retains the site's ancient atmosphere.
Within the palace grounds, the main audience hall, called Kunjong-jon, may best be seen from the edge of the flagstone courtyard to its front. 
With the jagged mountains as a backdrop, the view is stunning.
Perhaps the loveliest spot is the pavilion called Kyonghoe-ru, or the Pavilion of Joyous Meeting, an open structure whose tiled roof and eaves rest atop 48 pillars. 
Sitting beside a calm reflecting pool, the pavilion was the scene of receptions for foreign envoys or sometimes dissolute court parties during the Yi dynasty.
The pavilion is also the scene of official receptions in modern times. 
One summer evening in the 1970's a retired South Korean general stood in a corner of the pavilion when, in one of those rare moments of amity between South and North, a North Korean delegation was being entertained. 
The general, who had fought as an infantry commander in the Korean War, said: ''I tell you, I never thought I'd see this, when we welcomed North Koreans here.''
He sighed: ''Well, I guess it's better than bullets.''
In the back of the palace grounds is the National Folklore Museum. 
It provides an excellent introduction into Korean life in the 19th century with vivid displays of Buddhist, shaman and Confucian rituals and of houses, living and farming tools, pottery and artwork.
The National Museum of Korea, housing 90,000 items in the northeast quadrant of the palace grounds, was closed recently for remodeling but the new museum in the former capitol building, has a splendid collection of 7,500 pieces from ancient and medieval Korea.
Two exhibits stand out. 
In one large room are Buddhist statues, including several of Maitreya, the god or goddess of mercy and healing. 
Art historians have not decided whether Maitreya is male or female but the gentle, graceful lines bring peace and serenity to the viewer's soul.
In another room is a trove selected from 22,000 Chinese ceramics of the 14th century found off the southwest coast of Korea in 1975. 
After a fisherman snagged seven pieces in his net, the Korean Government sent divers to find a sunken ship. 
From that came vases, dishes, statuary, bowls, incense burners and pitchers, some in delicate shades of green celadon, others in white porcelain or black glaze, still more with silver or bronze glazes or bluish tints.
About four short city blocks to the east of Kyongbok is Ch'angdok, built in 1405 as a detached palace. 
After both were burned by Japanese invaders in 1592, Ch'angdok was rebuilt in 1611 to become the main palace. 
It is the best restored of the palaces but, unhappily, cannot be seen at leisure as the authorities apparently fear vandalism. 
Guides help visitors find the way through the maze of halls, living quarters and private courtyards but they intrude on the sensibilities by dispensing information through a bullhorn.
In the courtyard outside the main audience hall, called Injong-jon, are tablets to the right and left of the raised walkway marking the ranks of ministers and generals as they awaited a summons from the king. 
Visitors cannot enter the hall but the ornate interior can been seen from the front door. 
Centered along the back wall is a raised throne behind which stands a screen on which are painted five mountain peaks to symbolize, in Confucian lore, the five happinesses, the five elements or the five points of the compass, the fifth being the center where stands the king. 
Overhead is an intricately inlaid ceiling, three stories high, of gold and red.
Perhaps the nicest part of Ch'angdok is the stroll through the quiet courtyards and, if one wanders a bit from the tour group, sensing the secluded life of the palace. 
That is especially true in the adjacent Piwon, or Secret Garden. 
Lush with pines and maples and cherry blossoms, flowers that bloom in different seasons, filled with flowing streams and lotus ponds and small pavilions where the kings and their women idled a pleasant afternoon, the Secret Garden is perhaps the ultimate escape. 
But the gardens can also be instructive as, in one corner, the home of a well-to-do commoner has been erected to give some idea of life outside the walls.
NEXT to Ch'angdok and Piwon is the Ch'anggyong Palace, also once a detached palace. 
The main audience hall, Myongjong, escaped destruction during the Japanese invasion of 1592 and survives today as the oldest of those Yi dynasty chambers. 
Like the others, it is very ornate. 
The rest of the palace grounds are much like those of others but, with a large pond, seem more relaxed than those of Kyongbok or Ch'angdok, a place for picnicking on Sunday afternoon or for taking the kids on an outing. 
It differs from the other palaces in that the audience hall and main gate face east instead of south in what may have been a touch of cultural independence from China.
Finally, just southeast of Ch'angdok is the Chongmyo shrine in which are preserved in stone tablets the memory of the kings and queens of the Yi dynasty. 
The shrine was originally part of Ch'angdok but Japanese occupiers built a road through the grounds in 1932. 
There is not much to see in the shrine, except the simple stone tributes to rulers that are housed in two halls. 
On the first Sunday of May every year, the Yi Dynasty Association honors rulers of the 500-year reign by reenacting a highly stylized ceremony of wine drinking, music and chants and elaborate liturgies for the dead.
But the mood of Chongmyo is worth experiencing. 
On the rare day when Chongmyo has few visitors, an eerie lull settles on the secluded grounds. 
A rustle of leaves in the wind sounds remarkably like the skirt of royal gown brushing along the stone courtyard and the slam of a distant car door sounds like a muffled cough. 
As one turns to look, a slight movement from another corner of the grounds catches the eye and there is an uncanny feeling of being watched by an ancient spirit.
Correction
A picture caption on Sept. 
17 about Seoul misidentified a building on the grounds of the 14th-century Kyongbok Palace. 
It was the Korean National Folklore Museum, which was built in 1972, not the palace itself.
Because of a production error, an article on Sept. 
17 about Japanese pancakes omitted a passage. 
The section should have read: ''The main difference between eastern and western styles seems to be in the condiments. 
Whereas both finish off with a piquant brown sauce - something like a cross between Worcestershire and ketchup - as well as with a sprinkling of powdered seaweed, western-style goes a step further and adds swirls of mustard, ketchup and mayonnaise to the sauce.''
Correction-Date: October 8, 1989, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
The restored 14th-century Kyongbok Palace in Seoul. 
(Pam Hasegawa/Taurus)
