
One of the strangest and most popular coins munches coral and algae on the bottom of the Indian Ocean. 
The shell of the Maldive cowrie, Cypraea moneta, has been used as money by the Chinese, the Hawaiians, the West Africans and Ojibwa Indians. 
It was considered money 4,300 years ago and is still used today.
Even when the cowrie is not money, it makes a popular ornament and a potent fertility talisman. 
The cowrie filled a need for small change among the poorest people of the world. 
In Nigeria, for example, an English penny was worth 120 cowries.
The cowrie shell first surfaced as money in China in the 24th century B.C. The Chinese character pei, ''sea creature living in a shell,'' is still a part of many Chinese words associated with money. 
The cowries could not be counterfeited or defaced. 
The Chinese Emperor Wang Mang decreed that cowries would be the coins of the realm since copper coins were prey to clipping. 
Marco Polo noted the existence of cowries as money in Yunan and called them porcellani, a diminutive of porco, Italian for pig. 
The shells became the origin of the word, porcelain.
The people of the Maldives traded the cowrie for rice in Bengal, where 15 cowries bought a pound of rice. 
Later the cowrie was brought to Africa by Arab slave dealers and was in use in the Mali Empire 500 years ago.
King Gezo of Dahomey found the cowries the perfect coin - they could not be counterfeited and any worthwhile amount of them could not be hid from the royal tax collector. 
Popularity of the cowrie became spectacular when it was used by Dutch and English in the West African slave trade.
The English and the Dutch competed for the Maldive cowrie, each seeking to find favor with the king and queen of the Maldives. 
There the cowrie trade was a royal monopoly. 
Palm branches were floated on the ocean and removed once cowries started eating the leaves. 
Live cowries were placed in pits, then removed weeks later. 
They were washed, sorted and loaded as ballast aboard English and Dutch ships bound for London and Amsterdam. 
There the cowries were sold to the West African slave dealers. 
In the early 1500's an English slave dealer could purchase an adult slave for 16 pounds of cowries, about 6,400 shells.
By 1667, a slave cost 100 pounds of cowries and by 1772, 450 pounds. 
The reason for the inflation is found in the two species of cowries residing in the Indian Ocean. 
Another cowrie, Cypraea annulus or ring cowrie, is more numerous than the money cowrie, Cypraea moneta.
Only in the Maldives are the money cowries numerous enough to be culled profitably. 
On the shores of East Africa, the ring cowrie can be picked off the beach, which is exactly what the British did. 
When the ring cowries - they have a small reddish-orange circle on top of the shell - were introduced into the slave trade, they debased the other currency, the money cowries.
In the early 1900's the cowries began to disappear from international trade. 
Colonial authorities decreed that cowries would no longer be imported or be accepted as tax payments. 
And finally coins of extremely small denomination were minted.
The cowries are still in use in some remote areas of Ghana and Nigeria, especially in places where national boundaries cross tribal areas. 
There the cowries, without national insignia, are used for small transactions and the legend of the Cowrie Mother still exists. 
Living in the bush covered in cowries, she'll bring riches to the person who catches her. 
In Ghana the modern coin, the cedi, is a direct descendant of the old cowrie, called a sedie.
In the southern part of the United States, some houses still have a cowrie or two, their owners oblivious to the cowries monetary origins.
