
Political leaders receive awards frequently, but a double ceremony tentatively scheduled to take place in New York City on May 30 will be distinctly different. 
Two awards will be given to one of the leaders of the People's Republic of China for services to bridge.
Wan Li will be named ''Bridge Personality of the Year'' by the International Bridge Press Association and he will also receive an award from the American Contract Bridge League.
Mr. Wan has been involved as Deputy Prime Minister in his country's nuclear energy problems. 
He is now the chairman of the standing committee of the National People's Congress, and will be in Washington later this month as the guest of Vice-President Dan Quayle.
Mr. Wan and other members of the Chinese hierarchy including Deng Xiaoping, are enthusiasts who have encouraged the rapid growth of the game in their country. 
Team events sometimes draw 700 entries, and by the end of the century, China will probably have more players than any other country. 
Bridge is one of the few interests shared by the leadership and the student generation.
The diagramed deal played five years ago, earned Wan Li a different award from the I.B.P.A. 
He opened the South hand with one club, strong and artificial in accordance with the Precision system. 
The double showed major suits and North's one diamond was a ''positive-negative'' showing about six points. 
At the end of a contested auction South introduced an aggressive redouble, suggesting a willingness to raise the stakes.
The redouble might have induced East-West to retreat to five spades, failing by one trick barring a misguess in the trump suit. 
But they stood their ground and West made the imaginative lead of the spade eight. 
He was hoping to reach his partner for a heart lead, but South ruffed and studied his prospects. 
It was obvious that the hearts were on his left and he was in considerable danger of losing three tricks in that suit.
Most players would charge ahead, supposing that they could strip out the side-suits and eventually duck a heart to West. 
But South correctly saw that this would not quite work. 
By the time he had drawn trumps and ruffed two diamonds there would be no trumps left in the dummy and the endplay would fail.
The fact that West held major-suit length greatly increased the chance of finding East with both missing diamond honors. 
South therefore crossed to dummy and led the diamond nine. 
It would not have helped East to cover and he played low smoothly. 
South did likewise, holding his breath, and felt better when the nine held.
Now the declarer led a second diamond. 
A spade ruff would have been better, but would have led to the same result and this time East played the jack. 
South took the king and could see his way to an endplay. 
A trump lead to dummy and a spade ruff left this ending:
 
[Diagram]
The spade queen was discarded on the diamond ace and the diamond ten was ruffed. 
A heart was led to the eight, and West was forced to make a losing lead. 
Notice that the endplay would have been equally successful if East had held a singleton honor, for South would, of course, have played low. 
Wan Li made his redoubled contract and demonstrated shrewdness and ability.
Correction
The headline of the bridge column last Sunday misidentified Wan Li. 
He is Chairman of the National People's Congress in China, not Deputy Prime Minister.
Correction-Date: May 21, 1989, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
