
Some money just goes up in smoke. 
In Chinese communities around the world joss money does just that. 
It's burned in honor of the dead so the deceased can make ends meet in the afterlife and at 50 cents for a hundred notes, joss money is a bargain.
N.T. Wang, a senior research scholar at Columbia University's East Asian Institute, says that there are two worlds in Chinese belief - the yin and the yan. 
The living reside in the yan and the dead in the yin. 
And although the two are separate, some commerce exists between the two. 
Chinese believe that dead ancestors continue to care for their living descendants and guard them against misfortune. 
In return, the living continue to offer food, money and other necessities to their ancestors.
At a spring festival, called Qing Ming, families gather to pay homage to their ancestors. 
Meats and fruits are left for the dead, paper houses and paper banknotes are burned. 
In the past gold- or silver-colored foil was shaped into bullion bars and burned.
In autumn, another festival honors ghosts of the nether world. 
Called Da Jiao, it is a chance to appease spirits other than those of the family. 
Professor Wang explains that the world of yin also has ghosts who are rogues and gangsters. 
They must be appeased in the nether world just as they are in this one so fake gold and silver coins are sprinkled at funerals.
Classical Chinese belief describes the passage from the world of the living to the world of the dead as a one-way street. 
But Hindu and Buddhist influences have made inroads into that belief and some Chinese now feel that reincarnation is possible. 
Those Chinese think that offering joss money will help the dead do good deeds in the afterlife and then be reborn into a better life.
Funeral notes come in various colors; in the United States green is popular. 
On the front is a picture of the Lord of the Dead - Yen Wang. 
Two of his assistants supervise the receipt of all offerings and their signatures appear. 
Different spellings occur but those printed in Shen Zhen, China, appear as Yin Low and Yuk Wong. 
Joss money can be purchased in packets of 100 notes in denominations from one dollar to 50 million dollars. 
If the thought of carrying around a packet worth five billion dollars appeals, this reminder is offered as a public service - banknotes are only redeemable at the Bank of Hell.
