
An Eye on China
Americans in the clothing business are viewing the upheaval in China with deep concern.
In 1988 China was America's third- largest apparel trading partner, behind Hong Kong and Taiwan, exporting nearly 800 million square yards of clothing and textiles, worth $2.2 billion in all, to the United States. 
But in terms of number of garments, China is the No. 1 supplier to the United States.
Chinese-made clothes represent approximately 6 percent of all garments sold in this country, said Carl Priestland, the chief economist of the American Apparel Manufacturers Association. 
Chain retailers like K Mart and J. C. Penney and manufacturers like Liz Claiborne have become heavily involved with Chinese manufacturers in the last several years.
''There is no doubt there will be some effect, some late deliveries,'' said Bernie Ozer, a vice president of Associated Merchandising Corporation, which has an office in Hong Kong and representatives in China. 
''We're monitoring the situation in every way possible. 
Right now nobody knows.''
Mr. Ozer said there will almost certainly be delivery problems for early fall clothes.
''So far there has been no interruption of the flow of merchandise,'' said Herbert Rounick, the chairman of Hero Industries Inc., which imports women's dresses, suits, sweaters and blouses from China for its Oleg Cassini licensed apparel line.
Mr. Rounick pointed out that little garment manufacturing is done in Beijing and that he had experienced no communications problems with his Shanghai office. 
''If it's contained in Beijing, we foresee no problems,'' he said. 
''There's not much happening in the countryside, where most of the textile factories are.''
Beyond that, Mr. Rounick said he was hopeful that the ''new moves will bring in younger people who are more astute in pursuing businesses.''
 
Garment District Expansion
Real estate in the garment district has been undergoing a transformation, reflecting trends in manufacturing and retailing. 
On Broadway in the high 30's, a short block away from the true glitz of Seventh Avenue where the top designers have their showrooms, several buildings are being changed from combination office and textile showrooms to what realtors call ''first class'' ready-to-wear showrooms.
The movement toward larger, modernized showrooms mirrors changes in apparel retailing, where mergers and acquisitions of the last three years have resulted in centralized buying offices and, consequently, a reliance on fewer - and larger - clothing manufacturers. 
At the same time, retail sales have slumped, driving manufacturers out of the city or out of business.
''The marginal garment center tenants don't have the staying power,'' said Michael Kornblum, a senior partner of Catalano Kornblum Development Corporation, which is renovating 1412 Broadway, at 39th Street. 
''But for tenants who hit it big, 3,000 square feet is no longer enough. 
Some of the buildings do not accommodate lateral expansion.''
Catalano Kornblum has signed up Escada, a large German apparel company, to lease 35,000 square feet in the renovated No. 1412 building. 
Other Broadway renovations for first-class showrooms include Nos. 
1450, 1386 and 1372. 
A new office building at 115 West 39th Street, the first new construction in the garment center in two decades, will also be primarily for fashion showrooms.
''Seventh Avenue was once known as the better-price area and Broadway the cheaper,'' said Sidney Winoker, the president of Winoker Realty, the renting agent for 1450 Broadway, whose new tenants include Cherokee and Giorgio Armani men's hosiery. 
''But that distinction is starting to break down.''
Meanwhile, offshore production has shrunk the domestic textile business and forced the survivors to seek less expensive rents. 
''The problem is bolts of fabric take up a lot of room,'' said Peter Catalano, Mr. Kornblum's partner. 
''There has been a lot of octopussing out to the side streets,'' he added.
''A lot of manufacturers moved out of the city because of retailers going into private label,'' Mr. Kornblum said. 
''I see people outside of fashion moving in.''
He mentioned law and real-estate firms as the kind of nonfashion tenants who have been moving into the garment district.
 
Scarfs for AIDS Benefit
Beginning tomorrow, Bergdorf Goodman will exhibit a series of 69 scarfs by designers and artists like Geoffrey Beene, Bill Blass, Hubert de Givenchy, Stephen Sprouse, Roz Chast, Paul Davis, Maurice Sendak and Kenny Scharf. 
The designs also appear in a new book, ''The Scarf'' (Stewart, Tabori & Chang), by Andrew Baseman.
The one-of-a-kind silk squares will be on display in the store's 57th Street windows for one week; then they are to be auctioned off in a benefit for the Design Industries Foundation for AIDS. 
(This gives the foundation a major plate-glass presence in New York: costumes produced by Metropolitan Home magazine for its Love Ball benefit are in the windows of Barneys New York.) The auction of the designer scarfs is a silent one. 
Throughout the week sealed bids will be accepted in excess of $250, which is not a bad floor price considering that a regular Hermes scarf retails for about $175.
