
After more than a decade of unrelievedly vicious fighting and months of stalled peace talks, there is now a possibility that the end of the Cambodian civil war is imminent.
Probability is not the word, at least not yet. 
The Cambodian Government and rebels seeking to overthrow it have accused each other of violations of the cease-fire they agreed to only last month, and Western and Asian diplomats have been embarrassed before in predicting a quick end to the war.
Some diplomats say they still do not understand how there can be peace in Cambodia as long as there is the threat of a return to power by the Khmer Rouge, the Communist guerrillas whose radical attempt to remake Cambodian society resulted in more than a million deaths in their four-year reign in the 1970's.
But later this month, China, the patron of the Khmer Rouge, is scheduled to sponsor a new round of peace talks in Beijing that will bring together representatives of the Vietnamese-backed Phnom Penh regime and the three major rebel factions.
 
Shifts by Hanoi and Sihanouk
Chinese leaders are thought to be ready to use their influence at the talks to insist on new progress toward peace in Cambodia, a nation whose reputation acquired over centuries as a land of bounty and of a gentle grace has been sullied in a war often fought between soldiers young enough to be considered children.
There are other elements to the new optimism about prospects for a lasting settlement in Cambodia.
One is the Government of Vietnam, which seems willing to give up much of its influence in neighboring Cambodia in order to improve its relationship with China. 
There is also the stated desire of the exiled Cambodian leader Prince Norodom Sihanouk to die in peace in the land he ruled as a god-king until 1970.
"I want to die on Khmer soil," the mercurial 68-year-old Prince told a news conference last month in the Thai beach resort of Pattaya, where he was host of what may have been the most fruitful round of peace talks since the Vietnamese launched their invasion of Cambodia in 1978.
 
The Go-Ahead From Beijing
At the Pattaya talks, the Cambodian Government and the three major rebel groups -- the Khmer Rouge, the followers of Prince Sihanouk, and a faction faithful to former Prime Minister Son Sann -- agreed not only to an indefinite cease-fire, but also to a cessation of foreign arms supplies.
The agreements were reached under a framework drafted last year by the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council.
"The progress last month in ending this stalemate is due directly to the actions of Sihanouk," said a Western diplomat in Bangkok. 
"It appears the Chinese have given him the go-ahead to make peace, and his willingness to set aside past differences was the magic of Pattaya."
Temperamental, impishly charming and a man of shifting loyalties, the Prince remains a revered figure to many in his homeland, and diplomatic observers and Cambodian participants described the air of reconciliation fostered by Prince Sihanouk at the talks as remarkable.
 
Air of Reconciliation
For example, during earlier negotiations, the leader of the Vietnamese-backed Government in Phnom Penh, Prime Minister Hun Sen, and the Khmer Rouge negotiator, Khieu Samphan, were said to barely acknowledge the presence of each other in the same room.
But at Pattaya, Mr. Hun Sen, who rose to power in Phnom Penh after defecting from the Khmer Rouge, turned to Mr. Khieu Samphan at one point and described him as "my beloved excellency."
To an extent not yet clear, the success of the Cambodian talks was being determined hundreds of miles away, in Vietnam's capital, Hanoi, where the governing Communist Party was meeting the same week in its first party congress in five years.
While pledging continued support for the Government in Cambodia, the party made clear its desire for closer ties to Beijing and its intention to put an end to military interventions like the 1978 Cambodian invasion.
 
Reining In the Khmer Rouge
In what appeared to be a signal to China, the party ousted Vietnam's Foreign Minister, Nguyen Co Thach, who had long been seen in Beijing as China's chief adversary in Hanoi.
"I think the Chinese feel that with Thach gone and with the Vietnamese bowing out as the sponsors in Phnom Penh, it's time to restore some sort of peace in Cambodia," said an Asian diplomat. 
"You'll see China willing to rein in the Khmer Rouge."
The other superpowers are playing a more limited role in forging a peace agreement in Cambodia.
The United States has provided what is officially described as nonmilitary aid to Prince Sihanouk's followers and the Son Sann faction, and it has put pressure on Vietnam to end the war in exchange for normalized relations with Washington.
The Soviet Union has aligned itself diplomatically with Vietnam and with the Cambodian Government but, consumed by its internal problems, the Kremlin has indicated a desire to end all military involvement in Indochina.
The intentions of the feared Khmer Rouge remain the principal mystery in the peace negotiations.
