
Wang Qiming, a violinist from Beijing, grew up thinking of America as a paradise. 
Then he arrived in New York and had his luggage stolen at the airport. 
That was only the beginning of his troubles: he lost a small fortune gambling and his daughter became a drug addict before she was kidnapped and murdered.
Mr. Wang is a fictional character, but his creator, Cao Guilin, is a Chinese emigrant who lives in Queens and says the character is based on his own experiences.
In any case, his book, "A Beijing Man in New York," is the talk of the Chinese capital these days. 
It has been serialized in Beijing Wanbao, the most-read newspaper in the capital. 
A radio play based on the book is now being broadcast daily at lunchtime across the country, affording the public a tour through the seamy side of New York.
Many ordinary Chinese are reading with fascination about the experiences of a fellow Chinese who makes it to America and who initially strikes it rich by opening a small garment factory. 
Figuring out how to get to the United States is almost an obsession for many young Chinese, and Mr. Guilin's novel seems to offer a glimpse of what life might be like if they succeeded. 
At the same time, the Government is delighted to publicize how cruel life can be under capitalism.
Chinese newspapers have no shortage of reports about murders, rapes, robberies and homelessness in America. 
But many Chinese say they discount the reports as exaggerated or distorted. 
The novel, however, has captured the public imagination, and many readers seem genuinely surprised at its portrayal of the hardships faced by immigrants there.
"I picked it up accidentally and since then I've read every episode," said a college-educated restaurateur in Beijing. 
"Life in America is not a heaven, and this shows the ups and downs of an immigrant's life."
When the novel was first printed in a magazine, all 120,000 copies sold out immediately. 
Then it was published in book form in September, and that sold out. 
Now another magazine has published it, and it is being serialized in the China Press, a Chinese-language newspaper in New York.
"From a literary point of view, the craftsmanship is not very good, but the emotion is real," said Wang Hongxian, the magazine editor who first printed the story. 
"A number of students overseas write about their experiences. 
Some focus on the difficulties, some focus on the good things. 
This is not like those. 
It's more real, more objective."
In the novel, after Mr. Wang loses his luggage, he gets a job as a dishwasher while his wife knits for a garment factory. 
They are able to buy an old car and move into a decent apartment in their first year. 
Then Mr. Wang and his wife borrow money to start a knitwear factory. 
They become rich and buy a few buildings and a better car.
But life for the Wangs starts to turn sour when their daughter, corrupted by New York City schools, leaves home, turns to drugs and is kidnapped. 
Meanwhile, the factory goes bankrupt and Mr. Wang loses $40,000 when he gambles away the last of his money in the hopes of making enough to pay his debts. 
In the end, the kidnappers demand a ransom, which Mr. Wang cannot afford, so they kill his daughter.
"New York, ah, it really is a heaven in hell, a hell in heaven," moans the fictional Mr. Wang.
Mr. Cao, who was a violinist in Beijing before he left a decade ago for the United States, said he wrote the book because he wanted to dispel the fantasies that many young Chinese have about America. 
He admits he spiced it up to make it "more readable."
"You can achieve the American dream, but you can't just step off the plane and get it," Mr. Cao, who is himself a successful knitwear manufacturer, said in a phone interview. 
"You must go through a hard, bitter struggle that might make your heart bleed, but this cultural shock, you must go through all this before you can achieve the American dream."
Mr. Cao said he is surprised at the stir his novel has created in Beijing. 
Royalties, Mr. Cao said with a laugh, are no more than enough to cover a plane ride to Beijing. 
But he said he plans to publish another book soon.
