
IN a quiet enclave in the heart of Sichuan Province, two giant pandas ambled playfully among the rocks and bamboo, oblivious to the growing fear that their species could become extinct within decades.
Millions of dollars have been spent to preserve panda habitats and save the animals from hunters who kill them for pelts. 
But the efforts have been stymied by red tape and in-fighting among Government ministries. 
The result is that the panda is losing its competition with humans.
"I'm rather pessimistic about the giant panda," said Yin Lin, a technician who conducts artificial insemination in the panda at the Chengdu Zoo. 
"There is a very strong trend toward extinction."
According to China's official statistics, there are only about 1,000 pandas left in the wild, and another 100 in zoos all over the world. 
Privately, some experts say the number of pandas in the wild is as low as 700.
 
Loss of Food Supply
Pandas eat bamboo, but their digestion is so poor they must eat practically all day long to get enough nourishment. 
But in China, where arable land and wood are scarce, both local residents and the Government have cut down substantial areas of bamboo forests.
Many specialists say the panda's best chances for survival are in the wild, rather than in the zoos, but the wild panda reserves do not necessarily get the funds, and when they do success is limited.
"Our hearts are aching with anxiety," said Pan Wenshi, a panda specialist at Beijing University. 
"We know the panda must rely on man to survive. 
But man has not yet offered a good way of helping it."
Researchers and officials are often limited in what they can do: they lack funds, they do not have enough decision-making power or they are overruled by the bureaucracy.
Sometimes the panda projects are bogged down by petty jealousies and proud bureaucrats, both Chinese and foreign experts say. 
Money and time are often wasted on repetition of effort, and more money does not necessarily mean better results.
For example, at the Wolong Reserve, a large panda preservation about 90 miles northwest of Chengdu, officials built a research site with $1 million donated a decade ago by the World Wide Fund for Nature. 
Experts envisioned a program to breed pandas and put them back in the wild. 
In the past decade, however, the center has bred only one panda, and it died.
One problem is that China's reserves and zoos do not work together to share specialists, resources or even good breeding pandas. 
Specialists at the Chengdu Zoo have not been welcomed at Wolong, and panda experts from Beijing have been turned away, researchers say.
Part of the reason is that pandas in the wild are controlled by the Ministry of Forestry, while pandas in captivity are managed by the Ministry of Construction.
"We do have some contact, but there are some administrative obstacles," said a panda researcher under the Ministry of Construction. 
"It's a problem. 
But if we had a leading group overseeing panda work, who would lead it?"
This year Wolong appears to be opening up to outside researchers, and the Chengdu Zoo sent its first male panda to the center for mating this spring. 
Academics say that while this is progress, there are still many turf wars and problems.
"It's territorial behavior," said Wang Song, a biologist at the Academy of Sciences in Beijing. 
"The Smithsonian and the American Government departments cooperate very well. 
Under socialism, we should be better but we're not."
China's 14 panda reserves also face other challenges. 
They are isolated from each other, and sometimes they have so few pandas that the fertile ones have difficulty finding mates. 
As a result, there are problems with inbreeding as well as relatively low reproduction rates. 
The World Wild Fund for Nature has proposed linking the reserves together to address these problems, but some experts say this is often not feasible.
Another problem is that even in the reserves, the pandas have two-legged neighbors. 
Frantic researchers at Qinling Reserve in Shaanxi Province are trying to raise money to relocate the reserve's 2,200 human residents, who have slowly encroached upon the bamboo forest.
In Wolong Reserve, new houses have been built for 3,000 residents, but the residents refuse to move unless they are fully compensated for farming income they would lose. 
Meanwhile, the authorities built a power station to prevent them from further destroying bamboo trees for fuel.
"Everything about pandas gets mired in politics and sometimes it's forgotten that the main purpose is to save the pandas," said George B. Schaller, director for science at Wildlife Conservation International in New York.
Many experts say the panda population has dwindled to 700 to 900 over the past decade, although Chinese officials have been unwilling to announce the results of a panda census completed three years ago, and the official Government estimate remains about 1,000. 
In any case, some experts say the census faced enormous obstacles and was not very thorough. 
Some say it is possible there are more than 1,000 pandas.
The previous census, in the late 1970's, counted about 2,000 pandas, experts with first-hand knowledge say. 
But the Government announced that the panda population was about 1,000, apparently because it anticipated a decline and did not want to be blamed for it. 
Some experts believe that the authorities reported a lower number to attract more attention and funds to help the pandas.
Scientists say poaching is the principal reason for the population decline. 
In Wolong, the panda population dropped by half: from 145 to 72 in the 12 years to 1986, according to a recent report by the World Wide Fund for Nature.
 
Death Penalty for Poaching
"Hunting is the most serious immediate problem," said Mr. Schaller. "If poaching isn't checked, the panda will disappear."
Pandas have become so prized that the value of a pelt has risen to more than $10,000 to $20,000 in some parts of China, according to various Chinese and foreign reports. 
The pelts make their way through a long chain of underground dealers before they end up abroad, especially in Taiwan and Japan.
China recently decreed the death penalty for poaching and trading in panda pelts, and so far at least four men have been sentenced to death. 
A recent report in the official Public Security News said that in Sichuan alone there have been arrests in about 200 cases of trafficking in panda pelts in the last few years.
The impact of poaching is particularly serious in light of the panda's poor reproductive abilities. 
A female panda ovulates once a year, and may raise about half a dozen babies in her lifetime if she is lucky. 
Breeding in zoos has been difficult because not all researchers know how to tell when a panda is ovulating. 
Even if a panda is born, it frequently dies in the first few weeks or months, either because the mother accidently crushes it to death, or because it is not fed properly.
"In the best of worlds, the panda reproduces at an incredibly slow rate," said Devra G. Kleiman, a zoologist at the National Zoological Park of the Smithsonian Institution in Washington. 
"That's why the loss of even a single breeding period of a single panda is a real loss."
For this reason, some experts say that among pandas in captivity, all efforts should be concentrated on breeding, rather than putting them up for exhibition. 
But pandas for exhibition have become an enormously lucrative business for the Chinese zoos or institutions that control them.
A Chinese zoo can make more than $500,000 on the loan of a single panda for a few months, and the drive to make money often interferes with panda breeding.
Peter Karsten, director of the Calgary Zoo in Canada, also asserted that Chinese zoos sometimes loaned mismatched panda couples -- either pairs of the same sex or pairs that are unlikely to breed -- to avoid being embarrassed if a foreign zoo was able to arrange a mating that had eluded the animals' home zoo. 
He also said that China tries to control the supply of pandas outside China, perhaps for commercial reasons.
At a broader level, experts complain that there is a fierce competition among institutions that control the pandas, and the result is that zoos and ministries guard, rather than share, pandas as well as knowledge about how to care for them.
Thus, after nearly 20 years of panda breeding in China, only 28 pandas have been bred and raised successfully in captivity there, Chinese panda experts say.
Because of the poor track record, some specialists are skeptical about breeding programs, and more broadly, about panda preservation in China. 
Even Chinese experts have some difficulty in waxing optimistic.
"It will take several generations of researchers before we have success," said Hu Jinchu, a panda expert at the University of Nanchong in Sichuan. 
"This may be 100 to 200 years. 
But if the Government policy is good, the economy is good, the educational level is improved and we get international cooperation, then maybe there will be hope."
