
There was quite an instructive report on Chinese television this week, showing a ceremony at the Great Hall of the People in Tiananmen Square and featuring some of China's new heroes: the People's Armed Police.
A smiling Prime Minister Li Peng and the Communist Party General Secretary, Jiang Zemin, appeared before what was described as ''an enlarged meeting'' of the party committee of the armed police to thank them for their efforts in turning back the ''counterrevolutionary rebellion'' in June - regarded in the Western world, at least, as demonstrations for democracy.
Mr. Li and Mr. Jiang pointed out to the gathered security forces that while the national situation ''is going back to normal, they should not relax their vigilance,'' the official People's Daily reported in a front-page story.
The television report showed a display of military vehicles going up and down the streets. 
Although the ceremony itself took place on Dec. 
25, the day that the Rumanian leader, Nicolae Ceausescu, and his wife, Elena, were executed, the newspaper and television reports served to remind Chinese who might see an allegory in the fate of the Ceausescus that the security forces are prepared to defend their party - if anyone had forgotten.
To further the fight and also improve the image of the police, a new television series, ''Special Policemen,'' is being filmed. 
In 10 parts, the series will depict the police carrying out their duties in inns, gambling halls and other dens of iniquity.
But rather than ''the glint and flash of cold steel,'' the New China News Agency said, the series will feature ''the work, love and family life of policemen.''
A venture of the China Filming Art Center and the Beijing Public Security Bureau, it has a cast including ''comedians and policemen from local police stations,'' the agency said.
In a similar fashion, the efforts of the People's Liberation Army have not gone unnoticed by the official press. 
This week saw the end of a six-part newspaper series on their strenuous but rewarding work.
Readers were informed that every regiment has its own factories, fields and pig farm. 
Maj. Wang Shujie said proudly that his regiment's pig farm provided each soldier with almost two pounds of pork last year, ''which was much higher than the criterion set by the Army's General Logistics Department.''
Army life, according to the report, ''is always strenuous.''
Still, ''even those university students who have been to the division for military training have enjoyed it.''
After the crushing of the protests in June, the entire incoming freshman class of the elite Beijing University was sent off for military and ideological training for a year, and freshmen at other universities spent at least a month in uniform.
According to the series, the provision of excellent recreational areas more than makes up for the sacrifices of national service. 
Every regiment has a ''soldier's home'' with rec room, library and air-gun shooting room; every company ''is assigned a television set by the P.L.A. 
General Political Department.''
And then there are the party-organized entertainments. 
Pvt. Yan Lidong, recruited last February, ''still cherishes the memory of winning the top prize by performing a break dance'' at a celebration to mark the birthday of the People's Liberation Army. 
But if potential recruits still have qualms, the last part of the series, devoted to ''the family life of army officers,'' should ease them. 
Officers in the 179th Division, stationed in Nanjing, in Jiangsu Province, get married around the age of 25, the report states, ''and no one older than 30 is not married.''
Liu Zhongcheng, a company political instructor, spends his days off trying to do all he can to relieve his wife of the household chores. 
''But his wife, a hospital nurse, refuses his help and asks him to take a rest,'' the article said.
Chen Xia, the head of the district matchmaking office for army officers, says she has little trouble performing her duties. 
''In the girls' eyes, army officers are manly and heroic,'' she said. 
''Moreover, they think a wife of an army officer is usually respected by others.''
