
Serious flaws in family-planning programs in China and India make it unlikely that the world's two most populous nations will be able to stabilize growth until well into the next century, by which time they may have added more than 1.5 billion people to the world's population, according to findings published this week by the independent Population Crisis Committee.
The problem is especially acute in India, the research group says. 
India, with a population of about 882 million that is growing 2.1 percent a year, is likely to overtake China as the most populous country by 2035, the committee says; India's population may reach 2 billion before leveling off.
China, with about 1.165 billion people, is likely to stabilize at about 1.5 billion, the group says.
The world's population is estimated at 5.4 billion.
 
Burdens on the Environment
The continued growth in India and China contributes to an intensifying crisis in ecological and human resources in large areas of Asia, where land is being rapidly degraded by overuse, water supplies are under strain and agriculture must struggle to stay ahead of soil and water depletion.
Throughout Asia, there is no longer time to let economic development lead to smaller family size, as happened in industrial nations. 
Some Asian nations, led by South Korea, Thailand and Indonesia, have made significant reductions in population growth through effective family planning.
"For people who are concerned about problems like global warming, ozone-layer depletion or world poverty, we just have to be vitally interested in the success or failure of the Chinese and Indian programs," said Sharon L. Camp, senior vice president of the Population Crisis Committee.
Copies of the reports are available for $5 each, including postage, from the Population Crisis Committee, 1120 19th Street, Washington, D.C. 
20036.
 
India 'Most Critical'
The studies of China and India conclude that the success of China's much-publicized population-control efforts have been "exaggerated," and that most couples have not one, but two or three children.
The situation in India is more dire.
"From a demographic perspective, India may be the world's most critical country," the Population Crisis Committee says. 
Nearly half the illiterate people in the world live in India, where a third of the people suffer from malnutrition.
The studies -- "India's Family Planning Challenge: From Rhetoric to Action" and "China's Family Planning Program: Challenging the Myths" -- call for more international assistance to the two countries, and more receptivity in Beijing and New Delhi to outside advice and help.
 
U.S. Angry With China
Under the Reagan and Bush Administrations, however, Washington has denied family-planning aid to China because of coercive population-control programs, including forced abortions.
Under the influence of Republican conservatives, Washington also halted its contributions in 1985 to the United Nations Population Fund, citing its involvement in programs like China's. 
Washington supplied 20 percent of the fund's resources, and its withdrawal has hobbled the fund's work in both Asia and Africa.
The United States policy took shape in 1984, just before an international population conference in Mexico City, where Washington took a strong stand against abortion and population control in general. 
Abortions are used frequently in poor nations to regulate child-bearing.
Although Congress has been generous in appropriating money for programs in many other countries, and the United States Agency for International Development is a major contributor to family-planning programs worldwide, the policies on China and contributions to international organizations continue.
The reports on China and India, written by Ms. Camp and Shanti R. Conly, the committee's director of population policy analysis, fault both countries on the limited options available to women seeking contraception.
 
Flawed Technology
In India, sterilization (mostly of women) accounts for 70 percent of contraception. 
Because of the near finality of the method and the risks to health from unsterile operations, many women wait until they have had four or more children, Indian experts say.
In China, an outdated and often risky steel-ring intrauterine device is used by 60 million women, the study says. 
About 36 percent of women rely on tubal ligation.
The roots of the problems are different. 
In India the Government has pledged a renewed effort to slow population growth, but many earlier efforts have been undercut by cultural resistance and a lack of political will. 
Conversely, in China, the determination of the Government to cut growth drastically led to Draconian measures that also aroused opposition.
But the Population Crisis Committee study found similarities in the shortcomings of the two nations' programs.
"Local programs in China and India are typically characterized by poorly trained personnel who lack both the interpersonal skills and technical knowledge necessary to adequately counsel clients on the risks and benefits of contraceptive measures," the committee said.
