
The 15-story Glory China Tower, now under construction at 11 East Broadway, on the corner of Catherine Street, is at least eight months away from completion, but its development would seem to further the case for East Broadway as Chinatown's Wall Street.
The main tenant is to be the Ka Wah Bank of Hong Kong, which is owned by Citic -- the China International Trust and Investment Corporation -- based in Beijing. 
While Ka Wah has operated in New York since 1983, the opening of its new branch in 1991 will mark its debut as a retail bank. 
Its offices are now on the 38th floor of the Continental Illinois Building, 520 Madison Avenue, between 53d and 54th Streets. 
That location alone discourages anything but specialized business.
"We are authorized to do retail banking but we don't actively promote it," said Peter Zhao, senior vice president of the Ka Wah Bank and manager of its New York branch. 
"Asking Chinese people to come uptown and do business on the 38th floor is not ideal. 
Basically, we've been doing wholesale business."
"The bank had been looking for a prime location in Chinatown for quite a long time," Mr. Zhao said, "and this was one of the best locations."
Indeed, it is virtually at the center of a remarkable cluster of financial institutions around Chatham Square, including the Abacus Federal Savings Bank, 6 Bowery; Asia Bank, 23 Chatham Square; Bank of China, 42 East Broadway; Chinese American Bank, 225 Park Row; Citibank, 2 Mott Street; Golden City Bank, 45 East Broadway; Hang Seng Bank, 27 East Broadway; Hongkong Bank, 29 Bowery; Manhattan Savings Bank, 17 Chatham Square and United Orient Bank, 10 Chatham Square. 
These are based variously in New York, Hong Kong, Taiwan and China.
The site at No. 11 used to be occupied by the Pagoda movie theater. 
Earlier redevelopment plans, by a local builder, called for a hotel there. 
After that proved unworkable for lack of financing, the property was purchased in 1988 by Glory China Development Ltd., of Hong Kong. 
"They thought the best way was to build an office building and let a bank occupy this prime location," Mr. Zhao said. 
Ka Wah will occupy the first three floors and penthouse of the 60,000-square-foot structure.
The building, with limestone and glass curtain walls, was designed by Daniel Pang & Associates of Manhattan.
