
WHEN the first tanks rolled through Tiananmen Square on June 4, ''tourism to the People's Republic of China was crushed for the foreseeable future and probably for many years to come,'' Linda Ball, editor of the trade publication Tour and Travel News, wrote after she returned from China. 
Although her colleagues may dispute her on how long tourism to China will be eclipsed, people in the trade agree that a decade of effort by Chinese officials and Americans with commercial and personal investments was blown away in a matter of hours.
Take the flights of Northwest and United Airlines. 
Until the crackdown by Chinese authorities on the protesting students, Northwest was providing twice-a-week service into Shanghai from Osaka, Japan, on 747's with a capacity of 400 passengers. 
According to Bob Gibbons, a spokesman, the flight now goes only once a week - in on Monday and out on Tuesday - but there are only 150 passengers. 
Before the crackdown, Mr. Gibbons said, all of Northwest's flights in the Pacific were nearly twice that, about 70 percent full.
United, according to Sara Dornacker, a spokeswoman, had been sending three flights a week into China since February 1986. 
In the week of June 18, this was cut to one flight a week - into Beijing from Tokyo on Friday and out one hour later. 
On Friday, June 23, this flight, also using a 747 with a capacity of 400, carried just 72 fare-paying passengers into China. 
''And that's up from what it had been,'' Ms. Dornacker said.
Some of the impact was not felt for a few days. 
''I had one person who canceled June 21 on an October departure,'' said Howard C. Smith, president of the Chinasmith travel agency in New York. 
''They were willing to wait and see until the executions started. 
Then they said 'no way.'
''
That harsh ''no way'' undoes the long labor China began in 1978 when it opened its portals and began to seek dollars from tourism. 
The first tourists in almost 30 years went to worthwhile but dull places, in what is called hard class, but the Chinese moved to adapt to tourists' demands with the establishment of hotels and airline service with names familiar in the West. 
Northwest Airlines began flying into China again for the first time since the 40's on May 2, 1984.
By 1988, according to officials of the China National Tourist Office in New York, the trade contributed $2.2 billion to the gross national product. 
In the first four months of 1989, the trade publication Travel Weekly said, China was host to 93,000 United States tourists.
The negative impact of the Chinese Government's move to halt the demonstrations was felt quickly. 
United flew two evacuation charter flights for the State Department on June 8, in addition to its three scheduled flights that week. 
The line filled 1,290 seats of the 2,000 it had available on the five flights, Ms. Dornacker said. 
Mr. Gibbons said that in the rush, Northwest at first thought that more charters would be needed, but ''it was one person with 18 reservations'' who created the illusory demand.
 
Cruise Ships
Pearl Cruises dropped all its cruises into China for the rest of 1989: ''China Dynasty'' for June 23, as an example, became ''Highlights of the Orient,'' with calls in Japan, South Korea, Hong Kong and Taiwan. 
On June 22, Royal Viking Line discarded its China schedule for the fall; ''China in Depth,'' scheduled to depart Sept. 
10, became ''Shogun Autumn,'' with calls in Japan, South Korea, Okinawa, Taiwan and Hong Kong.
Pacific Delight, which describes itself as the biggest packager of tours to China and the Orient, canceled all its trips to China up to early August and began amending 60 or 65 of its 94 itineraries, according to Lythia Rousseas, a spokeswoman. 
Tour operators everywhere have done the same.
June was not over when Chinese authorities began to try to repair the damage. 
The China International Travel Service in Beijing said it was guaranteeing the safety of tourists and it was safe for everyone to return. 
''Now we are getting telexes and faxes from China agencies asking us please to send our people back,'' Mr. Smith, the president of Chinasmith, said on June 22. 
''They say they are offering 20 percent discounts across the board, and that is only the start.
''Of course, I have to reply that no one is asking to go to China. 
My reaction is that I cannot send people under the circumstances. 
For me, the tea is bitter because I always enjoyed going - I don't like what's going on.''
When Mr. Smith was interviewed, he said his agency was spending 90 percent of its time processing refunds. 
Clients who requested them were getting full refunds, he said, unless some of the money had already been sent to China, in which case a service fee of $150 was deducted. 
Most of his clients, he said, were accepting reroutings to Southeast Asia. 
For those who remained determined to go to China despite State Department warning against it, he said he was considering having them sign a risk-waiver form.
A Pacific Delight client who wants to shift to a new itinerary receives a discount of $100, Ms. Rousseas said. 
Pacific Delight is giving full refunds, on request, to all those booked on canceled trips. 
But like all the organizations interviewed, Pacific Delight said it weighed the situation day by day, considering how far ahead to cancel or maintain plans.
Most agencies and packagers, including the cruise lines, are giving full refunds to clients, and the fiscal health of an agency may hinge on how much money had already been remitted to China. 
Ms. Rousseas said that Pacific Delight was discussing with the Chinese authorities what might be recovered on deposits for tours. 
She said that the New York office laid off four out of 45 employees as a result of the drop in tours to China.
 
Ethnic Market
The most immediate impact was felt in the so-called ethnic travel market: Chinese families planning to visit friends and relatives in China. 
George Chen, president of C. L. Thomson Express, a big ticket wholesaler, said: ''Chinese visits to their friends and relatives in China dried up right away. 
And the ethnic travel agents are dead in their tracks now.''
Mr. Chen, who has offices in San Francisco but who began building his business in Hong Kong, said that one problem was Chinese-Americans' fear that they might be prevented from leaving China if there was further upheaval.
Mr. Chen does not sell his consolidator tickets to the public, only to travel agencies, so he is particularly sensitive to business failures. 
He said on June 22 that he had heard of no closings yet. 
''They don't react that quickly,'' he said of agencies. 
''They don't want to shut even though it might be the smart thing to do.''
Hong Kong tourism has been affected as well; 26 percent of its visitors are usually estimated to be on their way into or out of China. 
Hotel occupancy rates are down but, according to Douglas J. King of the Hong Kong Tourist Association, it is hard to assess because 4,500 rooms have been added in a year, and more are under construction. 
Before the troubles in China, 36 Hong Kong hotels were offering a promotional price for the summer: six nights for the price of four. 
Mr. King did not expect any new discounts but acknowledged that a further drop in tourists is expected in July and August. 
He did say, however, ''We expect the U.S. trade back, we have had setbacks before.''
At Oriental Clipper Travel, at 217 Park Row in New York, Andi Yu said on June 28 that a rebound was on the way. 
With the discount offered on land arrangements by China, Miss Yu said that her agency was selling a nine-night trip leaving Aug. 
10 to Beijing, Xian and Shanghai at half price. 
Including round-trip air fare from the West Coast, it will cost $1,277 - rather than $2,500. 
''It will be a one-shot, just to show the public that it is safe to go,'' Miss Yu said. 
Asked who was interested in the 45 places on this tour, Miss Yu said that many American students had called.
Nonetheless, most travel agents are less sanguine about prospects for renewed traffic to China. 
At Chinasmith, Mr. Smith said: ''Tourism is not normally thought of in conjunction with martial law.''
