
Dr. Doreen Chen first studied acupuncture 40 years ago in rural Chinese villages. 
She did not press her first silver needle into a patient's skin until her teachers were satisfied that she understood the philosophies of harmony and equilibrium that guided the needle. 
And she did not receive her license in to practice acupuncture on her own until she had completed a long and rigorous apprenticeship.
Now, she says with quiet but obvious outrage that New York State "wants to call someone an acupuncturist after some classes and a test."
The state Department of Education has changed the requirements for licensing acupuncturists and those who already have their licenses are angry. 
Among other things, acupucturists will no longer need 10 years of experience to qualify for a license.
The easing of the rules has prompted petition drives, letter writing campaigns and a rally in New York City, at which nearly 100 acupuncturists and their patients carried placards warning "Save Us From Quacks."
The acupuncturists describe their battle to reverse the new rules as a defense of their patients' health and their professional pride.
"This is not a 5 cents, 10 cents profession," Dr. Chen said during an interview in her Upper West Side office, where a closet is crammed with Tupperware filled with seaweed, lily flower, chrysanthemum and red peony that she blends to create medicinal teas.
She said that the current regulations mean nearly all acupuncturists are also medical doctors and can recognize serious underlying diseases, like diabetes or cancer, which require more modern treatment. 
The new regulations, she said, would grant licenses to acupuncturists who do not have the training to make those judgments.
"This is medicine not folk craft," said Dr. Chen, who also has an M.D. degree. 
"I'm worried that patients will get hurt."
The state officials who developed the new regulations, however, say other states with similar rules have not seen the problems Dr. Chen predicts. 
The real fear of practicing acupuncturists, state officials say, is not the loss of respect or quality but the loss of income.
Acupuncture has become popular in recent years, riding the wave of patient interest in "natural" medicine. 
This new popularity means new business and, state officials say, those who already have their licenses are reluctant to share.
"It's not uncommon for people who've been through a strict licensing process to feel territorial," said Ronnie Hausheer, acting executive secretary to the State Board for Acupuncture. 
"But there is enough business for everyone."
Until last year, when the rules were officially changed, New York State had the toughest licensing requirements of the 20 states that license acupuncturists. 
The original law, passed in 1974, required acupuncturists to be trained in both Western and Oriental medicine and already have a license outside of New York. 
In addition, acupuncturists had to prove that they had actually practiced acupuncture elsewhere for at least 10 years.
 
'Standards Were Hard'
"The standards were hard but they should be," said Dr. David P. J. Hung, who trained in China and Japan and was the first acupuncturist to be licensed in New York. 
"Some Westerners think this is just stick the needle in and take it out. 
That is wrong."
In the years since Dr. Hung received his license, acupuncture has become increasingly accepted. 
It has been recognized by the American Medical Association. 
Many hospitals, including several public hospitals in New York City, have acupuncture clinics. 
It is used to ease the side effects of chemotherapy, to bolster the immune system of AIDS patients and to stem the cravings of smokers and drug abusers.
"Before, when patients came to me, they came in secret," said Dr. He-Hon Lao, who came to the United States in 1985 after practicing acupuncture in China for 20 years. 
"Even a few years ago they were afraid to tell their medical doctor. 
They were afraid their doctor would say, 'That's silly, don't do it.'
Now their doctors send them here."
In some circles, acupuncture has become downright chic in this age of holistic and natural medicine. 
"My massage therapist recommended it," said Joanne Rubin, a 37-year-old advertising consultant who is seeing Dr. Chen for digestive problems. 
"I recommend it to all my friends."
Ms. Rubin, who first had acupuncture eight years ago has her own personal measure of how much more accepted the practice has become. 
"My mother doesn't think it's weird anymore," she said.
This new acceptance of acupuncture means new business for acupuncturists. 
After Dr. Chen received her New York license in 1982, she said had about 80 patients a month, working five days a week. 
She now treats 150 patients a month and works only three days a week. 
Next month she will open a second clinic in Tarrytown, N.Y. 
She charges $80 for her initial consultation and $50 for each subsequent visit.
Dr. Hung has three separate clinics, one in Manhattan, one in Queens and one outside of Rochester. 
Most of his patients are Westerners, he said. 
He estimates that he sees from 20 to 30 patients a day.
Dr. Lao, too, sees mostly Western patients at a rate of 150 a month. 
She opened her first office in Brooklyn last January. 
Three months later she opened a second office on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
While the acupuncture business has grown in recent years, the number of acupuncturists has remained fairly constant. 
Since 1974, 218 acupuncturists have been licensed in New York. 
At the moment only 140 are practicing, Ms. Hausheer said.
The plan to change the licensing requirements was at first supported by those who already had their licenses.
"We worked to get the new rules passed," said Charles P. Wang, an adviser to the American Acupuncture Association. 
"We agree that the 10 years' experience requirement is too long."
But the response of the board was not what the acupuncturists had expected. 
Rather than reducing the experience requirement, the board eliminated it altogether. 
Under the new rules a candidate for a New York State acupuncture license must complete at least two years of college, a three-year training program, and pass an examination.
The test, which is scheduled to be given for the first time in New York in March, was developed by the National Commission for the Certification of Acupuncturists and is used in 18 of the 20 states in which acupuncturists are licensed. 
Most New York acupuncturists, however, do not feel the exam is tough enough.
"Any one can pass this," Dr. Hung said. 
"If you study three months, four months, you can pass that test. 
People won't trust acupuncture anymore."
Because the test is "too easy" Dr. Hung said, "thousands of people will get a license."
"Three thousand, maybe four thousand," Dr. Hung said.
Ms. Hausheer disagreed. 
"There's a lot of fear that patients will be hurt and that thousands of people will apply for licenses but those fears are not substantiated by what's happening in other states that do it this way," she said.
Other states, she said, have not seen an increase in complaints against newly licensed acupuncturists.
Her office, she said, has "heard from maybe 100 people who will be applying for licensure and it's far from clear that all of those will qualify."
Ms. Hausheer says it is a safe guess that the new rules will encourage more Western-trained acupuncturists to apply for licenses, and that, she says, is the cause of much of the disapproval from the veteran acupuncturists.
Of the 140 acupunctursists currently registered in New York, 74 percent are Chinese, 11 percent are Korean, 7 percent are American, 2 percent are Japanese and 6 percent are of other nationalities.
Many of those trained in China admit they are concerned about the skills of those trained elsewhere.
"Acupuncture came from China," Dr. Chen said. 
"The root comes from China. 
It's Oriental medical practice. 
You can't just turn it around and upside down and say this is American acupuncture."
