
Project Orbis, a program that uses an airplane equipped as a teaching hospital to train eye surgeons in developing countries, has reached an agreement with China to establish a permanent relationship.
The pact, signed earlier this week by the Minister of Public Health and the executive director of Project Orbis, would send at least three ground-based surgical and nursing training groups a year to locations in China.
Next year Project Orbis plans to start 5- to 10-day training sessions away from the plane in Beijing, Shanghai and Chengdu. 
It already has held surgical programs on planes in each of the three cities since Orbis first visited China in 1982.
Project Orbis is financed primarily by the United States. 
Typically, a team of doctors conducts demonstration surgery on a patient in a DC-8 jet, where it has an operating room and a small viewing room. 
Closed-circuit cameras allow a larger audience of local doctors to watch the surgery in the airport where the plane is parked.
China is eager to improve its techniques of eye surgery to help some of its seven million blind people. 
Oliver Foot, executive director of Orbis, said that when the plane last visited China in 1985, only 10 percent of the eye surgeons used microscopes to perform operations but that the proportion rose to 80 percent this year.
''They read all the journals and soak up as much information as they can,'' he said. 
''During the surgery, there is absolute silence. 
Then afterwards there are continuous questions.''
Most of the training focuses on routine operations like cataract extraction, retina surgery and corneal transplants. 
But equipment and surgical instruments are scarce, except in major cities, and tradition discourages the donation of eye parts for transplant. 
As a result, the project has performed transplants in China with corneas supplied from North America.
So far, the project has focused on the major cities, but China hopes that under the new agreement the sessions will move to more rural areas.
For their part, Orbis doctors in China have learned about eye diseases that they have not encountered elsewhere, such as ocular leprosy, and they have picked up nuances in technique. 
In 1982, for example, Orbis doctors discovered that Chinese doctors were using a silica bead that soaked up a cataract as the bead was rolled across the eye. 
It is an inexpensive method and was later used by Orbis in other developing countries.
Orbis spends about $400,000 on programs in China from its annual budget of $6 million.
