
The Chinese authorities have released Wang Ruowang, a prominent writer and dissident, after 16 months of detention, but he remains subject to some restrictions, his wife says.
Mr. Wang's wife, Feng Suying, said in a telephone interview from her home in Shanghai that Mr. Wang could not come to the phone because he needed rest, and that in any case he was probably not permitted to speak to foreign journalists. 
But she confirmed that Mr. Wang had suddenly been released from a detention center on Monday, without any explanation from the authorities.
A prolific essayist and widely respected social critic, Mr. Wang is 72 years old and yet has retained the admiration of much younger intellectuals throughout the country. 
His influence and reputation seemed to gain when he was criticized and expelled from the Communist Party at the beginning of 1987, along with Fang Lizhi, the astrophysicist, and Liu Binyan, the journalist.
China's senior leader, Deng Xiaoping, personally ordered Mr. Wang's expulsion from the party. 
In a speech on Dec. 
30, 1986, which was later leaked to foreign reporters, Mr. Deng declared: "Wang Ruowang is indeed wayward. 
I said he should be expelled long ago. 
Why has this not been done?"
 
Accused by Beijing
Mr. Wang supported the 1989 democracy movement, but there is no evidence he was a leader of it. 
Nevertheless, the leadership in Beijing accused him of helping to inspire and spread the protests in Shanghai, where he was living, and accused him of being "a representative of bourgeois liberalization."
"Beijing Turmoil," a Government-sponsored book published this year, accuses Mr. Wang of taking part in street demonstrations, giving interviews to foreign reporters and wearing a sign reading: "Save the country, save the people, save the students."
After the crackdown on June 4, 1989, Mr. Wang was kept under house arrest at first, and in September 1989 he was formally detained in a prison that was nominally called a detention center. 
Ms. Feng said he had not been beaten or otherwise mistreated while under detention.
"They were rather humanitarian toward him," she said. 
"He's fattened up a bit, but he's not fit and he doesn't have any strength. 
When he writes, his hand shakes. 
His eyesight has deteriorated, and it's difficult for himto climb the stairs. 
If he exercises, he'll get better."
 
To Report Twice a Month
Ms. Feng said Mr. Wang would spent his time at home "studying" and would have to report twice a month to the authorities on his "ideological state."
He must receive approval to leave Shanghai, and it probably would be impossible for him to travel abroad, she said.
It is not clear why the authorities suddenly released Mr. Wang, without making any announcement. 
Ms. Feng said the authorities had given no reason for the release, but she suggested that her husband might have acknowledged making some errors -- which could give the Government an excuse to release him. 
The Shanghai Foreign Affairs Office and the Shanghai Public Security Department both declined to comment.
Ms. Feng said that there was no news on whether other dissidents would also be released soon. 
Shanghai's Mayor, Zhu Rongji, has said that only two other dissidents remain in prison in that city: Zhang Weiguo, a journalist, and another whom he did not identify. 
In addition, there may be hundreds of others who were sentenced to prison in Shanghai for taking part in violent protests after the crackdown, and whom the Government does not regard as political prisoners.
Throughout the country, hundreds or thousands of Chinese remain in prison or in detention centers for their involvement in protests and riots at the time of the crackdown. 
In addition, some political prisoners are still serving sentences from the Democracy Wall movement a decade ago.
