
TO ALL APPEARANCES A LADY
By Marilyn Bowering.
336 pp. 
New York: Viking. 
$18.95.
Those who think of Canada as a staid and proper place will have their misconceptions swept away by Marilyn Bowering's historical novel of the bad old days in Vancouver, British Columbia. 
Back then, vigilantes and smugglers, restless sea captains and idealistic reformers, Chinese gangsters and opium traders made the city as colorful and violent a community of misfits as could be found anywhere.
Ms. Bowering tells two linking tales: one of a modern half-Chinese bachelor seeking to discover his parents' true identities, the other of his mother's and father's adventures during the late-19th-century period of colonial expansion in the Far East and British Columbia. 
In 1957, Robert Lam sets off on a sea voyage with a briefcase full of just-discovered family documents. 
He is leaving behind, he thinks, his 100-year-old stepmother, who has just died and left him free to travel. 
But Lam Fan, the irascible old lady, appears on board as a ghost. 
She is determined to lead him - by guile if necessary - to understand the hard life his family once lived as immigrants to Western Canada, and to be proud of both his Chinese and British ancestors.
India Thackery, Robert's English mother, and Lam Fan, her Chinese adoptive sister, came to Vancouver from Hong Kong at the turn of the century, following a stormy voyage on a clipper ship via Kowloon and Saigon. 
Robert's father emigrated from China, driven by memories of mass famine and cannibalism. 
His mother's husband, Robert Haack, washed up in Canada from California.
All these people were in various ways sustained and undone by the opium trade that flourished quasi-legally in pioneer North America. 
Miss Thackery, a kind, idealistic Victorian lady, was quietly employed as a bookkeeper in an opium factory; Lam Fan was a lifelong addict of the factory's wares; and the hapless Robert Haack was a would-be opium smuggler who made enemies both among the Chinese who controlled the business and the white vigilantes who sought to exclude the prosperous immigrants.
Haack is the novel's most fully developed character, a drifter capable of both courage and cowardice, decency and hypocrisy, sentimentality and cold-bloodedness. 
His chance meeting with Robert Louis Stevenson and his love for the tender India Thackery inspire him to try bettering himself, but the impulsive ways he tries to gain respectability often land him in jail or worse. 
India Thackery, too, is appealing, as ingenuous and thoughtful as her young Chinese half sister is sly and impulsive. 
When the thieves who rob the opium factory maroon India on an island of quarantined Chinese lepers, she reacts to her predicament with great resourcefulness and charity.
Is this story beginning to sound melodramatic?
Well, it is, but that's all right. 
The 19th-century part of the novel is a tale of the times, featuring improbable plot twists and a cast of broadly drawn characters reminiscent of the fiction of Charles Dickens or Mark Twain. 
As fanciful as the story is, it provides a vivid picture of life in frontier Vancouver, which, like London slums or Mississippi River towns, could be as brutal as it was hospitable to newcomers.
Ms. Browering, an accomplished Canadian poet, has researched her material thoroughly and reports it with an eye to evocative details. 
When India and Robert go in search of a child prostitute India is intent on rescuing, they visit the makeshift lodging of some out-of-work settlers - ''a group of men sitting on an ice-covered floor around a small pile of leaves, which one man was attempting to blow alight. 
Another man was being shaved by a companion, and another lay on straw, smoking a pipe. 
They nodded politely to [a visitor] but had eyes for the food in his hands. 
In a corner, a man wrapped in rags and newspapers tried to hide the rat he'd been skinning with his fingers.''
The modern scenes, which take up about a quarter of the novel, are less successful. 
For one thing, they are overresearched; we learn a lot more about navigating the waterways of British Columbia than necessary. 
Also, neither Robert Lam nor Lam Fan develop well as characters in these sections. 
Robert has but one note to sing, that of a confused truth-seeker. 
Lam Fan is not a very interesting ghost; her one note is shrill and pedantic. 
Both characters seem willed into place as plot devices to give the book a complicated structure that it doesn't need.
Rather than holding the novel together, they constantly interrupt its flow. 
Juxtaposing stories from different centuries with their contrasting world views doesn't work. 
The technique almost forces the reader to skip over the present-day adventures of Robert and his ghostly stepmother in order to find out what will happen next in the much more compelling tale they are unfolding about their ancestors.
Marilyn Bowering does have a fascinating story to tell. 
If only she had told it more simply!
Still, ''To All Appearances a Lady,'' though not a completely satisfying novel, is ambitious and often enjoyable.
 
'DIRTY, DIRTY ROBERT!'
I sat on the broken steps and looked out into the darkened world I had known since childhood: the ghosting apple trees, the tilted greenhouses, and surmounting all the dark face of Christmas Hill. 
In this International Geophysical Year, in which nations had joined harmoniously together to observe the marvels of the earth, atmosphere, and space, in which boys in their twenties handled millions of dollars' worth of rocketry, I, Robert Louis Lam, three years from retirement, had quarrelled with a one-hundred-year-old woman over my future.
I sighed and thought about the Rose and what it would be like to set sail in her and never come back. 
And as I did, an icy hand gripped my shoulder and a voice shrill with anger cried out, ''Dirty Robert Lam!
Dirty, dirty Robert!''
I turned at that to see Fan standing there in her nightgown, holding a knot of papers in her shaking hand. 
. . .
I stood up and put my arms around her. 
Her head touched my chest, her arms felt like small dry sticks. 
She tried to say more, but her mouth was dry, and I could smell on her breath the sour fume of opium.
From ''To All Appearances a Lady.''
