
Jumping Chinese
Q. If all the people in China were to jump up and down all at once, would it affect the Earth's orbit?
A. The Earth's orbit would be unaffected, though a simultaneous hop by the 1,133,687,501 people reported to live in China on July 1, 1990, would release approximately as much energy as the magnitude-4 earthquake in Westchester County, N.Y., six years ago, according to calculations by the seismologists at the Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory of Columbia University.
Using just a round billion people weighing an average of 50 kilograms jumping one meter in the air, they came up with an energy release of 1018 ergs, or 1 followed by 18 zeros, said Nano Seeber, one of the seismologists. 
An erg is the force required to move one gram by one centimeter.
Even a jump by the whole population of the world, about five billion people, would not alter the Earth's orbit, Mr. Seeber said. 
The only things that would do so would be the loss of a large piece of the Earth or the impact of a large outside agent, he said. 
The hop's action and reaction would cancel each other.
 
Eliminating Alcohol
Q. How long after a person stops drinking does it take for all alcohol to be removed from the body?
A. The National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism of the National Institutes of Health estimates that alcohol is cleared at a rate of approximately 100 milligrams per kilogram of body weight per hour, or about half an ounce of pure alcohol every two hours, so that if a person ingested approximately three drinks in a half-hour period, it would take about six hours for that alcohol to leave the body.
Dr. T. K. Li, an alcoholism researcher at the Indiana University School of Medicine, emphasized that the speed could vary widely, as much as threefold, because of the range of individual variation in factors like body weight and blood alcohol levels.
Readers are invited to submit questions about science to Questions, Science Times, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y.
