
Pema Tsering's escape from Tibet began 30 years ago with a nighttime trek through the Himalayan mountains and ended three weeks ago on an Alitalia jet to Kennedy International Airport. 
With hot buttered tea and steamed beef dumplings, New York's entire Tibetan community turned out to help him celebrate, fitting comfortably into a small East Side restaurant.
For the 500 Tibetans in the United States, Mr. Tsering's arrival was a very big deal, the beginning of a wave of Tibetan migration to the United States that will ultimately quadruple their minuscule but passionate exile community. 
It was made possible when Congress authorized 1,000 special visas for Tibetans.
Although Tibetans have been fleeing the Chinese occupation of their homeland for 40 years, the United States has never granted them refugee status. 
Like tens of thousands of other Tibetans in India and Nepal, Mr. Tsering, who is 42 years old, lived for decades in a refugee settlement, stuck in an odd sort of limbo with no country to call his own.
Tibetans register only a blip in the great human drama of international migration, but immigration experts say their story highlights just how political, and how arbitrary, the refugee policy of the United States really is.
 
Working With Dalai Lama
The resettlement of the 1,000 Tibetans, scheduled to arrive over the next 3 years, also represents an unusual effort, organized and financed not by a government but by a national network of volunteers -- a small subculture of Tibetans and friends of Tibet working with the Dalai Lama's exile administration in Dharamsala, India.
"I personally see the resettlement project as a fantastic gift from America to Tibetans, which has been very late in coming," said Losang Gyatso, president of the Tibet Association in New York. 
Mr. Gyatso is a senior vice president at Lintas New York, an advertising agency, where he works as a creative director on the Diet Coke account.
Early this month, gazing upward at "enchanting skyscrapers," Mr. Tsering stood on a Manhattan street corner in the Murray Hill neighborhood that could be called Little, or Tiny, Tibet. 
It was far from the jungly Tibetan village where he was born, far from the mountainous Nepalese terrain where he labored on road gangs as a boy and far from the refugee camp in India where, until last month, he worked at a Tibetan school.
As the ever-present sirens of New York wailed, he spoke with calm about his childhood vision of the United States, taking a metaphorical step beyond the typical immigrant's dream of streets paved with gold.
"When I was little, in my village, we believed that America had made a spiral staircase from the Earth reaching to the moon," Mr. Tsering said. 
"And each stair was extremely wide, planted with a wild field of crops. 
And beyond each stair there was another, waiting to be developed."
It was a plain, linoleum-covered staircase that Mr. Tsering climbed that first night to the new apartment in Murray Hill he was to share with Tashi Dorjee, the second of 18 Tibetans to arrive in cities across the country last month. 
The apartment is still largely unadorned, but Mr. Tsering and Mr. Dorjee have constructed a colorful altar to the Dalai Lama, whom Tibetans call His Holiness, on a mud-brown bureau from the Salvation Army.
New York City's Little Tibet, where the new immigrants live, is so petite as to be mostly invisible to others in that part of Manhattan -- the 30's between First and Third Avenues. 
Besides the apartments of individual Tibetans, it consists of two restaurants and a brownstone, which houses the Office of Tibet, Tibet House and a bookstore. 
A sign on the brownstone door typifies the mellow Tibetan style: "While opening the doors, please be gentle with the door handles."
The 120 New York-area Tibetans, the biggest Tibetan community in the United States, are scattered from Murray Hill through Long Island, New Jersey and Connecticut. 
They get together several times a year, particularly for Tibetan National Day on March 10, when they demonstrate for Tibetan independence at the United Nations, and for the Dalai Lama's birthday on July 6, when they retreat to the mountains for an extended picnic, draping their leader's portrait with multicolored scarves.
 
Immigrants and Advocates
Unlike other immigrants they are not linked by churchgoing; their practice of Tibetan Buddhism tends to be a very private affair. 
But they are fiercely cohesive in their politics, and they see the new arrivals, first and foremost, as colleagues in advocacy for a free Tibet. 
That is also how the new immigrants see themselves. 
"Our mission here is not to get rich -- well, who doesn't want to get rich?
-- but to speak up and enlighten the American people about the Tibetan situation," Mr. Tsering said.
The Tibetans have been displaced for decades by Chinese rule, which, they say, has resulted in a million dead, 120,000 in settlement camps, and a population in Tibet itself outnumbered by the Chinese, 6 million to 7.5 million. 
But the United States, unlike India, Nepal, Canada and Switzerland, does not allow Tibetans into this country as refugees.
Technically, this is because they are coming through another country -- Nepal or India -- willing to grant them residency. 
Politically, it is because the United States Government has been unwilling to offend the Chinese by acknowledging that Tibetans could have a "well-founded fear of persecution," as refugees must under Federal law. 
China claims historical sovereignty over Tibet predating its military occupation of that country in 1950 and the Tibetan uprising, bloody and failed, in 1959.
Mr. Tsering's group of Tibetans is being allowed into the country not as refugees but as "qualified displaced Tibetans" under a special provision, sponsored by United States Representative Barney Frank, Democrat of Massachusetts, in the 1990 Immigration Act.
 
Fans, Gurus and Mormons
"It didn't make any difference to us what they were called, as long as they were provided haven," Mr. Frank said in a recent interview. 
He described their special status as "semantic" politics by the State Department intended to keep China happy.
The Tibetan U.S. 
Resettlement Project, based in New York City, is working to establish 19 "clusters" of Tibetans across the country, in cities including Minneapolis, San Francisco, Salt Lake City, Ithaca, N.Y., Portland, Ore., and Amherst, Mass. 
The project brings together an unusual assortment of volunteers, from Tibetan political enthusiasts to New Age gurus to Mormons.
Some volunteers spoke of the project with political fervor, like the national project coordinator, Tenzin Taklaj, a 26-year-old Tibetan-American in New York. 
"It is up to us here in exile to preserve our culture because it's being destroyed in Tibet right now," he said. 
"The more we are, the stronger we will be."
And others sounded idealistic on a more cosmic level, like a volunteer, Jed Miller in Amherst, Mass., a chiropractor who said he uses Buddhist meditation to reduce his patients' stress. 
He referred to the value of the new immigrants' "highly developed inner technology."
The volunteer network was constructed over the last few years, as the organizers of the project persuaded members of Congress to support their effort. 
Since two earlier intiatives had failed to earn the Tibetans refugee status, the organizers -- Tenzin Tethong, now a minister in the exile Government of the Dalai Lama, and Edward J. Bednar, an American friend of Tibet since discovering the Tibetan Book of the Dead after "a near-death experience" -- decided to go another route. 
They promised to bring Tibetans in at no cost to the U.S. government, which spent about $7,000 a person to resettle Indochinese refugees.
Congress agreed to grant the Tibetans something every immigrant wants: an instant "green card," allowing permanent residence in the United States, and full work authorization. 
The 500 Tibetans already living in this country arrived separately, on student visas or after marrying an American. 
The new immigrants, when joined by their families, will quadruple, at least, the Tibetan-American population.
"The Tibetans' situation has always been a clear illustration of the connection between immigration and foreign policy," said David Reimers, a New York University history professor and immigration expert. 
"But it also shows how immigration policy is made up of a whole series of weird things. 
Someone gets the ear of someone in Congress and these flukes happen, like instant legalization for 100 Burmese students, or, in this case, 1,000 Tibetans."
The State Department authorized the Tibetan Central Administration of the Dalai Lama to choose the immigrants from 47 refugee settlements in India and Nepal. 
Half will be poor refugees, including those who recently left Tibet; the other half will be more educated and considered likely to succeed in the United States.
 
'Big Smiles, Open Faces'
Across the country, the Tibetans are sponsored by families with whom they live. 
Volunteers find them jobs before they even arrive in the United States. 
The Minneapolis coordinator, Tara Dadak, an American whose husband is a former Tibetan Buddhist monk, said, "Tibetans come at you with big smiles, open faces and an ultra-American work ethic very pleasing to employers."
After they adapt to life in America, which other Tibetans say won't take long, the new arrivals will face something familiar to all Tibetan-Americans: They will be considered exotics.
"A lot of people project onto Tibetans their own fantasies about Tibet," said Mr. Gyatso. "Older Americans, in particular, who have known Tibet through National Geographic and 'Lost Horizon,' see Tibet as a very special place, like a crack in space or something. 
Which is terrific, in a way. 
But the negative side is that they don't want to confront the reality that the paradise has been shattered. 
They'd rather remember the Shangri-La."
