
The revolutionary changes in Eastern Europe appear to have swept eastward into Asia, with the Communist leadership in the remote nation of Mongolia preparing for a meeting on Monday that may lead to the ouster of its Politburo.
Wedged between the Soviet Union and China, Mongolia has only two million inhabitants, about half of them herdsmen who roam the nation's vast grasslands. 
It has long been under Soviet domination, but in the last three months an increasingly vocal democracy movement has pressed for more independence from Moscow and for the replacement of many top officials.
Responding to ever larger demonstrations and to hunger strikes by dissidents in the central square of the capital, Ulan Bator, President Zhambyn Batmonh announced on television Friday night that the Communist Party Central Committee would meet on Monday and consider the replacement of the entire Politburo.
Mr. Batmonh indicated that the Central Committee would move up the date of a party congress, which would elect a new leadership and institute policy changes. 
The President also said that leaders might call at the meeting on Monday for a national referendum to measure public confidence in the People's Great Hural, a rubber-stamp legislature.
 
Prospects for Change Unclear
A diplomat in Ulan Bator, reached by telephone from Beijing, said it was unclear whether changes in the Politburo would come as early as Monday or be delayed until the party congress. 
Nor is it clear whether the entire Politburo will be replaced or if some members, like President Batmonh, will remain on the new committee.
The diplomat said that Ulan Bator was quiet today, and that the hunger strike had ended Friday night after Mr. Batmonh's speech. 
A general strike proclaimed by the democracy movement also appeared to have been called off, the envoy said.
The democracy movement in Mongolia may have influence beyond its borders, in the Chinese region known as Inner Mongolia. 
The three million ethnic Mongolians living on the Chinese side of the border are said to be aware of the protests in Mongolia, and the authorities in Beijing appear to be nervous that unrest might spread. 
Prime Minister Li Peng already has called for vigilance against separatists among China's ethnic minorities.
A front-page article last month in China's official People's Daily praised officials in Inner Mongolia for spreading socialist ideology, and Beijing announced in January that it would boost investment in Inner Mongolia to create an industrial base.
 
Movement Born in December
Mongolia's democracy movement began in December with a few demonstrations of only a few thousand protesters, but it has gained momentum with its demands for greater political change, more prosperity and more assertions of Mongolian nationalism. 
The leadership has reacted with some criticism but primarily with accommodation, even giving live television coverage to a convention last month that brought the birth of Mongolia's first opposition party.
Prime Minister Dumaagiyn Sodnom said last month that he did not rule out the possibility of a multiparty system in Mongolia. 
But it is not clear to what extent the leadership as a whole is willing to give up power. 
Tserendashiyn Namsray, a Politburo member, was quoted on Radio Ulan Bator last month as saying there were differences of opinion within the Politburo on these subjects.
The second-oldest Communist regime in the world, behind the Soviet Union, Mongolia is unlikely to duplicate the changes in Eastern Europe, according to diplomats in Ulan Bator. 
They say that the bitterness in Mongolia is not as deep as it was in Romania or Poland. 
And while Mongolians are resentful of Soviet domination, the diplomats say, they also are wary that they might be vulnerable to pressure from China if they entirely leave Moscow's orbit.
