
A young secret policeman, or perhaps he was just an innocent student, held a banner the wrong way during today's demonstration.
Other students noticed he was holding the banner strangely, with one hand on the pole and the other cupped on the bottom. 
They decided he must be a police spy and pounced on him.
While he claimed to be from Anhui Province in central China, he had no student identification. 
These days students know that their ID cards mean free train rides, cut-rate soda and other benefits, so they always carry the cards with them.
The students took the suspect to a tent at their headquarters in Tiananmen Square for interrogation.
''What will you do with him?'' an onlooker asked. 
''We will release him after we put him through some education,'' came the reply.
 
The Tactics of Their Elders
The students have not only taken control of the streets during demonstrations, but have also picked up a few survival tactics from their Communist Party elders. 
They keep a careful eye out for provocateurs who might discredit the movement, and have no compunction about temporarily detaining the suspects.
The students, of course, do not have prisons at their disposal, but they try their hand at the ''re-education'' that is a central part of the Chinese prison experience.
Students are aware that secret agents are always milling around and listening in on conversations, even at the universities. 
It is not unusual for a stranger with a tape recorder to walk up to two people engaged in conversation and stick a microphone in front of the speaker.
Normally the intruders are only curious students, but the possibility they may be spies tends to put a damper on the conversation as well as on the student movement. 
The practice explains why the students are becoming experts in counterespionage.
 
Long-Distance Calls
Some of the banners carried in today's demonstration in Beijing suggested that the protesters had made a particular effort to reach sympathizers overseas.
Students wrote their banners in several foreign languages, not only to show their sophistication but also in the hope they would be seen in film clips shown by foreign television networks.
One banner read, ''Of the people, by the people, for the people.''
Chinese posters have always homed in on the people factor - ''people power'' and ''The People's Liberation Army shouldn't be used against the people'' are common slogans - but the reference to Lincoln's Gettysburg address was clearly meant for an American audience.
For the French, another poster read, ''Le 1789 de la Chine,'' referring to the hope that this year will be the Chinese equivalent of the French revolution of 1789.
And for Chinese all over the world, many of the banners were written in ''complex'' characters that normally are not used within China but are common in Hong Kong, Taiwan and American Chinatowns. 
After the Communist revolution, China simplified its writing system to improve literacy, and the simplified characters now used cannot always be understood by overseas Chinese.
 
Martial Notes
Just as the protesters in the United States in the 1960's incorporated music in their demonstrations, so have the Chinese. 
Throughout the protests they have sung the revolutionary Internationale as well as the Chinese national anthem. 
The latest rage is a mocking song incorporating the names of the Prime Minister, the senior leader and the President to the tune of ''Frere Jacques'':
Down with Li Peng, down with Li Peng Down with Xiaoping, down with Xiaoping There is another scoundrel, there is another scoundrel, Yang Shangkun, Yang Shangkun.
Many protesters have displayed portraits of Zhou Enlai, the former Prime Minister who died in 1976. 
That a pro-democracy movement should worship a leader of the China of Mao Zedong, in which where there was no democracy at all, may seem strange, but today Mr. Zhou symbolizes not Maoism but honesty in government and care for the will of the people. 
Mr. Zhou lived a simple life and is believed to have interceded to curtail the excesses of Mao.
 
A Slight to the Leaders
The posters of Mr. Zhou seem intended to slight China's current leaders by hinting that no one today is nearly as good as he was. 
The other innuendo is aimed directly at Prime Minister Li Peng, who was looked after in childhood by Mr. Zhou.
The idea is that they are entirely different kinds of leaders.
''Zhou came out to talk to students,'' said a recent graduate student. 
''He was wise and had good manners. 
Li Peng does not come out much to talk with students and he is not wise and has no manners.''
The anger against the Prime Minister has taken various forms. 
In today's demonstration, students held up pictures of Mr. Li with swastikas painted on them.
