
China is a big country to survey in six days, even if you are an emperor, travel on a personal Boeing 747 with an army of fretting chamberlains and speed to the Great Wall with thousands of Chinese paramilitary police lining both sides of the road for 50 miles.
But the challenge is even greater for Emperor Akihito of Japan, because every stop on his itinerary must serve an unstated agenda: to set aside China's fear that Asia's other great superpower still harbors the sense of cultural superiority, one that led it a generation ago to try to conquer the Middle Kingdom.
So on the first visit a Japanese emperor has ever paid to China, Akihito's handlers have taken care that every moment resound with deep cultural significance, preferably one that will remind China of the arduous days centuries ago when Japanese envoys came here to learn at the feet of China's masters.
So today, while his hosts pondered the roles that the likes of Toyota and Sony might play as Chinese-style Communism begins to look more like Japanese-style capitalism, the Emperor had something else in mind: the Tang Dynasty.
Spending the day inside the giant walls of Xian, the eastern end of the Silk Road, the 58-year-old Emperor sought out some of his roots. 
He visited the Shaanxi Provincial Museum to see the stone tablets where scholars and Chinese emperors had first etched the pictographic symbol for the word pronounced in Japanese as "heisei," or achieving peace. 
Three years ago, hours after the death of Akihito's father, Hirohito, "Heisei" was chosen as the name for the new imperial era.
The Emperor spent a considerable time at the tablets (there are more than a thousand, bearing everything from Confucian classics to a cure for stomachache), asking detailed questions about the calligraphy.
"It is all very interesting," a Chinese official traveling with the Emperor said as he stood outside the building. 
"So tell me, do you think this visit will increase Japanese investment in China?"
The museum is not the only place where the Emperor has driven home the connections between two countries that, on the surface at least, seem among the most dissimilar in Asia. 
An accomplished student of certain types of fish, the Emperor visited the Chinese Academy of Science and talked about how his eighth-century ancestor, Emperor Shomu, used medicines from China. 
He has quoted from famous Chinese poets whose work he studied as a child.
So enamored was the Emperor of finding proof of the centuries of exchanges between the two countries that he skipped the one attraction virtually everyone else comes to Xian to see: The giant terra-cotta army, uncovered in the mid-1970's, whose thousands of soldiers and horses guard the burial mound of a Chinese emperor.
"It is something popular among the Americans and Europeans, I think," Hideo Kagami, the Emperor's spokesman on the tour, said Sunday. 
"I believe His Majesty has a stronger interest in stone tablets."
 
He Who Would Have Been
For most of the Emperor's trip, his schedulers have taken care to glide past sites that millions of Chinese remember with bitterness, places like the Marco Polo Bridge, where Japan staged an incident that prompted its full-scale invasion of China in 1937. 
But there was one moment, out of sight of most of his hosts, when there was a brief reunion with a figure from Japan's colonial control of parts of China.
It came on Sunday, just before the Emperor and his wife, Empress Michiko, left Beijing. 
At a reception by the Japanese Ambassador to China, Akihito was approached by a slight, elderly man in a tailored Mao suit. 
He was Pu Jie, the younger brother of Pu Yi, the "last emperor" of China and the central figure in the epic film by that name.
Pu Yi became a willing ally of the Japanese, who installed him as emperor of their puppet state, Manchukuo, in 1935. 
Pu Jie was trained to be the next emperor, sent to Japanese schools and married to a member of the Japanese aristocracy. 
But he never got to the throne: Japan was defeated and the Chinese sent Pu Jie for "re-education."
Today he is a member of the National People's Congress and a frequent visitor to Tokyo to promote bilateral relations.
Pu Jie left no doubt that he has a warm spot in his heart for Japan's royals. 
Asked what he told Akihito, Pu Jie did not hesitate: "I said today is one of the happiest days for the Chinese people."
 
The Non-Best Seller
Perhaps so, but many Chinese seemed a little confused about whose motorcade was blasting past bicyclists and farmers in their fields. 
And the Japanese seem to have a way to go before they change their image among the Chinese people, most of whom know Japan only as a one-time invader.
Biographies of the Emperor, on sale at major bookstores around Beijing, were not exactly leaping off the counters. 
The stores seem to have sold a few more than 2,000 copies, or one for every 500,000 Chinese.
 
No Sex Please, We're Royal
Pity the Japanese reporters who cover the Emperor every day!
First, by strictly enforced tradition, Japanese emperors never say much. 
Second, unlike the British royals, the people who surround the Chrysanthemum Throne do not seem given to sex scandals and failed marriages.
The biggest story at the palace these days is whether the Crown Prince, the heir to the throne, will succeed in his seemingly endless search for a bride. 
But the Japanese press cannot write about it: They agreed earlier this year to stop writing about the search because the speculation was driving away many potential candidates.
It is hardly surprising that Japanese reporters analyze every word for a glimpse at the Emperor's life. 
So a round of wondering began when, in the Forbidden City, the Emperor was taken to the bedroom of his former Chinese counterparts. 
Akihito, getting right to the heart of the matter, asked whether Chinese emperors and empresses had separate bedrooms. 
(It seems they did.)
This was quickly flashed back to Tokyo, raising the obvious question about the sleeping arrangements in the Imperial Palace. 
The Emperor did not say, and the Japanese reporters, polite to their core, did not ask.
 
Lost, Maybe, in Translation
The other utterance still under debate is how exactly what the Emperor said when he placed the blame on Japan for attacking China.
According to the English translation provided by the Japanese Foreign Ministry, he said: "In the long history of relationships between our two countries, there was an unfortunate period in which my country inflicted great suffering on the people of China. 
I deeply deplore this."
But in Japanese the comments seem far less judgmental. 
Though the words he used could be stretched to mean "deplore," a more literal translation would be, "About this, I feel deep sadness."
Japanese is a vague language, and it gets vaguer when the war comes up, but there was considerable suspicion that the Tokyo Government might have deliberately used phrases that could be spun differently in different countries.
Japanese officials deny this: "We did the best translation we could," a senior Foreign Ministry spokesman said.
 
My Wall's Bigger Than Yours
The Emperor was whisked past some of the most obvious evidence of Japanese influence in China (a new Matsushita electronics plant in Beijing, the Red Lips Karaoke Bar) to see the Great Wall. 
His guide was Chen Xitong, the Mayor of Beijing, and as they walked a considerable distance the Emperor remarked again and again on how large and impenetrable the wall seemed.
Mr. Chen shrugged it off.
"In time of emergency it was useless," he said, recalling invaders who sidestepped it. 
Then, reciting a lesson that the Emperor of a mere 120 million Japanese hardly needed, he added, "The real great wall is the people."
