
When you tire of mashed potatoes and roast chicken, which should be any second now, a trip to Hong Kong may be just what your blanded-out taste buds require.
Fortunately, since Hong Kong restaurants have come to New York City, you won't have far to go. 
Triple Eight Palace, tucked away on the second floor of an all-Chinese shopping mall, is just under the Manhattan Bridge between Market and Forsythe Streets in Chinatown. 
And parking is right around the corner.
A vast Hong Kong food palace, slightly frayed around the edges, it has all the splendor of a Las Vegas casino: the glitter of gold embroidery on Chinese red fabric, twinkling neon lights, the sparkle of crystal chandeliers.
Triple Eight caters to the Chinese community: there were never more than two other Westerners there on any of our three visits. 
Toddlers arrive in strollers, infants in carriages along with their pre-adolescent siblings, parents and grandparents. 
Whatever the reason, we were the beneficiaries of the last remaining bastion of that wonderful old custom:that children should be seen and not heard.
If you would also like to take in a Chinese wedding celebration, Sunday evening is recommended. 
Along with our dinner one night, we were happy observers at the festivities of a beautiful young bride in a glittering red dress and a handsome, even younger-looking bridegroom. 
Their musical selections were ecumenical: Chinese words to Western music; country-and-western music in English, and Chinese music with Chinese words.
Perhaps because so few Westerners come here, not all of the staff is fluent in English. 
But all seem eager to warn you about the pricey dishes.
Patron: "Do you have bird's nest soup?"
Waiter: "Yes. 
Very expensive."
Patron: "Do you have abalone?"
Waiter: "Yes. 
Very expensive."
Patron: "Do you have shark's fin?"
Waiter: "Yes. 
Very expensive."
Moving right along, we ordered bird's nest soup and more dishes than five people needed.
Captain: "Order too much. 
Very expensive."
The bird's nest soup with chicken at $24 for four servings was wonderfully gelatinous. 
An acquired taste for most Westerners, it is a taste I have acquired.
In addition to the expensive dishes, Hong Kong restaurants are noted for their fish tanks. 
The patron picks the fish from the tank; the chef cooks it in one of many styles. 
To select mine, I was beckoned to a room off the kitchen where the captain netted a fish and suggested that it be prepared in the simplest manner -- steamed with soy, scallions and cilantro. 
It was impeccably fresh, of course, but slightly overcooked.
Though the menu is bilingual, the style of meals is not: there are no appetizers. 
For those, you must go for dim sum at lunch. 
You can have soup, or you can do as the Chinese do: order the entrees. 
Keep in mind that in a traditional Chinese restaurant there is an additional charge for steamed rice.
Many dishes on the menu will sound familiar to aficionados of true Cantonese cooking, the most popular regional food in Hong Kong. 
Whether you like the flavors of some of the more exotic dishes, like braised oysters with black mushrooms and fried dough, there are many well-cooked dishes. 
There were only two real clinkers: a light, freshly fried lemon chicken had a cloyingly sweet sauce, and a braised duck dish tasted reheated.
One of the most delicious choices was another duck, this one dipped in taro flour and deep-fried. 
The taro provides a very light but very crisp batter. 
There was a spectacular-looking gray sole in which the skin and bones had been deep-fried long enough to make the bones not only edible, but also irresistible. 
The flesh had been steamed and handsomely arranged on top with an assortment of vegetables that included the pleasingly bitter broccoli di rape. 
On one occasion, we thought we were ordering crabs with a spicy-sweet black-bean sauce. 
Better yet, we got clams.
The pork, a sophisticated version of the gloppy sweet-and-sour pork of our youth, is described by Grace Chan, one of the owners of the restaurant, as "a new creation begun in Hong Kong."
Ms. Chan and her husband, Ming, also own the H.S.F. restaurants in Chinatown and on the East Side of Manhattan.
Like American chefs who are exploring the regional cooking of their own country, those in Hong Kong have begun to borrow from other regions of China. 
Orange beef from Sichuan, for example, is skillfully interpreted at Triple Eight -- filet mignon is marinated in a savory mixture of garlic, dried orange peel, hot peppers, Sichuan hot sauce and vinegar and then pan-fried to form a crust over the tender cut.
The Chinese desserts are best skipped.
Lunch time at Triple Eight takes on all the characteristics of a Hong Kong dim sum parlor. 
Carts filled with steamers full of exotic "heart's delights," the poetic translation of dim sum, parade up and down the aisles, pushed by women singing in Chinese about their wares.
Point to what you want. 
The odds favor your chances of choosing something appealing from the dim sum cart as long as you stay away from anything that looks greasy. 
We tried 30 offerings and came away with many to recommend: shrimp bonnets, spareribs in black-bean sauce, seafood-stuffed bell peppers, steamed pork buns, meatballs, deep-fried taro pancakes, fried shrimp balls, turnip cakes, Shanghai egg rolls, and chicken feet for those who are fans. 
You might also like the sesame-seed buns filled with sweet bean paste.
Choose from five varieties of tea, including jasmine, at lunch.
Go early when everything is hot and fresh instead of hot and reheated.
And don't ask for fortune cookies. 
There are none.
 
Triple Eight Palace
*
88 East Broadway, near Market Street, in Manhattan, (212) 941-8886.
Atmosphere: A vast, slightly tattered Hong Kong food palace.
Service: Friendly, but some staff members are not fluent in English.
Recommended dishes: Bird's nest soup with chicken, fish from the tank with ginger, crispy duck with taro, fillet of gray sole with crispy fins, pork chop with Peking sauce, Triple Eight orange beef, hard clams with black-bean sauce. 
Dim sum: shrimp bonnets, spareribs in black-bean sauce, bell peppers stuffed with seafood, steamed pork buns, meatballs, deep-fried taro pancakes, fried shrimp balls, turnip cakes, Shanghai egg rolls, chicken feet, sesame-seed buns with sweet bean paste.
Wine: Very short list, and not always available. 
Tsing Tao beer is the better choice.
Price range: Dim sum lunch: $1.70 to $3.75, per dish; dinner: $6.95 to $35 per dish, with most dishes between $10 and $12.
Credit cards: American Express, Diner's Club, Mastercard and Visa accepted for for $25 or more.
Hours: Dim sum: 8 A.M. to 5 P.M. daily. 
Regular menu: noon to midnight seven days.
Reservations: Preferred.
Wheelchair accessibility: One flight up. 
Elevator on request; restrooms on the same level.
