
TENNIS
 
McEnroe Is Upset
 
Luis Herrera of Mexico upset second-seeded John McEnroe last night in the third round of the Sovran Bank Classic in Washington. 
Herrera, 19, is ranked 110th in the world, while McEnroe entered the tournament ranked 18th. 
Herrera will meet another unseeded player in the quarterfinals, Markus Zoecke of Germany. 
Zoecke advanced with a 6-3, 6-4 victory over Jimmy Arias. 
(AP)
Stich Gains: Michael Stich of Germany, the Wimbledon champion, beat Javier Sanchez of Spain, 6-3, 6-3, in the Mercedes Cup tournament in Stuttgart, Germany. 
Stich dominated the match with slashing backhands and passing shots in overpowering Sanchez in 69 minutes. 
Stich will face Richard Krajicek of the Netherlands in the quarterfinals. 
The unseeded Krajicek upset ninth-seeded Horst Skoff of Austria, 6-3, 6-4. 
(AP)
 
OLYMPIC FESTIVAL
 
Johnson Withdraws
 
Dave Johnson, the favorite to win the gold medal in the decathlon at the Olympic Sports Festival in Los Angeles, withdrew from the meet after the first event yesterday with tendinitis in his left knee. 
He quit after finishing third in the 100 meters with a time of 11.21 seconds. 
Johnson began experiencing soreness in his left knee on Monday. 
He was advised by a festival doctor to pull out if pain in the knee developed during competition. 
"Maybe it's a blessing in disguise; I've got to get ready for the worlds," Johnson said, speaking of the world championships in Tokyo next month.
 
WORLD UNIVERSITY GAMES
 
Diving Gold for Chinese
 
Lan Wei of China won the first diving gold medal of the games yesterday in Sheffield, England, and Dean Panaro of the United States took a silver. 
Panaro's score, 376.32, was only 1.32 points behind the winner's total in the one-meter springboard final. 
Simon McCormack of Australia gained the bronze but was a distant third with 334.83 points. 
In gymnastics, Yelena Sazonenkova of the Soviet Union scored a 9.80 on her final event, the floor exercise, to rally from second place and take the women's all-around championship. 
(AP)
