
The United Nations commission charged with encouraging respect for human rights worldwide refused to criticize China tonight for suppressing the student democracy movement last June.
But the Human Right Commission implicitly criticized Cuba by expressing concern about reported human rights violations there and by voting to examine its record again next year. 
The move, which came after a strenuous American diplomatic campaign, makes this the fourth consecutive year that the Government of President Fidel Castro will have been on the commission's agenda.
Seen as Test of Commission
The votes on Cuba and China had been seen as the most significant test this year of the 43-nation commission's ability to debate human rights records impartially. 
But the message for American diplomats seemed in the end to be ambiguous, with the United States getting its way against Cuba but unable to do so against China.
The United States delegation hailed the Cuba vote as a great victory. 
Armando Valladares, the Cuban-born writer and poet who is the head of the United States team here, called the outcome ''a great day for Cuba and a great victory for the human rights fight around the world.''
But he also said the defeat of a motion that avoided any direct criticism of China but merely provided for the commission to maintain pressure on Beijing by debating its record again next year showed ''a double standard'' in the debate. 
''It is inconceivable to me that the resolution could not make it through,'' he said, adding that ''I fought hard for that resolution. 
I criticized China in every speech.''
An American lawyer here said that the charges against China appeared far more serious than those against Cuba, which was accused of carrying out reprisals against citizens who gave evidence of human rights abuses to the commission two years ago.
''The violations of which Cuba is accused are little fish compared with Tiananmen Square,'' said the lawyer, Reed Brody of the International Commission of Jurists, a private human rights watchdog organization. 
''If the U.S. had made the same effort over China, it might have been different.''
The resolution on China, sponsored by the United States and most of its Western allies, welcomed the end of martial law, urged the Government ''to continue to take measures along the same lines'' and asked Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar to give its next session ''additional information including that provided by the Government of China.''
But a resolution introduced by Pakistan, Somalia and Cuba to take no action on this resolution was adopted with 17 in favor, 15 against and 11 abstentions.
Other countries siding with China on this vote included the Soviet Union, Bangladesh, India, Sri Lanka, Yugoslavia, Nigeria, Iraq, Cyprus, Ghana and Ethiopia. 
Hungary and Bulgaria, the commission's two Eastern European members, voted with the West against the no-action motion.
 
Resolution's Language Is Mild
The resolution on Cuba, cosponsored by Poland and Czechoslovakia as well as the United States, was also mild, merely asking the Secretary General to give the next commission meeting a report on his ''ongoing contacts with the Government of Cuba.''
The resolution to maintain the Castro regime's human rights record on the commission's agenda was carried by 19 to 12 with 12 abstentions.
Once again, the Soviet Union voted for Cuba, as did China, Cyprus, Ethiopia, Ghana, India, Iraq, Yugoslavia and Mexico.
