
The 14th annual Hong Kong International Dragon Boat Races began today and amid pageantry recalling the 2,000-year-old origin of this sport, and the United States team from Philadelphia qualified quietly and easily for the semifinals Sunday.
The wooden boats used are 38 feet long, weigh close to 4,000 pounds and use a crew of up to 20 rowers plus a coxswain to steer and a drummer, seated in the bow, to beat out the racing cadence. 
A dragon's head is mounted on the bow of each boat, and a dragon's tail is attached to the stern. 
The rowers sit two abreast in the boat, paddling in precise synchronization at a cadence of up to 100 strokes a minute.
Dragon boat racing was confined to Asian countries until 1976, when the first Hong Kong International Regatta was organized. 
This year, more than 3,000 rowers from 24 countries are competing. 
The United States first entered a men's team in 1982, placing second, a result it has yet to duplicate. 
This year's crew, from Philadelphia, is made up primarily of collegiate oarsmen and has altered its racing style in an attempt to find a winning combination.
 
Learning From the Chinese
''We're trying to emulate the style of Shun De,'' said Bob McNamara, the United States coach. 
The Shun De team from China has won this regatta the last four years, racing a short stroke at a cadence of 90 or more strokes to the minute.
''We've boated a lighter crew this year,'' McNamara said, ''averaging 160 pounds per man, which lets us use the Chinese style, eliminating the back lift heavier teams use.''
The United States team crossed the finish line two boat lengths in front of the Sai Kung team from Hong Kong. 
All the crews that failed to win today have repechage heats - a second chance to advance to the semifinals - Sunday morning. 
The semifinals and championship will follow.
 
Chants and Rice
Buddhist monks, clad in raspberry and black vestments, chanted the blessing ceremony officially opening the two-day regatta, which is raced along the Tsim Sha Tsui waterfront of Victoria Harbor.
The races commemorate the death of Qu Yuan, a Chinese poet and patriot who threw himself into the sea in protest against the corruption of the government of his time. 
The local fishermen were said to be so moved by Qu Yuan's sacrifice that they raced in their fishing boats to try to recover his body, beating the water with oars to ward off fish from eating it.
At the end of the opening ceremony today, rice was scattered over the competitors, invoking Qu Yuan's protective spirit for a safe regatta.
