
The way for peasants to get rich, Wang Hongjun used to think, was to raise more livestock and plant more grain and potatoes.
Then Mr. Wang, who heads a rural county in Sichuan Province, was sent three years ago to the State Training Center for Cadres from Poor Areas.
In the six-week course in Bejing and other parts of eastern China, Mr. Wang learned that in some parts of the country peasants had tripled their incomes by beginning small businesses, and he concluded that the road to wealth laynot in more farming but in running sideline businesses.
Upon his return to his county, Mr. Wang persuaded peasants to set up a silk-making cooperative. 
Instead of selling silkworm cocoons to Shanghai factories, they would process the silk right there. 
The factory has prospered, and Mr. Wang and other Sichuan Province officials describe it as an enormous money-maker for the county.
The Training Center is proud of the factory, and of other innovations that have resulted from its seminars. 
The center is part of a broad anti-poverty campaign in China that has shown considerable success in eliminating theproblems that afflict large numbers of people in other parts of the third world: malnutrition, epidemic disease and abysmal health care.
These days almost all Chinese have food to eat and roofs over their heads, so increasingly the trend in anti-poverty work is in spreading education and information rather than arranging income transfers.
"The Government used to try to spend money primarily on relief efforts," said Liu Yitao, deputy director of the training center. 
"If there wasn't enough grain in an area, then the Government would send grain. 
But these days the effort is mainly to help peoplehelp themselves."
Such efforts at education and assistance are aimed at the 110 million people, nearly 10 percent of the population, who are classified as poor because they earn less than $62 a year. 
Such people will not starve to death, but their lives are bleak: they live in mud huts or caves, eat meat only on festivals, and have trouble paying the fees to keep their children in school.
While China has been quite successful in alleviating the most dire forms of poverty, it has had little success in stimulating local markets and equalizing the opportunities among various parts of the country. 
While all China benefited immensely during the last dozen years of the open-door policy, the richer coastal areas gained the most. 
The gap between rich and poor areas has grown considerably in that period.Funds are limited, as is the effect the Training Center alone can have on the lives of the vast numbers of poor people. 
But since the center's founding in 1987, some 17,000 local workers have taken part in its programs.
Typically they spend about 45 days, partly in seminars in Beijing and partly touring parts of coastal China that have turned to agribusiness to help their economies.
Many of the officials in poor areas are peasants, and the tour of more prosperous regions comes as a revelation to them.
In particular, the program aims to show them how their villages can start rural enterprises -- everything from making shoes and buckets to processing tofu and sausage -- as a way to supplement the income from traditional agricultural products.
