
When Du Dayi found out that he had leprosy, the short, soft-spoken peasant was as worried about his neighbors as about the disease. 
In those days, more than four decades ago, Chinese villagers sometimes burned leprosy patients alive in an attempt to destroy a disease that they loathed like none other.
"People were afraid of us then and looked down at us," said Mr. Du, who has lost an eye as well as his nose to the disease, the latter affliction apparently distorting his speech. 
"But now it's no problem, and I can go around easily. 
I can even go to the bank!"
A hundred-odd villagers clustered around Mr. Du as he spoke and seemed a testimony to a monumental change in attitudes toward leprosy. 
The peasants in this remote village in south-central China were unconcerned about touching him and were staring wonderingly not at his severely disfigured face but at something they found even more astonishing: the face of an American interviewer.
Leprosy, which for thousands of years has been a scourge mainly of regions with warm climates, still afflicts some 4 million to 10 million people around the world, and hundreds of thousands of new cases are reported each year. 
But the number of victims around the world appears to have declined by more than half over the last decade, and in China and many other countries the progress has been enormous -- in fighting the disease and the fear that surrounds it.
"The struggle is being won; there's no doubt about that," said James A. Gittings, an officer of American Leprosy Missions, which fights leprosy in China and other countries. 
A multidrug treatment regime that became widely used in the 1980's has played a key role in the decline of leprosy, and doctors hope to conquer the disease by the year 2000 so that it is only a relatively minor problem in the third world.
 
An Energetic Campaign
In poor parts of China like this one, political issues like freedom of expression seem to many peasants remote and hazy compared with concerns of health and poverty, for villagers are far more likely to have seen a leprosy patient than to have seen a dissident. 
Responding to such concerns, the Chinese Government is campaigning energetically against leprosy and appears to be enjoying great success, for this is the kind of activity that the Communist Government does best.
If it sometimes outrages the West by mobilizing people against dissidents, it is also impressive in its ability to mobilize people against disease and other common threats. 
The authorities force doctors to work in remote areas, and while this may offend Western ideals of freedom it is nonetheless helpful in fighting a disease like leprosy.
"What they've managed to achieve is to reduce leprosy to a level where it's not really a public health problem any more, not a major contagious disease," said Dr. B. P. Kean, the representative in China of the World Health Organization. 
"They've done extremely well, especially in recent years."
China claims to have only 30,000 reported cases of patients now undergoing treatment, down from about 100,000 a decade ago. 
Four decades ago, it says, there were 500,000, although all the figures in China and elsewhere are uncertain and not particularly reliable. 
There are often variations in methods of counting and in estimating the number of people who carry the disease but whose condition has not yet been diagnosed.
The rural-based attack on leprosy is evident here among the rock-littered hills of Guizhou Province, one of the poorest in the country. 
Doctors hike from village to village, explaining the symptoms of leprosy and looking for patients. 
Most victims are now caught in the early stages and are treated, free of charge, before they are disfigured.
"The biggest problem we face is that leprosy victims don't go to the doctor soon enough," said Liu Fangmin, the deputy director of the Salaxi Leprosy Hospital here. 
"We tell them that the faster they come to us, the easier it is to cure. 
But the biggest headache is still finding the leprosy patients."
To overcome this problem, the medical authorities have begun to provide cash incentives, and consequently the easiest way to make a bundle of money in this poor area is simply to turn in a person with leprosy. 
The local government will pay the equivalent of $20 to anybody who reports such a person. 
Sufferers can even turn themselves in and claim the money, or doctors can turn in their patients.
The reward amounts to half a year's income for many peasants, and those who supply names are guaranteed secrecy -- because some villagers might resent it if they discover that a neighbor has fingered them.
Leprosy is an infectious disease that causes changes in skin color and deadens the sensation in various parts of the body. 
Because they do not feel pain, patients often injure themselves and as a consequence in later stages sometimes lose their fingers.
Despite an ancient misconception, leprosy is not easily spread and most healthy people seem to have a natural resistance to it. 
In any case, these days drugs can cure the disease in a period ranging from a few months to many years.
"When they are first diagnosed, the patients are afraid and feel they've been robbed of their dignity," said Wang Yongjuan, the health director for Bijie Prefecture, a poor region that encompasses Salaxi village. 
"But we tell them that they can be cured quietly, that we won't tell anyone about it. 
And they get their self-confidence back."
