
As the early-morning mist comes in from the harbor in Salem, Mass., the most pleasant place to be is on the Common. 
This wide expanse of green is both a cultural and physical hub of the coastal town north of Boston, and the odd geometry of its criss-crossing paths is a product of habit and time. 
Today, morning joggers may have replaced the pasturing cows and military parades of former times, but still there is a feeling in this setting, surrounded by fine Federal houses, of the orderliness and peace that gave this Essex County town its name (from the Hebrew word shalom, meaning peace).
With a population of 38,000, Salem is still a thriving everyday sort of place, which is part of its charm. 
And although its historic center is intact - from Chestnut Street to the Common - there is nothing now in the bustle of its waterfront streets to indicate anywhere near the density of commerce along its wharves and warehouses that made Salem in 1800 the richest city per capita in America.
It is thrilling to think of those merchant captains setting out from the small New England town to ports all over the world and bringing back not just cargoes of tea, spices and textiles but a whiff of the exotic that made every home in Salem a cosmopolitan place. 
''From father to son, for above a hundred years, they followed the sea,'' wrote the Salem native Nathaniel Hawthorne in his vivid introduction to ''The Scarlet Letter,'' entitled ''The Custom House.''
What made these merchant captains unusual was the additional mandate - be collectors - passed on to them by their professional association, the East India Marine Society, founded in 1799. 
No present-day auction house aficionado can hold a candle as a collector to the enthusiasm of a Salem sea captain who with untutored eye would find on those far-flung shores of China, Japan, India, Africa and the Philippines curiosities of both the natural and artificial world, which became the basis of the oldest continually operated museum in the country, the Peabody Museum of Salem. 
And because, in most cases, they were the first Westerners to sail into certain ports, what they collected was the real thing - a first-contact item - unadulterated by market expectations that developed later.
Although these items may have represented only 5 percent of the cargo, they are what survive in the showcases of the Peabody in displays that include rarities of the East, divided by country of origin - ivory boxes from India, porcelain cups in their original straw packing from China and packets of snuff from Zanzibar.
And for anyone fortunate enough to have just read ''Moby Dick,'' the maritime history division is a veritable gold mine of whaling memorabilia, including the actual art works depicting whales described by Herman Melville and scale models of harpooning paraphernalia and the try-works, or furnaces, used to melt down the blubber.
Situated on Essex Street, the Peabody's original structure is an 1825 quasicommercial building in the late Federal style, with a high granite gable pierced by a round window framed by radiating keystones set over seven high arched windows. 
It has been added to several times over the years, most recently in 1988, by a sleek, skylighted wing with a handsome interior floating circular staircase; there are 30 galleries.
Allied to the main collections of ethnology, natural history and maritime history is the newest division on Asian Export Art, a result of a 1984 merger with a collection at the Museum of the American China Trade in Milton, Mass. 
Headed by Dr. H. A. Crosby Forbes, whose great-grandfather Capt. Robert Bennet Forbes made 10 trips to Canton in the 19th century, these collections of ceramics, furniture, silver, paintings, textiles and metalware, made over a period of five centuries for the foreign market, fulfill the museum's purpose, which is to be a place to study the fine arts as cultural history.
In the contemporary wing, with views into an Oriental garden featuring Yingde rocks from the rivers of Hangzhou, Boston's sister city, are reflections of the classic lines of the museum's 1825 East India Marine Hall. 
Most of the exhibits - from China, Japan and India -can be appreciated for their color and form, but there is always a point to be made by the arrangement. 
Porcelains, divided by type - including blue and white, rose palette and white wares - showed the evolution of the Oriental style and European copies. 
One of the surprises of the furniture exhibit is to discover that the American ball and claw motif may be an old Chinese form, a reflection of the dragon's paw grasping the pearl of wisdom in the Ming dynasty. 
And even more than the paintings of foreign ports, the photographs of cities like Shanghai make the merchantile world come vibrantly alive.
A continued commitment to contemporary crafts from Asia, including one exquisite 1987 Khmer wedding costume, gives the museum a renewed link with Asia and the recent influx of Asian immigrants. 
But still it is those proud ship figureheads that line the walls of the East India Marine Hall that recall the great thrust into the unknown.
Not that anyone was the poorer for it. 
As the ships unloaded at Derby Wharf, the merchant princes of Salem, including Elias Hasket Derby, the new country's first millionaire, began to live in a style that raised building crafts to a level of perfection during one of the finest periods in American architecture. 
Today visitors can explore a historic area roughly 6 blocks by 10 blocks, encompassing a 17th- and 18th-century waterfront area as well as a grander 19th-century residential district. 
The main practitioner of this elegant Federal style was Samuel McIntire, whose houses of red brick with white-columed porticos still line the streets of Salem.
Walking down Chestnut Street on a spring afternoon, with side views into blossoming gardens, one is struck by the fact that this elegant neighborhood is still a place where people live and children play rather than simply a restored district of the kind that loses its character at the price of preserving its architecture. 
The townspeople deserve credit for having kept these handsome homes in shape without the benefit of profitable international commerce - the last ship sailed from Salem in 1880. 
For the rest, Salem is a typical American town, with small neighborhoods and public parks weaving in and out of the historic areas. 
And in the downtown shopping district, whose turn-of-the century buildings are also undergoing restoration, many new buildings blend with the old.
One of the grandest of the 20 or so historic properties open to the public is McIntire's Gardner-Pingree House (1804), recently reopened after a re-restoration conducted according to the latest technologies and under the guidance of the Essex Institute and its chief curator, Dean Lahikainen. 
The results give a sense of how the house would have originally been furnished - more open and spare and in brighter colors than was believed during an earlier restoration, which took a more romantic view. 
The three-story brick house, divided horizontally by two marble bands and crested by a balustrade, has an elliptical portico with delicate Corinthian columns. 
A master woodcarver, McIntire employed a signature form that consisted of a carved basket of fruit and flowers, a prosperity motif that adorns both fireplace surrounds and furniture.
By using period inventories and paint analysis, the restorers have come up with solutions that include a palette of seagreen, terra cotta and light blue, and floor coverings of Brussels carpet and a Turkey-pattern painted floor cloth. 
Rather than purchase substitute antiques for chairs and settees still known to be in family hands, they commissioned Allan T. Breed, a Maine cabinetmaker, to make reproductions from the originals. 
Although this is a controversial approach, the goal of restoring the rooms' integrity has been achieved.
In the garden, also newly restored by Lucinda Brockway, a 1790's plan from the Derby family has been followed; it called for ''an airy irregularity'' and a row of tall poplar trees behind a summer house at the foot of the garden. 
A Derby garden pavilion, which has been moved there, is a veritable dictionary of classical architectural forms. 
Painted a stone color, it is shuttered, swagged and festooned, and the roof balustrade is topped by urns with flame finials. 
In addition to myrtle, forget-me-nots and creeping thyme, there is a pear tree in the garden that is an offshoot of a 1629 pear tree in nearby Danvers.
In the Essex Institute next door, one can see versions of period rooms designed earlier in this century by the curator, George Francis Dow, when, to quote the label, they ''saw the Colonial period as an era of simplicity and virtue.''
In contrast to the Peabody, the Essex is a temple to local culture and crafts, including a stageful of chairs showing the evolution of certain decorative motifs. 
Elsewhere on the grounds and on nearby streets are other restored houses from the 17th to the 19th centuries, administered by the institute.
Closer to the old wharves is the world that Nathaniel Hawthorne, the son of a sea captain, knew. 
So vivid were his fictional accounts of old Salem that one senses in those pasts another present. 
The recently refurbished 1819 Custom House on Derby Street, where Hawthorne worked as surveyor of the port between 1846 and 1849, is still as he described it: ''Ornamented with a portico of half a dozen wooden pillars, supporting a balcony'' and ''an enormous specimen of the American Eagle with outspread wings, a shield before his breast.''
His own little office, overlooking the harbor, with a stool and high desk spread with ledgers and a fanlight window, is remarkably like his own description of it except that the newly painted mustard-colored walls are no longer ''cobwebbed, and dingy with old paint.''
Seeing the Custom House in functioning order - a Customs officer worked there as recently as last December - is an argument for restoring other custom houses along the coast for maritime use, even if only for regulating pleasure craft.
Not far from the Custom House on Turner Street is the most famous literary house in America, the 17th-century House of the Seven Gables, a clapboard house stained a dark brown with high triangular walls bounded by the roof slopes that give the house its name. 
It overlooks the water in a nondescript neighborhood of mostly clapboard houses, some with two-story balconies, painted red, green, yellow, gray and brown.
Readers are never disappointed, for here is a case where the reality comes very close to the fictional image. 
This is because Hawthorne hewed closely to the house as he knew and loved it on his visits to his distinguished cousin, Susannah Ingersoll, whom he nicknamed the Dutchess. 
In May 1840, in a letter to a friend, Hawthorne wrote, ''The day after the great storm in March, I went with David Roberts to make a call on the Dutchess at the old house in Turner Street, to learn how she weathered the gale. 
I had a more than ordinary pleasant visit, and among other things, in speaking of the old house, she said it has had in the history of its changes and alterations Seven Gables. 
The expression was new and struck me very forcibly; I think I shall make something of it.''
The house has been furnished to the period of Hawthorne's visits, and whether completely accurate or not, the rooms, the secret staircase, the tea set and even the penny-candy and notions shop all convey something magical - a cozy darkness overlooking a gnarled horse chestnut tree and the sea. 
The garden, of a geometric Colonial-revival style, lacks the irregularity and intimacy of the one Hawthorne describes, but never mind, wisteria covers the arbor, and the scarlet runner pole beans climb the trellises to attract the hummingbirds that so delighted the fictional party. 
Standing at the water's edge, one realizes that though the neighborhoods on land may have changed over the centuries, the view over the sparkling water is the same as it was for the first ship that set out to sea.
 
A TRIP BACK IN NEW ENGLAND
 
Getting There
Transportation by van between Logan Airport in Boston and Salem is offered by North Shore Shuttle Service (617-631-8660); $21 one way.
 
Hours and Fees
Peabody Museum of Salem (508-745-1876) in East India Square at Liberty and Essex Streets is open Monday to Saturday from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., Thursday till 9 P.M., Sunday noon to 5 P.M. Admission: $5, families of two adults and their children, $10.
Essex Institute (508-744-3390), 132 Essex Street, is open Tuesday to Saturday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M., Thursday till 9 P.M., Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M. Reservations for house tours may be made in advance or on arrival.
Custom House (508-745-1470) in Salem Maritime Historic Site, 174 Derby Street, is open daily, 8:30 A.M. to 5 P.M. Free admission. 
House of the Seven Gables (508-744-0991), 54 Turner Street, is open daily, 10 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; between July 1 and Labor Day, 9:30 A.M. to 5:30 P.M. Admission $6, children 6 to 17, $2.50.
 
Where to Stay
Rates at the following establishments are for two people.
Hawthorne Hotel (508-744-4080; 800-833-2008), on the Common; $91 to $122.
The Stephen Daniels House (508-744-5709), 1 Daniels Street, corner of Essex Street; $85 with private bath, $55 with shared bath, including Continental breakfast. 
Built between 1667 and 1756, the guesthouse has restored rooms with working fireplaces and a garden terrace.
 
House Tours
For Christmas in Salem, from five to seven homes are trimmed for the holidays and opened to the public from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. on Dec. 
8 and from noon to 4 P.M. on Dec. 
9. Get in touch with the sponsor, the Visiting Nurse Association of Greater Salem, at 508-745-9050 for tickets ($10; $8 for people 62 and older).
Historic Salem Inc.'s house and garden tour, held every other year, will take place in June 1991; 508-745-0799. 
P. D.
