
A visitor to this city's North Beach neighborhood could easily assume that the traditionally Italian community and its recently arrived Chinese neighbors have settled into the most harmonious blending of cultures since Marco Polo helped turn the Orient's noodles into Italy's spaghetti.
Near Broadway, which once marked a boundary between North Beach and Chinatown, it is possible to buy pasta or dim sum, focaccia bread or fortune cookies. 
Strolling past first-floor apartments on the way to the boccie court near Washington Square, the tiny park at the community's center, passers-by can hear the clicking of mah-jongg tiles through open windows.
And in the early mornings in front of Saints Peter and Paul Catholic Church overlooking Washington Square, Chinese immigrants silently exercise in unison to the ancient discipline of tai chi.
But a closer inspection discloses jagged scars left by rapid demographic change.
White residents at a bus stop in North Beach complain that the recent rerouting of a bus line to ease congestion in Chinatown was done for the convenience of ''those people'' at the expense of ''us.''
Others make jokes about the way Chinese drive cars. 
And half a block from Washington Square, the wall of a health center serving Chinese-speaking clients was spray-painted on the Chinese New Year: ''Kill You All Soon.''
''There's a lot of tension, a lot of animosity,'' said Henry Der, the executive director of Chinese for Affirmative Action, a civil rights and research group. 
''No matter how liberal we may be here, people still derive great comfort from having people like themselves living in their neighborhoods.''
It has been more than 100 years since anti-Chinese hysteria erupted here and unemployed whites led attacks against Chinese laborers, brutalizing them and vandalizing their stores and laundries. 
Since then tensions have seldom been evident until the last decade, when successive waves of immigrants from Asia burst the boundaries of what had long been a rigidly circumscribed Chinatown.
By the time of the 1990 census, the population of San Francisco is expected to be one-third Asian, half of them of Chinese descent. 
The growth is partly a result of Hong Kong's capitalists moving and investing their wealth on the West Coast in anticipation of the reversion of Hong Kong to control by China's mainland Government at the end of the century.
As this population has expanded, Chinese have bought up commercial and residential property in North Beach, jumping the psychological border at Broadway and sometimes, as landlords, bringing with them high rents that forced out established businesses.
Cultural differences are also causing friction. 
Some longtime North Beach residents complain about laundry hanging from balconies and the bins of bok choy on the sidewalks. 
They shake their fists at each home newly painted in the colors that signify good luck to the Chinese, pink with blue or green trim. 
The Chinese, meanwhile, wonder how their neighbors, many of them descendents of Genoa fishermen, could have come to prefer their homes in white or pale gray.
''The Italians perceive they are being driven out by the Chinese,'' said Dr. Grace Pung Guthrie, director of a study of North Beach financed by the Ford Foundation. 
''But the Chinese have an interest in preserving the unique quality of the neighborhood too.''
Thus it is especially irksome to the new residents that the old-timers are reluctant to acknowledge their contributions to the neighborhood, like the award-winning rehabilitation by a Chinese nonprofit group of a dilapidated hotel into 65 units of low-cost housing.
There are tensions within the Chinese community as well; one of Dr. Guthrie's findings is that established Chinese-Americans report feeling hostile toward the newly arrived Chinese. 
''They hate the rudeness of these newcomers, the shoving on the bus, spitting in the street,'' Dr. Guthrie said.
There are signs in North Beach of attempts to work together. 
The neighborhood association recently elected its first Chinese-American president.
But answers are not always simple. 
For example, nearly all of the dozens of Chinese businesses in the area were left out of a recent Chamber of Commerce guide to North Beach shops and services. 
Marsha Garland, founder of the North Beach Chamber, said she tried to make sure the Chinese were included by hiring a young man of Chinese descent who could speak Cantonese to approach the owners about paying to be listed in the guide as other businesses had done.
''They thought he was part of an extortion racket and they were afraid to talk to him,'' Ms. Garland said.
In the meantime, Chinese immigrants are bearing the burden of the racist stereotyping that occurs behind their backs and angry verbal attacks directed at them on the streets.
''They are bowing, smiling, saying, 'Sorry, so sorry,' to deflect aggression from Caucasians,'' Dr. Guthrie said.
Mr. Der agrees. 
''They don't confront, but they don't forget,'' he said. 
''It widens the gap.''
