
DURING the maelstrom of this year's election campaigns, Junjiu Tan arrived in New Haven to begin his study of American politics. 
In an attempt to understand the election process, he said, he started by collecting literature from Connecticut's three gubernatorial campaigns. 
Then he visited campaign headquarters, interviewed street canvassers and took dozens of photographs.
Sitting in his office in Yale University's political science department, Mr. Tan, a Fulbright scholar on leave from his teaching position at Wuhan University in China, said he found that American voters appeared to be serious and well informed. 
"But," he added, "am I correct when I say that Americans have much to do to make their politicians more responsible?"
A few blocks away, at the Yale School of Music, another Fulbright scholar, Stefan Linev of Bulgaria, was participating in a far different investigation. 
With the help of Prof. Eleazar de Carvalho, Mr. Linev, who is a conductor at the Varna State Opera, analyzed the musical score to Beethoven's Second Symphony.
 
Scholars From 15 Nations
When Mr. Linev questioned the composer's use of tempo in one measure, the professor, whose students have included Zubin Mehta and Seiji Ozawa, raised his right eyebrow and paused. 
"As re-creators," he said leaning toward Mr. Linev, "we must be very careful."
Earlier, at a nearby coffee shop, Mr. Linev had discussed the political climate in Bulgaria, the beauty of its countryside and the contrast between New Haven and Varna, a city on the Black Sea. 
"It is quite something for me to be here," he said.
Mr. Tan and Mr. Linev are among the 28 foreign scholars lecturing or conducting research this year at universities in Connecticut under the Fulbright grant program. 
Selected on the basis of academic or professional merit, they represent 15 countries and are involved in academic areas ranging from political science and music to medicine and urban design.
In addition, more than 70 foreign students are now attending classes in the state under Fulbright grants, said Dr. Norman Kogan, the president of the Connecticut Fulbright Alumni Association and emeritus professor of political science at the University of Connecticut.
Initiated in the mid-1940's by Senator J. William Fulbright of Arkansas, the international exchange program awards 4,500 grants annually to American and foreign students, teachers and scholars. 
What makes the Fulbright program different from other educational exchange programs, said Dr. Kogan, is its role as a catalyst for change in the age of the global community. 
He said students and scholars are chosen for their ability to share ideas and experiences with people of different cultures.
"After they have spent time here, we hope that students and scholars will return to their home with a less superficial and a more balanced view of America," said Dr. Kogan, the recipient of three Fulbright grants to study in Italy. 
"In turn, we hope that students and residents in Connecticut, once exposed to Fulbrighters, will develop a more enlightened view of other cultures."
In a crowded auditorium at the University of Hartford recently, Perveen Shakir of Pakistan, dressed in a silk sari with embroidered flowers, gave an impassioned lecture on the history of her country, leading to the recent political demise of Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto. 
Ms. Shakir, a poet and linguist, is visiting through May under the aegis of the Hartford Consortium for Higher Education. 
She will teach and lecture on the literature and history of her country at several colleges and universities in the area.
The author of three books of poetry and recipient of numerous writing awards, Ms. Shakir said in an interview that poets in Pakistan often have the status of film stars. 
In her country, she said, "even the least educated person has an ear for poetry."
She also said that she hopes to instill in her students a deeper understanding and appreciation of Pakistani culture. 
"Their picture of us is somewhat out of focus," she said. 
"They consider us very exotic. 
Some have even asked me if we have cars."
Amir Sagi's research may have nothing to do with intercultural relations, but by living in Connecticut, he is exposed daily to the details of American life. 
A biologist and oceanographer from Jerusalem, Dr. Sagi is researching hormonal activities in crustaceans with Dr. Hans Laufer, a biology professor at UConn in Storrs. 
Before coming to Connecticut a few years ago, Dr. Sagi worked as a researcher at the Life Sciences Institute at Hebrew University in Jerusalem.
He said he often discusses Middle East politics with colleagues and American friends, some of whom have formed their impressions of the region through television news reports.
"That gives you a brief glimpse of nothing," said Dr. Sagi, who was raised in an agricultural community outside of Jerusalem that was settled after World War II by Jewish refugees from Yugoslavia and Egypt. 
"The conflict between Arabs and Jews involves a long and very complicated political history."
Dr. Sagi, whose wife, Kei, a psychologist, and their two children are also living in Connecticut, said he had adjusted slowly to the pace and temperament of the state's residents. 
Recalling the day last year when he took his son to his first day at school, Dr. Sagi said he had assumed he would meet other parents. 
"Instead, they rushed in, dropped their kids off, then rushed off to their jobs," he said. 
"New Englanders are very slow at making new relationships, and that took some getting used to."
In his book "The Price of Empire" (Pantheon, 1989), Senator Fulbright recounted his hope that the scholarship program might erode "culturally rooted mistrust that sets nations against one another."
He called the scholars' experience "the acquisition of empathy -- the ability to see the world as others see it, and to allow for the possibility that others may see something that we have failed to see, or may see it more accurately."
This need to understand cultural values and actions applies particularly to Asha Basnyat of Katmandu, Nepal. 
Mrs. Basnyat, who is living with her husband and three children in West Haven, is working on an internship at the Mental Health Resource Center at St. Raphael Hospital in New Haven as part of a master's program in community psychology at the University of New Haven. 
With a caseload of six clients, Mrs. Basnyat said she focuses mainly on marriage and family counseling, adding that although problems arising from relationships are universal, solutions vary from culture to culture.
 
Shocked at Crime Rate
"When a woman is having difficulties in a relationship in Nepal, she is advised to compromise and to be more accommodating, since it is rare for a woman to divorce," said Mrs. Basnyat, who is training to be a psychotherapist. 
"But here, the emphasis is more on getting women to be assertive and to become independent. 
Therefore, I always must remind myself to deal with the individual and not let my cultural instincts interfere."
For many scholars, the level of crime in Connecticut cities came as a shock. 
For the first few weeks after he arrived, Mr. Linev, the conductor, said he often took late-night walks from the Yale campus to his apartment, about a mile away.
"Then I bought a television set and started watching the New Haven news," he said. 
"After that, I stopped my midnight walks."
Mr. Tan said that even the most commonplace activities for Americans can pique a visitor's curiosity. 
From his office window, which overlooks Sachem Street and the Yale skating rink, he often admires the abundance of trees, grass and shrubbery below, he said. 
"It is not something you see a lot in Chinese cities."
Walking down Orange Street one Saturday, Mr. Tan spotted a sign for a tag sale and decided to investigate. 
There, he said, "I found people selling everything from bicycles to used pencils."
Such a practice would be unheard of in China, he said, mainly because families are far less mobile than in the United States. 
He added, "the Chinese would be ashamed to sell used items from their homes."
Nevertheless, Mr. Tan said he felt that tag sales are a good example of Americans' pragmatism, a quality he appreciates.
 
Expanded Repertoire
Depending upon the type of research involved, Dr. Kogan said, Fulbright scholars often share their findings through lectures, articles or books. 
His own research on Italian political parties resulted in the two-volume "Political History of Post-War Italy," (Praeger, 1988), he said, which has been used by American Foreign Service officers in Italy.
Mr. Linev said his work at Yale and the private lessons with Professor Carvalho will help him expand his repertoire, which already includes operas by Mozart, Verdi and Puccini.
And Mr. Tan said that when he finishes his research on public participation in the American political process, he will incorporate his findings into his courses at Wuhan University. 
But before he leaves, he said, he would not mind immersing himself in one other all-American enterprise.
"Perhaps by May," he said, grinning, "I will be experienced enough to run my own tag sale."
