
Peng Wenyi, a high-school principal, worries about absenteeism, lesson plans and his pupils' test scores. 
But these days, he also frets about the school's plans to expand its three clothing shops into a large department store.
Seven hundred miles to the north, the Sanyuanli Xiaoli Elementary School has a small sign at the main entrance. 
But it has an even larger sign next to that one, identifying its sideline venture: "Air-Conditioner and Refrigerator Repair Shop."
Throughout China, schools like those are diversifying into business. 
From elementary schools to universities, they are opening shops and factories to raise funds and join in the national entrepreneurial boom.
Making money has become a national obsession, and government bureaus, police stations and intelligence services are parlaying their expertise and staff into profits. 
But the fascination with money raises special questions when it is schools that are engaging in business, particularly when the success or failure of the business is what determines the facilities and opportunities that the students enjoy.
 
Profits and School Resources
Those questions are particularly striking -- and unexpected -- in a Communist-run country that prided itself on providing educational prospects to all pupils.
"This issue was debated for a long time, with people asking: Wouldn't this influence the school?" said Mr. Peng, a lanky, enthusiastic principal, who continues to teach physics to students. 
"But now, everyone is running businesses. 
And our school is in great demand. 
Lots of students want to come here, but we can't take them because we have no space."
Last year, nearly 680,000 school-run businesses across the nation, from textile factories and television manufacturers to book shops and fish farms, brought in a total income of about $850 million, and this year the figure is expected to soar much higher. 
In some areas, like the western district of Beijing, school-run businesses produce half the output of all industry.
One reason why Mr. Peng's school, the Fuxing Middle school, is so popular is that its enterprises make large profits that result in better academic conditions. 
At Fuxing, the 1,300 pupils may borrow books from a computerized library, learn BASIC computer language at one of 60 terminals, or watch television in one of the 40 classrooms.
 
Efforts to Make Money
In the last four years, the school has had a complete makeover.
It renovated its cafeteria, its basketball and volleyball courts, its jogging track and its Ping Pong recreation room and raised the bonuses for its teachers. 
Even after all that expansion, it is still hunting for new commercial investments to absorb its excess profits.
But the capitalist road to a good education has not been smooth. 
In local legislatures, Chinese officials disapproved of schools putting so much time and effort into making money instead of teaching their subjects. 
Schools had no expertise in negotiating their way through business deals and obtaining raw-material supplies, and many people said that the education of an entire generation could be impaired if too much time was spent on commerce.
And if the businesses lost money, would school funds go to pay commercial debts?
 
No Rent, Low Taxes
In a Beijing suburb, for instance, a school-run store selling cosmetics, soft drinks and toys, lost so much money that instead of getting their monthly bonus in cash, teachers were given a monthly credit at the store. 
Everyone complained, and the manager was changed earlier this year.
Sanyuanli Xiaoli elementary school, in the eastern part of Beijing, sorely needs money. 
State education funds next year will mean a mere $54 per student at the school, so it hopes its appliance repair shop will make money.
But the shop appears to be a dumping ground for unpopular teachers. 
The manager is a retired teacher of agriculture who seems to spend more time napping than selling. 
Another salesman, who appeared drunk when a reporter dropped by recently, is a former gym teacher who was asked to switch to the business side.
Even so, the shop brings in about $30,000 a year, partly because it pays no rent, since the school owns the property, and partly because it hardly pays any taxes. 
The school's recently launched mail-order book company also brings in nearly tax-free profits.
 
Finding Foreign Capital
"It's hard for these enterprises not to make money," said a teacher in a Beijing school. 
"If they don't make money one year, they just shift to something else."
With a national economy growing at nearly 10 percent a year, and increasingly prosperous consumers searching for all kinds of new goods and services, most businesses do indeed seem to be making money. 
That is especially true if, like most school-run ventures, they pay no rent and are run by local managers instead of by huge conglomerates.
This year, the Government offered even more tax relief to schools to encourage them to make money. 
In some regions, local and business taxes are also waived. 
Such tax breaks also give schools an advantage in finding foreign joint-venture partners, a practice the Government has supported by giving swift approvals.
In Beijing there are 67 school-run joint ventures, more than double the number for the year before, according to the State Education Commission.
 
Intellectuals and Merchants
"Of course there will be some schools that do better than others," said Wang Xiaoqing, a senior official at the Education Commission. 
"But this also follows the trend of the entire nation."
Mr. Wang and other teachers say the schools will not be hurt by commerce because the enterprises are small and flexible and can respond quickly to the market.
Moreover, the businesses are not staffed by students or regular teachers, and they are supposed to abide by guidelines to maintain their license. 
Instead, some teaching staff are detached from their regular academic responsibilities to run or supervise the businesses.
In China, intellectuals still turn up their noses at merchants, so that teachers say they do not fear a wholesale abandonment of educational standards.
"It took a while for me to get adjusted because, well, traditionally Confucius simply does not think highly of commerce," said Yang Jiajian, a 46-year-old history teacher who is now running Fuxing Middle School's successful clothing store. 
"Most teachers don't want to go into business. 
It's not easy to do and you have to have the gall to chase after money."
"Me?" he continued. 
"I still prefer to be called Teacher Yang."
