
It is hard to believe that CHINA MOUNTAIN ZHANG (Tom Doherty/Tor, $19) by Maureen F. McHugh is a first novel. 
The author, who has spent several years teaching in China, has imagined a 22d century unlike any other I have read about. 
It is full of believable details and surprises. 
What makes it so fresh is that it feels so ordinary. 
There is no trick to inventing an exotic future; what is difficult is to make the exotic sound familiar -- so that the people of the future inhabit a world that, however different from the reader's, appears every bit as real.
Ms. McHugh's 22d century is dominated by China; the United States, after undergoing a socialist revolution, has apparently settled down with only minor grumbling to play its assigned role as a secondary power. 
The main character, who lends his name to the book, is an "ABC" -- American-born Chinese -- which places him far above all non-Asians on the social ladder but far below the Chinese-born, who get all the good jobs even though everyone is theoretically equal. 
Zhang is smart, nonpolitical, good company and a good friend. 
He also has two secrets that he wisely keeps from the authorities: his mother is Hispanic (not good for his social standing) and he is gay (even worse).
Let me quickly add that "China Mountain Zhang" is not a book about racism or homosexuality. 
These facts of life are simply built into the world that Ms. McHugh unfolds for us, along with the triumph of a highly pragmatic socialism and the manned kites that race, for money and fame, in the dark night sky above a much altered New York City. 
The plot takes Zhang, who is 26 years old when the book begins, from New York to the Arctic Circle to China and back to New York. 
Each setting is beautifully realized, and the futuristic touches, while sparing, are entirely convincing. 
Besides the kite races, I especially liked the computer-assisted design technique called "daoist engineering" and the fact that no one in Zhang's New York ever worries about getting mugged on the subway. 
There is also a beautifully realized subplot about settlers on Mars, a woman alone and a man with a small daughter, who unexpectedly find that they are good for each other.
However, the focus never strays far from Zhang, even when other narrators take over; everything that happens touches his life in oblique but consequential ways. 
Ms. McHugh has chosen her protagonist well: Zhang is just enough of an insider to get beneath the skin of his society and just enough of an outsider to question what he finds there. 
A first novel this good gives every reader a chance to share in the pleasure of discovery; to my mind, Ms. McHugh's achievement recalls the best works of Samuel R. Delany and Kim Stanley Robinson, without being in the least derivative.
Indefatigable is the word for Orson Scott Card. 
His latest novel, THE MEMORY OF EARTH (Tom Doherty/Tor, $21.95), bears the subtitle "Homecoming, Volume One."
His publishers inform us that this is the first of a five-book series, which Mr. Card is beginning even before he finishes two other multivolume series (including his ambitious "Ender" saga). 
Some science fiction series are simply accretions of novels tied together by common characters or settings. 
But Mr. Card's "Ender" books form one long philosophical rumination on the question of whether taking life can ever be morally justified. 
"The Memory of Earth" poses the same question in the context of a planetary civilization, 40 million years in the future, that has been preserved in a kind of stasis by a nearly omniscient global computer.
Having kept the peace for millions of years by preventing its wards from developing destructive technology, the artificial intelligence known as the Oversoul realizes that it is breaking down, losing control over its own functions and over the human beings on the planet Harmony; to save the people and the planet, it decides to return to Earth to seek help from the artificial intelligence that created it. 
To assist it in this enterprise the Oversoul recruits members of a large extended family; it communicates with its chosen servants by stimulating visions of one kind or another in their brains. 
Some sacrifices are necessary; before the world-saving can even begin, a 14-year old boy named Nafai, through whose eyes we follow the story, is asked to kill a man in cold blood.
Mr. Card handles the biblical parallels with circumspection; the city-state of Basilica, where Nafai and his family live, is divided between matriarchal and patriarchal spheres, and the odd technological survivals that the Oversoul permits are constant reminders that while history may repeat itself, no one is a slave to the past. 
As always, Mr. Card writes with energy and conviction about agonizing moral problems, but I had the sense that this book would have profited from one more run through the word processor: some scenes go on long after their point is made; others feel sketchy and schematic, as if the author himself were eager to get to Earth and unlock the mysteries hidden there. 
Which, of course, is what sequels are for.
LORD KELVIN'S MACHINE (Arkham House, $19.95) by James P. Blaylock is an example of a new subgenre with the unfortunate label "steampunk."
Cyberpunk, as everyone surely knows by now, is fast-paced, technologically oriented fiction in which computers play a dominant role. 
Steampunk is cyberpunk set in the age of steam. 
The definitive steampunk work is "The Difference Engine" by William Gibson and Bruce Sterling, which takes place in an alternative 1855 when steam-driven cybernetic "engines" have brought the computer age to England a century early.
The machine of Mr. Blaylock's imaginings is far less interesting. 
Although it is capable of reversing the earth's magnetic field and traveling through time, neither it nor the large cast of characters who try to turn it to their purposes make much of an impact on their world, which is a sodden pastiche of Victorian England. 
"Lord Kelvin's Machine" (a sequel to Mr. Blaylock's "Homunculus") is full of intrepid derring-do and nefarious goings-on that pit the forces of good (led by the inventor- explorer Langdon St. Ives) against the forces of evil (led by the hunchbacked Dr. Ignacio Narbondo). 
But instead of building toward a climax, each confrontation has the effect of canceling out the previous one, so that the book seems to erase itself as it goes along, leaving behind a vaguely unpleasant aftertaste. 
The uses of the past are many, but journeying back in time in order to create villains whose evil is palpable in their physical deformities and funny-sounding foreign names seems regressive in more ways than one.
