
The casino buses arrive every two hours from 9 A.M. until 11 P.M. at the Confucius Statue on the Bowery in Chinatown. 
Men and women in tattered coats and worn sneakers scurry out of bakeries and snack shops, jostling to get on the bus. 
After a week of hard work, they are off to risk their week's pay at the blackjack and baccarat tables of Atlantic City.
These natives of China, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Southeast Asia, who arrived in New York hoping to make the "big money" America had given their friends and relatives, live in communal apartments to save money. 
They work 12 hours a day, six days a week, in restaurants and sewing factories, making $300 to $450 a week.
For them a day in the casinos of Atlantic City is often the one release from their hardscrabble lives, a place where a week's salary can be won or lost in 15 minutes. 
Their sheer numbers and willingness to gamble make them valuable to the casinos. 
One expert, Paul Siu, estimates they might bring in as much as 10 percent of Atlantic City's $4 billion in annual revenue.
To make the casinos more appealing to the Chinese, two of the new games approved by the New Jersey State Legislature this year are Chinese -- Sic Bo, a dice game, and Pai Gow Poker -- said Stephen Richer, president of the Greater Atlantic City Convention and Visitors Bureau.
Although gambling dens are scattered throughout Chinatown, many Chinese still choose Atlantic City because they are afraid of tongs, loan-sharking and police raids, according to Mr. Siu, who is executive director of Far Eastern operations for Caesars World Marketing, a subsidiary of Caesars World Inc.
 
A National Obsession
Culturally and historically, gambling has played a large role in the lives of Chinese who have little education. 
It is popular in Hong Kong, Taiwan and other Southeast Asian countries with large Chinese populations. 
Indeed, a campaign in Shanghai by Communist Party officials earlier this year against mah-jongg that included mass self-criticisms by 4,300 party members, a bonfire of 400 mah-jongg sets and the unleashing of 5,000 "anti-gambling squads" failed to stamp out the national obsession with the game.
Chow Yin Kung, a cook and a weekly gambler, lives in a 10-by-14-foot room in a two-bedroom apartment in Flushing, Queens. 
Three mattresses take up most of the space. 
A 20-inch television set, two red milk crates, three black plastic shelves and a hot pot complete the furnishings. 
A photo album is full of pictures of his daughter and son, 21 and 20 years old, left behind in Malaysia. 
Mr. Chow says he misses them terribly: "When I have nothing to do, I think about them and go crazy."
On his day off, Mr. Chow gets up earlier than usual to go to Atlantic City, to the glittering chandeliers, sleek smoked-glass pillars with brass columns, pink plastic cranes and palm trees. 
The clanking of slot machines, the flashing of roulette signs and the shouting of bets make him forget his problems. 
"Isn't this nice?" he grinned as waitresses in low-cut minidresses and high heels strutted by.
Another gambler, Mr. Pan -- like most of those interviewed, he declined to give his first name, which is what would identify him in the Chinese community -- says he does not feel comfortable in his own home because he does not have much in common with his two sons, who grew up in America. 
"They prefer to hang out with their English-speaking friends and go to ball games," said Mr. Pan, who came to America in 1984 from Taiwan. 
"What else is there for me to do?"
Mr. Pan, a cargo hauler for an international airline, said he hides his gambling from his children. 
"My sons have no idea where I am now," he said on the bus ride home.
 
Secret Sojourns
Many of these gamblers ride to Atlantic City in secret. 
Compulsive gambling conflicts with moderation, order and family stabilityI, Confucian principles that helped shape Chinese society, according to experts like Lee Feigon, chairman of the department of East Asian culture and languages at Colby College in Waterville, Me., and the author of several books on China.
Mr. Chow said he had seen little outside Chinatown and Flushing, which has recently become home to many Chinese immigrants, since he arrived in the United States five years ago. 
"I'm scared to go anywhere," he said shyly. 
"I hear there is a park in the city that's really nice. 
But I feel awkward because I wouldn't understand what people say."
Mr. Chow said he does not have that problem in the casinos, where he is surrounded by other Asian gamblers and Chinese hosts and hostesses who often speak more than two dialects. 
"I feel at home there," he said.
But Mr. Chow seemed lost when he left the gambling floor. 
In Cafe Roma at Caesars, where he is entitled to a free meal, Mr. Chow pointed to the menu listings for creole gumbo and steak.
Until recently, when he made a point of memorizing a few dishes by their positions on the menu, Mr. Chow's orders were a game of suspense. 
He would point at random and wait for his surprise. 
Many times his main course turned out to be an ice cream sundae or a piece of cheesecake. 
"I hope they don't change the menu," he said with a grin.
 
Concentrating on Winning
Not everyone bothers with the free meals, though. 
They concentrate on one thing: winning money.
"When you eat their food, you feel like you owe them something," Mr. Pan said. 
"I don't want the casinos to think they have a hold on me."
Mr. Pan pocketed his $900 in winnings and headed for the bus stop.
Casinos offer special incentives to attract Asians. 
Hotels advertise special room rates in Chinese-language newspapers. 
Casinos often bring in famous entertainers from Asia. 
Buses to the casinos are often free after cash rebates and special coupons. 
Caesars charges $12 for a ticket ($10 at night), but gives each gambler $15 in cash in the casino and a $5 coupon good for the next trip.
After 14 hours of gambling with only one short tea break in which he devoured a roll in three bites, Tsoi Leung Choy, 46, and his 72-year-old father were still going strong in the baccarat pit at Bally's Park Place, fanning the cards and blowing away the bad luck with their mouths.
At Trump Plaza, C. S. Yeoh rubbed his chips on his pants and kissed them before betting on the Players.
At a blackjack table in Caesars, with a glass of milk by his side, Mr. Chow, who speaks little English, knew just what to say to his dealer. 
"More, more," he knocked on the blue felt table. 
"Big one!
Big one!" he screamed as the dealer threw him a card. 
"No more!" he waved his hand. 
"Thank you," he said, smiling as the dealer threw him some chips.
After winning $200 in less than 15 minutes, Mr. Chow called it quits. 
He knew that the casinos always win in the long run. 
"See this?" he pointed to a naked statue of David near the wall and then a topless Cleopatra perched from the ceiling. 
"They stayed in here for too long."
At the end of the day, Mr. Pan kept to himself on the bus, his brows furrowed despite his winnings. 
Luck will reverse for those who have no self-control. 
"Lose, I shall not cry," he said. 
"Win, I shall not rejoice."
"Greediness is the debacle and moderation the virtue," Mr. Chow said, referring to his 15-minute battle at the blackjack table. 
The winnings will go to New York Telephone to pay for the calls he made to his two children in Malaysia.
Mr. Tsoi worried over what to tell his wife. 
It took him all week sewing suits in a midtown garment factory to earn the $400 he lost. 
"She'll be upset," he muttered. 
"Very upset."
Mr. Yeoh complained of a severe headache after losing his whole month's salary, $2,000, during his 24-hour binge. 
He says he must find a way to pay his rent for the next month.
"Maybe," he said hopefully, "I'll win it all back next week."
